AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersMOSCOW — Russia's drive to build a large power-generating turbine to lessen its dependence on Western technology has suffered a major set-back after a prototype broke beyond repair, two sources familiar with the project told Reuters.In the past few years Russia has imported the large-capacity gas turbines required to run modern power stations from firms such as Siemens, GE and Alstom.After Western sanctions were imposed on Russia over the conflict with Ukraine four years ago, Russian President Vladimir Putin urged officials to replace imported technology with home-grown substitutes in energy, software, aerospace and medicine.The mishap with the 110 Megawatt turbine, a capacity large enough to power a sizeable town, underlines the technical challenges.Testing was underway on a prototype 110 MW turbine at the Saturn engineering plant in Rybinsk, central Russia, in December last year according to one of the two sources, who are both in the energy sector and familiar with the results of the tests."The turbine fell apart," said the first source, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the subject. "They tried to repair it in time for March, but they did not manage it."March was the target date for completion of tests on the turbine. Putin, in power since 1999, won a second consecutive term in an election on March 18.The first source, and a second source, both said it was not possible to rebuild the prototype turbine and the project would have to start again with new equipment."The turbine broke up," said the second source, who requested anonymity because he is not authorized to speak to the media. "There's no turbine, that's it.""NOT FATAL"Without any home-grown equivalents, Russia should in most cases still be able to buy turbines from Western suppliers, but U.S. and European Union sanctions have made it harder to import Western power technology under certain circumstances.Last year Russia clandestinely delivered turbines made by Siemens to a power station in Crimea, which is subject to sanctions, and the European Union retaliated by imposing extra sanctions on officials and companies involved in the operation.Set-backs to the domestic turbine program could hamper the modernization of power generation if growing tensions with Western states result in tighter sanctions since Russia's modernization plan is focused on using gas turbines.The technical hitch also carries a potential political cost: Putin has publicly trumpeted progress in replacing Western technology imports, so any failures will jar with the picture of success he has painted.The new turbine is being developed by a consortium of ODK, a unit of state-owned conglomerate Rostec that owns the Saturn factory where the testing was being conducted, Russian state technology firm RUSNANO, and state energy firm InterRAO.In a statement, ODK said one of the mechanisms of the prototype turbine had malfunctioned. It said that would delay work on the project, but could be fixed. "It is not fatal for the project." It said set-backs were to be expected since this was a pioneering project for Russia.RUSNANO acknowledged there had been an accident but gave no details. It said it remained committed to the turbine project and expects it will be completed. InterRAO declined to comment.Russia's Trade and Industry Ministry, which oversees the machine-building sector, declined to comment and referred questions to Rostec.WESTERN SANCTIONSLarge capacity gas turbines have been in use around the world for years but their construction is tricky to perfect.Because they operate at extremely high speeds and high temperatures, they need to be engineered to very precise standards and they use sophisticated electronic control systems to make sure that they operate efficiently.For many years Russia made no major investment in developing the technology because it was able to import the turbines or the know-how to produce them. A scheme started in the 1990s to develop a large-capacity turbine produced prototypes but they did not go into production.At a meeting in Russia's second city of Saint Petersburg in May last year, chaired by Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, Energy Minister Alexander Novak said a 110 MW turbine had been developed and testing should be completed by March 2018."This is the first Russian produced powerful machine with 100-percent domestic manufacture and it will, of course, help us to completely substitute purchases of foreign equipment of this capacity," Novak told the meeting. His ministry did not respond to questions on Tuesday about the set-back. (Additional reporting by Gleb Stolyarov; writing by Christian Lowe; editing by Philippa Fletcher)Advertisement
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO
 
FEB. 2, 2018
Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo, The Times’s technology columnist, reviews the week’s news, offering analysis (and maybe a joke or two) about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Good morning, readers! Here are a couple of big stories from tech land this week.Amazon, JPMorgan Chase and Berkshire Hathaway walk into a hospital. That’s either the setup to a bad joke or the start of a revolution in American health care — but for now, nobody knows the punch line.The three companies announced on Tuesday that they were forming an independent health care company for their employees in the United States. That was just about all they announced.The companies offered few details on how they plan to overhaul their workers’ health care, or even if they planned to overhaul it — for all we know, they might just start some kind of office wellness program, hand out free pedometers and kitchen magnets reminding you to drink more water and call it a day.AdvertisementBut this is Amazon! Amazon thinks big! And so despite the dearth of details, the announcement made a splash in the business world, prompting optimism that someone may finally be on the verge of reforming the expensive and complex health care industry.AdvertisementYou should read this piece by my colleagues at The Upshot for an explanation of why American health care will prove difficult even for Jeff Bezos, Jamie Dimon and Warren Buffett to fix. And they’re not necessarily the first to try.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For me, the hype surrounding the announcement was further evidence of Amazon’s recent ability to get big public-relations wins for offering only the vaguest of promises — see its recent HQ2 media coup. It’s an impressive achievement, in terms of marketing. Where the company’s reputation once seemed headed toward something like Walmart’s — that is, widely seen as a kind of monster spawn of American capitalism — now Amazon is fast becoming something else in the public eye: The fix-anything, can-do business hero who rolls up his sleeves to take on America’s biggest challenges.In that vein: Tune in for Bezos’s star turn in Amazon’s Super Bowl commercial on Sunday.Amazon’s rep rehab happened in a year in which tech companies have been hammered in the media, none more so than Facebook. Now Facebook is turning a new leaf, according to Mark Zuckerberg.In an earnings report on Wednesday, Facebook’s chief repeated what he has been saying for several months now: Facebook is going to address its effects on society by encouraging people to use Facebook less often.And guess what? It’s working! Right there in the lead paragraph of its earnings news release, Zuck proudly noted that “we made changes that reduced time spent on Facebook by roughly 50 million hours every day.”I don’t need to tell you that it is very strange for a C.E.O. to brag about people using his products less often. Investors didn’t know what to make of the news; Facebook’s stock fell in the aftermath of its report. But by Thursday, shares were back up, suggesting Facebook’s argument to investors had stuck.Zuck argues that if people spend less time on the site but feel like the time they do spend there is more valuable, Facebook’s advertising business will prosper too. So far that is bearing out — Facebook’s bottom line is still increasing at a double-digit rate.But I’m fascinated by what happens next. Facebook, so far, has thrived on its promise of never-ending usage growth. Its shift to a new metric for success will be of enormous significance for the company and how its products fit into our lives. I doubt the transition will occur without eventual pushback from investors.Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Less Time on Facebook, More Noise From Amazon.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By RAYMOND ZHONG and PAUL MOZURMARCH 23, 2018
A cold war is being waged across the world’s most advanced industries. And it just got a lot chillier.Recent tit-for-tat trade actions could deepen what has become a global contest for technological dominance between the United States and China, home to the planet’s largest population of internet users and a flourishing community of start-ups and innovative companies.The Trump administration this week accused Beijing of stealing valuable technological know-how from American companies as it proposed tariffs on $60 billion in Chinese goods and curbs on Chinese investments. China responded with its own set of penalties aimed at American products.The fight between the two countries is cleaving the high-tech realm. The world’s two biggest economies have each become increasingly protective of their own leading-edge industries, and mistrustful of the other’s. Reconciliation looks difficult. And the rising tensions could further undercut American influence in a huge and fast-changing market.AdvertisementBoth sides have been putting up defensive walls for years.To stay in business in China, Apple has had to set up a data center there to store Chinese customers’ personal information. Amazon recently had to sell equipment to its Chinese cloud services partner to comply with new Chinese rules. Facebook and Twitter are blocked in the country; newer American players, such as Snap, are not even trying to enter anymore.AdvertisementIn the United States, regulators have repeatedly thwarted attempts by Chinese tech groups to acquire American firms. And espionage concerns have for years kept Huawei — one of the world’s biggest suppliers of telecom gear, and a powerhouse of China’s tech scene — largely out of the American market.The Trump administration says it wants to level the playing field, dishing out to Chinese companies the kind of treatment that American ones have been receiving in China for some time.“China’s abilities and ambitions have shifted much further up the value-added chain, to tech that represents our crown jewels economically and that is relevant for national security,” said Scott Kennedy, a fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. “So there’s no way to kick this can down the road anymore.”Still, as much as American companies complain about how they are treated in China, it could get even worse if Beijing amplifies its retaliation beyond the tariffs, announced Friday, on $3 billion worth of goods.China could require that foreign tech companies undergo costly additional tests for new products, or simply make it more difficult to operate in the country. Apple, whose iPhones remain coveted among well-off Chinese, made nearly $18 billion in the country in the last quarter of 2017. Qualcomm, the San Diego microchip maker, has earned half its revenue in China in recent years.It could also devise new regulatory hoops for foreign companies to jump through. China’s Ministry of Commerce has not yet approved Qualcomm’s proposed, $44 billion purchase of NXP Semiconductors, a Dutch chip maker. The deal, more than a year in the making, needs a signoff from Chinese antitrust authorities because the two companies count a large number of electronics makers in China as customers.Both countries’ efforts to kneecap each other’s tech champions are as much about national security as economic might. Likewise with the race to dominate frontier fields such as artificial intelligence, quantum computing and next-generation wireless internet. Mr. Trump recently blocked a hostile bid by Broadcom to buy Qualcomm. He did so not because the bidder was Chinese — Broadcom is headquartered in Singapore — but because the administration said the deal would weaken Qualcomm, leaving Huawei with a stronger hand to shape 5G, or fifth-generation mobile technology.AdvertisementThis is why the present tensions are so difficult to resolve. In a previous era, Japan was a technological rival but a military ally. The Soviet Union was a tech rival in defense, though a laggard in the commercial sphere.“The U.S. and China have so intertwined their science and technology systems through trade and investment and cooperative research — but see each other, and continue to see each other, as strategic competitors and adversaries,” said Adam Segal, a tech and security expert at the Council on Foreign Relations. “That hasn’t happened before.”China’s angst about foreign tech dominance runs deep.For most of the past decade, Beijing has blocked many American internet services, including Facebook’s and Google’s, to control the flow of information and head off social media-fueled movements such as the Arab Spring.Another great paroxysm of worry came in 2013, when Edward J. Snowden leaked documents showing ties between American technology providers and the National Security Agency’s vast surveillance program.For China, “one of the major takeaways was, ‘We are overly reliant on American technology over which we have very little control,’” said Rogier Creemers, a scholar of Chinese tech policy at Leiden University in the Netherlands.A Communist Party-linked newsmagazine singled out the American companies that it said had penetrated most deeply into China’s information infrastructure. The “Eight Guardian Warriors,” as they were called — Apple, Cisco, Google, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, Oracle and Qualcomm — had been able to “drive right into China,” the article said, whereas Huawei and another Chinese equipment maker, ZTE, had been kept out of the United States.Beijing swung into action. It banned government offices from installing the most recent version of Microsoft Windows, and antitrust investigators raided Microsoft’s offices. Cisco, Apple and Intel products were removed from state lists that officials use as guides when buying equipment. Qualcomm got slapped with a $975 million fine for anticompetitive behavior.The political pressure sent American companies scrambling to link up with Chinese partners, leading to joint ventures of the sort that the Trump administration, and some in the American business community, have decried as unfair.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cisco partnered with a Chinese firm to sell networking systems. Microsoft, in conjunction with a state company closely tied to the Chinese military, developed a version of Windows more suitable for China’s government. Advanced Micro Devices, Intel and Qualcomm began working with Chinese organizations in microchips, which China imports in huge quantities to put into smartphones, computers and other electronics.AdvertisementDespite the boost from America’s giants, and hefty doses of state funding, China’s semiconductor push is still in its early days. But most observers believe that it is only a matter of time before Chinese factories catch up to those at industry leaders in the United States, South Korea and Taiwan.“They are very conscious that they still have a long way to go,” said Dieter Ernst, a senior fellow at the East-West Center, a research and educational organization based in Honolulu. “But they also know that in semiconductors, they are by far the most important market for American companies.”One stumbling block for China: Attempts to scoop up foreign chip makers mostly have not worked out. State-owned Tsinghua Unigroup tried to buy Micron Technology, a memory chip maker based in Idaho, for $23 billion in 2015, but regulatory worries scuttled the deal.The Trump administration last year blocked a China-backed investor from buying Lattice Semiconductor, an Oregon-based manufacturer. And regulatory concerns scotched a Chinese investment group’s plan to buy Xcerra, even though the Massachusetts-based company makes chip-testing equipment and not chips themselves.In Washington, concern about the emerging rivalry with China has been reflected in a number of recent reports, from the likes of the Pentagon and the Department of Energy, that warn about the country’s growing tech capabilities. Still, shorter-term considerations could mean that Washington would back down before Beijing in an all-out trade war.“If the markets take a nose-dive as we move closer to the midterm elections,” Mr. Kennedy of the Center for Strategic and International Studies said, “that would put some pressure on Trump to look for face-saving solutions, even if final problems haven’t been addressed.”Follow Raymond Zhong and Paul Mozur on Twitter: @zhonggg and @paulmozur.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Icy Maneuvering  By U.S. and China  In Tech Cold War.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO
 
JAN. 19, 2018
Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo, technology columnist at The New York Times, reviews the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Good morning, readers! It was an interesting week in the tech world. Let’s get to the news.One thread in the yearlong backlash against the tech industry concerns inequality. Many tech giants are built on scale — the idea that they can serve billions of customers while employing far fewer people than corporate giants of yore. Those dynamics are good for business, but they don’t make for great optics. There’s a danger that tech C.E.O.s come to be seen as out-of-touch coastal elites.Well, they want you to know they aren’t.Amazon is so all-in on America that it wants to open another headquarters here; on Thursday, the company announced the 20 cities that made its cut as possible locations. There’s one city in Canada — Toronto — and several coastal enclaves (New York, Washington, Los Angeles), but there’s oh-so-much Middle America here, too. Wherever it ends up is, at this point, almost beside the point; Amazon has won so much positive coverage from the selection process that it can already count the story as a big win.Meanwhile, in its own very well-designed press release, Apple announced this week that it would bring a historic pile of cash back to America. The company has about $270 billion in cash, but it had parked most of it overseas for tax reasons. Under the new tax code signed into law last year by President Trump, Apple said, it will pay $38 billion in taxes on that money — the largest tax bill ever paid — and invest billions in new facilities and people in the United States. The company is also giving many of its employees a $2,500 bonus.AdvertisementApple’s announcement made Trump very happy. And the president’s victory lap is, I think, somewhat deserved. Trump and the tech industry have not had the warmest relationship, but it’s clear that his campaign — in which he constantly harangued Apple and Amazon for perceived slights — has shaken the industry from its presumption that everyone in the country loves it.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Just a few weeks ago, people brave enough to enter the market for Bitcoin and its many rival electronic currencies looked like lucky geniuses. They were suddenly making millions, even billions — and you were kicking yourself for overlooking the crypto boom.AdvertisementWell, now you’re the genius (if still poor). Much of the cryptocurrency market took a bath this week, with Bitcoin falling below $10,000 at one point, more than 50 percent off its December peak.Reddit was flooded with panicked crypto lovers, but, as it usually does, the market leveled off by the end of the week, and crypto-heads were professing to be back on board for the long haul. Godspeed, I guess.There wasn’t so much else in tech news this week, so take some time to read some great magazine stories.In Bloomberg Businessweek, Eric Newcomer and Brad Stone have a dishy inside look at how Travis Kalanick, Uber’s co-founder and former hard-charging C.E.O., fell from grace. Among the details: During one harrowing Kalanick-caused scandal, he fell to “his hands and knees and began squirming on the floor.”Also, Steven Johnson has a fascinating piece in The New York Times Magazine about the uses for the blockchain, the technology undergirding cryptocurrencies. And in The New Yorker, there’s a lovely ode to blogging and The Awl, a much-beloved Brooklyn web magazine that sadly called it quits this week.Speaking of quits: See you next week!Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Tech Is Pouring Love on America. Thank Trump?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 3:40 P.M. E.D.T.
HAMBURG —  Satellite technology to provide Wi-Fi on board planes has matured to a point where more and more airlines are looking to use it, triggering a "gold rush" among suppliers.That brings opportunities for a vast array of companies, from satellite firms such as Viasat and Inmarsat, to connectivity providers such as Gogo, Global Eagle, and Panasonic Avionics and software and hardware companies such as Lufthansa Systems and Lufthansa Technik."It's like a gold rush feeling at the moment," Jan-Peter Gaense, head of passenger experience products & solutions at Lufthansa Systems, said at the Aircraft Interiors trade fair in Hamburg this week.But as competition for a slice of the business intensifies, Gaense foresees a wave of mergers very soon, predicting that out of around 17 connectivity companies around today, only a handful would remain in the future.AdvertisementSome are hitting bumps on the way. Gogo started with air-to-ground services but is now offering a satellite-based service. Customer American Airlines is de-installing Gogo systems in favor of Viasat after performance problems with the older ATG systems, which will weigh on Gogo's revenues this year.Advertisement"It's competitive but competitive in a growing market. It makes you all the more agile, keeps you on the edge of innovation," Gogo's Chief Technology Officer Anand Chari said at the Hamburg event, which drew a host of industry players.Gogo is already looking into how it can make its existing hardware suitable for the next round of technology, which could see lower orbit satellites come into play.Satellite company Inmarsat has had to cut its dividend so it can invest in Wi-Fi on board and its shares have been hit as investors worry that the business won't be as lucrative as once hoped."Everybody's trying to grab a piece," Panasonic Avionics' Chief Technology Officer David Bartlett said."This will separate the companies who are in it for the long haul, who can sustain a business, which are financially viable."SCRAMBLEAccording to a 2018 report by Routehappy, which provides information on flight amenities, Wi-Fi is now accessible on 43 percent of all available seat miles worldwide, up 10 percent from early 2017.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Best Wi-Fi, which Routehappy classes as comparable to a home connection and capable of streaming media, is now available on 16 percent of available seat miles worldwide, more than doubling from 2016."The technology has finally matured to the point where airlines aren't as apprehensive to pick the latest generation technology," Jason Rabinowitz, director airline research at Routehappy, said. "Airlines are cost-conscious and they prefer to know it's not going to need replacing in two years," he said.AdvertisementThe technology doesn't come cheap. Lufthansa Systems says it costs several hundred thousand euros just to install the systems, never mind buying the bandwidth or maintaining it.Airlines can make money on the systems by signing up sponsors, as JetBlue did with Amazon, to make broadband free for its passengers on board, or by charging passengers, which is still commonplace unlike in hotels.Having passengers connected to their software platforms on board also gives airlines a chance to drive ancillary revenues via onboard retail or via booking restaurants and taxis from the plane.Inmarsat cited a recent study by the London School of Economics, which forecasts that broadband could bring airlines an extra $30 billion in revenue from ancillary services by 2035, almost doubling their profits.Airlines can use broadband connectivity to make savings on maintenance for example, by ensuring that spare parts can be requested en route and made available when the plane lands to minimize the amount of time the jet spends on the ground.Panasonic Avionics in Hamburg also unveiled a new partnership with onboard catering and retail company Gate Group, which aims to help airlines cut costs by analyzing data to help them more accurately predict which food and shopping products they should stock, reducing weight and waste.(Reporting by Victoria Bryan; Editing by Susan Fenton)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATASHA SINGERAPRIL 18, 2018
Maryland could become the first state to address parental concerns about computer screen time for children in the classroom.Legislation passed this month would require state education officials to develop optimum health and safety practices for the use of digital devices in schools. Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, has not taken a public position on the legislation. If he does not sign or veto it before May 28, the measure will become law without his signature.The bill throws Maryland into an already heated national debate over the potential for digital devices and apps to addict children — and whether it is up to the tech industry or parents to make sure children don’t get hooked.Until now, health concerns about children’s use of devices have centered largely on entertainment activities. Studies have reported that children with excessive internet or video-gaming habits can become preoccupied with online activities to the detriment of real-life activities and relationships.AdvertisementMindful of such risks, a group of Apple shareholders recently wrote the company a letter that warned of the iPhone’s potential for overuse and that pressed Apple to develop tools for parents to better manage their children’s device habits.Some pediatricians and parents are now raising similar concerns about classroom laptops, tablets and apps, partly because school districts are adopting digital tools in droves. Last year, primary and secondary schools in the United States spent $5.4 billion on 12.4 million laptop and tablet computers, according to International Data Corporation, a market research firm known as IDC.AdvertisementSeveral pediatricians warned that heavy digital device use in schools or for homework could have unintended physical and emotional consequences for students, including vision problems, interrupted sleep and device compulsion. In particular, they noted that some classroom learning apps used powerful, video-game-like reward systems to engage and stimulate students, making it difficult for some children to turn them off.“The concern is that many programs students use in school are entertainment and gamified,” said Dr. Scott Krugman, a pediatrician in Baltimore County who supported the school device bill. “We felt these are things that should be tracked and monitored.”So far, however, there is little concrete evidence on the potential health effects of digital learning tools for students.Many schools are more focused on tapping the potential for digital tools to enrich children’s education — by helping them collaborate, create projects and research online — than on tracking the effects of screen time on students. And video-game-like math education apps may benefit some children even if the apps create problematic habits for other children, said Dr. David L. Hill, a pediatrician in Wilmington, N.C., who is the chairman of the American Academy of Pediatrics’ council on communications and media.The doctors’ group has published guidelines on entertainment media, recommending among other things that children avoid exposure to digital screens at least an hour before bed. But Dr. Hill said the group had decided against issuing recommendations on the use of devices in classrooms because of the lack of school-specific research.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As a doctor, my answer is always to get the data,” Dr. Hill said. “Right now, we have anecdotes.”AdvertisementThe Maryland bill aims to provide some answers. The legislation would require the state’s Department of Education, in conjunction with its Health Department, to develop best practices for the healthy and safe use of digital devices in schools, optional models that schools in the state can choose to follow.Some school districts are already developing their own recommendations.Baltimore County Public Schools, the nation’s 25th-largest school system, has a health council made up of doctors and other experts who give guidance on classroom technology. The group has recommended minimal screen time before children enter kindergarten and, for high school students, that computer use take up no more than half of learning time during the school day.It also recommended that students take activity breaks from computer tasks every 20 minutes and leave their devices inside during recess.School screen time guidelines like these could spread. Inspired by the Maryland effort, Parents Across America, a nonprofit public school advocacy group, has drafted letters for parents in other states to send to their legislators.“It could be model legislation for the rest of the United States,” said Laura Bowman, a board member of the parents’ group.Follow Natasha Singer on Twitter: @natashnytA version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Maryland Schools May Tell Children When It’s Time to Log Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By RAYMOND ZHONG, PAUL MOZUR and JACK NICASAPRIL 17, 2018
The United States undercut China’s technology ambitions on Tuesday, advancing a new rule that would limit the ability of Chinese telecommunications companies to sell their products in this country.The Federal Communications Commission voted unanimously to move forward with a plan that would prevent federally subsidized telecommunications carriers from using suppliers deemed to pose a risk to American national security. The decision takes direct aim at Huawei, which makes telecommunications network equipment and smartphones, and its main Chinese rival, ZTE, sending a message that the government doesn’t trust them.A day earlier, the government barred ZTE from using components made in the United States, saying the company had failed to punish employees who violated American sanctions against North Korea and Iran.The moves intensify an already testy fight between China and the United States for high-tech supremacy. Although tensions have simmered for years, the two economic powerhouses are threatening a global trade war as they look to protect their most advanced industries.AdvertisementLong bedeviled by political concerns about its ties to the Chinese government, Huawei (pronounced “HWA-way”) has spent the better part of the last decade trying to sell its equipment and phones in the United States.AdvertisementThe company made a big push in the United States with a new line of smartphones this year. But that effort was derailed when AT&T, appearing to bow to government security concerns, walked away from a deal to sell the devices.Since then, Huawei has signaled that its political battles in Washington may be all but lost. The company has been dialing back on government outreach in the United States, including lobbying, and last week it cut key staff there, according to people familiar with the matter. The new F.C.C. rule, which would become final with a second vote, could kill off what little equipment business Huawei has in the United States.These are uncertain times for tech companies, whether American or Chinese, that are trying to do business across the Pacific. The two nations are playing an aggressive game of one-upsmanship, both to support their own companies and guard against threats to national security. Last month, the Trump administration accused Beijing of stealing American know-how as part of its ambitions to transform the Chinese economy, prompting tit-for-tat tariffs.The latest moves against Huawei and ZTE mean that American companies like Apple and Qualcomm could soon be caught in the crossfire — and they have a lot to lose. Apple, for example, sold $46.5 billion worth of iPhones and other products in mainland China, Taiwan and Hong Kong last year. That was about 20 percent of its total sales.Wealthy Chinese consumers have gravitated toward Apple, and President Xi Jinping and the Communist Party still aim to keep the public happy. But there are limits to Apple’s leverage in the country.“Beijing will not sit idly by,” said Paul Triolo, who leads global technology policy analysis at Eurasia Group, a geopolitical risk consultancy. “Chinese officials will likely pause to digest this move, and the series of other trade and investment moves coming at them in waves, before deciding how best to respond. It is likely to get ugly before it gets better.”Beijing could use its broad cybersecurity laws to steal the core computer code of American companies operating in China, said Dean Garfield, head of the Information Technology Industry Council, a trade group that represents the largest American tech companies. The Chinese government also could walk back recent commitments to allow more financial and electronic payments services from Mastercard, Visa and JPMorgan Chase. Or it could simply restrict American companies’ ability to do business in China, he said.AdvertisementFor ZTE, this week’s sanctions are a nightmare come true. The company’s smartphones and network gear rely on American microchips and software, which means it could need to redesign as much as 90 percent of its product line.ZTE and Google, which supplies the Android operating system in the Chinese company’s phones, are concerned that the ban may prevent ZTE from licensing the software, according to a person familiar with the discussions but not permitted to speak publicly on the matter. No conclusion has been reached yet, the person said.Huawei is a global telecommunications equipment powerhouse, with $93 billion in revenue last year. It has spent millions trying to pry its way into the United States but found few takers — save for smaller, rural telecom companies that receive federal subsidies and would likely be barred from working with it by the F.C.C. rule.Huawei’s troubles in the United States have been mounting since 2012, when a congressional report warned that its gear could be used to spy on Americans or to destabilize American telecom networks. The company spent $1.2 million on lobbying that year. Last year, it spent $60,000.Major American carriers such as Verizon and AT&T have since shunned Huawei. The Commerce and Treasury Departments have subpoenaed it over possible violations of American sanctions on Iran and North Korea. And bills are before Congress to stop government agencies and contractors from buying Huawei products.In January, researchers discovered security flaws in the microprocessors inside nearly all of the world’s computers. A Senate committee wrote to Huawei’s founder to ask what the company knew about the vulnerabilities, and how it had been affected by them. Huawei decided not to respond.Then, last week, Huawei laid off five American employees, including William B. Plummer, the executive who was the face of its Sisyphean efforts to win over Washington.The company has said repeatedly that its products pose no security risk and that it complies with the law everywhere it operates. Still, the layoffs appear to be an acknowledgment by Huawei that it has failed to clear the political cloud around it.Advertisement“Some things cannot change their course according to our wishes,” Eric Xu, Huawei’s deputy chairman, said at the company’s annual meeting with analysts on Tuesday in its home city, Shenzhen. “With some things, when you let them go, you actually feel more at ease.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Plummer, who was Huawei’s vice president of external affairs, had been with the company for almost eight years. He was the most senior member of Huawei’s American policy team who was not a Chinese citizen.It is not clear whether he will be replaced. The company’s policy operations in the United States are led by a relatively recent arrival, Zhang Ruijun, who took the post nine months ago after working for the company in Mexico and Russia.A Huawei spokesman said in a statement that any layoffs simply reflected an effort to better align resources with “business strategy and objectives.”“Any changes to staffing size or structure are simply a reflection of standard business organization,” he said.In the United States, Huawei customers that would be affected by the F.C.C.’s proposed rule — small cellular carriers, largely in rural areas — may soon need to find new equipment suppliers.These carriers love Huawei gear, said Carri Bennet, general counsel for the Rural Wireless Association, an industry group for American telecom companies with fewer than 100,000 subscribers.The association’s members have even elected a Huawei executive, William Levy, to their board.Ms. Bennet said that rather than blacklisting specific manufacturers, Washington should be creating a system for testing telecom gear for security vulnerabilities.“These companies who are reliant on this support, they don’t have the funds to overhaul their whole network,” she said. “Public safety, getting 911 services, broadband — it all just starts falling apart.”Follow Raymond Zhong, Paul Mozur and Jack Nicas on Twitter: @zhonggg, @paulmozur and @jacknicas.Daisuke Wakabayashi contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Limiting Chinese Sales In Tech Battle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 9:52 P.M. E.D.T.
MOSCOW —  Russia's state communications regulator on Tuesday said it had blocked IP addresses owned by Google and Amazon, saying they were being used by the Telegram messaging service which Moscow moved to ban this week.Russia's Roskomnadzor watchdog began blocking Telegram, a messaging service popular in Russia, on Monday after it refused to comply with a court order to grant state security services access to its users' encrypted messages.Roskomnadzor's head Alexander Zharov said it had blocked 18 sub-networks and a significant number of IP-addresses belonging to Google and Amazon, the Interfax news agency reported."We have currently informed both companies that a significant number of IP addresses located in the clouds of these two services have fallen under the block on the basis of the court ruling (to block Telegram)," Zharov was quoted as saying.AdvertisementBlocking the IP addresses has prevented Russian internet users from accessing Telegram and other services that route content through Google and Amazon servers.AdvertisementSome users have circumvented the block by using virtual private networks, which make it seem as though they were accessing the internet from another country.Zharov told Interfax that Roskomnadzor hoped it would receive "legally meaningful" responses from Amazon and Google by Wednesday.The U.S. companies did not immediately respond on Tuesday to a request from Reuters for comment on the Russian move.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."DIGITAL RESISTANCE"Telegram CEO Pavel Durov called on Tuesday for "digital resistance", saying he was prepared to give out millions of dollars worth of grants in bitcoin digital currency to individuals and companies that run proxies and VPNs to support internet freedom.Writing on his Telegram channel, Durov said there had not been a significant drop in users of the service in Russia since the ban took effect because users were using VPNs and proxies to access the messenger. He also thanked Apple, Google, Amazon and Microsoft "for not taking part in political censorship".Durov, a pioneer of social media in Russia, left the country in 2014 and has become a vocal critic of the Kremlin's policies on internet freedom.Telegram is widely used in countries across the former Soviet Union and Middle East. Durov said on Tuesday that Russians account for about 7 percent of its users.As well as being popular with journalists and members of Russia's political opposition, Telegram has also been used by the Kremlin to communicate with reporters and arrange regular conference calls with President Vladimir Putin's spokesman.On Monday the spokesman's office asked journalists who were previously subscribed to a chat in Telegram to switch to a chat that had been set up in a different messaging service, ICQ, which is part of the Russian Mail.ru technology group (MAILRq.L).Advertisement(Reporting by Gabrielle Tétrault-Farber; Editing by Gareth Jones)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPInternet con artists hope their crafty coding will fool you into asking for their fraudulent tech-support services, but you can often escape with a few keystrokes.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. My husband periodically receives a warning box telling us to contact Microsoft because of viruses. We cannot close it, so we turn the computer off and wait a few minutes before turning it back on. Local computer gurus have run scans three times and say that we are not infected with a virus. What can we do? A. The persistent warning boxes sound like they are part of the ongoing blight of “tech support” scams that have plagued computer users for years. In some cases, the “virus alerts” are merely deviously scripted web pages or advertisements that can take over the screen and make it look like a realistic message to spook you into opening your wallet.This type of ruse may not trigger an antivirus program because it is technically just a pop-up window in your web browser. Some adware programs can also fly under the radar of an antivirus tool, but an anti-malware utility like Malwarebytes or Bitdefender might be able to root out any software squatters on your system.Even if the window is hard to close with a click, you may not have to restart the computer to ditch the message. If pressing the Alt and F4 keys on a PC (or the Mac’s Command and Q keys) does not close the program, try force-quitting the browser by pressing the Control, Shift and Escape keys to get to the Windows Task Manager — or by pressing the Command, Shift, Option and Escape keys on a Mac. Make sure your browser is set to block pop-up windows and not to reopen the previous pages when it starts. Microsoft recommends using its newest Edge browser if you use Windows 10, but if you do not care for that program, other modern browsers can block malicious sites — or work with add-ons that do. Google’s Chrome browser has built-in tools in its settings area for removing ads, pop-ups and malware.Microsoft, Apple and the Federal Trade Commission have information on their sites on how to spot and report tech-support scams, as does the Better Business Bureau. As always, never call a telephone number listed on the alert or supply information to the pestering site.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementBy RAYMOND ZHONG and PAUL MOZURAPRIL 17, 2018
SHENZHEN, China — In a grand hotel ballroom on Tuesday, Huawei executives laid out a soaring vision for the future. The Chinese electronics giant, already the world’s biggest supplier of the equipment that powers the wireless age, now wants to provide the digital backbone for artificial intelligence, the internet of things and other transformative technologies.But that future is increasingly looking as if it will not include the United States.Last week, the company laid off five American employees, including William B. Plummer, the executive who was the face of its Sisyphean efforts to win over Washington, according to people familiar with the matter. Huawei has also been dialing back its political outreach in the United States, these people said — which could end a decade of mostly fruitless efforts to dispel Washington’s accusations that the company has ties to the Chinese government.Huawei’s tactics are changing as its business prospects in the United States have darkened considerably. On Tuesday, the Federal Communications Commission voted to proceed with a new rule that could effectively kill off what little business the company has in the United States. Although the proposed rule does not mention Huawei by name, it would block federally subsidized telecommunications carriers from using suppliers deemed to pose a risk to American national security.Like other major tech companies, whether American or Chinese, Huawei (pronounced “HWA-way”) has been caught in the crossfire as the Trump administration ratchets up efforts to stop China’s high-tech ambitions. The two countries are waging a new kind of cold war, and with each increasingly suspicious of the other’s technology, winners are chosen based on national allegiances.AdvertisementHuawei’s latest moves suggest that it has accepted that its political battles in the United States are not ones it is likely to win.AdvertisementOne recent example of reduced communication with Washington came after the discovery in January of security flaws  in the microprocessors inside nearly all of the world’s computers. A Senate committee wrote to Huawei’s founder to ask what the company knew about the vulnerabilities, and how it had been affected by them. Huawei decided not to respond.“Some things cannot change their course according to our wishes,” Eric Xu, Huawei’s deputy chairman, said at the company’s annual meeting with analysts on Tuesday. “With some things, when you let them go, you actually feel more at ease.”Huawei’s main Chinese rival, ZTE, also hit a roadblock in Washington this week. The Commerce Department said it would ban the much smaller company from buying American components after it made false statements to the government as part of an investigation into possible violations of American sanctions.Yet Huawei’s experience also illustrates how little Washington can do to curb Chinese influence in cutting-edge industries throughout the rest of the world.At Tuesday’s meeting with analysts, executives at the company, which says it is owned by its employees and not by the Chinese state, emphasized growth opportunities in Europe and Asia. They also described ambitions to further diversify Huawei’s business into helping organizations of all kinds — not merely wireless carriers, but factories, governments and the police — transform themselves through cloud computing and artificial intelligence.“For Huawei, the major challenge is not how we can serve operators better,” said David Wang, a company president. Instead, he said, “we have to work harder to cope with wider challenges in all industries.”Huawei’s troubles in the United States have been mounting since 2012, when a congressional report warned that its gear could be used to spy on Americans or to destabilize American telecom networks. The company spent $1.2 million on lobbying that year. Last year, it spent $60,000 on such efforts.AdvertisementMajor American carriers such as Verizon and AT&T have since shunned Huawei. The Commerce and Treasury Departments have subpoenaed it over possible violations of American sanctions on Iran and North Korea. The company’s ambitions to become a major smartphone brand — it is already the world’s third largest, after Samsung and Apple — were curtailed when AT&T abandoned a deal this year to sell its handsets. And a bill is before Congress to stop government agencies and contractors from buying Huawei products.The company has said repeatedly that its products pose no security risk and that it complies with the law everywhere it operates. Still, the layoffs last week appear to be an acknowledgment by Huawei that it has failed to clear the political cloud around it.Mr. Plummer, Huawei’s vice president of external affairs, had been with the company for almost eight years. He was the most senior member of Huawei’s American policy team who was not a Chinese citizen.It is not clear whether he will be replaced. The company’s policy operations in the United States are led by a relatively recent arrival, Zhang Ruijun, who took the post nine months ago after working for the company in Mexico and Russia.A Huawei spokesman said in a statement that any layoffs simply reflected an effort to better align resources with “business strategy and objectives.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Any changes to staffing size or structure are simply a reflection of standard business organization,” he said.Founded three decades ago, Huawei made $93 billion in revenue last year — not much less than Google’s parent company, Alphabet, and more than its two main rivals in telecom gear, Nokia of Finland and Ericsson of Sweden, combined.When it comes to the next generation of mobile internet, or 5G, Huawei has invested heavily in technology development.AdvertisementChinese carriers are likely to deploy such networks more quickly than their American counterparts are, at least in the beginning. But as 5G comes up in the United States, Japan, South Korea and Europe, Nokia and Ericsson will catch up, said Pierre Ferragu, an analyst in New York with New Street Research.Still, Huawei’s telecom business could be dampened as other countries, particularly allies of the United States, weigh risks to their national security. The chief executive of a leading wireless provider in South Korea told the newspaper The Korea Herald last month that the company was unsure whether to use Huawei’s 5G equipment.In the United States, Huawei customers that would be affected by the F.C.C.’s proposed rule — small carriers in rural areas — may soon need to find new equipment suppliers.These carriers love Huawei gear, said Carri Bennet, general counsel for the Rural Wireless Association, an industry group for American telecom companies with fewer than 100,000 subscribers.“They just love it,” she said. “It works like a charm, the customer service support is awesome,” and the price is attractive, she added.The association’s members have even elected a Huawei executive, William Levy, to their board.Ms. Bennet said that rather than blacklisting specific manufacturers, Washington should be creating a system for testing telecom gear for security vulnerabilities.“These companies who are reliant on this support, they don’t have the funds to overhaul their whole network,” she said. “Public safety, getting 911 services, broadband — it all just starts falling apart.”Follow Raymond Zhong and Paul Mozur on Twitter: @zhonggg and @paulmozur.Raymond Zhong reported from Shenzhen, China, and Paul Mozur from Shanghai.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersNEW DELHI — Microsoft Corp is investigating the methods partner KPMG uses to crack down on the illegal use of its software in India, after a complaint from a senior member of the country's ruling political party, documents seen by Reuters showed.India is one of the U.S. technology firm's biggest markets in Asia, yet over half of all software installed on computers in the country is unlicensed, advocacy group Business Software Alliance said in 2016.A pirated compact disc of Microsoft's Windows 10 can be bought for around $2 in New Delhi, compared with $130 needed to buy the operating system from Microsoft's online portal.To ensure compliance, Microsoft runs a global "software asset management" (SAM) program under which it partners global consultants, such as KPMG in India, which seek permission from business owners to check for the use of unlicensed software.Last month, Vinit Goenka, a member of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and technology adviser to the government, complained to both companies that a KPMG employee "barged in" to his Mumbai recruitment firm without an appointment to check its software, according to emails reviewed by Reuters.Rajiv Sodhi, a senior Microsoft India executive, told Goenka in a March 20 email that the company was looking at the issue with "utmost seriousness"."We are also getting an assessment agency to carry out an audit of the process delivery at KPMG to identify and correct gaps, if any," Sodhi wrote in the email reviewed by Reuters.Sodhi did not respond to a request for comment.Microsoft told Reuters its SAM program is run as per global standards, while KPMG said it follows "appropriate procedures agreed in our engagement with clients". Both declined to comment on the alleged incident and probe.The employee, who identified himself in the emails as Srijesh, declined to comment.Goenka confirmed the incident and complaint, telling Reuters the handful of computers at his company, Ratein Infotech, used genuine software. He said he planned to file a police complaint against both companies.Ratein Infotech last month received a letter from the U.S. software firm saying it needed help in "interpreting licensing policies of Microsoft", the emails showed. The issue escalated when the KPMG employee entered Ratien's office on March 15.Microsoft and KPMG apologized and the employee, Srijesh, resigned, the e-mails showed."This is part of my regular job, that I do on a daily basis as directed by KPMG and Microsoft," Srijesh wrote in an apology email to Goenka, seen by Reuters.Goenka is a former employee of International Business Machines Corp and advises government committees on information technology initiatives. (Reporting by Krishna N. Das and Aditya Kalra; Editing by Euan Rocha and Christopher Cushing)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 9:37 A.M. E.D.T.
MOSCOW —  Russia's state telecommunications regulator said on Monday it had begun blocking access to Telegram messenger after the company refused to comply with an order to give Russian state security access to its users' secret messages.The watchdog, Roskomnadzor, said in a statement on its website that it had sent telecoms operators a notification about blocking access to Telegram inside Russia.The service, set up by a Russian entrepreneur, has more than 200 million global users and is ranked as the world's ninth most popular mobile messaging app.A Roskomnadzor official said it would take several hours to complete the operation to block access, Interfax news agency said.AdvertisementIn Moscow, the Telegram app was still functioning as normal by mid-afternoon on Monday, but the company's website had been blocked by two of Russia's biggest service providers, MTS and Megafon.AdvertisementBoth MTS and Megafon declined to comment.Roskomnadzor was implementing a decision handed down on Friday by a Russian court, which ruled that Telegram should be blocked because it was in violation of Russian regulations.Telegram has repeatedly refused to comply with requests to give Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB) access to its users' encrypted messages.The FSB has said it needs such access to guard against security threats such as terrorist attacks. But Telegram said  compliance would violate users' privacy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Telegram's founder and CEO, Pavel Durov, said the ban would damage the quality of lives of 15 million Russians and do nothing to improve Russia's security."The terrorist threat in Russia will stay at the same level, because extremists will continue to use encrypted communication channels - in other messengers, or through a VPN," he said."We consider the ban decision anti-constitutional and will continue to defend the right to secret correspondence for Russians."Durov was a pioneer of social media in Russia but left the country in 2014. He has since been a vocal critic of the Kremlin's policies on Internet freedom.Telegram is widely used in countries across the former Soviet Union and Middle East.As well as being popular with journalists and members of Russia's political opposition, Telegram is also used by the Kremlin to communicate with reporters and arrange regular conference calls with President Vladimir Putin's spokesman.On Monday, the spokesman's office asked journalists who were previously subscribed to a chat in Telegram to switch to a chat that had been set up in a different messaging service, ICQ, which is part of the Russian Mail.ru technology group.Advertisement(Editing by Gareth Jones and Richard Balmforth)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATHANIEL POPPER and NICHOLAS CONFESSOREAPRIL 17, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The embattled political data firm Cambridge Analytica quietly sought to develop its own virtual currency in recent months through a so-called initial coin offering, a novel fund-raising method that has come under growing scrutiny by financial regulators around the world.The offering was part of a broader, but still very private push that the firm was making into the nascent world of cryptocurrencies over the last year.Much like its acquisition of Facebook data to build psychological profiles of voters, the new business line pushed the firm into murky ethical and legal situations. Documents and emails obtained by The New York Times show that Cambridge Analytica’s efforts to help promote another group’s digital token, the Dragon Coin, associated the firm with a famous gangster in Macau who has gone by the nickname Broken Tooth.The goal of Cambridge Analytica’s own coin offering? Raise money that would pay for the creation of a system to help people store and sell their online personal data to advertisers, Brittany Kaiser, a former Cambridge Analytica employee, said in an interview. The idea was to protect information from more or less what the firm did when it obtained the personal data of up to 87 million Facebook users.Advertisement“Who knows more about the usage of personal data than Cambridge Analytica?” Ms. Kaiser said. “So why not build a platform that reconstructs the way that works?”
         Revelations that consultants to the Trump campaign misused millions of Facebook users’ data set off an international furor. This is how The Times covered it.
      The effort was overseen by Cambridge Analytica’s British chief executive, Alexander Nix, who was forced out of the company in March after he was caught on tape bragging about his company’s approach to political work in other countries, including the use of shell companies and strategies designed to entrap opponents. The Facebook data revelations and Mr. Nix’s comments appear to have put the virtual currency work, which was still in the early stages, on hold.AdvertisementInitial coin offerings, or I.C.O.s, are a method of fund-raising in which companies sell their own virtual currencies. The tokens are generally structured like Bitcoin, using a so-called blockchain to record transactions. The coins are usually designed to be used as an internal payment method in software that the start-ups are building. Over the last year, companies have raised over $6 billion through I.C.O.s.Coin offerings generally avoid the regulatory oversight that accompanies traditional fund-raising methods, opening the door for significant fraud. A number of coin offerings have been shut down by law enforcement, and there are several broad investigations of the industry by regulators around the world.“There are only a handful of more controversial areas it could have expanded its business into,” said Tim Swanson, a consultant to companies in the industry, who was briefed on the Cambridge Analytica coin offering.A spokesman for Cambridge Analytica did not respond to multiple requests for comment.Cambridge Analytica began working with coin offerings in the middle of last year. The business was guided by Ms. Kaiser, an American who led the company’s business development and previously appeared at a press event with organizers of the “Brexit” campaign to get Britain out of the European Union.Cambridge Analytica boasts that its “psychographic profiles” of voters and consumers allow for more persuasive and precisely targeted advertising. In marketing material sent to investors, the firm said Ms. Kaiser was “helping blockchain companies in using predictive modeling to target investors for token sales.”Jill Carlson, a consultant who has worked with several blockchain companies, attended meetings where Cambridge Analytica pitched its services to virtual currency companies, including one that Mr. Nix attended.AdvertisementMs. Carlson said the Cambridge Analytica employees had bragged about their success in helping get President Trump elected and their ability to carefully target advertising campaigns using data from social networks like Facebook.She also remembers they spoke about an array of potential campaigns. The most unusual idea involved sending virtual currencies to people in far-flung regions of Mexico. The payments would give people incentive to fill out surveys and get data that could then be used to help design campaigns for Mexican political candidates.Ms. Carlson said the pitch was contrary to the ideas of openness and transparency that drew her to virtual currency projects like Bitcoin.“The way that Cambridge Analytica was talking about it, they were viewing it as a means of being able to basically inflict government control and private corporate control over individuals, which just takes the whole initial premise of this technology and turns it on its head in this very dystopian way,” she said.Cambridge Analytica did win over some clients. Last summer, Ms. Kaiser’s team began working with Dragon Coin, a new virtual currency that was designed to be used by gamblers. The coin was supposed to make it easier for people to get their money to casinos in Macau, an island that is technically a part of China with some independent political structures.Cambridge Analytica had little public role in promoting Dragon Coin. But behind the scenes the company emailed potential partners and investors and arranged for some of them to take all-expenses-paid trips to a glitzy Dragon Coin event in Macau.The South China Morning Post published a photo from the event showing Wan Kuok-koi in attendance. Mr. Wan is known as Broken Tooth Koi from his days as the leader of the famous 14K gang in Macau. He was released from prison in 2012 after serving a 14-year term.The founder of Dragon Coin, Chris Ahmad, told Business Insider at the time that Mr. Wan “is not involved in Dragon, and he is not financing Dragon in any way.”But documents sent in September to potential investors by Dragon Coin’s co-founder Paul Moynan listed Mr. Wan as the sponsor of the initial coin offering and included his picture. Ms. Kaiser was included in the email. A separate Dragon Coin document that Mr. Moynan sent out at the same time listed Mr. Wan as one of a few high-profile supporters of the project.AdvertisementWhen reached recently, Mr. Moynan initially said that his email address had been hacked and that he did not recognize the documents. He later said the documents were a “hypothetical wish list” of a “junior staff” member.“We will be conducting an internal investigation, as unfinished draft documents would never have been indicative of actual agreed partnerships,” he said.Ms. Kaiser said that her work on the Dragon Coin event in Macau had been done in a personal capacity, and that the Dragon Coin team had told her that Mr. Wan was not involved with the project.Dragon Coin claimed it raised more than $300 million from investors last fall. That total has been hard to verify. Like many coin offerings, Dragon Coin has failed to live up to its promises.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The document sent to investors in September said Dragon Coin had secured a partnership with Visa to release a debit card that would work on the Visa network. A spokeswoman for Visa said that there was no partnership and that no Dragon card had been approved, as is necessary for a card to be issued.The documents last summer also said the Dragon app, which would let investors use its virtual coin, would be available in September. When that didn’t happen, the company promised the app in January — but it still has not appeared. In the meantime, the company has spent its money sponsoring a Formula E car racing team and a team climbing Mount Everest.The setbacks did not stop Cambridge Analytica from plunging further into the virtual currency realm. The company’s New York office continued reaching out to potential investors and partners, emails show. And in January, Ms. Kaiser hosted a side conference dedicated to blockchain projects, known as CryptoHQ, at the World Economic Forum’s annual conference in Davos, Switzerland. Mr. Nix spoke on a panel at the event.AdvertisementHe said that the technology would be helpful in solving the very problems that Cambridge Analytica has since become the emblem of — the abuse of online personal data.“We’re going to see a new type of economy emerging where people can start to take ownership of their data and monetize on their data,” Mr. Nix said, according to a tweet from the CryptoHQ account. “And that is only possible through the blockchain.”
            “We’re going to see a new type of economy emerging where people can start to take ownership of their data and monetize on their data. And that is only possible through the blockchain.” -Alexander Nix, CEO, Cambridge Analytica #CryptoHQ #blockchain #BuenoCapital #Decentranet pic.twitter.com/cjdSmdMWxt The virtual currency that Cambridge Analytica was designing was aimed at exactly this problem, and would have also helped the company raise money from investors.The company wrote a document describing the technical specifications of the coin, Ms. Kaiser said. Her account was confirmed by another person who worked on the project and agreed to speak on the condition of anonymity. The work was overseen by Alexander Tayler, the firm’s chief data scientist and briefly the interim chief executive after Mr. Nix stepped down.Ms. Kaiser left Cambridge Analytica in February and has been sharply critical of the company since then. As far as she knows, the coin offering has not moved forward. But she is still working on similar concepts at her new consulting firm, Bueno Capital.Follow Nathaniel Popper and Nicholas Confessore on Twitter: @nathanielpopper and @nickconfessore.Nathaniel Popper reported from San Francisco, and Nicholas Confessore from New York.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: After Obtaining Real Personal Data, A Political Firm Explores Virtual Currency.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSHANGHAI — China has laid out national guidelines for testing self-driving cars as it looks to keep pace with the United States in a global race to develop autonomous vehicles, the China Daily newspaper reported on Friday, citing the country's industry ministry.The rules lay out requirements that vehicles must first be tested in non-public zones, that road tests can only be on designated streets and that a qualified person must always sit in the driver's position, ready to take over control.China is making a major push into autonomous smart vehicles, keen to have its own national champions in self-driving to compete with global leaders such as Waymo, the self-driving arm of Google parent Alphabet Inc, and Tesla Inc.Xin Guobin, the country's vice industry minister, said China would slip behind rivals like the United States if it did not "firmly seize" initiative in the sector, which he called a key plank of Beijing "Made in China 2025" push."We will accelerate to build a strong manufacturing country, a strong country in science and technology with strong networks and transportation," he said in comments posed on the Ministry of Industry of Information Technology website.Chinese cities including Beijing and Shanghai have previously announced local guidelines for self-driving tests, while internet giant Baidu Inc already has approval to test self-driving vehicles on city streets.In the wake of two high-profile crashes in the United States involving Uber Technologies [UBER.UL] and Tesla, MIIT vice minister Xin said China would emphasize safety as the "top priority" in testing for autonomous vehicles."To ensure the safety of road tests, we will not only not only require that road tests take place on prescribed streets, but also that the test driver sits in the driver position throughout, monitoring the car and the surrounding environment and ready to take control of the car at any time," he added."This is a lesson that we have learned from the accidents faced by Uber and Tesla."Fatal crashes last month involving the two U.S. firms have raised scrutiny on self-driving globally and ramped up pressure on the industry to prove its software and sensors are safe.Xin added China should also push forward other technologies needed to support smart vehicles, including next-generation 5G communications networks and intelligent roads. (Reporting by Adam Jourdan; Editing by Shri Navaratnam)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 11:04 A.M. E.D.T.
MOSCOW —  A Russian court on Friday ordered that access to the Telegram messenger service be blocked in Russia, heralding possible communication disruption for millions of users in the latest clash between global technology firms and Russian authorities.The decision came a week after state communication watchdog, Roskomnadzor, filed a lawsuit to limit access to Telegram following the company's repeated refusal to give Russian state security services access to its users' secret messages.As part of its services, Telegram allows its more than 200 million global users, including senior Russian government officials, to communicate via encrypted messages which cannot be read by third parties.But Russia's FSB Federal Security service has said it needs access to some of those messages for its work that includes guarding against terrorist attacks. Telegram has refused to comply with the demands, citing respect for user privacy.Advertisement"The court decided to meet the requirements of Roskomnadzor, impose restrictions on access to Telegram messenger and stop providing technical conditions for the exchange of messages," the TASS news agency quoted judge Yulia Smolina as saying.AdvertisementRoskomnadzor head Alexander Zharov said the ban would be enforced soon but would not say exactly when, TASS reported. Roskomnadzor later added Telegram to its register of banned websites, paving the way for it to be blocked.Russia's top network providers, Megafon and MTS, declined to comment on the ban. Competitor Beeline said it would "act within the framework of the law."Telegram founder and CEO, Pavel Durov, said the app will use built-in systems to circumnavigate the ban but could not guarantee 100 percent access without the use of a virtual private network, or VPN.Pavel Chikov, a lawyer representing Telegram, said the court decision was warning to global technology firms of the dangers of operating in Russia."They have demonstrated again and again that the court system is devoted to serving the interests of the authorities. They no longer even care about basic external appearances," he said on his Telegram channel.Fallout from the court decision will also be closely watched by investors as Telegram is undertaking the world's biggest initial coin offering - a private sale of tokens which can be traded as an alternative currency, similar to Bitcoin or Ethereum.The company has so far raised $1.7 billion in pre-sales via the offering, according to media reports.AdvertisementKREMLIN USERSRanked as the world's ninth most popular mobile messaging app, Telegram is widely used in countries across the former Soviet Union and Middle East.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As well as being popular with journalists and members of Russia's political opposition, Telegram is also used by the Kremlin to communicate with reporters and arrange regular conference calls with President Vladimir Putin's spokesman.Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters on a conference call on Friday, organized using Telegram, that his office would soon move to another messaging service."Limiting access was not the goal in and of itself," he said. "There is the legal position, which requires the provision of data to certain Russian state bodies. Meetings this condition would have allowed for a consensus. But unfortunately this consensus was not reached."Telegram is the second global network to be blocked in Russia after LinkedIn was banned in 2016 for failing to comply with a law that requires companies holding Russian citizens' data to store it on servers on Russian soil.Other international technology companies, such as Facebook and Alphabet Inc's Google, have also clashed recently with Russian regulators.Roskomnadzor asked Facebook earlier this week about the steps it was taking to meet its requirements under the data law and has said it will carry out an audit of Facebook's compliance with Russian legislation in the second half of 2018.Durov himself left Russia in 2014 after selling the country's biggest social media network, VK, to a businessman close to the Kremlin after coming under pressure from Russian authorities.Russian users will still be able to access Telegram's services by using VPNs, which allow people to bypass internet restrictions imposed by authorities.AdvertisementWhen Reuters asked a person in the Russian government how they would operate without access to Telegram, the person, who asked not be identified due to the sensitivity of the issue, replied by sending a screenshot of his mobile phone with an open VPN app.Russia's deputy communications minister, Alexei Volin, said VPNs and other ways of circumnavigating the ban meant Telegram users would not be greatly inconvenienced."Many Telegram users have already adopted different messengers, and those who want to stay with this product know a lot of ways to get round the ban and continue using the services they are used to," Interfax news agency quoted him as saying.(Additional reporting by Anastasia Teterevleva, Maria Kiselyova and Denis Pinchuk in Moscow, Eric Auchard in London; Editing by Matthew Mpoke Bigg)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersNEW DELHI — Coinsecure, an Indian cryptocurrency exchange, said nearly $3 million were stolen from its bitcoin wallet, the biggest reported so far in the country's fledgling virtual currency market.The theft is expected to further weaken trade in cryptocurrencies, which the government has likened to "Ponzi schemes" that offer unusually high returns to early investors.Coinsecure, which has over 200,000 users trading on its platform daily, said that around 438 bitcoins, which were stored in a password-protected virtual wallet were siphoned off to an unknown destination on the internet after the details were leaked online. "We regret to inform you that our bitcoin funds have been exposed and seem to have been siphoned out to an address that is outside our control," the company said in a statement posted on its website.Legal experts said there was a need to regulate the virtual currency market, instead of imposing restrictions on its trade."It is for reasons like these that there is a need to regulate crypto-exchanges," said Anirudh Rastogi, founder and managing partner at TRA Law, a firm that specializes in emerging-technology businesses. "Pushing the exchange business out from the formal economy to the informal cash economy to operate under the radar will worsen the problem, not solve it," Rastogi said. Coinsecure said it would compensate customers for losses from its existing funds.Bitcoins in India were trading at 480,000 Indian rupees, or about $7,359 on Friday, according to cryptocurrency exchange Coinome, well below its international market price of about $7,771. The Reserve Bank of India has already dealt a blow to the crytocurrency exchanges, barring banks from facilitating trade on virtual currencies and mandating them to unwind their existing relationship with exchanges within three months. Elsewhere in Asia, Vietnam and South Korea have also suffered millions of dollars worth of fraud and embezzlement in some of the cryptocurrency businesses. Earlier this year, one of Japan’s cryptocurrency exchanges was hit by a daring $530 million theft of digital money.($1 = 65.2800 Indian rupees) (Reporting by Neha Dasgupta, additional reporting by Abhirup Roy; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani and Shri Navaratnam)AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPIf you can’t get your printer on the network, you may be able to get assistance without waiting for a human to come to the phone.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. I cannot even get my Canon printer on my wireless network in the first place so I can register it or print anything with a Chromebook. Where do I start?A. Canon makes a large number of different printers, and the wireless setup steps will vary based on the model you have. If you cannot reach anybody on the company’s telephone support lines to walk you through the process, check the technical support area of Canon’s printers site for instructional videos or browse the page devoted to wireless printing. The Canon video library has clips that guide you through the wireless setup for several printers, and you may be able to find one for your specific model. In some cases, you may need a smartphone or a computer to help get the printer on the network.You can also find written guides for dozens of models on the Support for Printers page on the Canon site. The page is organized by model number and the guides have a separate section devoted to wireless setup for the printers that offer Wi-Fi connectivity. Check your wireless network setup as well and make sure you are using the correct password when trying to get the printer to join.Google’s Chromebook computers usually work the easiest with “cloud-ready” printers, and Canon has a guide for setting up the Google Cloud Print service on compatible models. If you do not have a cloud-ready Canon printer model — but it still has wireless connectivity — you may be able to print from a Chromebook by adding the printer to the Cloud Print site with a PC or Mac laptop.Other options include manually adding the printer to your Chromebook by entering its network address and other information, finagling the Chromebook to work with a networked printer or using a Chrome browser extension to get the software to talk to the hardware so you can print.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementBy ZACH WICHTERAPRIL 12, 2018
Senator John Kennedy told Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, that his company’s user agreement “sucks.” Our reporter Sheera Frenkel explains the senator’s questions, Mr. Zuckerberg’s answers and what they really mean.Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s founder, endured a rite of passage this week that other powerful executives have gone through before: a public grilling before Congress.Over two days, nearly 100 lawmakers in the House and Senate interrogated Mr. Zuckerberg about the company’s handling of user information. He faced almost 600 questions, including whether the company should be more heavily regulated, whether it intentionally censors conservative content and how much Russians may have meddled with America’s democratic process through the social network.The hearings came in the wake of revelations that the political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica improperly harvested data of up to 87 million Facebook users.Mr. Zuckerberg spent most of Monday visiting with top lawmakers he would later face in the hearings, mounting an apology tour of sorts. He tried to impress upon them that he understood where his company had failed, and outlined the work that Facebook was doing to avoid similar issues in the future.AdvertisementThe 33-year-old executive prepared for the hearings as if they were presidential debates, coordinating with a team of experts that included a former special assistant to President George W. Bush. He was ready to discuss topics from privacy to political polarization.AdvertisementThe company made a series of announcements that it said would help people to take better control of their information. It cut off advertisers’ access to information from third-party data brokers, which had allowed marketers to increasingly target users on the social network. The company also promoted ways for people to download and review their data. What Facebook amassed about our main personal technology writer shocked him.Privacy and data practices weren’t the only things that drew scrutiny. Some of Facebook’s most devoted users publicly criticized the social network for how they said it profited off unpaid publishers. And organizations working in Myanmar rebuked Facebook for not doing enough to stop hate speech, which has incited violence in that country. The organizers received a personal response from Mr. Zuckerberg, saying — perhaps unexpectedly — sorry.In a hearing held in response to revelations of data harvesting by Cambridge Analytica, Mark Zuckerberg, the Facebook chief executive, faced questions from senators on a variety of issues, from privacy to the company’s business model.This was Mr. Zuckerberg’s first testimony before Congress. To mark the occasion, he shed his iconic T-shirt-and-hoodie wardrobe for more formal attire. For his first round of testimony, before the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees, he wore the standard Washington uniform of a navy blue suit, paired with a “Facebook blue” tie. It was what one may call his “I’m sorry” suit. Our fashion critic said that while the gesture may have been superficial at best, it was strategic and optically effective.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Senate hearing turned out to be a pointed gripe session. Senator Richard Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, zeroed in on the central issue of the hearing, asking Mr. Zuckerberg whether he would be comfortable sharing aloud the name of the hotel where he stayed on Monday night, or whether he would be comfortable sharing the names of the people he has messaged this week.“No. I would probably not choose to do that publicly here,” Mr. Zuckerberg said.“I think that may be what this is all about,” Mr. Durbin said. “Your right to privacy. The limits of your right to privacy. And how much you give away in modern America in the name of, quote, connecting people around the world.”At some point during the Senate hearing, Mr. Zuckerberg inadvertently disclosed some of his talking points. One section suggested responses in case someone asked if he would step down. No one did.Members of the Energy and Commerce Committee pressed Facebook’s chief executive on data privacy, security and political bias on the social media platform.Mr. Zuckerberg’s second day on the Hill was arguably more tense, with lawmakers from the House Energy and Commerce Committee asking more pointed questions than their counterparts in the Senate had. Calls for greater congressional scrutiny began to grow, as our reporters on the Daily podcast explored.AdvertisementOver the two days, Mr. Zuckerberg did not have any major slip-ups, but his testimony was inaccurate at times. We fact-checked what he said.Mr. Zuckerberg’s testimony may have been so smooth in part because he avoided answering many questions, using a variation of the phrase “my team will get back to you” more than 20 times.In the meantime, lawmakers are trying to see how to best regulate internet behemoths. One of our columnists writes that even legislators who are not digital natives should not be cowed from regulating technology companies as they have other industries.Many of them are regular Facebook users anyway.Privacy experts agree with the calls for regulation, saying there is now enough social consciousness to make real and important changes in the way the internet user data is handled and regulated.Members of Congress can perhaps look to their counterparts in Europe for legislation inspiration. Regulators there are already cracking down on Facebook, forcing the company to stop using facial recognition technology within the European Union and curtail some of its internet-use tracking practices in some countries. Mr. Zuckerberg’s inquisitors in Congress have already suggested that they may be looking to mirror some of those efforts in the United States.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 1:13 P.M. E.D.T.
(Reuters) - A bipartisan group of lawmakers in the U.S. House of Representatives on Friday sent a letter to FBI Director Christopher Wray questioning the law enforcement agency's decision to take Apple Inc to court to force the company to help unlock a mass shooter's iPhone.Last month, a report from the Justice Department's internal watchdog found that the FBI didn't exhaust all its  options to unlock San Bernardino shooter Syed Farook's iPhone before attempting to force Apple to help do so. The FBI didn't consult its own internal experts or outside vendors before going to court, and the poor coordination resulted in the FBI withdrawing its legal efforts when an outside vendor eventually accessed the device.A group of 10 representatives evenly split between Republicans and Democrats said the report raised concerns that the FBI officials didn't exhaust the agency's technical options "precisely because they wanted the suit against Apple to go forward."The report "undermines the statements that the FBI made during the San Bernardino litigation and consistently since then, that only the device manufacturer could provide a solution," the lawmakers wrote.AdvertisementThe lawmakers also said that recent media reports that cyber security vendors such as Cellebrite and GrayShift are routinely able to unlock iPhones "raises even more concerns that the FBI has not been forthcoming about the extent of the 'Going Dark' problem."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."Going Dark" refers to law enforcement officials' inability to read data on encrypted devices and services such as Apple's iPhones or messaging services like Signal. The FBI says it has some 7,800 devices inaccessible due to encryption, and Wray has called unbreakable encryption an "urgent public safety issue."AdvertisementTechnology companies and many digital security experts have said that the FBI’s attempts to require that devices allow investigators a way to access a criminal suspect’s cellphone would harm internet security and empower malicious hackers. U.S. lawmakers, meanwhile, have expressed little interest in pursuing legislation to require companies to create products whose contents are accessible to authorities who obtain a warrant.In their letter to Wray, lawmakers asked whether the FBI has consulted third-party vendors to crack iPhones and, if not, explain why those methods won't work for the agency. The lawmakers also want to know how many of the FBI's locked phones might also have data that could be obtained from a cloud-based Internet service, which is typically straightforward for law enforcement officials to obtain with a valid legal order.(Reporting by Stephen Nellis; Editing by Andrea Ricci)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPPhotographers who want to leave the bulky laptop at home can edit and save images in the uncompressed RAW format right on Apple’s tablet.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. Can I edit RAW image files from my D.S.L.R. on an iPad Pro? If so, is it possible to save the edited images back to the computer later so I don’t have to take a laptop with me on my trip?A. If your camera uses a RAW format supported by Apple’s iOS system on the iPad and you have a photo-editing app that works with RAW files, you should be able to import, edit and save your photos as you go. When you are done, you can transfer the edited images to the computer back home in a few different ways. (For those unfamiliar with the file type, RAW photos are uncompressed image files that retain much more visual data in the picture than do files saved in the compressed JPG format. RAW files give photographers more to edit.)When you are ready to edit photos, you first need to get the picture files from the camera to the tablet. You can do this in a few ways, including using one of Apple’s camera-card adapters plugged into the iPad to download the original RAW files, or beaming the photos wirelessly from camera to tablet with a camera memory card enabled for Wi-Fi. Once you have imported the images to the iPad’s camera roll, you can pull them into an app that supports RAW editing and make your adjustments. The $20 Affinity for iPad, the freemium RAW Power and the older (but free) Snapseed are among the apps that can edit RAW files on the tablet. The free Adobe Lightroom CC for iOS added RAW editing in 2016 and can sync edited files back to the companion Adobe Lightroom CC app on a Mac or Windows PC — with a paid subscription. You can also sync the edited photos to a cloud server like iCloud Photo Library. You will need a decent broadband connection to sync a lot of large RAW files to an online server, but doing so does back up the images and make them available to download on your computer. If you do not want to use an online service, you can import the edited images to your computer over a USB connection between the tablet and laptop, or back them up to a portable flash drive designed to work with the iPad Pro’s Lightning connector.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Natasha SingerMark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, went to Capitol Hill this week to explain to members of Congress how the detailed personal information of up to 87 million Facebook users ended up in the hands of a voter-profiling company called Cambridge Analytica.What Mr. Zuckerberg got instead, as he testified before the House Energy and Commerce Committee on Wednesday, was a grilling about Facebook’s own data-mining practices.Representative Debbie Dingell, a Democrat from Michigan, for one, wanted to know about Facebook’s use of different types of tracking software to follow consumers’ activities on millions of non-Facebook sites all over the web.“It doesn’t matter whether you have a Facebook account,” Ms. Dingell said to Mr. Zuckerberg. “Through those tools, Facebook is able to collect information from all of us.”Facebook meticulously scrutinizes the minutiae of its users’ online lives, and its tracking stretches far beyond the company’s well-known targeted advertisements. Details that people often readily volunteer — age, employer, relationship status, likes and location — are just the start.Facebook tracks both its users and nonusers on other sites and apps. It collects biometric facial data without users’ explicit “opt-in” consent.And the sifting of users can get quite personal. Among many possible target audiences, Facebook offers advertisers 1.5 million people “whose activity on Facebook suggests that they’re more likely to engage with/distribute liberal political content” and nearly seven million Facebook users who “prefer high-value goods in Mexico.”“Facebook can learn almost anything about you by using artificial intelligence to analyze your behavior,” said Peter Eckersley, the chief computer scientist for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a digital rights nonprofit. “That knowledge turns out to be perfect both for advertising and propaganda. Will Facebook ever prevent itself from learning people’s political views, or other sensitive facts about them?”Many other companies, including news organizations like The New York Times, mine information about users for marketing purposes. If Facebook is being singled out for such practices, it is because it is a market leader and its stockpiling of personal data is at the core of its $40.6 billion annual business.Facebook uses a number of software tools to do this tracking. When internet users venture to other sites, Facebook can still monitor what they are doing with software like its ubiquitous “Like” and “Share” buttons, and something called Facebook Pixel — invisible code that’s dropped onto the other websites that allows that site and Facebook to track users’ activity.Ms. Dingell asked Mr. Zuckerberg how many non-Facebook sites used various kinds of Facebook tracking software: “Is the number over 100 million?” He said he’d have to get back to her with an answer.“There are common parts of people’s experience on the internet,” Matt Steinfeld, a Facebook spokesman, said in a statement. “But of course we can do more to help people understand how Facebook works and the choices they have.”While a series of actions by European judges and regulators are trying to curb some of the powerful targeting mechanisms that Facebook employs, federal officials in the United States have done little to constrain them — to the consternation of American privacy advocates who say Facebook continues to test the boundaries of what is permissible.Facebook requires outside sites that use its tracking technologies to clearly notify users, and it allows Facebook users to opt out of seeing ads based on their use of those apps and websites.That has not stopped angry users from airing their grievances over Facebook’s practices.In 2016, for example, a Missouri man with metastatic cancer  sued Facebook. The suit, which sought class-action status, accused the tech giant of violating the man’s privacy by tracking his activities on cancer center websites outside the social network — and collecting details about his possible treatment options — without his permission.Facebook persuaded a federal judge to dismiss the case. The company argued that tracking users for ad-targeting purposes was a standard business practice, and one that its users agreed to when signing up for the service. The Missouri man and two other plaintiffs have appealed the judge’s decision.Facebook is quick to note that when users sign up for an account, they must agree to the company’s data policy. It plainly states that its data collection “includes information about the websites and apps you visit, your use of our services on those websites and apps, as well as information the developer or publisher of the app or website provides to you or us.”But in Europe, some regulators contend that Facebook has not obtained users’ explicit and informed consent to track them on other sites and apps. Their general concern, they said, is that many of Facebook’s 2.1 billion users have no idea how much data Facebook could collect about them and how the company could use it. And there is a growing unease that tech giants are unfairly manipulating users.“Facebook provides a network where the users, while getting free services most of them consider useful, are subject to a multitude of nontransparent analyses, profiling, and other mostly obscure algorithmical processing,” said Johannes Caspar, the data protection commissioner for Hamburg, Germany.In 2015, for instance, the Belgian Privacy Commission ordered Facebook to stop systematically using “long-term and uniquely identifying” codes to track nonusers without their “unequivocal and specific consent.” The agency subsequently sued Facebook. In February, a judge in Brussels ordered Facebook to stop tracking “each internet user on Belgian soil” on other websites.Facebook has appealed the decision. In his comments in the House hearing on Wednesday, Mr. Zuckerberg said Facebook tracked nonusers for security purposes — to ensure they could not scrape public data about Facebook users.But, in one presentation on the case, Belgian regulators wrote: “Tracking nonusers for security purposes is excessive.”And on Friday, the Italian Competition Authority said it was investigating Facebook for exercising “undue influence” by requiring users to let the company automatically collect all kinds of data about them both on its platform and off.“Every single action, every single relationship is carefully monitored,” said Giovanni Buttarelli, the European data protection supervisor, who oversees an independent European Union authority that advises on privacy-related laws and policies. “People are being treated like laboratory animals.”Regulators have won some victories. In 2012, Facebook agreed to stop using face recognition technology in the European Union after Mr. Caspar, the Hamburg data protection commissioner, accused it of violating German and European privacy regulations by collecting users’ biometric facial data without their explicit consent.Outside the European Union, Facebook employs face recognition technology for a name-tagging feature that can automatically suggest names for the people in users’ photos. But civil liberties experts warn that face recognition technology could threaten the ability of Americans to remain anonymous online, on the street and at political protests.Now a dozen consumer and privacy groups in the United States have accused Facebook of deceptively rolling out expanded uses of the technology without clearly explaining it to users or obtaining their explicit “opt-in” consent. On Friday, the groups filed a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission saying that the expansion violated a 2011 agreement prohibiting Facebook from deceptive privacy practices.Facebook sent notices alerting users of its new face recognition uses and said it provides a page where they can turn the feature off.Facebook has other powerful techniques with implications users may not fully understand.One is a marketing service called “Lookalike Audiences,” which goes beyond the familiar Facebook programs allowing advertisers to target people by their ages or likes. The look-alike audience feature allows marketers to examine their existing customers or voters for certain propensities — like big spending — and have Facebook find other users with similar tendencies.Murka, a social casino game developer, used the feature to target “high-value players” who were “most likely to make in-app purchases,” according to Facebook marketing material.Some marketers worry that political campaigns or unscrupulous companies could potentially use the same technique to identify the characteristics of, for instance, people who make rash decisions and find a bigger pool of the same sort of Facebook users.Facebook’s policies prohibit potentially predatory ad-targeting practices. Advertisers are able to target users using the look-alike service, but they do not receive personal data about those Facebook users.Jeffrey Chester, executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, a nonprofit group in Washington, however, warned that this look-alike marketing was a hidden, manipulative practice — on a par with subliminal advertising — and said it should be prohibited.Follow Natasha Singer on Twitter: @natashanytAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPFacebook’s “post tabs” try to keep you in the conversation your friends are having about your posts, but you can turn off the tabs.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. I often get interrupted by little pop-up windows showing comments from friends when I’m using Facebook on my computer. I looked in the notification settings for a place to turn off the pop-ups, but didn’t see anything. Am I stuck with these annoyances?A. Unlike the simple notification alerts that appear quickly and disappear, those windows that rise up from the lower part of the window when you are browsing Facebook are intended to keep you in the loop when your friends comment and start a conversation on a post you have made. (Facebook does not pop up windows for every conversation connected to your posts, but concentrates on the conversations it has determined you might care about the most.) The pop-up windows are more immediate than email notifications about comments on your posts. If you dislike the alerts, you can turn them off — but not in the main Facebook settings.Facebook refers to these windows as “post tabs” and has placed the controls for enabling or disabling them in the settings for its Chat feature in the lower-right corner of the browser window. Click the cog-shaped Options icon at the bottom of the page and select Turn Off Post Tabs to disable the pop-up conversation windows. This menu also holds options for turning off the chat function, video and voice calls, and other features if you want to make other adjustments.If you want to keep an eye on the conversation on some posts but not others, you can also disable the windows for the discussions you do not care about. To do that when a post tab pops up, click the cog-shaped icon in the top-right corner of the pop-up window itself and choose Hide This Tab.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and JACK NICASAPRIL 13, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Two pages of notes sitting in a binder in front of Mark Zuckerberg during his congressional testimony this week hinted at a message the Facebook chief executive rarely got a chance to deliver: We’re not the only ones.Mr. Zuckerberg was prepared to say that his company accounts for just a slice of the $650 billion advertising market and that it has plenty of competitors. Google, for example, has an online advertising business more than twice the size of Facebook’s. And Google also collects vast amounts of information about the people who use its online services.But as Facebook has taken it on the chin over the way it has handled the personal information of its users, the leaders of other tech companies have demonstrated that even in publicity-hungry Silicon Valley, it is entirely possible for billionaire executives and their sprawling empires to keep a low profile.What set Mr. Zuckerberg apart? The personal information of up to 87 million Facebook users ended up in the hands of the voter-profiling firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked with the Trump campaign in the 2016 presidential election. Google and the biggest tech companies — as far as anyone knows — have never made such a giant mistake.AdvertisementMr. Zuckerberg was the only executive to testify in two days of hearings this week. Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive, and Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, were also asked to testify by the Senate Judiciary Committee.AdvertisementBut when that hearing combined with one from another committee, which had not asked for Google or Twitter’s participation, Mr. Pichai and Mr. Dorsey were let off the hook, said company officials and congressional aides.For now, at least.Before the hearing on Tuesday, Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, sent letters to Mr. Pichai and Mr. Dorsey with 14 questions. In his letter to Google, Mr. Grassley wanted to “understand how Google manages and monitors user privacy for the significant amounts of data which it collects.”[2 days, 10 hours, 600 questions: Read about what happened when Mark Zuckerberg went to Washington.]The companies have until April 25 to respond. When asked whether they were concerned about congressional or regulatory scrutiny, Google and Twitter, through company representatives, declined to comment.“Outside of Facebook, there is probably no company paying more attention” than Google, said Jason Kint, a frequent critic of Google and Facebook and chief executive of Digital Content Next, a trade group that represents entertainment and news organizations, including The New York Times. “They’re absolutely ducking for cover while the heat is on Facebook. They don’t want to try to trip any alarms.”Like Facebook, Google collects vast amount of data on users — including their YouTube choices, internet searches and location history — to target advertisements. Facebook has more than two billion users globally, but Google has seven products, including YouTube, Gmail and its Android software, with more than a billion users each.On Wednesday, when Representative John Shimkus, Republican of Illinois, questioned Facebook’s tracking of logged-off users, Mr. Zuckerberg was quick to point out that Google and “the rest of the industry” employed similar tactics. It was one of the few times Google’s data practices were mentioned in the two days of hearings.Mr. Zuckerberg did not get a chance to say much more about Facebook’s industry peers this week. Over two days of hearings, Google was referenced 11 times by lawmakers. Twitter was mentioned 10 times and Amazon once. Apple was mentioned three times, mostly in passing.AdvertisementGoogle employees said they had not received explicit orders from management to keep a low profile because most already understood the risk. One employee, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because workers were not allowed to speak publicly on the issue, said there was an understanding inside Google that the company was the obvious next target.In a statement, Aaron Stein, a Google spokesman, said the company was “completely focused on protecting our users’ data” and “will take action” if it found evidence of “deceptive behavior or misuse of personal data.”Google has been criticized — even fined — for its privacy practices over the years. It paid a $17 million fine to settle a case when it bypassed privacy settings in Apple’s Safari browser to track users and show them advertisements in 2011 and 2012. It also got dinged for scooping up people’s passwords, email and other personal information during its Street View mapping project.Privacy advocates also criticized a Google social network, called Buzz, in 2010 for automatically including users’ email contact. Google eventually settled the matter with the Federal Trade Commission and agreed to strengthen an existing privacy program.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Google is staying on the sidelines in other ways. Four days before Mr. Zuckerberg was set to testify, Facebook surprised many in Washington when it endorsed the Honest Ads Act, a Senate bill that would require more transparency and stricter rules for political ads on the internet. Facebook’s endorsement was a reversal from its previous opposition, said a spokeswoman for one of the bill’s co-sponsors, Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia.Mr. Warner and another co-sponsor, Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, called on Twitter and Google to also back the bill. Twitter quickly responded with an endorsement. Google has not taken a public position.Similarly, Facebook and Google had donated $200,000 each to a group opposing a California ballot initiative that proposes enabling Californians to sue companies for data breaches, among other things. Facebook this week dropped its opposition to the initiative, which organizers said was on track to appear on the November ballot in California.Mr. Zuckerberg’s notes, which were photographed during the testimony, also contained a prepared response if lawmakers echoed criticism from Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, who has chided Facebook and other companies for collecting gobs of personal information about their users.“Lots of stories about apps misusing Apple data, never seen Apple notify people,” said the document. “Important you hold everyone to the same standard.”AdvertisementRepresentatives for Facebook and Apple declined to comment on Mr. Zuckerberg’s notes.Apple has long campaigned to draw a distinction between the way it operates and the way Facebook and Google do.“We’re not going to traffic in your personal life. I think it’s an invasion of privacy,” Mr. Cook told MSNBC. “I think everybody needs to understand Silicon Valley is not monolithic.”After users download Apple’s most recent software update for iPhones and iPads, released on March 29, their devices prominently display a message that said “privacy is a fundamental human right.” Fred Sainz, an Apple spokesman, said the update, which has been in the works for months, was intended to better inform users on its data practices and comply with Europe’s new data-privacy rules that take effect May 25 — not taunt Facebook.When asked if it was worried about regulations for the industry stemming from new scrutiny of Facebook, Apple referred to recent comments Mr. Cook made to MSNBC. He said he typically believed “the best regulation is no regulation” but “I think we’re beyond that here.”Amazon, for its part, has mirrored Google’s approach, staying silent despite  the frequent attacks President Trump has made against the company on Twitter. Drew Herdener, an Amazon spokesman, declined to comment.Amazon uses shoppers’ purchase history to target ads, though Forrester Research estimated its advertising revenue last year was $2.5 billion. Facebook makes $39.9 billion on ads and Google makes $95.4 billion.Privacy advocates are also concerned about the tens of millions of Amazon Echo smart speakers and other voice-controlled devices that have put microphones in people’s homes.Amazon’s top competitors for that business? Google and Apple.Many tech companies understand that Washington’s renewed focus on privacy is likely to reach them soon, said Dean Garfield, head of the Information Technology Industry Council, a trade group representing the largest tech companies.“The tide has shifted,” he said. “I don’t think this is passing us by.”Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi and Jack Nicas on Twitter: @daiwaka and @jacknicasNick Wingfield contributed reporting from Seattle.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: As Facebook  Takes Punches,  Rest of Valley  Ducks, for Now.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPIf a scammer has swiped your password and is using your account to spew spam, take action and add measures to help stop it from happening again.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. Could you please review best practices if one’s email is hacked? Is changing the password for that email sufficient? Is it necessary to change the email address (use a whole new email) for each site, like Amazon, that uses the hacked email as the user login?A. If you still have access to the compromised account, changing the password is one of many steps you should take to protect yourself. If you are having trouble regaining control of the account, visit your mail provider’s site for instructions on recovering your account. Apple, Google, Microsoft and Yahoo all have guides on their sites, as should other email and internet service providers. Tell your friends that your account was hacked and to ignore any odd messages that appear to have come from you.Your account may have been hacked through malicious software, so scan your computer for malware and viruses with a security program. If you do not have security software installed, you can use Microsoft’s built-in Windows Defender or Microsoft Security Essentials. Avast and AVG are among the many companies that make free basic antivirus software for Windows and Mac. Malwarebytes has free and trial versions of its malware-scanning program for Windows and Mac that can work alongside antivirus software. You should also update your computer and devices with the latest security updates.Next, check your mail settings to make sure nothing has been changed — like copies of your messages set to forward to an unfamiliar addresses, unfamiliar entries in your address book, or new links or information added to your email signature file. Take this opportunity to change and update your security questions and answers that your provider uses to confirm your identity if you use the Forgot Password option.While you are in your mail settings, set up two-factor authentication or two-step verification if you have not already and the feature is available from your mail provider. You will need to provide a code or acknowledge a login attempt on another device after you enter your password, but the extra step helps keep your account more secure.If you have rescued your account and bolstered its defenses, you should be able to keep using the address as a login for other sites, but go in and change the password you used with it, along with all the other passwords for other sites where you used the address as your login. You should also update any site where you repeatedly used the same password as the one for the hacked mail account.The Federal Trade Commission has an online guide to dealing with a hacked mail account. And to avoid being hacked again, follow basic precautions like avoiding public wireless networks without using a virtual private network.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byIn two days on Capitol Hill, the Facebook chief promised numerous lawmakers that he would get back to them with answers to their questions. We counted up that workload. By Sheera Frenkel and Tiffany HsuFacebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg — or perhaps more accurately, members of his staff — are going to be very busy getting through a stack of homework. Over two days of congressional hearings this week in which Mr. Zuckerberg was barraged with questions by lawmakers over data privacy, election interference and more, the 33-year-old billionaire was often not able to provide an immediate answer. His standard response in those situations, a variation of “my team will get back to you,” was repeated so often it became an internet meme. Here are all the things that Mr. Zuckerberg has committed to getting back to Congress on. Yes, it’s a long list. To Senator Chuck Grassley, Republican of Iowa ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would get back to Mr. Grassley on whether his team finds any new examples in which user data was improperly transferred to a third party in breach of Facebook’s terms of service. He also said he would get back to Mr. Grassley on how many outside developers his team has audited to make sure they are following Facebook’s rules. To Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would follow up with Ms. Feinstein on the exact number of fake accounts Facebook has removed from the social network.To Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would get back to Ms. Cantwell on whether Facebook employees ever worked with Cambridge Analytica to help the Trump campaign during the 2016 presidential election. To Senator Roger Wicker, Republican of Mississippi ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would circle back to Mr. Wicker on whether Facebook collects call and text history on minors, and whether or not Facebook tracks a user’s internet browsing activity even when they have logged off Facebook. To Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would tell Mr. Leahy whether a number of specific pages were part of Russian misinformation operations during the 2016 elections. To Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina ...Mr. Zuckerberg’s to-do item was answering how to have a broad discussion on where the tech industry should be regulated. To Senator Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri ...The Facebook chief said he would get back to Mr. Blunt on whether the company collects data from devices that are not currently logged in to the social network. To Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would follow up with Mr. Blumenthal on whether Facebook would support a number of pieces of legislation. (It was unclear which legislation.)To Senator Ed Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would get his team to “flesh out the details” with Mr. Markey on a potential privacy bill of rights for minors on the internet. To Senator Tom Udall, Democrat of New Mexico ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would get back to Mr. Udall on whether he, personally, would return to Congress to support the Honest Ads Act. (Mr. Zuckerberg added that he didn’t visit Washington often and that he would likely direct his team to focus on support of the act.)To Senator Jerry Moran, Republican of Kansas ...The Facebook chief said he would circle back on whether Facebook’s new bounty program on data sharing will also investigate unauthorized access to data. To Senator Dean Heller, Republican of Nevada ...Mr. Zuckerberg had two to-do items with Mr. Heller, including answering how many people in the state of Nevada were part of the 87 million people who may have had their data harvested by the political research firm Cambridge Analytica and how long Facebook keeps a user’s data after they have deleted their accounts. To Representative Frank Pallone, Democrat of New Jersey ... Mr. Zuckerberg said he would return with answers for Mr. Pallone on whether Facebook would change its default settings to minimize collection and use of user data. To Representative Fred Upton, Republican of Michigan ...The Facebook chief said he would follow up on the circumstances behind the company’s rejection of a political ad from a candidate for Michigan state senate. To Representative Eliot Engel, Democrat of New York ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would get back to Mr. Engel on artificial intelligence tools and other procedures being deployed to identify fake accounts that spread misinformation. To Representative Gene Green, Democrat of Texas ...Mr. Zuckerberg’s homework for Mr. Green was answering how Facebook would apply the European Union’s coming General Data Protection Regulation privacy rules to users in the United States. To Representative Steve Scalise, Republican of Louisiana ...Mr. Zuckerberg told Mr. Scalise he would come back with details about data that is mined for security purposes and whether it is sold, as well as whether Facebook employees responsible for the perceived censorship of the pro-Trump video personalities Diamond and Silk faced repercussions. To Representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers, Republican of Washington ...The Facebook chief said he would offer Ms. Rodgers more detail on how Facebook is ensuring fair treatment of users by content reviewers. To Representative G.K. Butterfield, Democrat of North Carolina ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he would circle back on an idea to convene a meeting of chief executives of technology firms to boost racial diversity in the industry. He added that he would get back to Mr. Butterfield with data on employee retention broken out by race.To Representative Morgan Griffith, Republican of Virginia ...Mr. Zuckerberg promised to look into the progress on extending broadband into rural areas. To Representative Debbie Dingell, Democrat of Michigan ...Facebook’s chief said he would follow up with the number of Facebook “like” buttons and “share buttons” on non-Facebook pages. He also said he would get back to the Congresswoman on the time frame within which Facebook would respond to regulators’ requests for transparency. To Representative Ben LujÁn, Democrat of New Mexico ...Mr. Zuckerberg said he planned to circle back on the average number of data points that Facebook keeps on non-Facebook users. Mr. Zuckerberg also said he did not know that number for Facebook users.To Representative Leonard Lance, Republican of New Jersey ...Mr. Lance, who is co-sponsoring a online privacy bill with Representative Marsha Blackburn, Republican of Tennessee, asked Mr. Zuckerberg whether Facebook will support the legislation after reviewing it. Mr. Zuckerberg said he would get back to him.To Representative Adam Kinzinger, Republican of Illinois ...And finally, Mr. Zuckerberg said he could get back to Mr. Kinzinger about how Facebook handles requests made by law enforcement in foreign countries, particularly Russia. Sheera Frenkel covers cybersecurity from San Francisco. Previously, she spent over a decade in the Middle East as a foreign correspondent, reporting for BuzzFeed, NPR, The Times of London and McClatchy Newspapers.@sheerafTiffany Hsu is a breaking news reporter on the Business Desk. Before joining The Times in 2017 she covered economic news for The Los Angeles Times and earned an M.B.A. from Columbia University.@tiffkhsuAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTech TipMany financial institutions offer fraud alerts by text, but if you’re not sure the message is real, call the company directly or check your account online.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. Do scammers send unsolicited text messages about credit card fraud? How do I know what is real?A. Scammers will try just about anything to steal your money or your identity, so bogus credit card fraud alerts are certainly possible. Many credit card companies have a warning system in place to automatically notify you of suspicious activity on your account, and will contact you by the method specified in your account settings — usually by text message, telephone call or email.If you get a text message or email alert about fraud out of the blue and want to confirm its authenticity, call the customer-service number on the back of your card and ask to speak to a representative. If you prefer an online approach, log into your account on the company’s website (or mobile app) over a secure network connection and check for notifications about suspicious account activity. To be on the safe side, do not call the number or open any links that may have been included with the message, even though some can be legitimate.Many financial institutions have sophisticated and automated fraud-detection algorithms that can quickly detect signs of unusual activity on your account — often before you are aware of it. Your purchasing history, geographic location of the charge, merchant choice and spending amounts are some factors typically used in fraud-detection systems.If you want to see what other account protections are available from your bank or credit-card company, browse its website and look for its safety and security section. American Express, Discover, Mastercard and Visa all offer alerts and other security tools, as do many banks that issue cards, like Chase and HSBC.Fraud happens year round, but because the Internal Revenue Service is on many people’s minds this month, also be on guard for tax-related scams. The IRS.gov site has information on the latest ruses and how to report them.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementBy NELLIE BOWLESAPRIL 12, 2018
PALO ALTO, Calif. — Doc Searls met with a group of fellow internet privacy experts one recent afternoon here at the Computer History Museum. On a whiteboard were the words “OUTRAGE” and “MAKE HAY” — capitalized, underlined and surrounded by lines jutting in all directions like a cartoon “BOOM!”For the first time in years, their field of expertise was front and center. Facebook had just come under intense scrutiny over how the political data firm Cambridge Analytica had improperly harvested the information of up to 87 million its users.Seated in a wide circle of folding chairs, members of the group excitedly discussed what they could do next.“A lot of geeks in the world are looking at Facebook as a redwood that’s starting to fall,” said Mr. Searls, whose given name is David and who created ProjectVRM, a program at Harvard University’s Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society that seeks to empower internet users to protect personal privacy. “They’re saying, ‘O.K., it’s barn-raising time.’ ”AdvertisementThe scandal swirling around Facebook and Cambridge Analytica has begun to usher in a new era for this once-ignored community of privacy researchers and developers. After years of largely disregarding their warnings about exactly what companies like Facebook were doing — that is, collecting enormous amounts of information on its users and making it available to third parties with little to no oversight — the general public suddenly seemed to care about what they were saying.AdvertisementThe outcry over data privacy has been so strong that it pushed Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, into testifying on Capitol Hill this week over the company’s failures to protect users’ information. Protesters rallied outside the Capitol during his testimony. Someone even arrived at a hearing dressed as a Russian troll.In their own lives, privacy experts are now fielding a spike in calls from their relatives asking them for advice about protecting their personal data. Engineers are discussing new privacy projects with them. Even teenagers are paying attention to what they have to say.For many developers, this is the right time to push ahead with testing more privacy solutions, including more advanced advertising blockers; peer-to-peer browsers that decentralize the internet; new encryption techniques; and data unions that let users pool their data and sell it themselves. Others want to treat tech giants more as information fiduciaries, which have a legal responsibility to protect user data.And for the first time, many privacy experts think internet users will be more willing to put up with a little more inconvenience in return for a lot more privacy.“This is the first blink of awakening of the world to a danger that’s been present for a long time, which is that we are exposed,” Mr. Searls said. “Cambridge Analytica is old, old news to privacy folks.”John Scott-Railton, who researches digital rights and privacy at the Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto, said he recently thought back to all the PowerPoint presentations and papers he had given and seen that cautioned about how third parties might access and abuse user data.“It didn’t stick until now,” he said. “Now it’s changed, or at least people nod along when we talk about it.”AdvertisementNeema Singh Guliani, legislative counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union, recalled  the organization’s years of efforts to get Facebook to monitor how third parties were using data. Yet few paid attention at the time, even though the group specifically called out Facebook’s quizzes in 2009. (Cambridge Analytica used a third-party quiz app from an independent researcher to harvest Facebook users’ data.)The social network has said it will investigate many third-party apps that have had access to large amounts of users information. Nonetheless, the A.C.L.U. is pushing for users to have tighter control over what Facebook apps can do and arguing that Facebook ought to audit its developers. The organization also believes that more privacy protections should be enshrined in law.“We’re having the conversation now that we should have had over a decade ago,” Ms. Singh Guliani said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some privacy experts are prepared for disappointment. There have been privacy scandals before that did not lead to sea changes. For example, Google once collected private Wi-Fi information as it was building out Google Maps. The ensuing outrage did not have a lasting effect on the Silicon Valley company’s vast data collection effort.But this Facebook scandal seems to be enduring even in the new frenetic news cycle.“This has kept the national attention for what: three or four weeks now?” said Allie Bohm, policy counsel at Public Knowledge, a nonprofit in Washington that promotes an open internet. “It really feels like, hey, we could get some stuff done.”One reason it has always been hard to get consumers interested in security and privacy is that the harms were vague and hard to understand. With Facebook and Cambridge Analytica, the harms are identifiable and frightening, said Ashkan Soltani, an independent researcher specializing in privacy and a former chief technologist of the Federal Trade Commission.“Much like a car accident, the harms on social media are low-probablility events with extremely variable outcomes,” he said. “ ‘So what if my boss saw me doing a keg stand?’ But all of a sudden the ‘so what if’ becomes more serious — ‘I get denied insurance or my information is used by a nation state actor to manipulate me.’ ”Cambridge Analytica’s work, which included using Facebook data to build psychological profiles of voters, tapped into an anxiety many Americans already had over the outcome of the 2016 presidential election.“This one stuck because it was Trump, and we’re looking for someone to blame,” said Bruce Schneier, a cryptographer who runs the Schneier on Security blog and wrote “Data and Goliath: The Hidden Battles to Collect Your Data and Control Your World.” “If Hellmann’s mayonnaise did this, we’d be impressed.”AdvertisementPrivacy experts said this shift in public opinion was what they had been waiting for, because it is the only way to bring about change. Facebook will not willingly change its policies without pressure from shareholders or regulators, they added.Historically, public opinion is “the crucible” for era-defining industry change, said Shoshana Zuboff, a professor at Harvard Business School and the author of a forthcoming book about tech platforms and power.“If you go back to the rapaciousness and lawlessness of Gilded Age capitalism, it was the slow burn of public opinion that gradually gathered force and ultimately became the driving force that provided cover for dramatic new legislative and regulatory efforts,” she said. “Public opinion gave the Gilded Age a beginning, a middle and an end.”For Rohit Ghai, president of the cybersecurity firm RSA, whose SecurID technology has become an industry standard for companies protecting access to their internal systems, the change is evident even inside his home in San Jose, Calif.He previously tried to talk to his 13-year-old daughter about data privacy and social media — even providing examples of how much the tech companies know about people and what they can do with that information. She shrugged him off.Then the Cambridge Analytica revelations happened. For once, Mr. Ghai said, his teenager came to talk to him.“She just asked me about Mark Zuckerberg,” he said. “That’s a sign.”Follow Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @NellieBowlesA version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Privacy Issue Rises to Fore, Vindicating Data Experts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

      By KEITH COLLINS and 
    
LARRY BUCHANAN

APRIL 11, 2018

One in five dollars spent on online advertising in the United States currently goes to Facebook. The power of the company’s ad platform comes from the ability it gives politicians, brands, real estate agents, nonprofits and others to precisely target people on its social networks.Facebook has expanded its ad apparatus over time by continuously accumulating details about its users and turning those details into targetable data points. As it has grown, however, the company has drawn the scrutiny of privacy advocates, regulators and lawmakers around the world.When Facebook introduced its ad platform in 2007, advertisers could target people using information they had volunteered on the platform.This is what a typical target audience might have looked like with those options:Anyone who lives in Philadelphia, studies philosophy in college and is 18 to 22.In 2009, Facebook added several features, including the ability for users to click a “like” button on posts in their newsfeed, which refined the list of interests that advertisers could target. The company also introduced ways for advertisers to target friends of those who had interacted with their brands, and to target ads to people by age or birthday.Anyone who lives in Philadelphia, studies philosophy in college and is 21.Three years later, Facebook introduced Custom Audiences, a feature that allowed companies to upload their own lists of people to targetAdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu GoelNEW DELHI — Seeking to build an identification system of unprecedented scope, India is scanning the fingerprints, eyes and faces of its 1.3 billion residents and connecting the data to everything from welfare benefits to mobile phones.Civil libertarians are horrified, viewing the program, called Aadhaar, as Orwell’s Big Brother brought to life. To the government, it’s more like “big brother,” a term of endearment used by many Indians to address a stranger when asking for help.For other countries, the technology could provide a model for how to track their residents. And for India’s top court, the ID system presents unique legal issues that will define what the constitutional right to privacy means in the digital age.To Adita Jha, Aadhaar was simply a hassle. The 30-year-old environmental consultant in Delhi waited in line three times to sit in front of a computer that photographed her face, captured her fingerprints and snapped images of her irises. Three times, the data failed to upload. The fourth attempt finally worked, and she has now been added to the 1.1 billion Indians already included in the program.Ms. Jha had little choice but to keep at it. The government has made registration mandatory for hundreds of public services and many private ones, from taking school exams to opening bank accounts.“You almost feel like life is going to stop without an Aadhaar,” Ms. Jha said.Technology has given governments around the world new tools to monitor their citizens. In China, the government is rolling out ways to use facial recognition and big data to track people, aiming to inject itself further into everyday life. Many countries, including Britain, deploy closed-circuit cameras to monitor their populations.But India’s program is in a league of its own, both in the mass collection of biometric data and in the attempt to link it to everything — traffic tickets, bank accounts, pensions, even meals for undernourished schoolchildren.“No one has approached that scale and that ambition,” said Jacqueline Bhabha, a professor and research director of Harvard’s FXB Center for Health and Human Rights, who has studied biometric ID systems around the world. “It has been hailed, and justifiably so, as an extraordinary triumph to get everyone registered.”Critics fear that the government will gain unprecedented insight into the lives of all Indians.In response, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and other champions of the program say that Aadhaar is India’s ticket to the future, a universal, easy-to-use ID that will reduce this country’s endemic corruption and help bring even the most illiterate into the digital age.“It’s the equivalent of building interstate highways,” said Nandan Nilekani, the technology billionaire who was tapped by the government in 2009 to build the Aadhaar system. “If the government invested in building a digital public utility and that is made available as a platform, then you actually can create major innovations around that.”The potential uses — from surveillance to managing government benefit programs — have drawn interest elsewhere. Sri Lanka is planning a similar system, and Britain, Russia and the Philippines are studying it, according to the Indian government.Aadhaar, which means “foundation” in English, was initially intended as a difficult-to-forge ID to reduce fraud and improve the delivery of government welfare programs.But Mr. Modi, who has promoted a “digital India” vision since his party took power in 2014, has vastly expanded its ambitions.The poor must scan their fingerprints at the ration shop to get their government allocations of rice. Retirees must do the same to get their pensions. Middle-school students cannot enter the water department’s annual painting contest until they submit their identification.In some cities, newborns cannot leave the hospital until their parents sign them up. Even leprosy patients, whose illness damages their fingers and eyes, have been told they must pass fingerprint or iris scans to get their benefits.The Modi government has also ordered Indians to link their IDs to their cellphone and bank accounts. States have added their own twists, like using the data to map where people live. Some employers use the ID for background checks on job applicants.“Aadhaar has added great strength to India’s development,” Mr. Modi said in a January speech to military cadets. Officials estimate that taxpayers have saved at least $9.4 billion from Aadhaar by weeding out “ghosts” and other improper beneficiaries of government services.Opponents have filed at least 30 cases against the program in India’s Supreme Court. They argue that Aadhaar violates India’s Constitution — and, in particular, a unanimous court decision last year that declared for the first time that Indians had a fundamental right to privacy.Rahul Narayan, one of the lawyers challenging the system, said the government was essentially building one giant database on its citizens. “There has been a sort of mission creep to it all along,” he said.The court has been holding extensive hearings and is expected to make a ruling in the spring.The government argues that the universal ID is vital in a country where hundreds of millions of people do not have widely accepted identification documents.“The people themselves are the biggest beneficiaries,” said Ajay B. Pandey, the Minnesota-trained engineer who leads the Unique Identification Authority of India, the government agency that oversees the system. “This identity cannot be refused.”Businesses are also using the technology to streamline transactions.Banks once sent employees to the homes of account applicants to verify their addresses. Now, accounts can be opened online and finished with a fingerprint scan at a branch or other authorized outlet. Reliance Jio, a telecom provider, relies on an Aadhaar fingerprint scan to conduct the government-mandated ID check for purchases of cellphone SIM cards. That allows clerks to activate service immediately instead of forcing buyers to wait a day or two.But the Aadhar system has also raised practical and legal issues.Although the system’s core fingerprint, iris and face database appears to have remained secure, at least 210 government websites have leaked other personal data — such as name, birth date, address, parents’ names, bank account number and Aadhaar number — for millions of Indians. Some of that data is still available with a simple Google search.As Aadhaar has become mandatory for government benefits, parts of rural India have struggled with the internet connections necessary to make Aadhaar work. After a lifetime of manual labor, many Indians also have no readable prints, making authentication difficult. One recent study found that 20 percent of the households in Jharkand state had failed to get their food rations under Aadhaar-based verification — five times the failure rate of ration cards.“This is the population that is being passed off as ghosts and bogus by the government,” said Reetika Khera, an associate professor of economics at the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, who co-wrote the study.Seeing these problems, some local governments have scaled back the use of Aadhaar for public benefits. In February, the government for the Delhi region announced that it would stop using Aadhaar to deliver food benefits.Dr. Pandey said that some problems were inevitable but that his agency was trying to fix them. The government is patching security holes and recently added face recognition as an alternative to fingerprint or iris scans to make it easier to verify identities.Fears that the Indian government could use Aadhaar to turn the country into a surveillance state, he said, are overblown. “There is no central authority that has all the information,” he said.Before Aadhaar, he said, hundreds of millions of Indians could not easily prove who they were.“If you are not able to prove your identity, you are disenfranchised,” he said. “You have no existence.”Suhasini Raj contributed reporting.Follow Vindu Goel on Twitter: @vindugoel.AdvertisementBy RAYMOND ZHONGAPRIL 6, 2018
BEIJING — It was not Yang Qingning’s millions of social media followers or her political beliefs that made the young woman the scorn of Chinese state media recently.It was her tiny baby.Two of China’s most popular video platforms disappeared from app stores this week after the state broadcaster CCTV accused them of promoting underage pregnancy. A segment last week on CCTV featured what it said were teenage women whose videos — chronicling the joys and tribulations of motherhood, complete with images of swollen bellies — had attracted millions of followers and viewers. A stern but unspecific rebuke from China’s top media regulator followed a few days later.The slapdown — which comes as China’s government extends its internet controls to encompass not only what it finds politically subversive, but also what it deems unwholesome or pornographic — prompted quick declarations of remorse from the video apps’ creators.“Content appeared on the platform that shouldn’t have been there, and it has had an extremely bad influence on society,” Su Hua, the chief executive of the company that operates Kuaishou, one of the apps, wrote in a statement. “I am very grateful to CCTV and other media for criticizing Kuaishou, so that I could clearly see my own deficiencies.”AdvertisementThe company behind the other app, Huoshan, wrote: “Thanks to CCTV’s supervision, Huoshan feels a deep sense of responsibility.” The creators of both apps said that they would strengthen their systems for screening videos.AdvertisementIt was not clear whether or when the apps would be returned to stores. Spokeswomen for Kuaishou’s and Huoshan’s parent companies declined further comment.Online video has become a fierce battleground for Chinese technology firms. Kuaishou (pronounced KWAI-show) says its app is used by 100 million people every day. The parent of Huoshan (hwaw-SHAN) is Beijing Bytedance Technology, which says its flagship news app, Jinri Toutiao, has 120 million daily users. The attention of big-name Silicon Valley investors such as Sequoia Capital has helped Bytedance become one of the most highly valued tech start-ups in the world, with a recent valuation of $30 billion.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kuaishou has a huge following outside China’s megacities. The platform, which shares features in common with Instagram, Snapchat and Periscope, has become a way to exchange glimpses — often bawdy and free spirited — of ordinary lives in China. It has made celebrities out of people as varied as train conductors, ice fishermen, female welders in shipyards and would-be guitar heroes in ramshackle hamlets.The democratizing possibilities of such services have not gone unnoticed by China’s censors.As they have taken a harder line on online discourse, media regulators have made targets of celebrity gossip blogs, ranting rappers and more. Updates to several sections on Toutiao, Bytedance’s news app, were halted for 24 hours recently after regulators accused it of spreading “vulgar information.” Sina Weibo, a Twitter-like forum, had to take several features offline for a week after it was scolded for similar transgressions.Adolescent motherhood is a subject that arouses special alarm in China. Even as economists warn of a  demographic emergency caused by the “one child” policy, which was ended in 2015, unwed mothers — even those of legal age — are stigmatized and face legal bias. What is more, sex education has struggled to keep up with changing mores, increasing the likelihood of unwanted pregnancies.Last week’s CCTV segment begins with a young man and woman sitting together on a bed, their faces digitally blurred, as bouncy pop music plays in the background. “What do you think of when you see this video?” a narrator says. “Someone showing off their family’s cute children? Wrong. These two children already have their own children. This mother is not even 16.”Over images of another young woman with strawberries digitally superimposed on her cheeks, the segment continues: “Perhaps this sweet young girl is obediently helping her parents take care of her little brother. You’re wrong again. This is another 16-year-old young mother.”AdvertisementChina does not allow men to marry before the age of 22, and women not until 20, the segment says. The young mothers on these apps, according to the segment, mostly live in rural areas and have dropped out of school. “Their lives are dull, and they crave attention,” the narration says.The segment says that several such women had been vying, on the video apps, to be crowned the internet’s youngest mother. One went by the username “14 years old and already have my little cutie.”After you have viewed the Kuaishou account of one teenage mother, CCTV says, the app even recommends other teenage mothers whose videos might be of interest.An expert interviewed in the segment warns that such technology could cause young viewers to be drawn into a self-reinforcing spiral of “negative influence.” “She will think that in her world, this kind of abnormal or illegal behavior is normal,” the expert says.Follow Raymond Zhong on Twitter: @zhonggg.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Teenage Mothers Become Internet Stars, Prompting China to Crack Down on Apps.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott Shane and Daisuke WakabayashiWASHINGTON — Thousands of Google employees, including dozens of senior engineers, have signed a letter protesting the company’s involvement in a Pentagon program that uses artificial intelligence to interpret video imagery and could be used to improve the targeting of drone strikes.The letter, which is circulating inside Google and has garnered more than 3,100 signatures, reflects a culture clash between Silicon Valley and the federal government that is likely to intensify as cutting-edge artificial intelligence is increasingly employed for military purposes.(Read the text of the letter.)“We believe that Google should not be in the business of war,” says the letter, addressed to Sundar Pichai, the company’s chief executive. It asks that Google pull out of Project Maven, a Pentagon pilot program, and announce a policy that it will not “ever build warfare technology.”That kind of idealistic stance, while certainly not shared by all Google employees, comes naturally to a company whose motto is “Don’t be evil,” a phrase invoked in the protest letter. But it is distinctly foreign to Washington’s massive defense industry and certainly to the Pentagon, where the defense secretary, Jim Mattis, has often said a central goal is to increase the “lethality” of the United States military.From its early days, Google has encouraged employees to speak out on issues involving the company. It provides internal message boards and social networks where workers challenge management and one another about the company’s products and policies. Recently, the heated debate around Google’s efforts to create a more diverse work force spilled out into the open.Google employees have circulated protest petitions on a range of issues, including Google Plus, the company’s lagging competitor to Facebook, and Google’s sponsorship of the Conservative Political Action Conference.Employees raised questions about Google’s involvement in Project Maven at a recent companywide meeting. At the time, Diane Greene, who leads Google’s cloud infrastructure business, defended the deal and sought to reassure concerned employees. A company spokesman said most of the signatures on the protest letter had been collected before the company had an opportunity to explain the situation.The company subsequently described its work on Project Maven as “non-offensive” in nature, though the Pentagon’s video analysis is routinely used in counterinsurgency and counterterrorism operations, and Defense Department publications make clear that the project supports those operations. Both Google and the Pentagon said the company’s products would not create an autonomous weapons system that could fire without a human operator, a much-debated possibility using artificial intelligence.But improved analysis of drone video could be used to pick out human targets for strikes, while also better identifying civilians to reduce the accidental killing of innocent people.Without referring directly to the letter to Mr. Pichai, Google said in a statement on Tuesday that “any military use of machine learning naturally raises valid concerns.” It added, “We’re actively engaged across the company in a comprehensive discussion of this important topic.” The company called such exchanges “hugely important and beneficial,” though several Google employees familiar with the letter would speak of it only on the condition of anonymity, saying they were concerned about retaliation.The statement said the company’s part of Project Maven was “specifically scoped to be for non-offensive purposes,” though officials declined to make available the relevant contract language. The Defense Department said that because Google is a subcontractor on Project Maven to the prime contractor, ECS Federal, it could not provide either the amount or the language of Google’s contract. ECS Federal did not respond to inquiries.Google said the Pentagon was using “open-source object recognition software available to any Google Cloud customer” and based on unclassified data. “The technology is used to flag images for human review and is intended to save lives and save people from having to do highly tedious work,” the company said.Some of Google’s top executives have significant Pentagon connections. Eric Schmidt, former executive chairman of Google and still a member of the executive board of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, serves on a Pentagon advisory body, the Defense Innovation Board, as does a Google vice president, Milo Medin.In an interview in November, Mr. Schmidt acknowledged “a general concern in the tech community of somehow the military-industrial complex using their stuff to kill people incorrectly, if you will.” He said he served on the board in part “to at least allow for communications to occur” and suggested that the military would “use this technology to help keep the country safe.”An uneasiness about military contracts among a small fraction of Google’s more than 70,000 employees may not pose a major obstacle to the company’s growth. But in the rarefied area of artificial intelligence research, Google is engaged in intense competition with other tech companies for the most talented people, so recruiters could be hampered if some candidates are put off by Google’s defense connections.As Google defends its contracts from internal dissent, its competitors have not been shy about publicizing their own work on defense projects. Amazon touts its image recognition work with the Department of Defense, and Microsoft has promoted the fact that its cloud technology won a contract to handle classified information for every branch of the military and defense agencies.The current dispute, first reported by Gizmodo, is focused on Project Maven, which began last year as a pilot program to find ways to speed up the military application of the latest A.I. technology. It is expected to cost less than $70 million in its first year, according to a Pentagon spokeswoman. But the signers of the letter at Google clearly hope to discourage the company from entering into far larger Pentagon contracts as the defense applications of artificial intelligence grow.Google is widely expected to compete with other tech giants, including Amazon and Microsoft, for a multiyear, multibillion-dollar contract to provide cloud services to the Defense Department. John Gibson, the department’s chief management officer, said last month that the Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure Cloud procurement program was in part designed to “increase lethality and readiness,” underscoring the difficulty of separating software, cloud and related services from the actual business of war.The employees’ protest letter to Mr. Pichai, which has been circulated on an internal communications system for several weeks, argues that embracing military work could backfire by alienating customers and potential recruits.“This plan will irreparably damage Google’s brand and its ability to compete for talent,” the letter says. “Amid growing fears of biased and weaponized AI, Google is already struggling to keep the public’s trust.” It suggests that Google risks being viewed as joining the ranks of big defense contractors like Raytheon, General Dynamics and the big-data firm Palantir.“The argument that other firms, like Microsoft and Amazon, are also participating doesn’t make this any less risky for Google,” the letter says. “Google’s unique history, its motto Don’t Be Evil, and its direct reach into the lives of billions of users set it apart.”Like other onetime upstarts turned powerful Silicon Valley behemoths, Google is being forced to confront the idealism that guided the company in its early years. Facebook started with the lofty mission of connecting people all over the world, but it has recently come under fire for becoming a conduit for fake news and being used by Russia to influence the 2016 election and sow dissent among American voters.Paul Scharre, a former Pentagon official and author of “Army of None,” a forthcoming book on the use of artificial intelligence to build autonomous weapons, said the clash inside Google was inevitable, given the company’s history and the booming demand for A.I. in the military.“There’s a strong libertarian ethos among tech folks, and a wariness about the government’s use of technology,” said Mr. Scharre, a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security in Washington. “Now A.I. is suddenly and quite quickly moving out of the research lab and into real life.”Scott Shane reported from Washington, and Daisuke Wakabayashi from San Francisco. Cecilia Kang contributed reporting from Washington.AdvertisementBy PAUL MOZURAPRIL 5, 2018
SHANGHAI — Civil society groups in Myanmar on Thursday criticized Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, arguing that he mischaracterized his company’s effectiveness at detecting and quashing messages encouraging violence in the country.Taking aim at comments Mr. Zuckerberg made in a recent interview, the groups said that Facebook had no consistent methods for dealing with hate speech in Myanmar. The same problems keep recurring, they said, with the company routinely failing to follow up on their comments and suggestions.In a conversation with Ezra Klein of Vox this week, Mr. Zuckerberg referred to a pair of chain letters that were widely shared in Myanmar on Facebook Messenger last year. One message warned Buddhist groups about an imminent attack by Muslims, expected on Sept. 11. The other, spread among Muslims, cautioned of violence from Buddhist nationalists on the same date.“So that’s the kind of thing where I think it is clear that people were trying to use our tools in order to incite real harm,” Mr. Zuckerberg said. “Now, in that case, our systems detect that that’s going on. We stop those messages from going through.”AdvertisementIn an open letter, the organizations, which have worked with Facebook to flag dangerous and misleading content, including the chain letters, said the messages had spread for days, caused widespread fear and set off at least three violent incidents.AdvertisementThey also said there was no system at all, only a group of organizations and volunteers doing their best to keep up with a torrent of vitriol.
         Revelations that consultants to the Trump campaign misused millions of Facebook users’ data set off an international furor. This is how The Times covered it.
      “In your interview, you refer to your detection ‘systems.’ We believe your system, in this case, was us — and we were far from systematic,” the letter says. “From where we stand, this case exemplifies the very opposite of effective moderation: It reveals an overreliance on third parties, a lack of a proper mechanism for emergency escalation, a reticence to engage local stakeholders around systemic solutions and a lack of transparency.”Facebook responded to the criticism in a satement on Friday. “We are sorry that Mark did not make clearer that it was the civil society groups in Myanmar who first reported these messages,” it said. “We took their reports very seriously and immediately investigated ways to help prevent the spread of this content. We should have been faster, and are working hard to improve our technology and tools to detect and prevent abusive, hateful or false content.”Myanmar highlights existential questions about Facebook’s mission and responsibilities. The site has closely connected people in the country — in many cases, Facebook is the only online service they use. It has also become a major channel for the spread of hate speech and propaganda that has encouraged and obfuscated ethnic cleansing of the country’s Muslim Rohingya, according to human rights groups.Almost 700,000 Rohingya have fled to neighboring Bangladesh since last summer, when the military started a crackdown in the country’s western Rakhine State. Last month, United Nations investigators said Facebook played a role in spreading hate speech that incited violence against the Rohingya.For Mr. Zuckerberg, the timing of the letter is bad. Both he and his top deputy, Sheryl Sandberg, are making multiple media appearances this week to address questions about how the company handles users’ personal data. The company has faced harsh criticism for reports on how information about millions of users may have been improperly leaked to a political consulting firm connected to President Trump’s 2016 campaign.The criticism has sent the company’s stock tumbling. Next week, Mr. Zuckerberg is expected to appear at multiple congressional hearings.AdvertisementAmong the half-dozen signatories of the letter posted on Thursday in Myanmar are Phandeeyar, a leading technology hub in the country that helped Facebook draft its Burmese-language community standards; Myanmar ICT for Development Organization, which monitors online hate speech; and the Center for Social Integrity.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The letter lists what the groups say are several problems with Facebook. It says the company lacks adequate tools to report messages that might incite violence. It also says Facebook failed to provide channels for organizations to communicate with data and engineering employees who might have been able to devise solutions to the problems.“Presumably, your data team should be able to trace the original sources of flagged messages and posts and identify repeat offenders, using these insights to inform your moderation and sanctioning,” the letter says.Jes Petersen, chief executive of Phandeeyar, said problematic messages in Myanmar were not a one-time problem.“There’s multiple cases of similar things that have happened where we’ve done everything we can to bring it to Facebook’s attention but we don’t see much happening on their end,” he said. “That’s a big part of the problem.”Victoire Rio, a social media analyst in the country who previously worked at Phandeeyar, said another major issue was Facebook’s lack of Burmese speakers for local monitors to communicate directly with.“It’s evident to us that there are not enough resources and not enough human resources dedicated to Myanmar,” Ms. Rio said. She added that the company’s Burmese-speaking reviewers were based in Dublin, and from the company’s recruiting pages it seems it is struggling to find qualified candidates.The groups also faulted Facebook’s lack of transparency. They said that after they had reported the messages that Mr. Zuckerberg cited in his interview, they heard nothing from the company about what happened or how Facebook would better respond.“I was seriously concerned and looking for anyone I could,” Ms. Rio said. “I was surprised to hear that Mark had been contacted about this fairly quickly, the use of strong language was effective.”Follow Paul Mozur on Twitter: @paulmozur.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Zuckerberg Rebuked for Claiming Facebook Defused Hate Speech in Myanmar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick Wingfield, Paul Mozur and Michael CorkerySEATTLE — To see what it’s like inside stores where sensors and artificial intelligence have replaced cashiers, shoppers have to trek to Amazon Go, the internet retailer’s experimental convenience shop in downtown Seattle.Soon, though, more technology-driven businesses like Amazon Go may be coming to them.A global race to automate stores is underway among several of the world’s top retailers and small tech start-ups, which are motivated to shave labor costs and minimize shoppers’ frustrations, like waiting for cashiers. They are also trying to prevent Amazon from dominating the physical retail world as it does online shopping.Companies are testing robots that help keep shelves stocked, as well as apps that let shoppers ring up items with a smartphone. High-tech systems like the one used by Amazon Go completely automate the checkout process. China, which has its own ambitious e-commerce companies, is emerging as an especially fertile place for these retail experiments.If they succeed, these new technologies could add further uncertainty to the retail work force, which is already in flux because of the growth of online shopping. An analysis last year by the World Economic Forum said 30 to 50 percent of the world’s retail jobs could be at risk once technologies like automated checkout were fully embraced.In addition, the efforts have raised concerns among privacy researchers because of the mounds of data that retailers will be able to gather about shopper behavior as they digitize their locations. Inside Amazon Go, for instance, the cameras never lose sight of a customer once he or she enters the shop.Retailers had adopted technologies in their stores long before Amazon Go arrived on the scene. Self-checkout kiosks have been common in supermarkets and other stores for years. Kroger, the grocery chain, uses sensors and predictive analytics tools to better anticipate when more cashiers will be needed.But the opening of Amazon Go in January was alarming for many retailers, who saw a sudden willingness by Amazon to wield its technology power in new ways. Hundreds of cameras near the ceiling and sensors in the shelves help automatically tally the cookies, chips and soda that shoppers remove and put into their bags. Shoppers’ accounts are charged as they walk out the doors.Amazon is now looking to expand Go to new areas. An Amazon spokeswoman declined to comment on its expansion plans, but the company  has a job posting for a senior real estate manager who will be responsible for “site selection and acquisition” and field tours of “potential locations” for new Go stores.“Unanimously, there was an element of embarrassment because here is an online retailer showing us how to do brick and mortar, and frankly doing it amazingly well,” said Martin Hitch, the chief business officer of Bossa Nova Robotics, a company that makes inventory management robots that Walmart and others are testing.Nowhere are retailers experimenting more avidly with automating store shopping than in China, a country obsessed by new tech fads.One effort is a chain of more than 100 unmanned convenience shops from a start-up called Bingo Box, one of which sits in a business park in Shanghai. Shoppers scan a code on their phones to enter and, once inside, scan the items they want to buy. The store unlocks the exit door after they’ve paid through their phones.Alibaba, one of China’s largest internet companies, has opened 35 of its Hema automated grocery stores, which blend online ordering with automated checkout. Customers scan their groceries at checkout kiosks, using facial recognition to pay electronically, while bags of groceries ordered by customers online float overhead on aerial conveyors, headed to a loading dock for delivery to shoppers.Not to be outdone, JD, another big internet retailer in China, said in December that it had teamed up with a developer to build hundreds of its own unmanned convenience shops. The businesses put readable chips on items to automate the checkout process.At its huge campus south of Beijing, JD is testing a new store that relies on computer vision and sensors on the shelves to know when items have been taken. The system tracks shopping without tagging products with chips. Payment, which for now still happens at a kiosk, is done with facial recognition.JD and Alibaba both plan to sell their systems to other retailers and are working on additional checkout technologies.Back in the United States, Walmart, the world’s largest retailer, is testing out the Bossa Nova robots in dozens of its locations to reduce some tedious tasks that can eat up a worker’s time. The robots, which look like giant wheeled luggage bags, roll up and down the aisles looking for shelves where cereal boxes are out of stock and items like toys are mislabeled. The machines then report back to workers, who restock the shelves and apply new labels.At 120 of Walmart’s 4,700 American stores, shoppers can also scan items, including fruits and vegetables, using the camera on their smartphones and pay for them using the devices. When customers walk out, an employee checks their receipts and does a “spot check” of the items they bought.Kroger, one of the country’s largest grocery chains, has also been testing a mobile scanning service in its supermarkets, recently announcing that it would expand it to 400 of its more 2,700 stores.New start-ups are seeking to give retailers the technology to compete with Amazon’s system. One of them, AiFi, is working on cashierless checkout technology that it says will be flexible and affordable enough that mom-and-pop retailers and bigger outlets can use it. In the United States, venture capitalists put $100 million into retail automation start-ups in each of the past two years, up from about $64 million in 2015, according Pitchbook, a financial data firm.“There’s a gold rush feeling about this,” said Alan O’Herlihy, chief executive of Everseen, an Irish company working with retailers on automated checkout technology that uses artificial intelligence.While such technologies could improve the shopping experience, there may also be consequences that people find less desirable. Retailers like Amazon could compile reams of data about where customers spend time inside their doors, comparable to what internet companies already know about their online habits.“It’s combined with everything else Amazon might know about you,” said Gennie Gebhart, a researcher at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, an online civil liberties organization. “Amazon knows what I buy online, what I watch and now how I move around a space.”In China, there is less public concern about data privacy issues. Many Chinese citizens have become accustomed to high levels of surveillance, including widespread security cameras and government monitoring of online communications.Depending on how heavily retailers automate in the years to come, job losses could be severe in a sector that has already experienced wave after wave of store closings by the likes of Macy’s, Toys “R” Us and Sears.Retailers are playing down the threat to jobs. Walmart, the largest private employer in the United States, says that it does not anticipate automation will lead to job losses, but rather that the new technologies are meant to redirect employees to spend more time helping customers find what they need.“We see this as helping our associates,” said John Crecelius, vice president of central operations at Walmart. “We are a people-led business that is technology enabled.”Some traditional retailers are also skeptical about whether the sort of automation in Amazon Go can move to large stores. They say the technology may not work or be cost effective outside a store with a small footprint and inventory.“That’s probably not scalable to a 120,000-square-foot store,” said Chris Hjelm, executive vice president and chief information officer at Kroger.But he said it was just a matter of time before more cameras and sensors were commonplace in stores. “It’s a few years out,” he said, “before that technology becomes mainstream.”Nick Wingfield reported from Seattle, Paul Mozur from Shanghai, and Michael Corkery from New York.Advertisement
Bits By                     
 KEVIN ROOSE
 
APRIL 6, 2018
Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.It’s hard to imagine now, but at one point, long ago, Facebook did not monopolize the entire tech news cycle — a heady and innocent era when you could read an entire day’s news without encountering the words “Cambridge Analytica” or “third-party developers.”I confess that, like many of you, I have been obsessed with the fallout from Facebook’s latest privacy scandal, to the point that I had a stress dream that I overslept and missed covering Mark Zuckerberg’s testimony on Capitol Hill next week. (Related: I need to get out more, and possibly take up yoga.)But despite the wall-to-wall news of the past few weeks, lots of important things are happening in the tech world that don’t involve Facebook. So let’s run down a few of them?AdvertisementI thought this article by Scott Shane and Daisuke Wakabayashi, about thousands of Google employees who are protesting the company’s involvement in a Pentagon A.I. program, was fascinating on a number of levels.AdvertisementFirst, it’s an unusually clear example of the double-edged nature of artificial intelligence. Google has spent billions of dollars teaching computers to play Go, drive cars and translate languages on the fly. The company has been extremely proud of its advances in machine learning, even releasing some of its tools to the public via open-source frameworks like TensorFlow, which provides a fascinating contrast to what’s happening inside the company now. When its image-classification algorithms are used to spot tumors on radiology scans, Google puts out a press release, and engineers cheer. But when these same types of algorithms are used by the Pentagon to improve the accuracy of drone strikes, it’s a moral outrage.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yonatan Zunger, a former Google engineer, had an interesting op-ed the other day in The Boston Globe about the “reckonings” that various scientific fields have undergone, as the scientists who develop powerful tools begin to see how those tools can be used for evil purposes. He used the examples of the atomic bomb, which forever changed the way that physics was taught in universities, and dynamite, which made chemists aware of the consequences of their expertise. It’s not hard to see A.I. as a similar kind of turning point for computer scientists — and if it is, the Google-Pentagon issue might be the first of many similar fights.Second, the Google-Pentagon incident is a revealing story about the leverage that Silicon Valley engineers have over their companies. Because the labor market for engineers in the Bay Area is so tight, and because companies live and die on their ability to attract and retain talent, these employees have much more say in how a company like Google governs itself than, say, regulators or outside activists. If an antiwar group protests outside Google’s headquarters, it’s an annoyance. But if 3,000 engineers walk out, it’s a crisis. And as the tech industry goes through its moral reckoning, executives of these companies should bear in mind that their biggest risk isn’t regulation, it’s rebellion from within.I’ve also been following the feud between Amazon and President Trump this week, which has led to a bull market for explainers about the business models of the United States Postal Service. My colleague Nick Wingfield wrote that, contra President Trump, the available evidence suggests that “Amazon has been a boon to the Postal Service.” But Vox’s Jen Kirby added that, because the exact details of the contract between Amazon and the Postal Service aren’t known, it’s possible that President Trump is partly right: “Maybe the U.S.P.S. isn’t actually making the best deals.” Meanwhile, Matt Stoller, a fellow at the Open Markets Institute, says President Trump is “actually right” that Amazon is ripping off the federal government through its U.S.P.S. contracts.I’m a nonexpert on the subject of parcel shipping, so my opinion on Amazon’s the -U.S.P.S. probably isn’t worth one first-class stamp. But it’s possible, and maybe plausible, that all of these analyses are partly correct — that the Postal Service benefits from Amazon’s dominance, and that Amazon is getting a sweetheart deal that should be re-examined. Anyway, Amazon’s stock dipped sharply after President Trump started tweeting angry things about it, but it has now recovered to its pre-tweetstorm levels, meaning that investors may be as confused as I am.Last, and most obvious, the horrific shooting at YouTube on Tuesday, which injured three people and left the company badly shaken. As more details have emerged on Nasim Najafi Aghdam, whom the police have identified as the attacker, it has become increasingly clear that this was a new kind of violence — an act of revenge by an internet creator against the platform that she felt controlled her economic destiny. As my colleagues Nellie Bowles and Jack Nicas wrote, “Ms. Aghdam’s complaints echoed what a wide range of YouTube posters — from self-described animal rights activists like her to right-wing political provocateurs — have increasingly been protesting over the last year.”It’s a tragic reminder that social platforms aren’t just websites anymore. They’re powerful economies unto themselves, and even seemingly minor policy decisions can alter the lives of millions of people, a few of whom might be disturbed enough to act on their darkest impulses.Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer-at-large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Google’s Pentagon Connections.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
APRIL 4, 2018
If there was one broad takeaway from the data leak involving Cambridge Analytica, the voter profiling firm that obtained private information from up to 87 million Facebook accounts, it’s that you should hesitate before sharing your data with an unknown brand.This lesson applies to just about everything that touches your personal technology, including the apps that you download to your phone or computer and the free online services that you use. And, yes, it also includes those seemingly harmless personality tests run by some unfamiliar organization on Facebook — the kind that helped Cambridge Analytica get the data on users.To make matters worse, the information that can be stolen from you is becoming increasingly personal. Smartphones, for one, are embedded with microphones, motion sensors and cameras that can spy on your every move if corrupted by a bad actor. Home gadgets like internet-connected thermostats, power outlets and audio speakers are capable of collecting information about what you are doing at home, including listening to your conversations, and knowing when you are away from home.It’s time to stop using technology and the internet as though you were shopping at a supermarket. In a grocery store, you can reasonably assume that the food labels are accurate and the products safe to eat, because the food industry is heavily regulated. The handling of personal digital information, in contrast, is  loosely regulated. There have been scores of obscure companies baiting you with products that purport to improve your life — but actually capitalize on your data.Advertisement“We don’t really know why we’re trusting that a particular company with access to our data won’t do something like sell it or rent it or share it without our consent,” said Lee Tien, a lawyer for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a nonprofit that focuses on digital rights.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That’s not to say the tech behemoths are innocent. The data leak to Cambridge Analytica was ultimately Facebook’s fault because its app platform allowed data to be harvested from people’s friends lists in the first place. About five years ago, Google had to pay a $7 million fine after acknowledging that it had scooped up passwords, email and other personal data with its Street View mapping project.Yet I am recommending taking extra caution with obscure tech brands because it is something under your control. You can take a pause. Don’t immediately download every app you see in an app store or on the web just because it looks fun. Don’t take every quiz you see on Facebook (even if you are dying to know which “Game of Thrones” character identifies with you). Don’t impulse buy internet-connected devices from unfamiliar brands. Don’t do any of this without first doing some research on the reputations of these vendors and their business models.AdvertisementHere are some examples of when unknown brands did us wrong — and the lessons we can learn.Last year, The New York Times revealed that Uber bought information about Lyft, its main ride-hailing competitor in the United States, from Unroll.me, a free email service that offered to unsubscribe people from marketing emails.How did Unroll.me get data about Lyft? Unroll.me scanned users’ inboxes for information and sold it to other businesses, and Uber paid it for data it found about Lyft receipts. Many consumers found it misleading that a company that promised to rid you of spam from marketers made money by selling your information to marketers and other companies.Here’s the kicker: The truth was always laid out in the privacy policy, which said that “we may collect, use, transfer, sell and disclose nonpersonal information for any purpose” and that data could be used “to build anonymous market research products and services.”In response to the backlash, Unroll.me said it was “heartbreaking” to see that people were upset and pledged to be more transparent about its use of data. The app continues to operate.The lessons. Whenever you have the time, read privacy policies before opting to share your data with a brand. This is a daunting task but a healthy exercise, especially when you are unfamiliar and feeling distrustful toward an obscure company. And do the best you can to research a company’s business model. When a service or product is free, assume that your personal information is being monetized.“We all need to know that whenever you’re not paying for the thing, then you’re paying for the thing in a nonmonetary way,” Mr. Tien said.Last year, an app called Soniac was available for Android phones on the Google Play app store. Soniac marketed itself as a messaging app — and indeed, it included features for sending text messages. The less obvious features: The app was also capable of silently recording audio, taking photos with the camera, placing phone calls and downloading call logs among other features.Lookout, a security firm that follows malicious software for Android devices, alerted Google about Soniac’s hidden abilities last year, and the app was quickly removed from the Play app store.AdvertisementYet Lookout said its researchers had identified over 1,000 spyware apps with many of the same characteristics that Soniac had. Many of those spyware apps were served in third-party app stores that are not authorized by Google.The company that offered Soniac, Iraqwebservice, had published other spyware apps on the Play store. All of its apps have been removed from Play, but Lookout warned that the spyware would probably resurface in the future.The lessons. For one, before you install an app from a company you’ve never heard of, look at its user reviews and do a web search on the company to see if its services are legitimate. You can also check reputable web publications that review apps, like TouchArcade, CNET and Tom’s Guide.For another, when installing an app, take a close look at what data it is accessing. Smartphone apps will ask for permission for access to certain data and sensors. If an app is asking for data that is unrelated to the product, don’t install it. For example, you can reasonably expect a mapping app to ask for your location data, but it shouldn’t need access to your camera.“If something seems outside of the scope, like if a calculator app tells you it needs to use your webcam, say, ‘What, why?’” said Adam Kujawa, the head of malware intelligence at Malwarebytes, a security firm.Third, avoid downloading apps from unofficial app stores and sites that are not affiliated with large brands. And keep in mind that alternative app stores are particularly ripe for malware, because just about anything can be distributed there, similar to a flea market.Parents, beware: A number of internet products have specifically collected data about children. EchoMetrix is a notorious example. In 2009, the company issued a news release bragging that it had predicted the winner of that year’s “American Idol” singing competition.How did it do that? By looking at children’s private information. The company started in 2004 with the name SearchHelp, offering a parental control app called FamilySafe for parents to monitor their children’s online activities. Five years later, it rebranded itself as EchoMetrix and released Pulse, a tool for providing insight to third-party marketers on youths, by aggregating data from millions of teenagers’ chat transcripts and blog posts, among other sources.AdvertisementEchoMetrix’s practices attracted the attention of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, a privacy rights group, which filed a complaint about the company to the Federal Trade Commission. The group accused EchoMetrix of violating the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act by collecting information on minors without parental consent. In 2010, EchoMetrix reached settlements with the commission and the New York attorney general’s office in which it agreed not to analyze or share information about children’s private communications or online activities. EchoMetrix has since rebranded itself as Protext Mobility, a biotech company.The lessons. Be judicious when choosing tech products for your children. Increasingly, toys are beginning to include internet connections — before buying a “smart” toy, do your homework on what the companies are doing with the data. Common Sense Media, a nonprofit that evaluates content and products for families, is a good place to start your research.Perhaps the most important lesson is to acknowledge that you don’t know anything about the vast majority of brands you engage with on the internet. So tread carefully.“These threats aren’t going away,” Mr. Tien said. “With the expansion of data collection and the expansion of what’s possible to collect, it’s just going to continue to proliferate.”Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes Tech Fix, a column about solving tech problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What frustrates you about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: To Protect Data, Be Wary of Unfamiliar Brands.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NATASHA SINGERAPRIL 3, 2018
Grindr, the social network aimed at gay, bisexual and transgender men, is facing a firestorm of criticism for sharing users’ H.I.V. status, sexual tastes and other intimate personal details with outside software vendors.The data sharing, made public by European researchers on Saturday and reported by BuzzFeed on Monday, set off an outcry from many users. By Monday night, the company said it would stop sharing H.I.V. data with outside companies.The criticism of the company continued on Tuesday, with officials in Europe and the United States joining in. A consumer group in Norway filed a formal complaint with the country’s data protection agency, accusing the company of breaching European and Norwegian laws. Two United States senators sent a letter to Grindr’s chief executive, asking whether the app had asked users to opt in before it shared their most personal details with third parties.In a statement on Monday, the company said that sharing user data with outside companies was a standard industry practice and that Grindr had “policies in place to further protect our users’ privacy from disclosure.”AdvertisementOn Tuesday, in response to questions about the Norwegian group’s accusations, a Grindr spokesman said: “We welcome the questions about our policies and always look for opportunities to improve. ”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An increasing number of online users in the United States, along with some members of Congress, are  questioning the tech industry’s largely unfettered collection and data-mining of consumers’ personal details. The Grindr controversy also highlights the widening regulatory gap between the United States, which lacks a comprehensive federal consumer privacy law, and Europe, where privacy is viewed as a fundamental human right, with laws to back it up.AdvertisementGrindr, which is owned by the Kunlun Group, a company based in Hong Kong, has more than 3.6 million active users. The Norwegian Consumer Council, a nonprofit group in Oslo that first raised concerns about the company’s practices, said the dating app had shared users’ H.I.V. status with two software companies, Apptimize and Localytics. Although the app encrypted the H.I.V. status data, the analysis found that Grindr had shared other highly sensitive details — including users’ romantic aims and self-identified tribes like “leather” or “bear” — with an ad-targeting company without encryption.In a complaint to the Norwegian data protection agency, the group said Grindr had violated a European data protection law that requires special protections for processing sensitive data including details about health and sex. The group said Grindr had also violated a provision in the law that requires companies to obtain informed consent before using people’s data for new purposes.In its statement, Grindr said that it worked with software vendors to improve its platform and that, in doing so, it may share details about users’ H.I.V. status or location. The company reminded users that “Grindr is a public forum” and that they should know that data they included in their profiles, including their H.I.V. status, would become public.“As a result, you should carefully consider what information to include in your profile,” the statement said.But consumer advocates said Grindr had used intimate personal details for purposes that the app’s users had never signed up for or even knew about.“It’s totally invisible to the user, which is why they feel betrayed and a loss of control when sensitive data about them is shipped to some third party,” said Justin Brookman, the director of consumer privacy and technology policy at Consumers Union, the advocacy arm of Consumer Reports. “I hope this will get app developers and other companies to rethink their promiscuous data-sharing practices.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech We’re Using By                     
 HANNA INGBER
 
APRIL 4, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Hanna Ingber, editorial director of The Times’s Reader Center, discussed the tech she’s using.The Reader Center collects story ideas and feedback on our coverage from readers. What have been the most important tech tools for engaging with our audience?We use a variety of tools to listen to our readers and respond to them. We need that variety because readers are talking about our coverage on so many different platforms — our own site, Twitter, Facebook and more. Plus, there are readers contacting us directly by email and phone. We even received a letter in the mail — which I promptly Instagrammed.Twitter can be very useful for quickly knowing how readers are reacting to our coverage, but it’s also very noisy. The social media dashboard Tweetdeck makes a big difference. I set up columns that help me sort through the high volume of tweets and find the ones that are most important to me. For example, I have a column that shows me every time a tweet mentioning The New York Times is getting a lot of attention.Facebook is also crucial to our work. We can use it to get feedback on our coverage and reach out to our readers, asking them about the news or their communities.AdvertisementOne of my colleagues on the Reader Center, Josie Sedgwick, wanted to know what the long winters are like for our readers who live around the Arctic Circle. She put together a series of questions using an in-house tool called Formacist, and then posted that on Facebook, targeting readers who live in countries in that region. She was hoping to hear from maybe a dozen readers; she heard from 700. (And their responses were breathtaking.)AdvertisementFacebook Live enables us to have candid and accessible back-and-forth discussions between our journalists and our audience. A recent thought-provoking example was a Race/NYT chat with hosts John Eligon and Rachel Swarns discussing adoptions that cross racial and ethnic lines.We also use email, and the comments system on our site. Plus, our colleagues send us interesting or useful feedback they spot through our Reader Center Slack group.And then there’s text message. My brother-in-law happens to be very good at spotting criticism of our coverage that is bubbling up on Twitter and probably will deserve our attention. On the weekends, when I am less active on Twitter, he’s my early warning system.What could be better?Many of our colleagues wish they had a better sense of what our readers are saying about their coverage. There is a lot of feedback to keep up with and sort through. We’d love to have a tool that would enable us to aggregate reader feedback (emails, social media posts, comments and more) in a faster and more systematic way.You’ve invested time in coming up with creative ways to use social media. What are some of your favorite uses of social media sites like Twitter, Facebook, Snapchat or Instagram? I appreciate Twitter when reporters bring us along on a journey, telling a story with their tweets. Rukmini Callimachi, our correspondent who covers Islamist extremism, took her followers along as she traveled with an embed into western Mosul, for example, introducing us to villagers and showing us what she saw.When Julie Turkewitz, a national correspondent, traveled with a group of students from Parkland, Fla., to the state capital to demand more gun control, she tweeted scenes from the bus along the way. Her tweets were gripping and immediate, and they gave us a window into a scene we couldn’t have otherwise gotten.AdvertisementTwitter is also an indispensable tool for journalists and just about anyone else to be part of a conversation about the news as it’s unfolding.While journalists are on Twitter, the bulk of our readers are on Facebook. At The Times, we regularly use Facebook to reach our readers and ask them to participate in our coverage.I also prefer Facebook for its sense of community. Facebook groups tend to be closed, so people are writing posts to a segment of people. Perhaps because the posts are not for the wider public, there seems to be a lot less posturing on Facebook than on Twitter.Do you have a personal favorite Facebook group?My guilty pleasure is scrolling through the Maplewood Moms* Facebook group. (I live in a neighboring New Jersey town.) Local parents post questions that are incredibly relevant to my life, like how to get your toddler to brush his teeth. There are discussions on managing a commute and bedtimes, and horror stories of lactation rooms that don’t lock.Even though I don’t know all of the mothers, or even most of them, I feel a sense of shared values and experiences. We can so easily relate to one another, battling toddler meltdowns and long waits at the pediatrician’s office. And this leads to an online environment that feels both intimate and supportive.What other tech product are you currently obsessed with using in your daily life?I tried the Apple Watch and could barely figure it out. So I’ll say my phone (an iPhone 7 with a maroon and purple case).Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.My entire life exists on my phone. For nonwork purposes, I love that I have a camera and video recorder with me wherever I am — crucial for a parent of young children.I do my banking, listen to podcasts, read, and jot down funny things my 4-year-old, Isaac, says. And I wrote out these answers on my phone (in the Notes app) while getting my hair cut.AdvertisementSmartphones now also make for easy house stalking. I love going to a dinner party and then checking out the person’s home on Zillow. My husband and I often play a game to guess how much we think the house sold for. (Life in the suburbs is underrated.)In our own home, our kids love using our Amazon Echo. Isaac asks it all sorts of important life questions (like “Alexa, do you like bubbles?”). He also orders up his favorite songs, then he and his little brother dance around the kitchen.I wish there were a feature on my phone that could make it quickly obvious to others what I am doing on it. I grew up watching my parents read the newspaper over breakfast. I wish that when I was reading the news, my kids could tell. Instead, they just see my head in my phone. That is the major reason I still get the Sunday paper.Follow Hanna Ingber on Twitter: @HannaIngberA version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Hearing From Readers Over Multiple Channels.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NICK WINGFIELDAPRIL 1, 2018
The recent tribulations of Facebook, which has lurched from crisis to crisis over the last year, most recently over the handling of users’ personal data, has pushed a few of the industry’s most prominent names to speak out against the company.Marc Benioff, the chief executive of Salesforce.com, has compared the deleterious effects of social media to those of tobacco and alcohol, and has called for more regulation of those tech companies. Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, has also suggested new regulation protecting personal data might be in order for businesses like Facebook.“I think that this certain situation is so dire and has become so large that probably some well-crafted regulation is necessary,” Mr. Cook said recently at an event in China, referring to Facebook’s recent problems.But don’t expect a long lineup of other industry leaders to speak out any time soon.Although technology companies have their differences, a spirit of comity prevails among its leaders in moments of crisis. For example, technology chiefs have mostly kept quiet about Uber’s travails — from its efforts to sidestep law enforcement to a pedestrian death caused by one of its self-driving cars — even if they might express their opinions privately.AdvertisementRepresentatives from companies as varied as Amazon, Microsoft and Slack declined to comment for this story. Part of the silence, people in the industry say, comes from a desire to avoid the business equivalent of bad karma — knowing that they, too, may one day face the buzz saw of public censure.AdvertisementOthers say companies have little moral standing to criticize Facebook’s practices, when they have themselves relied on the social network to acquire customers, using the same ad-targeting tools that rely on personal data that have stirred up so much controversy in the context of politics.“I think we just have to acknowledge the entire industry’s complicity with what’s happening with Facebook,” said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, an internet real estate firm. “It’s almost like we’re Inspector Renault in ‘Casablanca’ where we say we’re shocked, shocked with what’s happening and then a moment later someone hands us our winnings.”“We’ve all been advertising avidly on Facebook,” Mr. Kelman added.Many companies are also linked to Facebook through partnerships, professional organizations and a worldview about the power of data that is not all that different from that of Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It has been really hard for executives to turn their back on the gold mine of big data even in the face of compelling arguments to do so,” said Roger McNamee, an early investor in Facebook and a mentor of Mr. Zuckerberg’s before becoming one of the company’s most vocal detractors. “The C.E.O.s who are stepping forward here are taking the long view.”Vanessa Chan, a spokeswoman for Facebook, declined to comment.There are many critics of Facebook in Silicon Valley. They include former tech workers, venture capitalists and entrepreneurs like Brian Acton, who became a billionaire when Facebook acquired WhatsApp, a messaging company he helped found. “It is time. #deletefacebook,” Mr. Acton posted on Twitter last month.
            It is time. #deletefacebook But there are few active corporate leaders in Silicon Valley who have taken a stand. Most of the handful of chiefs who have spoken out against Facebook have long been forthright on the topic of privacy. It is no coincidence that their businesses do not rely on the collection of personal data to the same degree that most internet companies do. Mr. Cook of Apple, which makes the vast majority of its revenue from the sale of devices, has for years declared that “when an online service is free, you’re not the customer — you’re the product.”Steve Dowling, a spokesman for Apple, declined to comment.When asked about the Facebook’s difficulties at an event in China recently, Ginni Rometty, chief executive of IBM, said companies needed to give their users better control over their personal information. “Ginni has long believed that individuals or customers own their data — not platforms,” said Edward Barbini, a spokesman for IBM.AdvertisementNoah Theran, s spokesman for the Internet Association, a trade group that counts Facebook and Salesforce among its members, though not Apple and IBM, said maintaining privacy and security was a top priority for internet companies.“Internet companies comply with a wide variety of data privacy and security laws and regulations that are actively enforced by the F.T.C. and state attorneys general,” Mr. Theran said. “Trust and comfort with our products and services is essential to a thriving internet, and the internet industry is committed to providing people with information and tools to make informed choices about how their personal information is used, seen and shared online.”Another tech leader, Elon Musk, chief executive of Tesla and SpaceX, said recently on Twitter that none of his companies advertise on the social network and vowed to take down the official Facebook pages for Tesla and SpaceX.“It’s not a political statement and I didn’t do this because someone dared me to do it,” he wrote. “Just don’t like Facebook. Gives me the willies. Sorry.”Mr. McNamee, the early Facebook investor, believes more industry leaders should speak out, partly because he predicts the United States can and should eventually adopt more stringent regulations akin to those emerging in Europe.“Companies that get ahead of that curve,” he said, “will be way more successful than those who can pretend they can sustain the old model.”A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: As Facebook Struggles, Rivals Stay (Mostly) Mum.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATHANIEL POPPERAPRIL 1, 2018
From Bitcoin to Litecoin to Ethereum, we explain how cryptocurrency transactions work.SAN FRANCISCO — Worried about someone hacking the next election? Bothered by the way Facebook and Equifax coughed up your personal information?The technology industry has an answer called the blockchain — even for the problems the industry helped to create.The first blockchain was created in 2009 as a new kind of database for the virtual currency Bitcoin, where all transactions could be stored without any banks or governments involved.Now, countless entrepreneurs, companies and governments are looking to use similar databases — often independent of Bitcoin — to solve some of the most intractable issues facing society.Advertisement“People feel the need to move away from something like Facebook and toward something that allows them to have ownership of their own data,” said Ryan Shea, a co-founder of Blockstack, a New York company working with blockchain technology.AdvertisementThe creator of the World Wide Web, Tim Berners-Lee, has said the blockchain could help reduce the big internet companies’ influence and return the web to his original vision. But he has also warned that it could come with some of the same problems as the web.Blockchain allows information to be stored and exchanged by a network of computers without any central authority. In theory, this egalitarian arrangement also makes it harder for data to be altered or hacked.Investors, for one, see potential. While the price of Bitcoin and other virtual currencies have plummeted this year, investment in other blockchain projects has remained strong. In the first three months of 2018, venture capitalists put half a billion dollars into 75 blockchain projects, more than double what they raised in the last quarter of 2017, according to data from Pitchbook.Most of the projects have not gotten beyond pilot testing, and many are aimed at transforming mundane corporate tasks like financial trading and accounting. But some experiments promise to transform fundamental things, like the way we vote and the way we interact online.“There is just so much it can do,” said Bradley Tusk, a former campaign manager for Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, who has recently thrown his weight behind several blockchain projects. “I love the fact that you can transmit data, information and choices in a way that is really hard to hack — really hard to disrupt and that can be really efficient.”Mr. Tusk, the founder of Tusk Strategies, is an investor in some large virtual currency companies. He has also supported efforts aimed at getting governments to move voting online to blockchain-based systems. Mr. Tusk argues that blockchains could make reliable online voting possible because the votes could be recorded in a tamper-proof way.“Everything is moving toward people saying, ‘I want all the benefits of the internet, but I want to protect my privacy and my security,’” he said. “The only thing I know that can reconcile those things is the blockchain.”AdvertisementBlockchains assemble data into so-called blocks that are chained together using complicated math. Since each block is built off the last one and includes information like time stamps, any attempt to go back and alter existing data would be highly complicated. In the original Bitcoin blockchain, the data in the blocks is information about Bitcoin wallets and transactions. The blocks of data in the Bitcoin blockchain — and most of its imitators — are kept by a peer-to-peer computer network.The novel structure allows people to set up online accounts that can securely hold valuable personal information without having to trust a single entity that can hoard, abuse or lose control of the data, as happened with Facebook and the consumer credit reporting agency Equifax.A range of corporations and governments are trying to apply the blockchain model — for projects from the prosaic to the radical. Various departments of the United Nations now have blockchain experiments looking to tackle climate change, the delivery of humanitarian aid and the identity challenges faced by stateless people. Coca-Cola and the State Department recently announced a project to register foreign employees on a blockchain in an attempt to eliminate forced labor.These experiments have drawn skepticism from Bitcoin aficionados, who say blockchains are being applied to problems that could be more easily solved with old-fashioned databases.Other critics say the rapid pace of blockchain development could lead to the same problem facing the broader tech industry: a willingness to disrupt and overthrow old systems before the replacement has been thoroughly tested.“The blockchain industry is ready and waiting to say, ‘Yes, we are the solution,’ and they have every incentive to do so,” said Angela Walch, a research fellow at the Center for Blockchain Technologies at University College London. “But somebody needs to ask the question: ‘Is it actually better? Is it measurably better?’”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many blockchain projects opened themselves to criticism and regulatory scrutiny by raising money through so-called initial coin offerings last year. These fund-raising campaigns often brought in tens of millions of dollars in minutes with little regulatory oversight.But new blockchain efforts continue apace, motivated in no small part by concerns about the emergence of internet giants like Facebook and YouTube.Most of the biggest internet companies make their money from collecting personal information and using it to sell targeted advertisements. This kind of massive data collection makes them vulnerable to hackers and outsiders who want to leverage the data — as was evident when Cambridge Analytica improperly gained access to 50 million Facebook profiles. And start-ups are using the blockchain in an attempt to pry control of all that data out of their hands.AdvertisementBlockstack has built a way to record the basic details about your identity on a blockchain database and then use that identity to set up accounts with other online projects that are built on top of it.The animating force behind the project is that users — rather than Blockstack or any other company — would end up in control of all the data they generate with any online service.Blockstack is one of several blockchain-based projects hoping to create a new generation of online services that don’t rely on having unfettered access to our personal information.The idea has gained enough steam that in the days after news of Facebook’s relationship with Cambridge Analytica broke, Twitter was filled with people calling for blockchain-based alternatives.
            As Facebook is collapsing we need to replace it with a blockchain based, decentralized platform! https://t.co/lgFGh3bHLi “As Facebook is collapsing we need to replace it with a blockchain based, decentralized platform!” one user, @GerdMoeBehrens, wrote.
            50 m Facebook profiles harvested for in major data breach | News | The Guardian #blockchain WE NEED U NOW!!! https://t.co/P0twwKsu2g “#blockchain WE NEED U NOW!!!” wrote another, @andymartin46.But Mr. Berners-Lee has warned that the development of the blockchain could come with unintended consequences, like more activity from criminals operating outside the oversight of governments.Even blockchain advocates say the hype has conditioned people to think that good answers are close at hand, when it could take five or 10 years for the technology to properly develop.In fact, most blockchain projects are still plagued by concerns about privacy. For example, the widely used Bitcoin blockchain allows certain data — details of the transactions between users — to be seen by anyone, even if other data — the users’ identities — remains obscured. Voting start-ups have solved this by encrypting the data before putting it on a blockchain, but there are questions about whether this will solve other privacy concerns.Blockchain-based accounts also rely on users keeping their own passwords or private keys, which people are famously bad at doing. With Bitcoin, when people lose their private key they lose access to the money in their account — if someone lost the private key to a blockchain-based online account, they could lose access to their identity.Advertisement“We’re not saying that tomorrow you can flip the switch and a blockchain is going to solve these problems,” said Michael Casey, a co-author of “The Truth Machine,” a new book on the blockchain. “What’s important is how it opens the door to a new way of thinking about the problems we face.”Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopper.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tech’s Answer For Security: Blockchain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Bits By                     
 KEVIN ROOSE
 
MARCH 30, 2018
Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.One perk — or hazard, I suppose — of being a technology writer for the past few years has been getting invited to ride in a bunch of autonomous vehicles. I’ve been shuttled around in nearly a dozen self-driving prototypes, including a Ford in Michigan, an Uber in Pennsylvania and a Chrysler minivan in the California desert.Whenever anyone asks what it’s like to ride in self-driving cars, my reply is: “Which self-driving cars?” Casual observers tend to talk about the progress of autonomous vehicles as if they’re a homogeneous category, but there is an entire spectrum of capability and safety. I’ve had calm and boring drives, and terrifying white-knuckle trips. The best results aren’t always from the companies with the most money or the most sophisticated marketing campaigns.This week, the self-driving car industry reached a turning point, one at which the mixed progress of self-driving car projects became very clear.AdvertisementThere was continued fallout from the fatal accident this month involving a self-driving Uber vehicle in Arizona, including a blockbuster story from my colleague Dai Wakabayashi about Uber’s struggles to get its self-driving cars ready for the market. Since the crash, Arizona officials have ordered Uber to suspend its autonomous vehicle testing program in the state, and Uber is not renewing its permit to test self-driving cars in California. In addition, Lior Ron, an executive who led Uber Freight and was involved in the company’s early self-driving efforts, is leaving the company.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Uber’s autonomous driving program stalls out, Waymo — the self-driving car division of Alphabet, Google’s parent company — is shifting into overdrive. (Sorry about the car puns — it’s an occupational hazard.) The company announced this week that over the next two years it would order up to 20,000 electric vehicles from Jaguar Land Rover for use in its consumer self-driving car service.AdvertisementAs my colleague Neal Boudette noted, Waymo’s announcement showed that the company has “an audacious vision that goes far beyond even the most optimistic plans of its rivals.” Waymo says that by 2020 — that is, two years from now — its fleet of self-driving Jaguars will be doing as many as a million trips per day.Self-driving car companies are notorious for overhyping their progress. But the Waymo announcement, complete with specific timetables, cost projections and firm indicators of fleet size, is a really, really big deal. As Alexis Madrigal wrote in a piece for The Atlantic, if Waymo is within even 50 percent of a million daily rides in two years, “the United States will have entered an entirely new phase in robotics and technology.”It’s unclear if Uber’s tragic accident in Arizona will have a broader effect on the autonomous vehicle industry. There could be a regulatory backlash that would hamper all self-driving projects, regardless of progress. Manufacturers could decide to be extra cautious when it comes to rolling out their projects on public roads, in order to avoid a worst-case scenario.But if Waymo’s announcement is an indication of where the rest of the self-driving car industry is heading, we shouldn’t expect too much of a slowdown. Autonomous vehicle manufacturers believe, with reason, that keeping their test vehicles on the road is a public health issue. The sooner they get safe self-driving cars to the masses, they say, the sooner we can avert some of the nearly 40,000 traffic deaths that happen in the United States every year.That means, unfortunately, that more accidents are inevitable — and underscores the importance of creating a reliable standard to measure the technological progress of self-driving car projects. But it also means that the self-driving future could arrive, from Waymo or someone else, sooner than most people think.Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer-at-large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By JACK NICASMARCH 30, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Two days after Donald J. Trump won the 2016 election, executives at Google consoled their employees in an all-staff meeting broadcast around the world.“There is a lot of fear within Google,” said Sundar Pichai, the company’s chief executive, according to a video of the meeting viewed by The New York Times. When asked by an employee if there was any silver lining to Mr. Trump’s election, the Google co-founder Sergey Brin said, “Boy, that’s a really tough one right now.” Ruth Porat, the finance chief, said Mr. Trump’s victory felt “like a ton of bricks dropped on my chest.” Then she instructed members of the audience to hug the person next to them.Sixteen months later, Google’s parent company, Alphabet, has most likely saved billions of dollars in taxes on its overseas cash under a new tax law signed by Mr. Trump. Alphabet also stands to benefit from the Trump administration’s looser regulations for self-driving cars and delivery drones, as well as from proposed changes to the trade pact with Mexico and Canada that would limit Google’s liability for user content on its sites.Once one of Mr. Trump’s most vocal opponents, Silicon Valley’s technology industry has increasingly found common ground with the White House. When Mr. Trump was elected, tech executives were largely up in arms over a leader who espoused policies on immigration and other issues that were antithetical to their companies’ values. Now, many of the industry’s executives are growing more comfortable with the president and how his economic agenda furthers their business interests, even as many of their employees continue to disagree with Mr. Trump on social issues.AdvertisementThe relationship remains bumpy. Mr. Trump lashed out at Amazon on Twitter on Thursday, accusing the e-commerce giant of evading taxes. (Amazon said it had saved $789 million under the tax law Mr. Trump signed.) The president is also expected to sign legislation,  passed by the Senate last week, that would strengthen policing of sex trafficking online — a bill that internet companies once opposed because they worried it would make them liable for content posted by their users.AdvertisementYet quietly, the tech industry has warmed to the White House, especially as companies including Alphabet, Apple and Intel have benefited from the Trump administration’s policies.Those include lowering corporate taxes, encouraging development of new wireless technology like 5G and, so far, ignoring calls to break up the tech giants. Mr. Trump’s tougher stance on China may also help ward off industry rivals, with the president squashing a hostile bid to acquire the chip maker Qualcomm this month. And Mr. Trump let die an Obama-era rule that required many tech start-ups to give some workers more overtime pay.Mr. Trump “has been great for business and really, really good for tech,” said Gary Shapiro, who leads the Consumer Technology Association, the largest American tech trade group, with more than 2,200 members including Apple, Google, Amazon and Facebook.Mr. Shapiro said that he had voted for Hillary Clinton, Mr. Trump’s opponent, in 2016, but that he and many tech executives had come around on Mr. Trump. While they disagree with him on immigration and the environment, they have found areas where their interests align, like deregulation and investment in internet infrastructure.“This isn’t Hitler or Mussolini here,” Mr. Shapiro said. And even though the president’s new tariffs on steel and aluminum could hurt American businesses and consumers, “disagreement in one area does not mean we cannot work together in others,” Mr. Shapiro said. “Everyone who is married knows that.”Mr. Trump himself has taken to naming tech companies he says are on his side.After Apple took advantage of the new tax law in January to bring back most of the $252 billion cash hoard that it had parked overseas, the company said it would make a $350 billion “contribution to the U.S. economy” over the next five years. That prompted Mr. Trump to suggest he had made good on a campaign pledge to get Apple to bring jobs back to the United States.“You know, for $350 million, you could build a beautiful plant. But for $350 billion, they’re going to build a lot of plants,” the president told members of Congress last month. Mr. Trump said he had called Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, to personally thank him.AdvertisementIn fact, Apple has no plans to build a plant in the United States. The company is uneasy with Mr. Trump’s invoking it to signify how his policies are working, according to a person close to Apple who was not authorized to speak publicly. Apple has not, however, publicly corrected the president.Mr. Trump has also stayed quiet on the controversy engulfing Facebook over user privacy, while other politicians have called for more regulations after revelations that the British political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica improperly harvested the information of 50 million Facebook users. Cambridge Analytica used that data to aid Mr. Trump’s campaign.Michael Kratsios, the White House’s deputy chief technology officer, said in an interview that while Mr. Trump and Silicon Valley had their differences, “in places where we do see eye to eye, I think we’re achieving extraordinary success.”Dean Garfield, head of the Information Technology Industry Council, a 102-year-old advocacy group that represents the biggest tech firms, said his members walked a tightrope, supporting and opposing the president on different issues. Lately, he said, “we have reached balance in the tightrope.”The equilibrium marks a turnabout from what had been a testy relationship between Mr. Trump and the tech sector. On the campaign trail in 2016, Mr. Trump was so critical of tech companies that Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive, once joked he might send Mr. Trump to space in a rocket.
            The @washingtonpost loses money (a deduction) and gives owner @JeffBezos power to screw public on low taxation of @Amazon! Big tax shelter        
            Finally trashed by @realDonaldTrump. Will still reserve him a seat on the Blue Origin rocket. #sendDonaldtospace https://t.co/9OypFoxZk3 Some tech executives have since disagreed with Mr. Trump on social issues. Mr. Cook emailed staff last June to say he had unsuccessfully lobbied the president to remain in the Paris climate accords. In November, Microsoft sued the administration to protect a law that blocks deportation of young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers. More than 100 companies, including Google, Facebook and Uber, filed a brief supporting California’s lawsuit on that issue.Even so, tech executives worked to build a relationship with the president, with some meeting him at Trump Tower before his inauguration and again at the White House in June. While in Washington for the second meeting, Mr. Cook and Satya Nadella, Microsoft’s chief executive, also dined with Jared Kushner, the president’s senior adviser and son-in-law, and Ivanka Trump at the couple’s Washington home, according to a person briefed on the meeting who wasn’t authorized to speak publicly about it. This month, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin visited Apple’s headquarters.
            Glad to visit @Apple HQ with @tim_cook. Thank you for your commitment to invest 350B in USA! #TaxCutsJobsAct pic.twitter.com/TasRA55smG Silicon Valley has found plenty to like about the Trump presidency. In September, tech giants including Facebook and Microsoft teamed up with the administration to pledge $500 million to computer science education. Amazon, Microsoft and Google are also eyeing the administration as a potential customer as Mr. Trump pushes to modernize the government’s digital infrastructure.But Silicon Valley’s favorite thing about Mr. Trump is almost certainly his new tax code. Many tech companies lobbied for corporate tax reform for years before Mr. Trump signed the new tax bill.AdvertisementTech giants immediately reaped the benefits. Under the new rules, Apple saved $43.7 billion in taxes, according to the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, a nonpartisan research group. Apple then announced the $350 billion “contribution” to the economy over five years.Most of the tally was previously planned spending with American suppliers and a $38 billion tax payment on its overseas cash. But Apple also said it planned to hire 20,000 new workers, invest in new data centers and another domestic campus, and increase a fund for innovative American manufacturers to $5 billion from $1 billion. It also gave employees $2,500 bonuses.The president was quick to tweet the news.
            I promised that my policies would allow companies like Apple to bring massive amounts of money back to the United States. Great to see Apple follow through as a result of TAX CUTS. Huge win for American workers and the USA! https://t.co/OwXVUyLOb1 The shifting relationship between Silicon Valley and Mr. Trump appears to have upset some tech employees. A Facebook page called “Angry Googler,” with nearly 1,000 followers, has been dedicated to criticizing Google for any sign it was cooperating with the president.“Not happy about Google pulling a 180 and jumping into bed with Trump? Same here,” said the “About” section of the page, which suggests it is run by a Google employee. This month, the page posted an article about Google helping the Defense Department analyze drone footage. “We’ve gone from organizing the world’s information to … optimizing weapons of war,” the page said.Messages to the account were not returned. Google declined to comment.Some tech firms remain discomfited about appearing as the president’s allies. Last month, Rob Goldman, Facebook’s vice president of advertising, played down Russia’s impact on the 2016 election after the Justice Department charged 13 Russians with trying to subvert its outcome, including by using Facebook. Mr. Trump retweeted Mr. Goldman approvingly.
            The Fake News Media never fails. Hard to ignore this fact from the Vice President of Facebook Ads, Rob Goldman! https://t.co/XGC7ynZwYJ Facebook was uncomfortable with that association with the president, said a person close to the company who was not authorized to speak publicly.Two days later, Facebook’s policy chief, Joel Kaplan, distanced the company from Mr. Goldman’s comments.“The special counsel has issued its indictments, and nothing we found contradicts their conclusions,” he said in a statement. “Any suggestion otherwise is wrong.”Kitty Bennett contributed research from Washington.Follow Jack Nicas on Twitter: @jacknicas.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Silicon Valley,  Wary of Trump,  Warms to Him.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Daisuke WakabayashiSAN FRANCISCO — One of the founders of Otto, a self-driving truck company founded by former Google employees and acquired by Uber, has left the ride-hailing service.Lior Ron — who along with Anthony Levandowski sold Otto to Uber in 2016, six months after leaving Google — was in charge of Uber Freight, a truck shipment booking service. Most of Uber Freight’s business does not involve the company’s autonomous trucks.The departure followed a fatal crash involving an Uber self-driving car in Tempe, Ariz. The police said the car, driving in autonomous mode, had failed to slow down before it struck and killed a woman who was walking her bicycle across a street.Uber has stopped testing of its autonomous vehicles in Arizona, California, Pittsburgh and Toronto while investigators look into the accident. A week after Uber halted testing, Arizona’s governor ordered the company’s self-driving cars off state roads. Uber also pulled an application to renew its permit for testing autonomous vehicles in California.CNBC reported Mr. Ron’s departure earlier on Wednesday.An Uber spokesman, Matt Kallman, said the departure was unrelated to the crash in Tempe, but he would not elaborate on why Mr. Ron had left or the timing of his exit.Uber executives have said self-driving car technology is a key to the company’s future. But the effort had become a headache long before the crash in Arizona.The company’s cars were struggling to meet internal development expectations and falling way behind the improvements made by competitors.Otto became the centerpiece of an intellectual property lawsuit between Uber and Waymo, the self-driving car business spun out of Google. Waymo had accused Uber of conspiring with Mr. Levandowski to steal important technology plans.Mr. Ron, who is not an engineer but has a background in business development, was a prominent figure in the lawsuit. His name came up repeatedly in evidence presented by Waymo to support its case that Mr. Levandowski — one of the engineers who helped start Google’s driverless car project — stole trade secrets.Uber fired Mr. Levandowski in May when he refused to cooperate with its case against Waymo. Uber and Waymo settled the case last month.While Uber’s autonomous vehicle testing has been stopped at least temporarily, Waymo is embarking on an ambitious expansion of its operation. The company said it would buy up to 20,000 electric cars from Jaguar Land Rover for its driverless ride service.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.AdvertisementBy STEVE LOHRMARCH 29, 2018
The Windows era at Microsoft, long in eclipse, is officially history.Microsoft said on Tuesday that it was splitting up its Windows engineering team and that the leader of its Windows business was leaving.The moves, analysts said, were part of a reorganization intended to accelerate Microsoft’s emphasis on newer, faster-growing businesses like cloud computing and data-fueled artificial intelligence. That shift, they noted, has been underway since Satya Nadella became chief executive in 2014.In an email to employees, Mr. Nadella cited the central role of cloud computing and the advances in artificial intelligence — and their potential across all the company’s products. The organizational overhaul, Mr. Nadella wrote, “enables us to step up to this opportunity.”Terry Myerson, 45, executive vice president of Microsoft’s Windows and devices group, will be departing. In a separate email to employees, Mr. Myerson said that he supported the company’s evolution under Mr. Nadella.Advertisement“I believe in it, and these changes are great for Microsoft,” wrote Mr. Myerson, who worked for the company for 21 years.AdvertisementBut with the revamp, the Windows group will be smaller and its engineering efforts dispersed. Windows technology, analysts said, will increasingly be folded into Microsoft’s cloud software. Other engineers will create the user applications — “Windows experiences,” in Microsoft terms — that ride on top of the underlying software, in smartphones, tablets, personal computers and game consoles.Today, cloud services from Amazon, Microsoft and Google have become the internet equivalent of Windows, the dominant operating system of the personal computer era.Software developers write new applications to run on the cloud services, just as they once did for the Windows operating system. Microsoft has successfully rewritten its popular Office productivity products as web-based applications running on the cloud.The reorganization is “really doubling down on the cloud as the fundamental platform for Microsoft,” said Ed Anderson, an analyst at Gartner.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Microsoft’s cloud business is powering its growth. In the most recent quarter, its Azure business grew 98 percent and its cloud-based Office 365 offering by 41 percent. By contrast, the division that includes the Windows PC software increased 2 percent.The formal relegation of the Windows franchise, said Michael Cusumano, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Sloan School of Management, “has been a long time coming.” And such a transition, Mr. Cusumano said, “probably had to be done by a second or third generation of leader.” Mr. Nadella succeeded Steven A. Ballmer, the longtime ally and friend of Microsoft’s co-founder, Bill Gates.Beyond the organizational changes, Mr. Nadella said in his email that Microsoft’s research leader, Harry Shum, and president, Brad Smith, have established a panel, the A.I. and Ethics in Engineering and Research Committee, to increase the odds that A.I. technology “benefits the broader society.”That move, said Patrick Moorhead, an independent analyst, is Microsoft’s effort to show it is “serious about the broader implications of A.I.” at a time of rising concern about the technology’s influence on people’s behavior and as a threat to jobs.Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohrA version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Microsoft Reorganizes, And Closes Windows Era.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Cade MetzPALO ALTO, Calif. — Inside an old auto body shop here in Silicon Valley, Stefan Avalos pushed a movie camera down a dolly track.He and a small crew were making a short film about self-driving cars. They were shooting a powder-blue 1962 Austin Mini, but through special effects the rusted relic would be transformed into an autonomous vehicle that looked more like the DeLorean from “Back to the Future.”Stepping back from the camera, Mr. Avalos referred wryly to the movie he was filming as “Project Unemployment.” The film was a way of testing new technology from a start-up called Arraiy, which is trying to automate the creation of digital effects for movies, television and games.This new type of artificial intelligence, which is also being developed by the software giant Adobe and in other technology industry research labs, could ultimately replace many of the specialists who build such effects.“This is no joke; it will put people out of work,” said Mr. Avalos, a Los Angeles-based filmmaker who also runs a visual effects house. “The artists are safe. But it will replace all the drudgery.”Over the past three decades, computer-generated imagery has transformed how movies and television are made. But building digital effects is still a painstaking and enormously tedious process. For every second of movie time, armies of designers can spend hours isolating people and objects in raw camera footage, digitally building new images from scratch and combining the two as seamlessly as possible.Arraiy (pronounced “array”) is building systems that can handle at least part of this process. The company’s founders, Gary Bradski and Ethan Rublee, also created Industrial Perception, one of several robotics start-ups snapped up by Google several years ago.“Filmmakers can do this stuff, but they have to do it by hand,” said Mr. Bradski, a neuroscientist and computer vision specialist with a long history in Silicon Valley. He has worked with companies as varied as the chip maker Intel and the augmented reality start-up Magic Leap.Backed by more than $10 million in financing from the Silicon Valley venture firm Lux Capital, SoftBank Ventures and others, Arraiy is part of a widespread effort spanning industry and academia and geared toward building systems that can generate and manipulate images on their own.Thanks to improvements in so-called neural networks — complex algorithms that can learn tasks by analyzing vast amounts of data — these systems can edit noise and mistakes out of images or apply simple effects and create highly realistic images of very fake people or help graft one person’s head onto the body of someone else.Inside Arraiy’s offices — the old auto body shop — Mr. Bradski and Mr. Rublee are building computer algorithms that can learn design tasks by analyzing years of work by movie effects houses. That includes systems that learn to “rotoscope” raw camera footage, carefully separating people and objects from their backgrounds so that they can be dropped onto new backgrounds.Adobe, which makes many of the software tools used by today’s designers, is also exploring so-called machine learning that can automate similar tasks.At Industrial Perception, Mr. Rublee helped develop computer vision for robots designed to perform tasks like loading and unloading freight trucks. Not long after Google acquired the start-up, work on neural networks took off inside the tech giant. In about two weeks, a team of Google researchers “trained” a neural network that outperformed technology from the start-up that had taken years to create.Mr. Rublee and Mr. Bradski collected a decade of rotoscoping and other visual effects work from various design houses, which they declined to identify. And they are adding their own work to the collection. After filming people, mannequins and other objects in front of a classic “green screen,” for example, company engineers can quickly rotoscope thousands of images relatively quickly to be added to the data collection. Once the algorithm is trained, it can rotoscope images without help from a green screen.The technology still has flaws, and in some cases human designers still make adjustments to the automated work. But it is improving.“These methods are still rough around the edges — there is still a long tail of things that can go wrong in unpredictable ways — but there aren’t any fundamental roadblocks,” said Phillip Isola, a computer vision researcher at M.I.T. and OpenAI, the artificial intelligence lab created by Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, and others.Mr. Avalos thinks this work could ultimately supplant work done by his own effects house. But he is comfortable with that. He already farms out many of the more tedious tasks, via the internet, to workers in other countries.As hardware improves, these methods will help generate preliminary effects right on the movie set, giving filmmakers a better idea of what the finished product will look like, Mr. Bradski said. The Mill, an effects house based in London, recently used Arraiy’s technology to create a system that could instantly apply effects that change the look of an automobile.If tech companies can help automate some of the grunt work involved in creating special effects, creative people will have a chance to try new things, said Pasha Shapiro, a filmmaker and special effects artist who has also worked with Arraiy.“Some work is so tedious that it is not practical,” he said. “That is where technology can help even more.”Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrThe Federal Communications Commission is joining the Trump administration, Congress and other government agencies that have targeted Huawei, China’s giant telecommunications equipment maker, as a national security risk.Ajit Pai, chairman of the commission, on Monday proposed a rule to tighten restrictions on companies building internet infrastructure in the United States. Part of the rule’s impact may be to further crimp Huawei’s meager sales in America by potentially affecting some deals with small and rural carriers, analysts said.The proposed F.C.C. rule would prohibit carriers from using money from the Universal Service Fund to buy gear from companies deemed to pose national security risks. The $8.5 billion fund subsidizes phone, wireless and broadband service to poor and remote communities. Its money comes from small monthly fees on consumers’ phone bills.A first draft of the proposed rule will be published on Tuesday, starting a public comment period. An initial vote on the proposed rule will take place at an agency meeting on April 17.The proposed rule does not mention Huawei by name. Instead, it says it would apply to any telecom supplier or subcontractor defined as a security risk. The agency also said it had not yet determined how it would identify companies that posed a risk to telecom systems, particularly as spying tools.But there was no doubt that Huawei was a target of the proposal. The commission said it might decide to follow the lead of intelligence agencies and Congress. In its military spending authorization, Congress has prohibited the Pentagon from buying network equipment from either Huawei or ZTE, another Chinese equipment maker.Huawei declined to comment.American government policies and regulations, going back years and motivated by security concerns, have already hobbled Huawei’s access to the American market.The big Chinese company had worldwide revenue of more than $90 billion last year. In the United States, its sales were $200 million to $300 million, analysts estimate. Most of the American sales are smartphones, though it does sell some network equipment to small and rural telecom carriers.“This is one more step in the broader confrontation with China,” said Doug Brake, director of telecom policy at the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a nonpartisan research organization.The Russian software company Kaspersky Lab is also on the banned list, after accusations that its antivirus software was a back door for surveillance by Russia’s intelligence agencies. Kaspersky has denied those accusations.The F.C.C. proposal adds to recent moves by Washington to limit the reach of foreign tech companies in the United States. This month, President Trump blocked Broadcom’s $117 billion takeover bid for Qualcomm, a leading maker of smartphone chips. In his order, Mr. Trump said “credible evidence” had led him to believe that if Singapore-based Broadcom acquired control of Qualcomm, it “might take action that threatens to impair the national security of the United States.”Huawei animated those concerns. The administration’s theory was that to make the costly deal pay off, Broadcom would cut back research spending by Qualcomm, undermining its ability to be a leader in next-generation wireless technology, so-called 5G. And that would further open the door for Huawei to win the race for 5G, a critical technology for the economy and for national security.Mr. Pai, a Republican, was encouraged to take action by Congress, specifically in a letter on Sept. 20 from Senator Tom Cotton, an Arkansas Republican. Later briefings with intelligence agencies added to Mr. Pai’s determination to propose the rule, senior F.C.C. officials said.Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohr.Advertisement
Tech We’re Using By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

MARCH 28, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Julie Turkewitz, a correspondent who is based in Denver, discussed the tech she’s using.How often are you on the road on assignment?I’m on the road about a third of the year. I cover a section of the West, which means I spend a lot of time in small towns and on winding mountain roads. I also work breaking news stories all over the country.So that must mean you live out of a suitcase. What are your most essential tech tools for doing your work?My travel bag is a constant work in progress. I try to be prepared for anything, because I never know when a trip is going to involve a surprise sit-down with a governor or an unexpected flight to cover a hurricane.AdvertisementFor all the talk about the changing media landscape, the most important tools of my job are a pen, a notebook and a way to file the story to my editors. There are still many places in America without cellphone or internet service, so simply communicating with my editors can be a challenge. I’m often filing on a laptop from the back seat of a car on the side of a road over a weak signal through my phone or a mobile hot spot.AdvertisementI carry two phones (in case one falls in the mud), a power strip that allows me to charge my computer from the car, and a Canon 5D camera that I bought off a White House photographer years ago. I use my iPhone’s recording app, or a downloadable app called TapeACall, and I will occasionally pay for a transcription service for lengthy interviews. I’ve used both Trint.com and Rev.com.When I’m working on breaking news stories, Twitter is crucial. Law enforcement agencies send out updates through social media, and the first thing I do when I head into a big story is make sure that I'm receiving their new tweets as immediate text messages. Then I use social media to report the texture of the story as it unfolds.Beyond breaking news, I’ve found Twitter to be a great tool for conveying a sense of place. Sometimes a single picture or video can really cut to the heart of a story.
            Just met Gloria Quintanilla. She's an immigrant frm El Salvador who spent more than an hr wading thru this to get to work at the Doubletree. pic.twitter.com/rwTeDVuupZ Lastly, roving reporters have to take care of themselves. I travel with an extra thin yoga mat from Manduka that packs down to the size of a book.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What could be better?We need longer-lasting batteries. Battery life is a constant source of stress for reporters in the field.You’ve reported extensively on the Parkland, Fla., school shooting and many other such shootings. After Parkland, the survivors used Twitter and other outlets to speak out about gun control. Do you foresee this use of social media having any effect on gun control regulations?AdvertisementWe’re already seeing that happen. Several of the Parkland students now have tens of thousands of followers on Twitter, and they have been using that tool to speak directly to people in power. And when Gov. Rick Scott of Florida passed a major gun bill recently, he credited the students for making it possible.I’m curious to see what’s next. Will social media messaging continue to be as powerful as the weeks go on? And how will students deal with their new roles as survivors, advocates and public figures?Has tech affected how you research and investigate the people you write about?Social media has expanded the reporter-subject relationship, making it more personal, and allowing for interaction beyond the life of a particular story.This means that I sometimes contact people on Facebook to ask for an interview, and stay connected to them for weeks or months. As a reporter covering a vast region — and as someone who focuses on capturing national narratives and sentiments — I find social media to be a helpful way to avoid a news bubble. It keeps me connected to Montana and Utah and Wyoming even when I can’t be there.Beyond your job, what tech product are you currently obsessed with using in your daily life?Audible audiobooks and Spotify playlists have gotten me through many a road trip.But my current obsession is taking time off from technology. As someone who spends a lot of time linked to the internet, I try to spend off-days away from devices. I buy books. I keep a physical calendar, not a digital one. I get two papers on Sundays and have several magazine subscriptions.And I try to spend as much non-travel time in face-to-face conversations with friends and family.Follow Julie Turkewitz on Twitter: @julieturkewitzA version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: In the Wide Open West, Being Ready for Anything.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Daisuke WakabayashiSAN FRANCISCO — Uber was ordered to suspend testing of its autonomous vehicles on Arizona roads Monday evening, eight days after one of its cars struck and killed a woman in Tempe.State officials said the ride-hailing service had failed to meet an expectation that it would prioritize public safety as it tested the technology.“The incident that took place on March 18 is an unquestionable failure to comply with this expectation,” Gov. Doug Ducey of Arizona wrote in a letter sent to Dara Khosrowshahi, Uber’s chief executive. “Arizona must take action now.”Uber had already suspended all testing of its cars in Arizona, San Francisco, Pittsburgh and Toronto.“We proactively suspended self-driving operations in all cities immediately following the tragic incident last week. We continue to help investigators in any way we can, and we’ll keep a dialogue open with the governor’s office to address any concerns they have,” said Matt Kallman, an Uber spokesman.The rebuke from the governor is a reversal from what has been an open-arms policy by the state, heralding its lack of regulation as an asset to lure autonomous vehicle testing — and tech jobs. Waymo, the self-driving car company spun out from Google, and General Motors-owned Cruise are also testing cars in the state.Mr. Ducey said he was troubled by a video released from the Tempe Police Department that seemed to show that neither the Uber safety driver nor the autonomous vehicle detected the presence of a pedestrian in the road in the moments before the crash.The police said the car never slowed down before striking 49-year-old Elaine Herzberg, who was pushing a bicycle across the road. The National Transportation Safety Board, which is investigating the crash with the local police, has not yet ruled whether the company was at fault.The governor’s decision comes after The New York Times reported that Uber’s autonomous vehicles had struggled to meet company targets for reliability in the months leading up to crash.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwakaAdvertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 26, 2018
Q. I thought you were supposed to be able to cut and paste content between Macs and iPhones, but I can’t make it work. A. The Universal Clipboard tool allows people to copy text, images and videos on one Apple device and then paste the content into an app on another Apple device. The feature arrived in 2016 with iOS 10 and macOS Sierra, but you need to meet a few other conditions to use it. (Some apps, like Notes, can sync content between iOS and macOS automatically with iCloud.)Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.You need to be logged into the same iCloud account with the same Apple ID on all of the hardware in the mix. You can check the accounts in the iCloud system preference on the Mac and in the iOS settings on the iPhone; if you have multiple Apple IDs — like an old one used for iTunes Store purchases and another you created to set up a new iPad — you may be logged in under two different accounts.Universal Clipboard is part of Apple’s Continuity technology, and it generally requires at least iOS 10 on an iPhone 5, and macOS Sierra on Mac computers released in 2012 or later. Both the iOS gadgets and the Mac must have Wi-Fi and Bluetooth enabled, as well as the Handoff feature that allows one Apple device to pick up, using certain apps, where another let off.To enable Handoff on the iPhone, tap open the Settings icon on the home screen, select General and then Handoff, and tap the button next to Handoff. On the Mac, open the System Preferences icon from the desktop dock, click the General icon and click the box next to “Allow Handoff between this Mac and your iCloud devices.”When the iPhone and Mac are set up properly, try copying text or an image on one device and pasting it into an app on the other.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Copy Here, Paste There.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Nellie BowlesElon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg have clashed on artificial intelligence, space travel and the direction of technology.On Friday, Mr. Musk showed just how little love lost there was between the two tech titans.Mr. Musk, the chief executive of SpaceX and Tesla, deleted the Facebook pages of both of his companies. In doing so, he joined a growing chorus of tech leaders calling for people to abandon Mr. Zuckerberg’s social network after it allowed a political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, to obtain and misuse data on 50 million users. The revelations have plunged Facebook into its worst public relations crisis in years.As with most news in 2018, Mr. Musk’s decision started with a barrage of tweets.The tech luminary began by criticizing Sonos, a maker of wireless speakers, which had pulled some ads from Facebook for a week.“Wow, a whole week. Risky ...,” Mr. Musk tweeted in response to a news article about Sonos’s move.A minute later, he replied to Brian Acton, the founder of WhatsApp, which Facebook had acquired for $19 billion several years ago. Mr. Acton, who has since left Facebook, had on Wednesday called for people to “#deletefacebook.”“What’s Facebook?” Mr. Musk replied to Mr. Acton. Then Mr. Musk announced he would shut down the SpaceX and Tesla pages. He said the Tesla Facebook page “looks lame anyway.”The posts, which sent the Twittersphere into a virtual frenzy, escalated a public feud between Mr. Musk and Mr. Zuckerberg. Mr. Musk has often urged people to be cautious of embracing technology such as artificial intelligence because of the consequences it might bring, once saying that it could become so powerful it would start wars and turn people into its “house cats.”Mr. Zuckerberg has argued that people need to trust and embrace technology in their lives. When the Facebook chief executive was asked about Mr. Musk’s warnings around artificial intelligence during a Facebook Live broadcast in 2017, he called Mr. Musk a “naysayer.” That’s an insult in a technology world that celebrates perpetual optimism.“With A.I. especially, I’m really optimistic,” Mr. Zuckerberg said. “People who are naysayers and kind of try to drum up these doomsday scenarios — I just, I don’t understand it. I think it’s really negative and in some ways I actually think it is pretty irresponsible.”In response, Mr. Musk shot back that Mr. Zuckerberg did not fully comprehend the issues.“I’ve talked to Mark about this,” Mr. Musk wrote. “His understanding of the subject is limited.”The two have also clashed on space travel. Mr. Zuckerberg traveled to Kenya in 2016 for the launch of a Facebook-affiliated satellite called Amos-6, which was set to go to outer space in a SpaceX rocket. But the rocket exploded. Mr. Zuckerberg released a chilly statement.“As I’m here in Africa, I’m deeply disappointed to hear that SpaceX’s launch failure destroyed our satellite that would have provided connectivity to so many entrepreneurs and everyone else across the continent,” he wrote on Facebook.Mr. Musk is a frequent Twitter presence, who has posted increasingly macho and humor-focused messages including video of himself playing with a flamethrower.He said he plans to keep using his Instagram account, which is owned by Facebook, and on which he has 6.9 million followers.When one reporter said on Twitter that it was remarkable Mr. Musk had so much time to troll online, Mr. Musk wrote, “What, a troll, me!?”Facebook and SpaceX didn’t immediately have a comment on Mr. Musk’s deleted pages. A Tesla spokeswoman did not have a comment beyond Mr. Musk’s tweets.Follow Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @NellieBowles.AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIMARCH 27, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Uber says it is not renewing its permit to test self-driving vehicles in California until the police and regulators wrap up an investigation into how one of its autonomous vehicles struck and killed a woman in Arizona last week.The company decided to withdraw its renewal application late last week. The move came to light in a letter that California’s Department of Motor Vehicles sent to Uber on Tuesday.The letter informed Uber that its testing permit will expire on Saturday and that it will have to address “any follow-up analysis or investigations from the recent crash in Arizona” if it applies for a new permit in the future.The loss of the permit, reported earlier by The San Francisco Chronicle, is the latest roadblock for Uber as the company weighs the future of its self-driving car program.AdvertisementUber halted all testing of its driverless cars after one of them killed Elaine Herzberg, 49, who was walking her bicycle across a road in Tempe, Ariz. The car was going 40 miles per hour and did not slow down before impact, the Tempe police said.AdvertisementArizona’s governor, Doug Ducey, ordered the company to suspend the testing of its autonomous vehicles on Monday, eight days after the crash, saying footage of the accident “raises many questions about the ability of Uber to continue testing in Arizona.”Uber said it withdrew its California application on Friday because it wouldn’t have been able to respond to questions from the state’s regulators until it had time to review the findings of the investigation in Arizona.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We proactively suspended our self-driving operations, including in California, immediately following the Tempe incident,” said Sarah Abboud, an Uber spokeswoman. “Given this, we decided to not reapply for a California D.M.V. permit, with the understanding that our self-driving vehicles would not operate on public roads in the immediate future.”Uber initially applied to renew its permit a few days after the crash. When the D.M.V. opened the mailed application on Friday, it called the company to confirm, a department spokeswoman said, and Uber asked to withdraw the request. The D.M.V. asked for the withdrawal in writing, and it received an email on Saturday.Uber has said it is cooperating with investigations by the Tempe police, the National Transportation Safety Board and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. None of the investigations have determined whether Uber was at fault in the crash.The intense focus on the accident has also prompted Uber’s suppliers to evaluate its technology. On Tuesday, a spokesman for Nvidia, a supplier of semiconductors and other computer hardware used in Uber’s autonomous vehicles, said it was suspending its tests of self-driving cars on public roads in order to “learn from the Uber incident.” The price of Nvidia shares fell 8 percent on the news.Uber has not said when it plans to resume testing its autonomous vehicles. The bulk of Uber’s testing was in Arizona, but it was also driving autonomous vehicles on roads in San Francisco, Pittsburgh and Toronto. Alexis Campbell, a community relations manager for Pennsylvania’s Department of Transportation, said it would work with Uber to ensure that safety was the top priority if tested was restarted in the state.AdvertisementUber has had a rocky history with the California D.M.V. In 2016, Uber started testing its self-driving cars in San Francisco without a permit, arguing that one wasn’t necessary because a safety driver was monitoring the vehicles.The D.M.V. disagreed and ordered Uber to apply for a permit. When Uber refused, the department revoked the registrations for the 16 cars that Uber was testing in the city.After California revoked the registrations, Mr. Ducey said Arizona welcomed Uber’s cars with “open arms and wide open roads.” In a public showing, Uber loaded its cars onto a truck and hauled them to Arizona. Uber eventually applied for a permit and resumed testing in San Francisco last March.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.Cade Metz contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Self-Driving Cars at Uber Come Across New Hurdle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By SHEERA FRENKEL and NATASHA SINGERMARCH 28, 2018
Facebook said it would roll out a centralized system for its users to control their privacy and security settings in response to an outcry over the way it has handled personal data.The system, which will be introduced to Facebook users globally over the coming weeks, will allow people to change their privacy and security settings from one place rather than having to go to roughly 20 separate sections across the social media platform.From the new page, users can control the personal information the social network keeps on them, such as their political preferences or interests, and download and review a file of data Facebook has collected about them. Facebook also will clarify what types of apps people are currently using and what permissions those apps have to gather their information.Facebook began developing the centralized system last year but sped it up after revelations that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested the information of 50 million users of the social network. The amount of data Cambridge Analytica obtained about Facebook users reawakened fears over how much information the social network has gathered about people, leading to a #DeleteFacebook movement and other criticism.Advertisement“The last week showed how much more work we need to do to enforce our policies, and to help people understand how Facebook works and the choices they have over their data,” Erin Egan, Facebook’s chief privacy officer, and Ashlie Beringer, a Facebook deputy general counsel, said in a statement announcing the new system. “We’ve heard loud and clear that privacy settings and other important tools are too hard to find, and that we must do more to keep people informed.”AdvertisementThe Cambridge Analytica scandal has plunged Facebook into its worst crisis in years, with regulators and lawmakers in the United States and Britain demanding answers about how the social network deals with data privacy. Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, has agreed to appear in front of lawmakers on Capitol Hill next month, people familiar with the decision have said.Last week, Mr. Zuckerberg said in a statement that Facebook had to do better with user data and promised to roll out products that give users more control over their information and privacy settings.In the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal, in which data from over 50 million Facebook profiles was secretly scraped and mined for voter insights, many Facebook users have decided to delete their accounts — but untangling yourself from a site like Facebook is not as easy as pressing “delete.”“One of our biggest responsibilities is to protect data,” he told The New York Times last week. “Whenever there’s an issue where someone’s data gets passed to someone who the rules of the system shouldn’t have allowed it to, that’s rightfully a big issue and deserves to be a big uproar.Late Wednesday, Facebook also said that it was halting its practice of allowing advertisers to target ads using information from third-party data brokers. These are business-to-business companies that can collect a vast range of details about individual consumers such as their shopping habits, health concerns, income range and preferred credit card.The social network had previously allowed advertisers to use consumer details from data brokers like Experian, Acxiom and Oracle’s Datalogix unit to help target ads to Facebook users. But Facebook said it was now mothballing that option, called “Partner Categories.””We want to let advertisers know that we will be shutting down Partner Categories,” Graham Mudd, a product marketing director at Facebook, said in a statement.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This product enables third-party data providers to offer their targeting directly on Facebook,” he added. “While this is common industry practice, we believe this step, winding down over the next six months, will help improve people’s privacy on Facebook.”AdvertisementIn 2012, the Federal Trade Commission opened an inquiry into data brokers and subsequently recommended that Congress consider enacting a law “to make data broker practices more visible to consumers and to give consumers greater control over the immense amounts of personal information about them collected and shared by data brokers.”How much of a difference these actions may make to Facebook’s data privacy practices was unclear. Some privacy advocates noted, for instance, that the company’s new centralized privacy and security settings page has been tried in the past.“The platform made similar promises many times before,” said Zeynep Tufekci, an associate professor at the University of North Carolina who studies how technology affects society. She pointed out that in 2010, Mr. Zuckerberg said in The Washington Post that Facebook users needed simpler controls over their privacy and had promised then that Facebook would “add privacy controls that are much simpler to use.”Yet eight years later, the same concerns have resurfaced, Ms. Tufekci said.“The past decade shows that user concerns over privacy appear to have little teeth on changing how the platform behaves, aside from a recycling of contrite statements and promises to do better from its C.E.O.,” she said.Follow Sheera Frenkel and Natasha Singer on Twitter: @sheeraf and @natashanytA version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook, Stung by Data Harvest, Says It Will Centralize Its Privacy Settings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack Nicas and Natasha SingerCHICAGO — Apple unveiled a new iPad aimed at classrooms and other education tools on Tuesday, in a bid to catch up to Google for students’ attention — and win more school districts’ dollars.Apple said the new 9.7-inch iPad includes a faster processor and supports Apple Pencil, a stylus that previously paired with just its pricier iPads. The device costs $299 for schools and $329 for consumers, the same price as its previous version, and the Apple Pencil was priced at $89 for schools. The company also increased the amount of cloud storage for students to 200 gigabytes, from 5 gigabytes.In addition, Apple announced new software for the classroom. That includes Schoolwork, an app for teachers to create and track assignments, and updates to its productivity apps for education. The company also showed off a curriculum called Everyone Can Create that helps teach students skills in music, video, photography and art.“Our place at the intersection of technology and the liberal arts makes it possible for us to create powerful products and tools that amplify learning and creativity,” said Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, at an event in the auditorium of Lane Technical College Prep High School on Chicago’s North Side.Apple, Google and Microsoft are each aiming to accustom schoolchildren to their operating systems to win the next generation as lifelong customers.Even Amazon got in on the act on Tuesday, announcing a plan to give students access to resources in its Amazon Web Services cloud network.“These companies know that it’s very important to build mind share at a very early age,” said Linn Huang, a research director at the International Data Corporation, a market research firm known as IDC.Apple has some catching up to do. Mac laptops and iPads were once the dominant devices in American classrooms, but Google has shot past Apple with inexpensive laptops called Chromebooks. Google has also led the way in software products designed specifically for schools, with an app called Google Classroom that teachers use to take attendance, assign homework and do other tasks, among others.Of the 12.4 million tablets and laptops shipped to primary and secondary schools in the United States last year, Chromebooks accounted for 58 percent of the market, compared with a negligible share in 2012, according to IDC. In the same period, the share of iPads and Mac laptops fell to 22 percent from about half. And Microsoft Windows devices dropped to 18 percent from about 45 percent, IDC said.School districts embraced Chromebooks because they were comparatively inexpensive and easy to use. Since the laptops were cloud-based, they could be shared among students who could pick up any device to get access to their documents. And school districts could use a software dashboard to manage thousands of devices at once. Districts that needed to institute online testing began buying Chromebooks in bulk.Still, Apple generates the most revenue from school hardware sales in the United States, partly because its devices cost more. Of the $5.4 billion spent on school devices last year in the United States, Apple’s iPads and laptops accounted for about $2.1 billion, followed by Chromebooks at $1.95 billion and Microsoft Windows devices at $1.35 billion, according to IDC.Apple’s new iPad signals how the company sees an opening at the lower end of the market. Last year, it lowered the price of its entry-level iPad to $329 for consumers and $299 for schools, helping to bolster sales of iPads after years of declines. Some Chromebooks and Windows laptops cost less than $200.But as the American market for classroom devices matures and school districts prepare to replace the basic Chromebook laptops they purchased, analysts said Apple was well positioned to take advantage of growing interest among school districts for more sophisticated technologies that encourage student creativity in fields like robotics and computer-assisted design.“We’re starting to see an evolution of use cases around coding, STEM, creative arts and design, some of the areas where Apple is focused,” said Ben Davis, a senior analyst in education at Futuresource Consulting, a market research firm that tracks school device shipments. “In theory, we should start to see a trade-up in computing power in the devices going into schools to support that.”Apple’s event was atypical because it rarely goes outside its home state of California to make product announcements. But it opted for the backdrop of a Midwest high school to drive home its education message.The 84-year-old brick school’s front lawn was swarmed with black-clad security guards, including two with bomb-sniffing dogs, and dozens of chipper greeters from Apple in yellow knit hats and green sweatshirts — Lane Tech’s colors.“I can’t let you in unless you’re excited!” one said as guests entered.Follow Jack Nicas and Natasha Singer on Twitter: @jacknicas and @natashanyt.Jack Nicas reported from Chicago, and Natasha Singer from New York.AdvertisementBy DAVID STREITFELD, NATASHA SINGER and STEVEN ERLANGERMARCH 24, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The contemporary internet was built on a bargain: Show us who you really are and the digital world will be free to search or share.People detailed their interests and obsessions on Facebook and Google, generating a river of data that could be collected and harnessed for advertising. The companies became very rich. Users seemed happy. Privacy was deemed obsolete, like bloodletting and milkmen.Now, the consumer surveillance model underlying Facebook and Google’s free services is under siege from users, regulators and legislators on both sides of the Atlantic. It amounts to a crisis for an internet industry that up until now had taken a reactive, whack-a-mole approach to problems like the spread of fraudulent news and misuse of personal data.The recent revelation that Cambridge Analytica, a voter profiling company that had worked with Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign, harvested data from 50 million Facebook users, raised the current uproar, even if the origins lie as far back as the 2016 election. It has been many months of allegations and arguments that the internet in general and social media in particular are pulling society down instead of lifting it up.AdvertisementThat has inspired a good deal of debate about more restrictive futures for Facebook and Google. At the furthest extreme, some dream of the companies becoming public utilities. More benign business models that depend less on ads and more on subscriptions have been proposed, although it’s unclear why either company would abandon something that has made them so prosperous.Congress might pass targeted legislation to restrict consumer data use in specific sectors, such as a Senate bill that would require increased transparency in online political advertising, said Daniel J. Weitzner, director of the Internet Policy Research Initiative at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.AdvertisementThere are other avenues still, said Jascha Kaykas-Wolff, the chief marketing officer of Mozilla, the nonprofit organization behind the popular Firefox browser, including advertisers and large tech platforms collecting vastly less user data and still effectively customizing ads to consumers.“They are just collecting all the data to try to find magic growth algorithms,” Mr. Kaykas-Wolff said of online marketers. This past week, Mozilla halted its ads on Facebook, saying the social network’s default privacy settings allowed access to too much data.The greatest likelihood is that the internet companies, frightened by the tumult, will accept a few more rules and work a little harder for transparency. And there will be hearings on Capitol Hill.The next chapter is also set to play out not in Washington but in Europe, where regulators have already cracked down on privacy violations and are examining the role of data in online advertising.The Cambridge Analytica case, said Vera Jourova, the European Union commissioner for justice, consumers and gender equality, was not just a breach of private data. “This is much more serious, because here we witness the threat to democracy, to democratic plurality,” she said.Although many people had a general understanding that free online services used their personal details to customize the ads they saw, the latest controversy starkly exposed the machinery.AdvertisementConsumers’ seemingly benign activities — their likes — could be used to covertly categorize and influence their behavior. And not just by unknown third parties. Facebook itself has worked directly with presidential campaigns on ad targeting, describing its services in a company case study as “influencing voters.”“People are upset that their data may have been used to secretly influence 2016 voters,” said Alessandro Acquisti, a professor of information technology and public policy at Carnegie Mellon University. “If your personal information can help sway elections, which affects everyone’s life and societal well-being, maybe privacy does matter after all.”In interviews, Mr. Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, seemed to accept the possibility of increased privacy regulation, something that would have been unlikely only a few months ago. But some trade group executives also warned that any attempt to curb the use of consumer data would put the business model of the ad-supported internet at risk.“You’re undermining a fundamental concept in advertising: reaching consumers who are interested in a particular product,” said Dean C. Garfield, chief executive of the Information Technology Industry Council, a trade group in Washington whose members include Amazon, Facebook, Google and Twitter.If suspicion of Facebook and Google is a relatively new feeling in the United States, it has been embedded in Europe for historical and cultural reasons that date back to the Nazi Gestapo, the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe and the Cold War.“We’re at an inflection point, when the great wave of optimism about tech is giving way to growing alarm,” said Heather Grabbe, director of the Open Society European Policy Institute. “This is the moment when Europeans turn to the state for protection and answers, and are less likely than Americans to rely on the market to sort out imbalances.”In May, the European Union is instituting a comprehensive new privacy law, called the General Data Protection Regulation. The new rules treat personal data as proprietary, owned by an individual, and any use of that data must be accompanied by permission — opting in rather than opting out — after receiving a request written in clear language, not legalese.Mélanie Voin, a spokeswoman for the European Commission, said the protection rules will have more teeth than the current 1995 directive. For example, a company experiencing a data breach involving individuals must notify the data protection authority within 72 hours and would be subject to fines of up to 20 million euros or 4 percent of its annual revenue.In a January speech in Brussels, Facebook’s Ms. Sandberg said, “We know we can’t just meet the G.D.P.R., but we need to do even more.” Google declined to comment.AdvertisementThe United States does not have a consumer privacy law like the General Data Protection Regulation. But after years of pushing for similar legislation, privacy groups said that recent events were giving them new momentum — and they were looking to Europe for inspiration.“With the new European law, regulators for the first time have real enforcement tools,” said Jeffrey Chester, the executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, a nonprofit group in Washington. “We now have a way to hold these companies accountable.”But any ambitions for new rules may run into the realities of the tech industry.Privacy advocates and even some United States regulators have long been concerned about the ability of online services to track consumers and make inferences about their financial status, health concerns and other intimate details to show them behavior-based ads. They warned that such microtargeting could unfairly categorize or exclude certain people.In 2010, for instance, the Federal Trade Commission proposed a new option for consumers, called Do Not Track. Two years later, the Barack Obama administration introduced a blueprint for a Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights, intended to give Americans more control over what personal details companies collected from them and how the data was used.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the Do Not Track effort and the privacy bill were both stymied.Industry groups successfully argued that collecting personal details posed no harm to consumers and that efforts to hinder data collection would chill innovation. Instead, the advertising industry created a program to allow consumers to opt out of having their data used for customized ads, although it does not allow people to entirely opt out of having their data collected.“If it can be shown that the current situation is actually a market failure and not an individual-company failure, then there’s a case to be made for federal regulation” under certain circumstances, said Randall Rothenberg, chief executive of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, a trade group.The business practices of Facebook and Google were reinforced by the fact that no privacy flap lasted longer than a news cycle or two. Nor did people flee for other services. That convinced the companies that digital privacy was a dead issue.AdvertisementIf the current furor dies down without meaningful change, critics worry that the problems might become even more entrenched. When the tech industry follows its natural impulses, it becomes even less transparent.That would hamper any long-term understanding of the relationship between social media and political views, an urgent question in Germany, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, the United States and many other places.“To know the real interaction between populism and Facebook, you need to give much more access to researchers, not less,” said Paul-Jasper Dittrich, a German research fellow in digital economy at the Jacques Delors Institute.There’s another reason Silicon Valley tends to be reluctant to share information about what it is doing. It believes so deeply in itself that it does not even think there is a need for discussion. The technology world’s remedy for any problem is always more technology.“If Facebook and Google were merely interested in maximizing profits, we could regulate them,” said Maciej Ceglowski, who runs Tech Solidarity, a labor advocacy group. “But well-intentioned people can break things not easy to fix. It’s like a child running a bulldozer. They don’t have any sense of the damage they can do.”Follow David Streitfeld, Natasha Singer and Steven Erlanger on Twitter: @DavidStreitfeld and @natashanyt and @StevenErlangerDavid Streitfeld reported from San Francisco, Natasha Singer from New York and Steven Erlanger from Brussels. Milan Schreuer contributed research and reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Call for Privacy Hands a Crisis To Tech Giants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian X. ChenSAN FRANCISCO — On a recent Saturday night, German Salazar made chicken tacos for his friends while they chatted with him in his kitchen. Occasionally, he interrupted the conversation to talk to another friend: Google.Mr. Salazar was speaking to Google Home, the artificially intelligent speaker living on his kitchen counter. “Hey Google, set a timer for 20 minutes,” he said, to activate a countdown for when the chicken would be cooked and ready for shredding.At first, Mr. Salazar’s friends snickered when he talked to the speaker. But after a few bottles of wine, everyone began grilling Google Home with questions and requests: “How much did Jamie Lee Curtis make in ‘True Lies’?” and “Tell me a joke.”For many people, the kitchen is the center of the home and a locus for interactions that go beyond preparing and eating food. Now tech companies and appliance makers, aiming to deepen their relationships with customers, are increasingly targeting the room that is synonymous with togetherness.Household brands like Whirlpool, Samsung and Bosch are racing against tech behemoths like Google and Amazon to dominate the kitchen with internet-connected appliances and cooking gadgets that include refrigerators embedded with touch screens, smart dishwashers and connected countertop screens with artificially intelligent assistants that react to spoken commands.Yet the so-called smart kitchen remains a tough sell. With the kitchen often a hub for families and friends, habits there can be hard to change. And many people see the kitchen and mealtimes as a haven from their otherwise always-connected lifestyle. Only 5 percent of American households own smart appliances today, up from 3 percent in 2014, according to the research firm Parks Associates.“Will we see a reinvention of the kitchen like we saw in the living room?” said Michael Wolf, a tech analyst who hosts a podcast and a conference about the smart kitchen. “I don’t think it will happen overnight. There’s going to be a lot of skepticism.”Apart from their fears of disrupting the rhythms and patterns in the heart of the home, people may be hesitant to incorporate smart devices into their kitchens because of the costs of maintaining such appliances, which are often difficult to repair and use expensive components like touch screens. They also may worry about longevity: A touch-screen refrigerator may look modern today, but who knows how dated it may appear in five years?And with many smart kitchen appliances incorporating internet connections, cameras or microphones, digital privacy has become a concern. Security researchers said that one problem with smart appliances is that, unlike tech companies, household brands lack the cybersecurity expertise to vet products for vulnerabilities.Julie Kim-Whinston had some of those misgivings when she renovated her San Francisco home recently. For the revamped kitchen, she bought appliances from Wolf, Viking and Bosch — all lacking big screens, virtual assistants or internet connections. Ms. Kim-Whinston, a consultant in outerwear and sportswear, said she found smart appliances unappealing because the tech components could quickly go obsolete.The kitchen and the dining area are also where she, her husband and their two sons, ages 5 and 7, congregate and converse, she said. She said she did not want her children to be exposed to a refrigerator with a big touch screen.“Knowing how addictive their personalities are, they would literally stare at the refrigerator screen hoping for something to come up,” she said. “They’d be touching it and moving it, hoping it’s a video game.”But the potential payoff for manufacturers makes the kitchen an enticing target. The global kitchen appliances market is expected to balloon to $253.4 billion by 2020, up from about $175 billion in 2014, according to Allied Market Research.That has companies spreading their tech tentacles into kitchens with a variety of approaches. Samsung, the No. 1 phone maker that popularized smartphones with extra-large screens, this year unveiled a new version of Family Hub, a smart refrigerator that understands voice commands and sports a 21.5-inch touch screen. The appliance has three built-in cameras, which can beam live images of the fridge’s contents to a phone.Samsung bills the fridge as the next control center for a home — albeit a pricey one. Family Hub refrigerators start at about $3,500.“We’d really like consumers, at some point of time, to look back and say, ‘These days, a refrigerator without a screen feels awkward,’” said Sunggy Koo, Samsung’s vice president for smart appliances.Samsung’s aim is for people to someday conduct their digital lives with equal ease from a fridge, a phone, a television or a car. Fed by data about you in the cloud — and with the help of a virtual assistant — all of the machines will operate in perfect synchrony to enable a maximally efficient domestic life.Bosch is taking a more conservative approach. Its smart dishwashers, ovens and coffee machines, which range in price from about $1,300 to $3,100, look just like their disconnected counterparts and mostly use their internet connections for remote diagnostics. If a problem occurs, the appliance can automatically send an error code to Bosch’s customer service team, which can help determine whether you should fix the problem yourself or schedule a repair.“Whenever we talk to our customers, we get the feedback that they really appreciate technology when it makes their life simple, but they don’t want to bother with additional complexity,” said Anja Prescher, Bosch’s director of brand marketing.Whirlpool emphasizes the use of smartphones as kitchen companions. The company last year acquired Yummly, a recipe site that developed an app for scanning items in a refrigerator or pantry. The app then comes up with suggestions for what to cook and walks the user through recipes.For now, Amazon and Google are having some of the most notable successes in the kitchen, even though their devices are not specific to that room. Many people use Amazon’s Echo speaker or Google Home, both of which are embedded with the companies’ smart virtual assistants, for setting kitchen timers or looking up recipes.To take advantage of the frequency with which these devices end up in kitchens, the companies are expanding on those products with voice-controlled smart screens. Last year, Amazon debuted Echo Show, which can load step-by-step recipes on the screen. Google this year unveiled Smart Display, a software system that it shares with manufacturers like Lenovo, which will release smart screens this year that feature Google Assistant and can run apps and play recipe videos.But those devices have also raised privacy questions. The Amazon and Google screens constantly listen for voice commands, and they include cameras for placing video calls. Amazon and Google said they offer the ability to mute the microphones and turn the cameras off.Richard Gunther, a software consultant who works from home in Annapolis, Md., hates cooking but loves kitchen gadgets and high-end appliances. He uses his Amazon Echo to turn on his sous-vide cooker and he also owns a $399 Tovala smart oven, which includes a bar code scanner to identify meal kits and set the proper cooking time and temperature.Yet Mr. Gunther isn’t sold on the brave new world of smart appliances. He said that when he was shopping for a new refrigerator late last year, he researched Samsung’s Family Hub and was turned off by the idea of using cameras to look at what food was inside. Why not just open the door and check?“Trying to keep track of whatever I have inside by remembering to scan something or put the milk carton back in the same place where I had it before and not have it obscured by a piece of fruit in front of it?” he said. “I can’t be bothered by all of that.”He ended up with a dumb fridge from Sub-Zero for $23,000.Follow Brian X. Chen on Twitter: @bxchenRaymond Zhong contributed reporting from Suwon, South Korea.Advertisement

      By TROY GRIGGS and 
    
DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI

UPDATED MARCH 21, 2018

A woman was struck and killed on Sunday night by an autonomous car operated by Uber in Tempe, Ariz. It was believed to be the first pedestrian death associated with self-driving technology.What We Know About the AccidentN. Mill AvenueMoeur ParkN. Mill AvenueMarquee TheatreBody seen in this areaElaine Herzberg was struck while walking her bike across the street somewhere in this area.The self-driving Uber was traveling north at about 40 m.p.h.N. Mill AvenueN. Mill AvenueMoeur ParkBody seen in this areaElaine Herzberg was struck while walking her bike across the street somewhere in this area.The self-driving Uber was traveling north at about 40 m.p.h.N. Mill AvenueN. Mill AvenueMoeur ParkBody seen in this areaThe self-driving Uber was traveling north at about 40 m.p.h.Elaine Herzberg was struck while walking her bike across the street somewhere in this area.N. Mill AvenueN. Mill AvenueMoeur ParkBody seen in this areaElaine Herzberg was struck while walking her bike across the street somewhere in this area.The self-driving Uber was traveling north at about 40 m.p.h.The car, a Volvo XC90 sport utility vehicle outfitted with a sensor system, was in autonomous mode when it struck Elaine Herzberg around 10 p.m. on Sunday. There was a human safety driver at the wheel, but the car was carrying no passengers.The vehicle was going about 40 miles an hour on a street with a 45-mile-an-hour speed limit when it struck Ms. Herzberg, 49, who was walking her bicycle across the street, according to the Tempe police.Authorities on Wednesday released portions of a dashboard camera recording from the vehicle, which showed the exterior and interior of the car moments before the accident. (Warning: the video contains graphic material.)The video shows that the safety driver, identified by police as Rafael Vasquez, was clearly distracted and looking down from the road.It also appears that both of the safety driver's hands were not hovering above the steering wheel, which is what most backup drivers are instructed to do because it allows them to take control of the car quickly in the case of an emergency.Earlier in the week, police officials said the driver was not impaired and had cooperated with authorities. The self-driving car, however, should have detected the woman crossing the road.Like many self-driving cars, Uber equips its vehicles with lidar sensors -- an acronym for light detection and ranging systems -- to help the car detect the world around it. One of the positive attributes of lidar is that it is supposed to work well at night when it is dark, detecting objects from hundreds of feet away.The accident was a reminder that self-driving technology is still in the experimental stage, as Silicon Valley giants, major automakers and other companies race to develop vehicles that can drive on their own. Governments, for their part, are still trying to figure out how to regulate the technology, and a patchwork of rules are in place around the country.Uber’s self-driving program first started in Pittsburgh in September 2016, and extended to Tempe in February 2017. The Arizona city was considered an ideal place to test autonomous vehicles because of its favorable weather and wide roads.After Sunday’s crash, Uber quickly suspended the program in Arizona, as well as in Pittsburgh, San Francisco and Toronto.“The video is disturbing and heartbreaking to watch, and our thoughts continue to be with Elaine’s loved ones,” Matt Kallman, a spokesman for Uber, said Wednesday. “Our cars remain grounded, and we're assisting local, state and federal authorities in any way we can.”The Tempe police said it was still investigating the crash.Ms. Herzberg’s death was not the first involving self-driving technology.In 2016, a man in Florida was killed while at the wheel of a Tesla while using its Autopilot feature, which uses a computer vision-based vehicle detection system that differs from the technology used by Uber. Federal investigators later ruled that the system was not at fault in the crash.How a Self-Driving Car WorksLIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Use parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists.RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles.ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITSMAIN COMPUTER (LOCATED IN TRUNK)Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.LIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Use parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists.RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles.MAIN COMPUTER(LOCATED IN TRUNK)ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITSAnalyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.LIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Use parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists.RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles.MAIN COMPUTER(LOCATED IN TRUNK)Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITS12345LIDAR UNIT1Constantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.CAMERAS2Use parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists.MAIN COMPUTER (LOCATED IN TRUNK)3Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.RADAR SENSORS4Measure the distance from the car to various obstacles.ADDITIONAL LIDAR UNITS55There are a few different types of technologies that are used in autonomous driving systems. Uber and Waymo, which was spun off from Google, use lidar and radar technology, along with computer vision, to help guide the vehicle.A self-driving car’s sensors gather data on nearby objects, like their size and rate of speed. It categorizes the objects — as cyclists, pedestrians or other cars and objects — based on how they are likely to behave.Red boxes: cyclistsYellow boxes: pedestriansPink boxes:vehiclesGreen “fences”:locations wherethe car may needto slow downRed “fences”:locations where the carwill need to stopRed boxes: cyclistsYellow boxes: pedestriansPink boxes:vehiclesGreen “fences”:locations wherethe car may needto slow downRed “fences”:locations where the carwill need to stopRed boxes: cyclistsYellow boxes:pedestriansPink boxes:vehiclesGreen “fences”:locations wherethe car may needto slow downRed “fences”:locations where the carwill need to stopPink boxes:vehiclesRed boxes:cyclistsYellow boxes:pedestriansRed “fences”:locations where the carwill need to stopGreen “fences”:locations where the carmay need to slow downRebekah Zemansky contributed reporting in Tempe, Ariz.AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIMARCH 19, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Arizona officials saw opportunity when Uber and other companies began testing driverless cars a few years ago. Promising to keep oversight light, they invited the companies to test their robotic vehicles on the state’s roads.Then on Sunday night, an autonomous car operated by Uber — and with an emergency backup driver behind the wheel — struck and killed a woman on a street in Tempe, Ariz. It was believed to be the first pedestrian death associated with self-driving technology. The company quickly suspended testing in Tempe as well as in Pittsburgh, San Francisco and Toronto.
                The death of a woman who was struck by an autonomous car operated by Uber is believed to be the first pedestrian fatality associated with self-driving technology. Newly released video offers clues about what happened.            The accident was a reminder that self-driving technology is still in the experimental stage, and governments are still trying to figure out how to regulate it.Uber, Waymo and a long list of tech companies and automakers have begun to expand testing of their self-driving vehicles in cities around the country. The companies say the cars will be safer than regular cars simply because they take easily distracted humans out of the driving equation. But the technology is still only about a decade old, and just now starting to experience the unpredictable situations that drivers can face.AdvertisementIt was not yet clear if the crash in Arizona will lead other companies or state regulators to slow the rollout of self-driving vehicles on public roads.AdvertisementMuch of the testing of autonomous cars has taken place in a piecemeal regulatory environment. Some states, like Arizona, have taken a lenient approach to regulation. Arizona officials wanted to lure companies working on self-driving technology out of neighboring California, where regulators had been less receptive.[Read more on how Arizona became a destination for self-driving car tests.]But regulators in California and elsewhere have become more accommodating lately. In April, California is expected to follow Arizona’s lead and allow companies to test cars without a person in the driver’s seat.Federal policymakers have also considered a lighter touch. A Senate bill, if passed, would free autonomous-car makers from some existing safety standards and pre-empt states from creating their own vehicle safety laws. Similar legislation has been passed in the House. The Senate version has passed a committee vote but hasn’t reached a full floor vote.“This tragic incident makes clear that autonomous vehicle technology has a long way to go before it is truly safe for the passengers, pedestrians, and drivers who share America’s roads,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Uber car, a Volvo XC90 sport utility vehicle outfitted with the company’s sensing system, was in autonomous mode with a human safety driver at the wheel but carrying no passengers when it struck Elaine Herzberg, a 49-year-old woman, on Sunday around 10 p.m.Sgt. Ronald Elcock, a Tempe police spokesman, said during a news conference that a preliminary investigation showed that the vehicle was moving around 40 miles per hour when it struck Ms. Herzberg, who was walking with her bicycle on the street. He said it did not appear as though the car had slowed down before impact and that the Uber safety driver had shown no signs of impairment. The weather was clear and dry.Uber said it would work with the police.“Our hearts go out to the victim’s family,” an Uber spokeswoman, Sarah Abboud, said in a statement. “We are fully cooperating with local authorities in their investigation of this incident.”AdvertisementTempe, with its dry weather and wide roads, was considered an ideal place to test autonomous vehicles. In 2015, Arizona officials declared the state a regulation-free zone in order to attract testing operations from companies like Uber, Waymo and Lyft.“We needed our message to Uber, Lyft and other entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley to be that Arizona was open to new ideas,” Doug Ducey, Arizona’s governor, said in an interview in June 2017.Using an executive order, Mr. Ducey opened the state to testing of autonomous vehicles that had safety drivers at the wheel, ready to take over in an emergency. He updated that mandate earlier this month to allow testing of unmanned self-driving cars, noting that a “business-friendly and low regulatory environment” had helped the state’s economy.Even when an Uber self-driving car and another vehicle collided in Tempe in March 2017, city police and Mr. Ducey said that extra safety regulations weren’t necessary; the other driver was at fault, not the self-driving vehicle.But on Monday, Mark Mitchell, Tempe’s mayor, called Uber’s decision to suspend autonomous vehicle testing a “responsible step” and cautioned people from drawing conclusions prematurely. Daniel Scarpinato, a spokesman for Mr. Ducey, said the updated order from the governor “provides enhanced enforcement measures and clarity on responsibility in these accidents.”In California, where testing without a backup driver was just weeks away from being permitted, Jessica Gonzalez, a spokeswoman for the state Department of Motor Vehicles, said officials were in the process of gathering more information about the Tempe crash. Waymo, Lyft and Cruise, an autonomous vehicle company owned by General Motors, did not respond to requests for comment.In a news release, the National Transportation Safety Board said it was sending a team of four investigators to examine “the vehicle’s interaction with the environment, other vehicles and vulnerable road users such as pedestrians and bicyclists.”Since late last year, Waymo, the self-driving car unit of Google’s parent company Alphabet, has been using cars without a human in the driver’s seat to pick up and drop off passengers in Arizona.AdvertisementMost testing of driverless cars occurs with a safety driver in the front seat who is available to take over if something goes wrong. It can be challenging, however, to take control of a fast-moving vehicle.California requires companies to report the number of instances when human drivers are forced to take over for the autonomous vehicle, called “disengagements.”Between December 2016 and November 2017, Waymo’s self-driving cars drove about 350,000 miles and human drivers retook the wheel 63 times — an average of about 5,600 miles between every disengagement. Uber has not been testing its self-driving cars long enough in California to be required to release its disengagement numbers.Researchers working on autonomous technology have struggled with how to teach the systems to adjust for unpredictable human driving or behavior. Still, most researchers believe self-driving cars will ultimately be more safe than their human counterparts.In 2016, 37,461 people died in traffic-related accidents in the United States, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. That amounts to 1.18 fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles traveled in 2016.Waymo, which has been testing autonomous vehicles on public roads since 2009 when it was Google’s self-driving car project, has said its cars have driven more than 5 million miles while Uber’s cars have covered 3 million miles.In 2016, a man driving his Tesla using Autopilot, the car company’s self-driving feature, died on a state highway in Florida when his car crashed into a tractor-trailer that was crossing the road. Federal regulators later ruled there were no defects in the system to cause the accident.But the crash in Tempe will draw attention among the general public to self-driving cars, said Michael Bennett, an associate research professor at Arizona State University who has been looking into how people respond to driverless cars and artificial intelligence.“We’ve imagined an event like this as a huge inflection point for the technology and the companies advocating for it,” he said. “They’re going to have to do a lot to prove that the technology is safe.”Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwakaRebekah Zemansky contributed reporting in Tempe, Ariz. Cecilia Kang contributed reporting in Washington D.C. and Cade Metz contributed in San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Woman’s Death in Arizona Casts A Pall on Driverless Car Testing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 22, 2018
Q. Can I have a conversation with Google Assistant, or will there be an update in the future that will let me have one?A. Google Assistant, the company’s voice-based helper software that is similar to Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri and Microsoft’s Cortana software, can already hold basic two-way conversations based on spoken or typed questions and commands. However, more intricate interaction with all these virtual assistant apps is coming as companies expand their research into the scientific areas of artificial intelligence, machine learning and natural language processing. (For those with privacy concerns, keep in mind that most virtual assistant software is designed to collect personal data.)The Google Assistant software is available as an app for Android and iOS devices, built into Google Home and other speakers, Android-based wearables, cars, televisions, smart-home appliances and other gear. If you are not sure how to talk to the program, the Google Assistant site has a lengthy list of the questions, commands and topics that you can use with the software, complete with suggestions on how to phrase your requests.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.You can, for example, tell Google Assistant to remember where you parked your car and then ask the software to remind you of the location later. For those with Google Home speakers, the company recently released a series of Routines, which run through a set of regular daily tasks like adjusting the thermostat and lights before reporting the traffic and weather as you wake up.AdvertisementWhen you ask, Google Assistant will start a conversation with third-party chatbot personalities like the Hogwarts Sorting Hat or Bobo the Panda. The Cyber Argument bot on the site can even pit a Google Home speaker against a nearby Amazon Alexa-powered device; for the curious, video clips of chatbots arguing are available, as is an online publication called Chatbots Magazine.But beyond novelty applications, Google (and the other companies) are pushing to develop conversational user interfaces for their products to make them more useful and able to handle complex sets of tasks. An online guide for Google Assistant developers can give you an idea of how apps are designed to work with the software, and you will most likely see software updates to Google Assistant as the software becomes more advanced.Amazon, Apple and Microsoft have similar developer programs for their own virtual assistants. To help inspire its developers even more, Amazon last year created the Alexa Prize, a contest to advance conversational artificial intelligence with a financial reward to the research team that creates the best “socialbot” that can “can converse coherently and engagingly with humans on a range of current events and popular topics such as entertainment, sports, politics, technology and fashion.”Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Daisuke WakabayashiSAN FRANCISCO — Uber’s robotic vehicle project was not living up to expectations months before a self-driving car operated by the company struck and killed a woman in Tempe, Ariz.The cars were having trouble driving through construction zones and next to tall vehicles, like big rigs. And Uber’s human drivers had to intervene far more frequently than the drivers of competing autonomous car projects.Waymo, formerly the self-driving car project of Google, said that in tests on roads in California last year, its cars went an average of nearly 5,600 miles before the driver had to take control from the computer to steer out of trouble. As of March, Uber was struggling to meet its target of 13 miles per “intervention” in Arizona, according to 100 pages of company documents obtained by The New York Times and two people familiar with the company’s operations in the Phoenix area but not permitted to speak publicly about it.Yet Uber’s test drivers were being asked to do more — going on solo runs when they had worked in pairs.And there also was pressure to live up to a goal to offer a driverless car service by the end of the year and to impress top executives. Dara Khosrowshahi, Uber’s chief executive, was expected to visit Arizona in April, and leaders of the company’s development group in the Phoenix area wanted to give him a glitch-free ride in an autonomous car. Mr. Khosrowshahi’s trip was called “Milestone 1: Confidence” in the company documents.Tech companies like Uber, Waymo and Lyft, as well as automakers like General Motors and Toyota, have spent billions developing self-driving cars in the belief that the market for them could one day be worth trillions of dollars.The crash, which occurred Sunday night, was a major setback for Uber, which has been trying to improve its image since Mr. Khosrowshahi replaced Travis Kalanick as the company’s chief executive in a messy transfer of power last August. In February, Uber also settled a longstanding legal fight with Waymo.The death of a woman who was struck by an autonomous car operated by Uber is believed to be the first pedestrian fatality associated with self-driving technology. Newly released video offers clues about what happened.On Monday, Uber halted autonomous car tests in Arizona, Pittsburgh, San Francisco and Toronto. It is not clear when the company will revive them.The Tempe Police Department said it was investigating the crash, and has not determined whether the car was at fault. A Volvo XC90 sport utility vehicle equipped with Uber’s sensing technology struck Elaine Herzberg, 49, while it was going 40 miles an hour in a 45-mile-an-hour zone. According to the police, the car, with one safety driver and operating in autonomous mode, did not slow down before impact.A video shot from the vehicle’s dashboard camera showed the safety driver looking down, away from the road. It also appeared that the driver’s hands were not hovering above the steering wheel, which is what drivers are instructed to do so they can quickly retake control of the car. Ms. Herzberg, pushing a bicycle across the street, appeared in the camera right before she was hit.“As we develop self-driving technology, safety is our primary concern every step of the way,” said Matt Kallman, an Uber spokesman. “We’re heartbroken by what happened this week, and our cars remain grounded. We continue to assist investigators in any way we can.”Uber has been testing its self-driving cars in a regulatory vacuum in Arizona. There are few federal rules governing the testing of autonomous cars. Unlike California, where Uber had been testing since spring of 2017, Arizona state officials had taken a hands-off approach to autonomous vehicles and did not require companies to disclose how their cars were performing.Waymo and Cruise, a self-driving car company owned by GM, reported their “intervention” numbers to California regulators. Uber’s goals in Arizona were mentioned in internal documents — Arizona does not have reporting requirements — and it has not been testing self-driving cars in California long enough to be required to report them.Uber’s first road tests in its self-driving car effort, code-named Project Roadrunner, were actually in Pittsburgh in September 2016. The Phoenix area was added a year ago, and quickly became the company’s main testing ground, with 400 employees and more than 150 autonomous cars driving local roads because of "favorable regulatory environment, favorable weather conditions,” according to a company document.When Mr. Khosrowshahi took over as Uber’s chief executive, he had considered shutting down the self-driving car operations, according to two other people familiar with Mr. Khosrowshahi’s thinking.But he became convinced that it was important to Uber’s long-term prospects. His visit to Phoenix was seen by the Arizona team as a critical opportunity to demonstrate their progress, according to the people familiar with the company’s operations in the Phoenix area. They wanted to take him on a ride without human interventions to demonstrate that the cars could handle so-called edge cases, tricky road situations that are hard to predict.“With autonomy, the edge cases kill you, so you’ve got to build out for all the edge cases,” Mr. Khosrowshahi said at a conference in November. “Which makes it a very, very difficult problem.”By September 2017, Uber’s autonomous cars had driven one million miles in a year nationwide. Uber tallied its second million in 100 days and added its next million at an even faster clip, according to company documents.Early on in Phoenix, there were two groups of test drivers. A smaller group “stressed” the cars by putting them in challenging situations where, without human intervention, they would have crashed.A larger group of drivers was focused on picking up customers in the autonomous vehicles. Those drivers were expected to pay more attention to little details, often taking control to prevent a “bad experience” like hard braking, according to a company document.Around October, Uber merged the two groups to get to a point where it could offer a truly driverless car service to customers “as quickly as possible.” The customer pickup service was mostly dropped so drivers could focus on accumulating miles and gathering data to help the system become more reliable.Around the same time, Uber moved from two employees in every car to one. The paired employees had been splitting duties — one ready to take over if the autonomous system failed, and another to keep an eye on what the computers were detecting. The second person was responsible for keeping track of system performance as well as labeling data on a laptop computer. Mr. Kallman, the Uber spokesman, said the second person was in the car for purely data related tasks, not safety.Waymo had also moved from two operators at all times to one in some situations in late 2015, said Johnny Luu, a Waymo spokesman. Waymo still uses two test drivers when it is adding new systems or moving to a new location.But Uber’s autonomous cars are not operating nearly as well as those of its competitors. Cruise reported to California regulators that it went more than 1,200 miles per intervention. After its strong California results, Waymo is now testing cars in Chandler, Ariz., a Phoenix suburb, with no safety drivers.Mr. Kallman said miles per intervention was not a measure of safety but a rate of system improvement that could differ depending on where and how the cars were driven.When Uber moved to a single operator, some employees expressed safety concerns to managers, according to the two people familiar with Uber’s operations. They were worried that going solo would make it harder to remain alert during hours of monotonous driving. Mr. Kallman said it delayed the start of its single-driver initiative to allow for more training and to make sure drivers felt comfortable for the new role.Uber also developed an app, mounted on an iPad in the car’s middle console, for drivers to alert engineers to problems. Drivers could use the app anytime without shifting the car out of autonomous mode. Often, drivers would annotate data at a traffic light or a stop, but many did so while the car was moving, said the two people familiar with Uber’s operations. Mr. Kallman said it designed the app to meet government safety guidelines for in-car software to minimize distractions.Waymo had a different solution when it moved to a single safety driver. It added a button on the steering wheel for drivers to create an audio explanation when they took the car out of autonomous mode.Not all drivers followed Uber’s training. One was fired after falling asleep at the wheel and being spotted by a colleague. Another was spotted air drumming as the autonomous car passed through an intersection, according to the two people familiar with Uber’s operations.Uber was planning to seek regulatory approval by December to start a self-driving car service in Arizona, according to company documents. Uber said the vehicles would have to be safer than human drivers before they would commercialize it. They would not operate around the clock and would stop for bad weather or traffic. And the service did not need to prove “longer-term financial viability.”Already, one milestone will be missed. Mr. Khosrowshahi will not travel to Phoenix next month, because of scheduling problems that came up before the crash, Mr. Kallman said. But it is unclear how the crash will ultimately affect Uber’s plans for autonomous vehicles.“The collection of bad news around Uber creates a reputation in people’s minds,” said Michael Ramsey, an automotive analyst at Gartner. “Every other company would get a black eye, too, but they might be forgiven. For Uber, it’s going to be hard to shake.”Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwakaMike Isaac and Cade Metz contributed reporting.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTech We’re UsingBy Vindu GoelHow do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Vindu Goel, a technology reporter for The Times who moved last year from San Francisco to Mumbai, India, discussed the tech he’s using.What’s your favorite tech tool for staying on top of your beat? What do you like about it, and what could be better?The most vital tool for me here is WhatsApp, a messaging service owned by Facebook. Although I barely used the app when I worked in San Francisco, every smartphone user in India seems to be on it — more than 200 million people, according to the company.It’s the most reliable way to reach someone. Traditional SMS text messages cost money and are basically all spam or security verifications.So WhatsApp is the main way people communicate — words, links, photos, videos, holiday greetings. Since WhatsApp is linked to your phone, Indians give out their mobile numbers the way Americans give out email addresses.I do wish it were easier to search WhatsApp messages — something I do all the time in Gmail — and it would be helpful to be able to use a single account from multiple phones, as you can do with other services.Cellphone service in India is still spotty, so I carry one iPhone and one Android, with SIM cards for India’s three biggest carriers and power banks to recharge them both. If I have to go somewhere in heavy traffic, I often turn one phone into a Wi-Fi hot spot and work on my laptop from the back seat while the driver worries about the road.How do people use tech differently in India compared with the United States? What are the most popular homegrown apps there? Tech in India is mostly mobile — computers are quite rare. And smartphones are almost all Android, with Apple a bit player.Smartphone use has exploded in the past year. A price war started by a new phone carrier, Reliance Jio, in 2016 has given India one of the lowest prices for data in the world. My primary phone plan costs less than $10 a month for unlimited India calls and more data than I ever manage to use.Cheap data has led to a surge in streaming video. YouTube is popular. But Indians also watch local services like Hotstar, a service owned by 21st Century Fox in the United States. It bundles live cricket, Indian television and American cable shows like “Game of Thrones.”Jio offers local TV and many movies through its own apps. Amazon Prime and Netflix operate here, too.Food delivery apps like Swiggy and Zomato are also big, although I don’t think anyone is making any money at it. Delivery is very much a part of Indian culture — you can get virtually anything delivered, from a single cup of hot coffee to furniture that they assemble in your house.Mobile payments are another hot area. Local apps like Paytm are battling it out with Google’s Tez, Amazon Pay and a payments feature that’s coming in WhatsApp.What are the biggest consequences of people in India getting onto the internet for the first time via their smartphones?I don’t think we really know yet.Most new users know little or no English. So app makers and internet companies like Google are racing to adapt their products to handle different languages. Android phones, for example, offer a choice of keyboards in 33 different Indian languages besides English. Google also says that more than one-quarter of searches in India are done by voice command instead of typing.The combination of smartphones and cheap data has the potential to transform how poorer Indians find a job, socialize, do basic banking, get health care, even pursue an education.One big hurdle, though, is that even a basic Android smartphone starts at about $50, which is still out of reach for a lot of people.What is Mumbai’s high-tech scene like? Mumbai, like New York, is still primarily a hub for finance and trade.In tech, telecom is big — Reliance Jio and Vodafone’s Indian operations are based here. Two huge outsourcing companies, Tata Consultancy Services and Tech Mahindra, also have their headquarters here.Bollywood, India’s film industry, is centered in Mumbai, too. So services like Hotstar, Amazon Prime and Eros Now are here to be close to the studios. There are a few start-ups founded by people who simply like the city, such as Cleartrip, a travel booking site, and Hopscotch, an online retailer of children’s clothing.With so many major banks here, there is also an emerging scene of so-called fintech companies that are trying to apply technology to disrupt traditional financial services.Tech firms have been pushing for merchants to support digital payments in India. Do you think e-wallets will ever replace cash?Traditional e-wallets, where you store money until you need to spend it, will probably disappear. The government ordered e-wallet companies to get more identification information from customers by Feb. 28. Most customers did not cooperate, which limits their ability to refill their wallets.Still, it’s inevitable that noncash payments will play a bigger role in India’s economy over time. Debit cards are already popular, and the government is heavily promoting a technology called UPI, which instantly transfers money from one bank account to another.I doubt cash will ever disappear, though. Even in the United States, about one-third of all transactions are still cash.Beyond your job, what tech product are you currently obsessed with using in your daily life?Air purifiers!Like China, India has a big problem with air pollution in its major cities. Unlike China, the government is doing very little to address the problem.In New Delhi, the nation’s capital, the wintertime air is so bad that its chief minister called it a “gas chamber.” In Mumbai, which is on the coast and gets nice ocean breezes, the air tends to be better. But by World Health Organization standards, the level of tiny particles in the air is still unhealthy, especially in the mornings. And sometimes it’s downright toxic.So we run Swiss-made IQAir purifiers for at least part of every day.Our 2-year-old is obsessed with FaceTime on our iPhones. She loves to call her grandparents in New York and carry the phone around the apartment, giving them a prime view of our ceiling as she chatters away.Follow Vindu Goel on Twitter: @vindugoel.AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIMARCH 14, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The ride-hailing service Lyft has agreed to alliances with just about anyone working on driverless car technology. Its latest partnership aims to make its autonomous vehicle technology available to any car manufacturer.Lyft said Wednesday that it had reached a deal with Magna International, one of the world’s biggest auto suppliers, to jointly develop and manufacture self-driving car systems.The companies said they will work together to introduce autonomous vehicles to Lyft’s ride-hailing network. At the same time, Magna can sell the driverless-car technology to any customer — including other technology companies.Magna also said it would invest $200 million in Lyft’s latest fund-raising round, lifting the San Francisco-based company’s valuation to $11.7 billion.AdvertisementThe partnership reflects Lyft’s open-arms approach to autonomous vehicles.Lyft has opened its ride-hailing network to other companies working on self-driving cars, including Ford and General Motors, a major Lyft investor, so they can gain real-world experience by picking up passengers and collecting data.AdvertisementUber, Lyft’s main rival, has been developing self-driving technology mostly on its own. Waymo, a Lyft partner, is slowly introducing its own ride-hailing service using autonomous Chrysler Pacifica minivans equipped with Waymo’s own hardware and software.The hype over self-driving cars has made development of the technology challenging for some traditional automakers. Car companies face huge salaries for top artificial intelligence engineers and limited access to data and key components. The competitive landscape is so charged that it has already given birth to at least one high-profile lawsuit.As a result, automakers are confronting a choice: Pay big for a technology start-up or risk falling behind. Last year, Ford announced it would invest $1 billion in Argo AI, an artificial intelligence start-up focused on developing autonomous vehicle technology. GM acquired Cruise for an estimated $1 billion in cash, stock and incentive packages in 2016, the same year it invested $500 million in Lyft.After lagging behind Uber, Lyft has recently made a concerted push into self-driving cars. The company opened a research facility in Palo Alto, Calif., and has aggressively recruited engineers.It also has a major asset for self-driving technology — a ride-hailing network picking up and dropping off passengers 10 million times a week. This provides Lyft with a customer base to introduce and test the vehicles and a way to collect information that can be used to “train” autonomous cars.But Raj Kapoor, Lyft’s chief strategy officer, said it would be a few years before truly autonomous vehicles were ready for the road.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I believe this relationship will get us there faster,” Mr. Kapoor said.Magna, a Canadian auto parts maker, already supplies a wide range of driver-assist technology to its customers, including a system for staying in lanes, automatic emergency braking and rearview cameras. It also builds entire vehicles for customers like Mercedes-Benz, BMW and Jaguar — a capability that has made the company a potential partner for a new entrant like Apple.Magna has already been working on hardware for self-driving cars, including radar and lidar — an abbreviation for light detection and ranging — that help the vehicles see the world around them.AdvertisementBut Magna said the partnership with Lyft would be essential to helping it push further into autonomous vehicles, combining its automotive and manufacturing experience with Lyft’s ride network to better understand the many situations that a self-driving car will encounter.“The question isn’t whether autonomous vehicles are going to happen but how long the transition is,” said Swamy Kotagiri, Magna’s chief technology officer.Under the partnership, Lyft would take the lead in developing self-driving car technology while Magna would oversee manufacturing of the systems. The two companies would share the development costs and the resulting intellectual property.Lyft compared its strategy of operating its own self-driving cars as well as welcoming driverless cars from other companies to the way Amazon is both a retailer selling products to customers directly and an online virtual mall, providing space for other companies to sell goods on the site.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nellie BowlesAs Silicon Valley experiences a wave of criticism, even some former colleagues are becoming adversaries.Another prominent skeptic spoke out this week, as a creator of one of Facebook’s top products waded into criticism of the internet giant.“It is time. #deletefacebook,” wrote Brian Acton, one of the founders of WhatsApp, wrote on Twitter. His company was bought by Facebook for $19 billion in 2014. The deal made him a billionaire.Mr. Acton’s anti-Facebook message, retweeted more than 10,000 times, captured a moment in the tech industry when even some of its best-known people are publicly calling for change. The chorus has grown louder this week, as Facebook faces questions over how it allowed a political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, to obtain data on 50 million users.“The question is, ‘What are you loyal to?’” said Tristan Harris, a former Google employee who has started The Center for Humane Technology, an organization for Silicon Valley workers who want to change corporate culture. He has been critical of social media companies for creating addictive products that inflame cultural tensions.“Are you more loyal to your company,” Mr. Harris said. “Or are you more loyal to protecting the fabric of our society?”The tech defections have accelerated in recent months, especially for Facebook.Justin Rosenstein, the creator of the Facebook “like” button, deleted the product from his phone and spoke out about the industry using psychologically manipulative advertising. Chamath Palihapitiya, Facebook’s former head of user growth, said in December that the company was “ripping apart the social fabric of how society works.” And Sandy Parakilas, a former Facebook platform operations manager, wrote on Tuesday in The Washington Post that Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, must “be held accountable for the negligence of his company.”Loyalty to a company is beginning to crack because many tech workers are being asked to build or defend products they question, Mr. Harris said. His center is making resources for engineers on how to build more ethical products and starting an educational campaign, called “The Truth About Tech,” in 55,000 American schools.“More people are speaking up because they feel like they’ve been told lies,” Mr. Harris said. “You can’t just repeat, ‘We’re making the world more open’ over and over and over again while democracy is burning.”Silicon Valley companies have long prized secrecy and loyalty among their workers, who often exercise, play sports and eat three meals a day together. Facebook especially is known for its tight-knit community. Each employee has an annual “Faceversary” on his or her hire date, a ritual that within the company is seen as deeply meaningful and is usually accompanied by balloons.“Until very recently, it was taken as a given that tech equaled progress and tech equaled good and tech equaled economic strength,” said Leslie Berlin, the author of Troublemakers, a history of Silicon Valley.She said the defections she sees now are historically unique.“The Valley was founded on this notion of, ‘We’re very open,’ ” Ms. Berlin said. “But the secrecy has always been there.”“It’s been pretty much a straight line since the start of the Cold War until now,” she said. “This is something new.”Employees may feel the freedom to rebel because of Silicon Valley’s success, both technologically and financially. The technology platforms have become more powerful — and the fortunes much bigger — than the programmers ever expected. So while the industry’s power disturbs them, the wealth allows them to speak out without fear of retribution, Ms. Berlin said.“It’s the shadow of the success,” she said. “You have to understand them together.”Certainly, not everyone is critical. Mr. Acton’s WhatsApp co-founder, Jan Koum, is on the Facebook board of directors and remains deeply active on the platform, regularly posting pro-President Trump and anti-immigration news.And when former leaders have spoken out with criticisms of Facebook, the company has often responded aggressively.“They do yell,” said Roger McNamee, an early investor and adviser to Mark Zuckerberg, referring to Facebook leadership’s approach.But the culture of fear that the company has fostered among employees is not working anymore, he said."Facebook is at one of those moments where everybody who works there has to ask which side of history do you want to be on,” Mr. McNamee said. “The facts are not only indisputable, they’re not even complete. It’s going to get worse.”Follow Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @NellieBowlesAdvertisement
Bits By                     
 KEVIN ROOSE
 
MARCH 22, 2018
Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.You know those weeks when crazy things happen at work, your entire schedule goes haywire and the concept of a good night’s sleep starts to resemble a hazy and futile dream, like full employment or healthy pizza?Well, folks, this was one of those weeks. On Friday night, when Facebook published a blog post saying that it had suspended Cambridge Analytica for misappropriating user data — a post that was intended to pre-empt articles by The New York Times and The Observer of London about that very subject, which were published the next day — it became clear that this was a new kind of Facebook privacy scandal. It has already led to congressional inquiries and user revolts, thrusting the company into the kind of chaos it had not seen in its 14-year history.On Wednesday, after a five-day silence and lots of speculation about his whereabouts, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, finally re-emerged with a Facebook post and an interview with my colleague Sheera Frenkel and me, among others. You can read the transcript of our interview here, and read our article about Facebook’s horrible week here.AdvertisementWe had only about 30 minutes on the phone with Mr. Zuckerberg, but we managed to get him to address several important topics: the Cambridge Analytica mess, Facebook’s lax data policies, its plans to clamp down on third-party developer access and notify users whose data was misused, election interference (including previously unreported Macedonian attempts to interfere in last year’s Alabama special election) and Facebook’s broader responsibility as a global power.AdvertisementBut Mr. Zuckerberg’s responses also raised more questions.Here, for example, is how he answered a question about Facebook’s business model, which is based on selling advertisers and developers the ability to target Facebook users based on their personal data.Roose: Is the basic economic model of Facebook, in which users provide data that Facebook uses to help advertisers and developers to better target potential customers and users — do you feel like that works, given what we now know about the risks?Zuckerberg: Yeah, so this is a really important question. The thing about the ad model that is really important that aligns with our mission is that — our mission is to build a community for everyone in the world and to bring the world closer together. And a really important part of that is making a service that people can afford. A lot of the people, once you get past the first billion people, can’t afford to pay a lot. Therefore, having it be free and have a business model that is ad-supported ends up being really important and aligned.Now, over time, might there be ways for people who can afford it to pay a different way? That’s certainly something we’ve thought about over time. But I don’t think the ad model is going to go away, because I think fundamentally, it’s important to have a service like this that everyone in the world can use, and the only way to do that is to have it be very cheap or free.Narrowly, it may be true that being free and ad supported helps Facebook achieve its goals of connecting billions of people to its services. Facebook has developed a number of ways to make itself cheaper and easier to access — including, in some countries, effectively subsidizing use through its Free Basics program, which allows people to use Facebook without its counting toward their data plans.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it’s not clear this approach has served society well. Especially in countries like Myanmar, where Facebook was recently blamed by United Nations investigators for fueling ethnic violence against the Rohingya, it’s possible that having a slightly higher barrier to entry would be a net good, even if it cost Facebook some users in the short term. (And it’s not even clear that it would. People already pay for their cellphones and data plans all over the world, and might be willing to part with a small fee to keep using their favorite social network.)Switching to a subscription model wouldn’t fix all of Facebook’s problems overnight. There would still be foreign actors trying to interfere in elections, false news and divisive content intending to sway public opinion, and innumerable other issues. But moving away from an ad-supported model would make the network harder to exploit. (Bot networks are less effective on subscription platforms, for example.) And it would lessen the company’s incentive to sell out its users’ privacy to advertisers.Facebook has already shown a willingness to try new models. WhatsApp, for example, makes money by charging businesses for an enterprise product that lets them message their customers. And this week, in an announcement immediately buried by an avalanche of other news about the company, Facebook said it was experimenting with a subscription model that would allow popular creators to charge $5 per month for access to their posts.What if all of Facebook cost $5 per month to use, and certain types of divisive and exploitable ad categories and behaviors were removed from the network entirely? Would users revolt en masse, and decide to colonize some other free social media app? Would Facebook collapse without a pipeline of advertising dollars?Maybe. But being smaller might not be a bad thing. If we’ve learned anything from this year’s troubles, it’s this: Facebook’s platform problems multiply as it gets bigger and more complex, but its ability to deal with those problems stays fairly constant. Zuckerberg might be dedicated to fixing Facebook’s problems, but unless he addresses its biggest problem of all — its enormous scale, paired with a business model that requires the company to monetize its users’ private data to the greatest extent possible — there’s only so much he can do.Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer-at-large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Zuckerberg’s Answers Raise Questions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DON CLARKMARCH 16, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Qualcomm was co-founded in 1985 by Irwin Jacobs, who took the company public and made it a mobile chips behemoth. He later passed the baton to his son Paul.Now Paul Jacobs is trying to make sure that Qualcomm stays a family business — but he will have to do it from outside the company.On Friday, Qualcomm said Mr. Jacobs, a company director, would not be renominated for election at its annual shareholder meeting next Friday. The company’s board said it had reached that decision because Mr. Jacobs wanted to explore making his own bid for Qualcomm. He confirmed late Friday that he wanted to take the company private.The split, which means no member of the Jacobs family will be involved at the top echelons of Qualcomm for the first time in 33 years, was not friendly. In a statement, Mr. Jacobs said of the directors that it was “unfortunate and disappointing they are attempting to remove me from the board at this time.”AdvertisementThe boardroom high jinks followed months of turmoil at Qualcomm, which recently sidestepped a hostile $117 billion acquisition bid from rival semiconductor maker Broadcom and has been dealing with a litany of regulatory and legal troubles around the world. The developments have raised questions about Qualcomm’s prospects and brought fresh scrutiny from Wall Street.AdvertisementMr. Jacobs was chairman of Qualcomm from 2009 until March 9, when he was replaced. The change was widely seen as a move to placate shareholders who had been voicing their displeasure by voting for a slate of six candidates proposed by Broadcom for the 11-seat board as part of its bid to acquire the company.On Tuesday, Mr. Jacobs sent the board a letter saying that he wanted to explore taking the chip maker private and that he intended to talk to potential funding sources, according to people briefed on the situation, who declined to be named because the discussions were confidential. That led to the board’s decision on Friday during its regularly scheduled meeting.“Qualcomm is focused on executing its business plan and maximizing value for shareholders as an independent company,” the company said in a statement. “There can be no assurance that Dr. Jacobs can or will make a proposal, but, if he does, the board will of course evaluate it consistent with its fiduciary duties to shareholders.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Jacobs, in turn, said there were “clear merits to exploring a path to take the company private in order to maximize the company’s long-term performance, deliver superior value to all stockholders and bolster a critical contributor to American technology.”His potential bid was earlier reported by The Financial Times.In aiming to take Qualcomm private, Mr. Jacobs would be following a playbook used by Michael Dell. Mr. Dell, who founded Dell Computer in his university dorm room and built it into a personal computing colossus, took his company private in a $24.9 billion deal in 2013 after it had been battered by competition from Apple and the rise of mobile devices. Mr. Dell has since been working to turn Dell around, away from the prying eyes of Wall Street.Yet any takeover attempt of Qualcomm by Mr. Jacobs faces extraordinarily tough obstacles. As an owner of fewer than 1 percent of Qualcomm shares, Mr. Jacobs would have to find investors to buy equity in a transaction, as well as bankers willing to fund debt. Since Qualcomm’s directors had rejected Broadcom’s $117 billion offer as inadequate, the total price tag would likely have to be higher.If Mr. Jacobs reached out to foreign investors to raise funding, that would also most likely be problematic. President Trump blocked Singapore-based Broadcom’s bid for Qualcomm this week partly because the White House does not want to cede American primacy in fifth-generation wireless technology, known as 5G, which Qualcomm has been developing.AdvertisementMr. Jacobs is friends with Masayoshi Son, head of the Japanese conglomerate SoftBank, which would seem a likely candidate to help any buyout. But SoftBank has a heavy debt load already, and any move related to foreign investors could raise the same concerns that thwarted Broadcom.Not renominating Mr. Jacobs to Qualcomm’s board opens a new chapter for the company, which the Jacobs family had made an institution in its hometown, San Diego.Mr. Jacobs served as Qualcomm’s chief executive from 2005 to 2014, a time when revenue and profits surged as its technology became a foundation for third-generation cellular networks. As a result, Qualcomm began charging patent royalties for nearly all mobile phones that used 3G technology.The company was also able to garner a strong position in the next generation of cellphone networks — known as 4G — because it scooped rivals in delivering chips that could work with 4G networks.But rivals such as Taiwan’s Mediatek have cut into that lead recently. Qualcomm has also lately been hurt as Apple, a longtime customer, sued it over the royalty payments and stopped paying the company.Apart from expanding Qualcomm, Mr. Jacobs is associated with some of the company’s most famous failures, including a plan for broadcast cellular technology called MediaFlo and a technology for mobile-device displays called Mirasol. Qualcomm announced in 2013 that Mr. Jacobs would give up the chief executive position to Steve Mollenkopf after Mr. Mollenkopf was mentioned as a possible candidate to be chief executive of Microsoft.Follow Don Clark on Twitter: @donal888.Andrew Ross Sorkin contributed reporting from New York.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Qualcomm’s Former Chairman Will Leave Amid Plans to Take the Chip Company Private.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By SHEERA FRENKEL and KEVIN ROOSEMARCH 21, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, on Wednesday publicly addressed for the first time the misuse of data belonging to 50 million users of the social network and described the steps the company would take to safeguard the information of its more than two billion monthly users.Although his statement addressing a chorus of criticism fell short of a full-throated apology, Mr. Zuckerberg said that Facebook would contact users whose data had been harvested through a personality quiz app and passed along to the political data firm Cambridge Analytica.“We have a responsibility to protect your data,” Mr. Zuckerberg said Wednesday in a Facebook post, “and if we can’t then we don’t deserve to serve you.”Mr. Zuckerberg, 33, was trying to quell the crisis over the disclosure last weekend that Cambridge Analytica had used data that had been improperly obtained from Facebook as the firm worked on behalf of Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign.Advertisement“Are there other Cambridge Analyticas out there?” Mr. Zuckerberg said later in an interview with The New York Times. He added, “Were there apps which could have gotten access to more information and potentially sold it without us knowing or done something that violated people’s trust? We also need to make sure we get that under control.”AdvertisementMr. Zuckerberg said the company would investigate apps like the third-party quiz app that had previously obtained access to “large amounts of information” from the social network. He also said the company would restrict third-party developers’ access.In the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal, in which data from over 50 million Facebook profiles was secretly scraped and mined for voter insights, many Facebook users have decided to delete their accounts — but untangling yourself from a site like Facebook is not as easy as pressing “delete.”“We also made mistakes, there’s more to do, and we need to step up and do it,” he wrote in his Facebook statement.The Cambridge Analytica revelations added to the questions that have been raised about Facebook’s handling of user data and security. Those questions have only intensified as the company has faced criticism over the role its platform played in Russian attempts to influence the 2016 presidential election and the way it has been used to spread misinformation on the internet.The resulting backlash is Facebook’s worst crisis since it was founded by Mr. Zuckerberg and others in 2004. The information, photos and other content that users post and their frequent engagement with the platform is crucial to the social network, and to the company’s profitability. Questions about user privacy and security threaten the company’s standing at a time when people are already uneasy about whether the use of technology can bring good or ill.Last Friday, after The New York Times, The Observer of London and Channel 4 in Britain told Facebook that Cambridge Analytica had not deleted all of the data it had obtained, the social network banned the political consulting firm and Aleksandr Kogan, the Cambridge University researcher who created the personality quiz app that was used to harvest user data.“This was a breach of trust between Kogan, Cambridge Analytica and Facebook,” Mr. Zuckerberg wrote on Wednesday. “But it was also a breach of trust between Facebook and the people who share their data with us and expect us to protect it.”Facebook representatives confirmed that Cambridge Analytica representatives met with Facebook on Tuesday to discuss lifting the ban. Mr. Zuckerberg told The Times he did not rule out allowing Cambridge Analytica back, saying Facebook must first conduct a “full forensic audit of the firm” and “have full confirmation that there’s no wrongdoing here.”AdvertisementThe reaction to the Cambridge Analytica disclosure has been severe. Politicians in the United States and Britain have called for Mr. Zuckerberg to explain how his company handles user data, and state attorneys general in Massachusetts and New York have begun investigating Cambridge Analytica and Facebook. A #DeleteFacebook movement calling on people to close their accounts has also gathered steam.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Washington, there have been more calls for regulation of internet companies like Facebook. Mr. Zuckerberg’s troubles there were illustrated by the final passage on Wednesday of a bill to combat sex trafficking. The bill would lift liability protections that internet companies have enjoyed for content that users post on their platforms. Facebook and other internet giants had quietly fought the bill for more than a year, but eventually dropped their opposition.Lawmakers who have demanded that Mr. Zuckerberg testify before Congress about Facebook’s relationship with Cambridge Analytica were not appeased by his statement.“You need to come to Congress and testify to this under oath,” Senator Ed Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, tweeted in response to Mr. Zuckerberg’s post.Independent researchers who have used data from Facebook said that Mr. Zuckerberg’s statement did not acknowledge how the gathering of user data was fundamental to the company’s operations.“He avoided the big issue, which is that for many years, Facebook was basically giving away user data like it was handing out candy,” said Jonathan Albright, research director at the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia University. “There is no question that handing out that data made Facebook the success it is as a company. This has to be recognized as part of their business model and not just a one-off problem.”In his statement, Mr. Zuckerberg laid out a timeline of Facebook’s dealings with Cambridge Analytica. He traced the information-sharing issue to 2007, when Facebook decided to become an open platform — enabling people to use Facebook to log into other apps and share detailed personal information about themselves and their friends.In 2013, Mr. Kogan, the Cambridge researcher, created a personality quiz app that about 300,000 people installed, Mr. Zuckerberg wrote. Because Facebook was an open platform, Mr. Kogan was able to collect data on tens of millions of friends of those users who had installed the personality quiz app.AdvertisementA year later, Mr. Zuckerberg said, Facebook changed its policy to limit how much data third-party apps could access. “These actions would prevent any app like Kogan’s from being able to access so much data today,” he wrote.By 2015, Mr. Kogan had shared his data and findings with Cambridge Analytica, which later used the material to single out American voters. Mr. Zuckerberg said Facebook had banned Mr. Kogan’s app and demanded that the researcher and Cambridge Analytica formally certify that the data had been deleted. He did not address in his post why Facebook had not already disclosed those activities to its users whose data had been harvested by Mr. Kogan and Cambridge Analytica.“Whenever there’s an issue where someone’s data gets passed to someone who the rules of the system shouldn’t have allowed it to, that’s rightfully a big issue and deserves to be a big uproar,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in the interview.For Mr. Zuckerberg, the outcry over Cambridge Analytica has been personally damaging. Inside Facebook, even his staunch supporters have described a tense atmosphere. Some employees have sought to transfer to other divisions, such as the messaging app WhatsApp and the photo-sharing platform Instagram, calling their work on Facebook’s main product “demoralizing.”Mr. Zuckerberg spent part of the past week hunkered down with a small group of engineers to discuss how to make information on Facebook’s users more secure, and to potentially give them more control of their data, according to two Facebook employees who declined to be named because the proceedings were confidential.His silence on the matter has prompted mounting criticism in the past few days. Facebook held a staff meeting on Tuesday to answer questions about Cambridge Analytica and the surrounding outcry, but Mr. Zuckerberg did not appear at the event. He was scheduled to appear at a staff meeting that was set for Friday.In his interview with The Times, Mr. Zuckerberg said that the company’s efforts to safeguard its platform from bad behavior — which includes preparing for possible interference attempts in the 2018 midterm elections — were an important part of a larger transformation at the company, which has had to adjust from its roots as a social network for college students into a powerful global information hub.“If you had asked me, when I got started with Facebook, if one of the central things I’d need to work on now is preventing governments from interfering in each other’s elections, there’s no way I thought that’s what I’d be doing if we talked in 2004 in my dorm room,” Mr. Zuckerberg said.Follow Sheera Frenkel and Kevin Roose on Twitter: @sheeraf and @kevinrooseSheera Frenkel reported from San Francisco and Kevin Roose from New York. David Gelles contributed reporting from New York.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook’s Chief Admits Mistakes In Guarding Data.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.In Menlo Park, Calif., Facebook is building a real community and testing the proposition: Do people love tech companies so much they will live inside them?By DAVID STREITFELDMARCH 21, 2018
MENLO PARK, Calif. — John Tenanes, Facebook’s vice president for real estate, is showing off the company’s plans for expansion. It will have offices for thousands of programmers to extend Facebook’s fearsome reach. But that is not what Mr. Tenanes is excited about.He leans over a scale model of the 59-acre site, which is named Willow Village. “There will be housing there,” he points. “There will be a retail street along here, with a grocery store and a drugstore. That round building in the corner? Maybe a cultural center.”In just a few years, Facebook built a virtual community that linked more than two billion people, an achievement with few precedents. Now the social network is building a real community, the kind you can walk around. It is a project with many precedents in American history, quite a few of them cautionary tales about what happens when a powerful corporation takes control of civic life.Facebook, Mr. Tenanes says, has a dual mission: “We want to balance our growth with the community’s needs.”AdvertisementWillow Village will be wedged between the Menlo Park neighborhood of Belle Haven and the city of East Palo Alto, both heavily Hispanic communities that are among Silicon Valley’s poorest. Facebook is planning 1,500 apartments, and has agreed with Menlo Park to offer 225 of them at below-market rates. The most likely tenants of the full-price units are Facebook employees, who already receive a five-figure bonus if they live near the office.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The community will have eight acres of parks, plazas and bike-pedestrian paths open to the public. Facebook wants to revitalize the railway running alongside the property and will finish next year a pedestrian bridge over the expressway. The bridge will provide access to the trail that rings San Francisco Bay, a boon for birders and bikers.Mr. Tenanes contemplates the audacity of building a city.“It’s a good thing, right?” he says.Depends how it goes. Facebook is testing the proposition: Do people love tech companies so much they will live inside of them? When the project was announced last summer, critics dubbed it Facebookville or, in tribute to company co-founder Mark Zuckerberg, Zucktown.AdvertisementThe company has not warmed to these names. “I owe my soul to the company store,” Tennessee Ernie Ford sang. But Facebook’s ambitions are now confronting a more urgent problem: an escalating crisis over the company’s power to sway elections, its casual approach to data privacy and its susceptibility to Russian manipulation. If Facebook’s image is permanently sullied by the furor over Cambridge Analytica, the data firm hired by President Trump’s 2016 election campaign, Zucktown will falter before it is finished.The social media colossus is not the only Big Tech company in the complicated position of dressing up its expansion as a gift to its neighbors.A few miles down the 101 highway, another new civic-corporate partnership is underway in the city of Mountain View. Google is promising to place the public “in the very heart of Google’s vibrant community.”The search company plans a 600,000-square-foot office building with a roof that melts up into soft peaks, kind of like a meringue. It will have stores, cafes, gardens and even a space for theatrical performances, as well as a place for consumers to test-drive new Google technology.Google will build 5,000 homes on its property under an agreement brokered with Mountain View in December. Call it Alphabet City as a nod to Alphabet, Google’s corporate parent. The company said it was still figuring out its future as a landlord, and declined further comment.Zucktown and Alphabet City, as well as similar projects being contemplated across Silicon Valley, could at a minimum have consequences for the start-up culture that transformed fruit orchards into the world’s greatest tech hub. Silicon Valley was built by engineers jumping from company to company. That drove the innovation that sped the rise of some firms and hastened the demise of others.As workers begin to literally live at the office, they will inevitably be more beholden to bosses who also collect the rent. After all, it is much harder to find a place to live in Silicon Valley than a new job. Turnover may slump, and so might the turnover in ideas.The push into the physical also has implications for the 1.2 million people in Silicon Valley who are teachers, fitness instructors, clerks, baristas — all those who hold jobs that do not come with stock options. As they inch down the clogged streets and bid money they don’t have on miserable houses, they will hear the siren call of Big Tech: We can fix broken communities by building new ones. Trust us.Advertisement“Corporations are paying for things that the city or county and state used to pay for,” said Cecilia Taylor of Belle Haven Action, a community advocacy group. “They have a lot of money. A lot of money. More than the city does. And a lot more power.”On a wall in the Facebook division charged with the company’s growth there is a poster with a classic tech admonition: “Go Big or Go Home.” Facebook is in essence tweaking that to “Go Big at Home.” About 12,000 of its 25,000 employees work in Menlo Park. In a decade, it will have space for 35,000 — slightly more than the city’s current population.The notion of communities run by and for companies has been a fixture in the United States almost from the beginning. Often these places were exercises in plunder.In the textile town of Lowell, Mass., in 1846, the mill clock slowed down to lengthen shifts and then sped up at night when the workers were off, according to one contemporary reformer. U.S. Steel built Gary, Ind., but took little responsibility for its employees, many of whom lived in substandard housing in crime-ridden neighborhoods.There were more benign examples too. Milton Hershey began building a chocolate factory in the middle of Pennsylvania in 1903 and then surrounded it with a community where, he pledged, there would be “no poverty, no nuisances, no evil.” In return for surrendering certain rights — like local elections and privacy — workers in the town of Hershey got medical coverage, a free junior college, parks and a zoo.Corporate good will, however, had a way of curdling over time.In Wisconsin, the Kohler family established a plumbing-fixtures factory in 1900 and then created a town around it. Kohler built houses for couples and dorms for single men, financed schools, had a pension plan and paid well. When economic conditions deteriorated during the Depression, however, the employees tried to strike. Kohler responded by arming its deputies with machine guns. In the ensuing clash, more than 40 strikers were shot and two were killed.By the 1960s, the era of the company town in America was fading, even as countries like China picked up the notion. Zhengzhou is a remote Chinese city that was once impoverished. It now has 350,000 workers building iPhones.Hardy Green, author of “The Company Town: The Industrial Edens and Satanic Mills That Shaped the American Economy,” said that the tech companies had been reviving elements of the company town in the United States for years now.AdvertisementThe free meals, nap pods, concierge services, yoga classes, on-site laundry and haircuts are a perk but also a modern way of slowing down the mill clock so the workers can spend more time working. But in a society where government is increasingly ineffective, company towns are nevertheless likely to be welcomed, or at least tolerated.“It may be the best option for many, just as a benevolent dictatorship can be O.K. for as long as the benevolence lasts,” Mr. Green said.Only seven years ago, Silicon Valley had a very different attitude about building housing for workers, much less the community. A gaunt Steve Jobs, in what would turn out to be his last public appearance, made his case before the Cupertino City Council for a new Apple headquarters.Mr. Jobs told council members how great the new doughnut-shaped headquarters was going to be. It would have a lot of trees, a theater, curved windows. Architecture students would come from all over to study it.City Council member Kris Wang had a question: How could the 60,000 Cupertino residents benefit from this new campus?“We’d like to continue to stay here and pay taxes,” Mr. Jobs said. “If we can’t, we’d have to go somewhere like Mountain View.”Ms. Wang, a former Cupertino mayor, persisted. “Do we get free Wi-Fi or something like that?”“I’m a simpleton,” Mr. Jobs replied. “I always had this view that we pay taxes and the city should do those things. That’s why we pay taxes. If we can get out of paying taxes I’d be glad to put up a Wi-Fi network.”Since that June 2011 meeting, the number of hours commuters in Silicon Valley lose every day to congestion has doubled to 66,000. About 300,000 new jobs have been created, pushing the median apartment rental rate up 37 percent and the median cost of a home to $968,000.AdvertisementMeanwhile, the big companies — not only Apple but Amazon, which has an increasingly large presence in Silicon Valley, as well as Facebook and Google — are much wealthier.Apple built a $5 billion campus that, for all its splendor, is not readily accessible by mass transit. That problem was compounded by the company’s apparent lack of interest in where its new employees would live. Decisions like these are no longer acceptable from a public relations point of view, and would not be smart for the companies in any case. If Silicon Valley continues choking on its traffic, the companies will find hiring not merely difficult but impossible. Even for a tech programmer, a $2 million house is a hurdle.So the virtual companies are being forced to grapple with the most intractable physical issues.“I don’t think Google, for instance, thought they were going to have to get into the transportation business,” said Allison Arieff, editorial director of San Francisco Bay Area Planning and Urban Research Association, a research organization. “But they now have a giant swath of the company devoted to getting people around. Housing seems the next step. No one bats an eye if universities build housing for students, grad students and tenured professors.”When the tech companies played a much smaller role in Silicon Valley 25 years ago, even the working class could afford to live here. So could Stanford University students. Traffic flowed naturally.However enticing this past might seem, efforts to put the brakes on growth have had limited success.Measure M, a 2014 effort to restrict development in Menlo Park’s downtown, was soundly defeated by voters. Patti Fry, a former chairwoman of the Menlo Park City Planning Commission and an architect of the measure, said she is wary of Facebook’s increasing size and power.“They’re doing more than most companies, but most of what they do serves them,” she said. “I do not expect a company to have as a priority providing community services that a real community needs. They’re in business to be in business.”Drew Combs is a former journalist who became a member of the Menlo Park Planning Commission and then ran for City Council in 2014. He was loosely associated with Measure M and when it failed, so did his bid. He is now chairman of the planning commission, which reviews the use permits required for large projects.“I don’t think in a lot of cases this is a good-versus-evil battle,” Mr. Combs said. “This is a negotiation between different stakeholders.”Mr. Combs has since gotten a new job. He now works at Facebook. He recuses himself when Facebook issues come up before the commission, and also recuses himself from the question of whether Facebook is turning into a one-company town.Advertisement“Local issues here are passionately and thoroughly debated,” he said. “This hasn’t waned during the six years I’ve been involved and I don’t expect that it will in the future.”Facebook’s move toward openness and community engagement is recent. Its current campus, which it moved into in 2011, is a ring of buildings with a “street” in the middle that has restaurants, pop-up shops, a book exchange and other amenities, but only employees can go there.Across the street, the company opened in 2015 an office designed by Frank Gehry. It is basically one enormous room — the largest open-floor plan in the world, Facebook says. On the landscaped roof is a garden, a walking loop and many trees. The neighbors cannot see any of this.In Zucktown, this notion of firmly separated insiders and outsiders will be deliberately blurred.“The retail stores will not be managed by Facebook. But we have the mechanism, we are the property owner,” says Mr. Tenanes, the real estate chief, adding that he doesn’t know exactly how it will work in practice. “It is a bit new.”Menlo Science & Technology Park, a decaying office park that will be torn down for Willow Village, is not exactly a beloved part of the city, and neither are the other sites on which Facebook has been building. They were in an industrial zone. That has helped insulate the company from criticism, which nonetheless simmers beneath the surface in Belle Haven.The Peery Foundation, a grantmaker based nearby in Palo Alto, made a short video two years ago documenting how the area around Facebook’s headquarters was changing. It interviewed dozens of local residents, including one woman who referred to landlords who had been renting to low-income families and were now selling their properties. “Eventually,” she said, “there’s going to be nobody here but Facebook.”Facebook, in a comment at the end of the film, acknowledges, “We still have a lot of work to do.” The company has increased its efforts in the community. So has the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, a limited liability company set up by Mr. Zuckerberg and his wife Priscilla Chan for philanthropy. At the same time, Facebook has continued to expand.Ms. Taylor grew up in Belle Haven, left, came back to run for the Menlo Park City Council in 2016, narrowly lost, and last year formed Belle Haven Action. It is an organization on a shoestring; she and two colleagues do not have offices and hold meetings at the local community center.Advertisement“Facebook is very smart,” she said. “They have money in every problem. Immigration. Housing. Transportation. Education.” For example, the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative gave $3 million to an East Palo Alto legal services group that helps low-income residents with housing and immigration issues. It has given more than $7 million to create a primary school.And it is helping fund Belle Haven Action. In January, the organization got a $75,000 grant from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative.Ms. Taylor acknowledged it is awkward for an advocacy group to be funded by the company it is confronting, but said: “When you don’t have resources, that makes your work so much harder. This is about being a disrupter but also a negotiator.”A recent accomplishment by Belle Haven Action: getting a “no right turn” sign on a busy Facebook parking lot to stop workers from heading deeper into the community in an attempt to avoid congestion. Next it would like the company to install cameras on the streets to monitor traffic and pedestrian safety.“We need movement because nothing has been done for so long,” said Ms. Taylor. “Now Facebook comes in and they’re willing to give us a few pennies and something for the community. The trains will run. We’ll have better schools, a grocery store — although we’re going to push for a co-op.”Mr. Jobs promised Cupertino nothing — and that’s about all Cupertino got. Apple gave $6 million to an affordable housing fund and pays certain fees to the city, but the gleaming new campus is resolutely closed to the public.Its critics, Apple says, don’t understand.“We didn’t make Apple Park for other people,” Apple chief design officer Jonathan Ive said at a recent talk in Washington. “It wasn’t made for you.”AdvertisementMs. Wang, the former Cupertino council member, has no regrets about not pushing Mr. Jobs harder. “I’m proud of Apple,” she says. “They’ve done a good job. The campus is very impressive.”Her only wish — and it’s a small one — is that someday Apple will invite her in to actually see it.If Apple is unapproachable, Facebook and its money are becoming inescapable. In addition to the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative’s grants to local organizations, the social network is getting more involved with local policing.In 2014, Facebook paid $200,000 to create a new Menlo Park police substation adjoining its campus. It pays the annual rent. It also financed the $173,146 annual salary and benefits of an officer. Last year the company proposed giving the city $11 million to pay for a six-officer unit. That plan evoked some disquiet.“Instead of being beholden to the public, public servants will be beholden to a private company,” a local activist, J.T. Faraji, said at a City Council meeting.“Our goal is to strengthen the community,” said Juan Salazar, a Facebook public policy manager. “We want a more permeable relationship, where we engage more. The parks, the grocery store, are places to congregate together, to build a sense of place.”David Kirkpatrick, whose book “The Facebook Effect” is a history of the company’s early years, is ambivalent about the expansion. While he says “Facebook is a company that at least tries to have a conscience,” he also worries about so much enforced togetherness on employees.“Facebook has the attitude that if you are really a good employee you will live, eat and sleep Facebook,” he said. “That creates insularity, which is a big problem in Silicon Valley already.”AdvertisementIf Silicon Valley is the laboratory for the increasingly intimate relationship between big tech, its workers and its neighbors (who are also frequently its users), seeds are being planted elsewhere as well.In Toronto, an offshoot of Google won approval last fall to redevelop a 12-acre chunk of the waterfront. Chicago was so eager to land Amazon’s new headquarters that it proposed returning to the company half of all the state income tax its employees paid — money that would enrich the company, one of the world’s most highly valued, at the expense of the community. Chicago is now a finalist. So is Newark, where the state is offering up to $7 billion in tax credits.As Facebook works to make Willow Village a reality, its ambitions can only grow.The 1,500 apartments “are a starting point,” said Mr. Tenanes. “I would hope we could do more. We’re solving a problem here.”An earlier version of two picture captions with this article misstated the location of two Facebook buildings that will be razed to make room for the company’s new development. Both are in Menlo Park, Calif., not East Palo Alto, Calif.Follow David Streitfeld on Twitter: @DavidStreitfeld.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2018, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Welcome to Zucktown.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NICOLE PERLROTH, SHEERA FRENKEL and SCOTT SHANEMARCH 19, 2018
As Facebook grapples with a backlash over its role in spreading disinformation, an internal dispute over how to handle the threat and the public outcry is resulting in the departure of a senior executive.The impending exit of that executive — Alex Stamos, Facebook’s chief information security officer — reflects heightened leadership tension at the top of the social network. Much of the internal disagreement is rooted in how much Facebook should publicly share about how nation states misused the platform and debate over organizational changes in the run-up to the 2018 midterm elections, according to current and former employees briefed on the matter.Mr. Stamos, who plans to leave Facebook by August, had advocated more disclosure around Russian interference of the platform and some restructuring to better address the issues, but was met with resistance by colleagues, said the current and former employees. In December, Mr. Stamos’s day-to-day responsibilities were reassigned to others, they said.Mr. Stamos said he would leave Facebook but was persuaded to stay through August to oversee the transition of his responsibilities and because executives thought his departure would look bad, the people said. He has been overseeing the transfer of his security team to Facebook’s product and infrastructure divisions. His group, which once had 120 people, now has three, the current and former employees said.AdvertisementMr. Stamos would be the first high-ranking employee to leave Facebook since controversy over disinformation on its site. Company leaders — including Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, and Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer — have struggled to address a growing set of problems, including Russian interference on the platform, the rise of false news and the disclosure over the weekend that 50 million of its user profiles had been harvested by Cambridge Analytica, a voter-profiling company.■ More about how Cambridge Analytica collected Facebook data.■ The growing outcry on two continents over Facebook’s role in misuse of data. AdvertisementThe developments have taken a toll internally, said the seven people briefed on the matter, who asked not to be identified because the proceedings were confidential. Some of the company’s executives are weighing their own legacies and reputations as Facebook’s image has taken a beating. Several believe the company would have been better off saying little about Russian interference and note that other companies, such as Twitter, which have stayed relatively quiet on the issue, have not had to deal with as much criticism.One central tension at Facebook has been that of the legal and policy teams versus the security team. The security team generally pushed for more disclosure about how nation states had misused the site, but the legal and policy teams have prioritized business imperatives, said the people briefed on the matter.“The people whose job is to protect the user always are fighting an uphill battle against the people whose job is to make money for the company,” said Sandy Parakilas, who worked at Facebook enforcing privacy and other rules until 2012 and now advises a nonprofit organization called the Center for Humane Technology, which is looking at the effect of technology on people.Mr. Stamos said in statement on Monday, “These are really challenging issues, and I’ve had some disagreements with all of my colleagues, including other executives.” On Twitter, he said he was “still fully engaged with my work at Facebook” and acknowledged that his role has changed, without addressing his future plans.
            Despite the rumors, I'm still fully engaged with my work at Facebook. It's true that my role did change. I'm currently spending more time exploring emerging security risks and working on election security.        Facebook did not have a comment on the broader issues around Mr. Stamos’s departure.Mr. Stamos joined Facebook from Yahoo in June 2015. He and other Facebook executives, such as Ms. Sandberg, disagreed early on over how proactive the social network should be in policing its own platform, said the people briefed on the matter. In his statement, Mr. Stamos said his relationship with Ms. Sandberg was “productive.”Mr. Stamos first put together a group of engineers to scour Facebook for Russian activity in June 2016, the month the Democratic National Committee announced it had been attacked by Russian hackers, the current and former employees said.By November 2016, the team had uncovered evidence that Russian operatives had aggressively pushed DNC leaks and propaganda on Facebook. That same month, Mr. Zuckerberg publicly dismissed the notion that fake news influenced the 2016 election, calling it a “pretty crazy idea.”AdvertisementIn the ensuing months, Facebook’s security team found more Russian disinformation and propaganda on its site, according to the current and former employees. By the spring of 2017, deciding how much Russian interference to disclose publicly became a major source of contention within the company.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Stamos pushed to disclose as much as possible, while others including Elliot Schrage, Facebook’s vice president of communications and policy, recommended not naming Russia without more ironclad evidence, said the current and former employees.A detailed memorandum Mr. Stamos wrote in early 2017 describing Russian interference was scrubbed for mentions of Russia and winnowed into a blog post last April that outlined, in hypothetical terms, how Facebook could be manipulated by a foreign adversary, they said. Russia was only referenced in a vague footnote. That footnote acknowledged that Facebook’s findings did not contradict a declassified January 2017 report in which the director of national intelligence concluded Russia had sought to undermine United States election, and Hillary Clinton in particular.Mr. Stamos said in his statement that “we decided that the responsible thing to do would be to make clear that our findings were consistent with those released by the U.S. intelligence community, which clearly connected the activity in their report to Russian state-sponsored actors.”But Facebook’s decision to omit Russia backfired. Weeks later, a Time magazine article revealed that Russia had created fake accounts and purchased fake ads to spread propaganda on the platform, allegations that Facebook initially denied.By last September, after Mr. Stamos’s investigation had revealed further Russian interference, Facebook was forced to reverse course. That month, the company disclosed that beginning in June 2015, Russians had paid Facebook $100,000 to run roughly 3,000 divisive ads to show the American electorate.In response, lawmakers like Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, the top Democrat on the intelligence committee, said that although Facebook’s revelation was a good first step, “I’m disappointed it’s taken 10 months of raising this issue before they’ve become much more transparent.”And the revelation also prompted more attention into how Russians had manipulated the social network. Last October and November, Facebook was grilled in front of lawmakers on Capitol Hill for Russian meddling on its platform, along with executives from Twitter and YouTube.AdvertisementThe public reaction caused some at Facebook to recoil at revealing more, said the current and former employees. Since the 2016 election, Facebook has paid unusual attention to the reputations of Mr. Zuckerberg and Ms. Sandberg, conducting polls to track how they are viewed by the public, said Tavis McGinn, who was recruited to the company last April and headed the executive reputation efforts through September 2017.Mr. McGinn, who now heads Honest Data, which has done polling about Facebook’s reputation in different countries, said Facebook is “caught in a Catch-22.”“Facebook cares so much about its image that the executives don’t want to come out and tell the whole truth when things go wrong,” he said. “But if they don’t, it damages their image.”Mr. McGinn said he left Facebook after becoming disillusioned with the company’s conduct.By December 2017, Mr. Stamos, who reports to Facebook’s general counsel, proposed that he report directly to higher-ups. Facebook executives rejected that proposal and instead reassigned Mr. Stamos’s team, splitting the security team between its product team, overseen by Guy Rosen, and infrastructure team, overseen by Pedro Canahuati, according to current and former employees.Apart from managing a small team of engineers in San Francisco, Mr. Stamos has largely been left as Facebook’s security communicator. Last month, he appeared as Facebook’s representative at the Munich Security Conference.Over the weekend, after news broke that Cambridge Analytica had harvested data on as many as 50 million Facebook users, Facebook’s communications team encouraged Mr. Stamos to tweet in defense of the company, but only after it asked to approve Mr. Stamos’s tweets, according to two people briefed on the incident.After the tweets set off a furious response, Mr. Stamos deleted them.Roger B. McNamee, an early investor in Facebook who said he considered himself a mentor to Mr. Zuckerberg, said the company was failing to face the fundamental problems posed by the Russian meddling and other manipulation of content.“I told them, ‘Your business is based on trust, and you’re losing trust,’” said Mr. McNamee, a founder of the Center for Humane Technology. “They were treating it as a P.R. problem, when it’s a business problem. I couldn’t believe these guys I once knew so well had gotten so far off track.”■ Cambridge Analytica executives were caught on video offering to entrap clients’ opponents.■ How Cambridge Analytica harvested Facebook data.Follow Nicole Perlroth, Sheera Frenkel and Scott Shane on Twitter: @nicoleperlroth and @sheeraf and @ScottShaneNYT.A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Security Officer To Exit Facebook As Outcry Grows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAMIEN CAVE and VINDU GOELMARCH 18, 2018
SYDNEY, Australia — Ola built itself into India’s leading ride-hailing company by catering to the particular needs of Indian customers, who often like to settle fares in cash and jump on cheap, three-wheeled auto-rickshaws for short trips.Now Ola is expanding overseas for the first time, to Australia, in a major test of whether India’s new breed of technology start-ups can survive in a developed country.The company began service in the western city of Perth last month. Last week it extended into Sydney. In both cities, Ola is offering passengers free rides and giving drivers a larger portion of the fares, hoping to get more cars on the street and lure more riders to try it.Some drivers said they were already suggesting that riders use Ola to build up a viable competitor to Uber, which has long had the Australian market to itself.Advertisement“Uber doesn’t really have a great reputation for treating people fairly,” said Oliver Ward, 39, a driver for Uber and Ola in Sydney. “It’s good to see some new competition.”Ola’s move into a wealthy developed country like Australia, where fares and customer expectations are much higher than in India, is a calculated bet by the company that it can adjust its model to the needs of global customers.AdvertisementIndia is home to a raft of start-ups in e-commerce, mobile apps and other consumer internet businesses. But few of them have ventured beyond their home market successfully. Zomato, a restaurant review site similar to Yelp of the United States, expanded aggressively overseas a few years ago, only to scale back and focus more on India and a few countries like the United Arab Emirates. Paytm, India’s leading digital-payments company, has targeted its services to Indian immigrants in Canada, primarily as an experiment geared toward learning how to operate in developed countries.For Ola, Australia could be a compelling international opportunity.For starters, the country offers room to grow. Fewer than one in five Australians who regularly buy things online used a ride-hailing service in the past year, according to June survey data analyzed by eMarketer, an American research firm. And the typical fares are much higher than in India, meaning Ola could potentially make more money per ride.“In the ride-sharing market currently, there are no real enemies,” said Satish Meena, a senior forecast analyst with Forrester, a technology research firm. “Everyone is willing to share the pie.”Australian laws also make it generally easy to set up a ride-share business. Taxify, an Estonian company, arrived in December.“We welcome competition because it keeps us focused on delivering the very best product,” said David Rohrsheim, Uber’s general manager for Australia and New Zealand.Damien Cave, our new Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Experts say that Uber has another incentive: Australia has tough labor laws that could require the company to treat drivers as employees deserving of retirement and other benefits. If its drivers also drive for other services, Uber could more easily argue that they are free agents instead.AdvertisementOla is mostly trying to win drivers over with a better deal.The company takes only 7.5 percent of drivers’ fares, with plans to increase that figure to 15 percent. Uber collects 20 to 25 percent. Drivers said that with Ola they could make 50 Australian dollars, or $39, an hour compared with only $30 Australian an hour with Uber.“It’s a dramatic difference,” said Cheri Gristwood, an Uber driver in Perth, who was an early adopter of Ola. “I work my butt off, and with Ola I come home with a lot more.”Mr. Rohrsheim said that Uber had added incentives of its own last year, including paid wait time and a “no thanks” button that lets drivers refuse up to three rides in a row.“Uber isn’t Uber without driver partners,” he said, “and our success depends on their success.”Ola’s discounted commission has helped the company sign up 7,000 drivers so far. That is nowhere near the roughly 82,000 who drive for Uber, but more than double what Taxify started with in Sydney in December. Taxify did not respond to requests for comment.Many of the new Ola drivers help spread the word about the company. Cecilia Cornu, an Ola customer in Perth, first heard about the service when she asked an Uber driver about the two cellphones he had. One, he said, was for Ola.“He told me my ride would have been cheaper if I had booked it through Ola, as they were running a promotion with free rides,” she said.“As soon as I got to work,” she added, “I downloaded the Ola app.”Ola has not explicitly marketed itself to drivers or riders of Indian origin, but the company does expect that the awareness of its brand among Indians will help. About 1.9 percent of Australia’s population of 24 million was born in India, according to 2016 census data; many more are the children of Indian immigrants.AdvertisementThe Ola app still signals that connection: India sometimes shows up as the default country when someone in Australia signs up and adds his mobile phone number.Ola’s effort to shift from local to global remains imperfect. Some customers have reported problems with the app continuing to calculate rides after trips have ended. Mr. Ward, one of the Ola drivers in Sydney, said the company’s registration process was less streamlined than Uber’s.Ola’s expansion into Australia may also have a strategic goal beyond higher fares: protection against an unwanted takeover.The Japanese conglomerate SoftBank is Ola’s largest outside shareholder, and one of the largest shareholders in Uber. It has also invested in other ride-hailing companies around the world.SoftBank executives have made it clear that they would like to see Uber’s operations in some developing countries merge with local players to avoid a competitive blood bath, allowing the company to focus more intensively on higher-profit, developed markets.Ola recently changed its articles of incorporation to defend against any large investor from forcing a sale of the company. Bhavish Aggarwal, a founder of Ola and its chief executive, is busy trying to raise money from other investors to reduce SoftBank’s influence over his company’s destiny.Mr. Aggarwal declined several interview requests. “We are very excited about launching Ola in Australia and see immense potential for the ride-sharing ecosystem in a country which embraces new technology and innovation,” he said in a statement.At times, Uber has been a seller. It has left the ride-hailing business in China and Russia, selling its operations in those countries in exchange for stakes in the dominant local competitors.Mr. Meena predicted that Ola and Uber would eventually reach a similar arrangement in India, with the Australian operations of each company possibly added to the mix. Developing a robust Australian business could give Ola a bargaining chip in negotiations.Advertisement“Everyone is looking at capturing market share,” he said, “and then doing a deal with Uber.”Damien Cave reported from Sydney, and Vindu Goel from Mumbai, India. Giovanni Torre contributed reporting from Perth.Want more Australia coverage and discussion? Join us in our Facebook group, sign up for the weekly Australia Letter and start your day with the Australian Morning Briefing.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: On Uber’s Tail in Australia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CADE METZMARCH 19, 2018
LIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Uses parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists.RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles.ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITSMAIN COMPUTER (LOCATED IN TRUNK)Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.LIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Uses parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists.RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles.MAIN COMPUTER(LOCATED IN TRUNK)ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITSAnalyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.LIDAR UNITCAMERASConstantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.Uses parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists.RADAR SENSORSMeasure the distance from the car to obstacles.MAIN COMPUTER(LOCATED IN TRUNK)Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.ADDITIONALLIDAR UNITS12345LIDAR UNIT1Constantly spinning, it uses laser beams to generate a 360-degree image of the car’s surroundings.CAMERAS2Uses parallax from multiple images to find the distance to various objects. Cameras also detect traffic lights and signs, and help recognize moving objects like pedestrians and bicyclists.MAIN COMPUTER (LOCATED IN TRUNK)3Analyzes data from the sensors, and compares its stored maps to assess current conditions.RADAR SENSORS4Measure the distance from the car to various obstacles.ADDITIONAL LIDAR UNITS55On Sunday night, a woman died after she was hit by a self-driving car operated by Uber in Tempe, Ariz. The car was operating autonomously, though a safety driver was behind the wheel, according to a statement from the local police.Uber is one of many companies now testing this kind of vehicle in Arizona, California and other parts of the country. Waymo, the self-driving car company owned by Google’s parent company, Alphabet, has said it is also operating autonomous cars on the outskirts of Phoenix without a safety driver behind the wheel. On Monday, Uber said it was halting tests in Tempe, Pittsburgh, Toronto and San Francisco.Here is a brief guide to the way these cars operate.When designing these vehicles, companies like Uber and Waymo begin by building a three-dimensional map of a place. They equip ordinary automobiles with lidar sensors — “light detection and ranging” devices that measure distances using pulses of light — and as company workers drive these cars on local roads, these expensive devices collect the information needed to build the map.Once the map is complete, cars can use it to navigate the roads on their own. As they do, they continue to track their surroundings using lidar, and they compare what they see with what the map shows. In this way, the car gains a good idea of where it is in the world.AdvertisementLidar also alerts the cars to nearby objects, including other cars, pedestrians and bicyclists.Lidar works pretty well, but it can’t do everything. It provides information only about objects that are relatively close, which limits how fast cars can drive. Its measurements are not always sharp enough to distinguish one object from another. And when multiple autonomous vehicles drive the same road, their lidar signals can interfere with one another.AdvertisementEven in situations where lidar works well, these companies want backup systems in place. So most driverless cars are also equipped with a variety of other sensors.Cameras, radar and global positioning system antennas, the kind of GPS hardware that tells your smartphone where it is.With the GPS antennas, companies like Uber and Waymo are providing cars with even more information about where they are in the world. With cameras and radar sensors, they can gather additional information about nearby pedestrians, bicyclists, cars and other objects.Cameras also provide a way to recognize traffic lights, street signs, road markings and other signals that cars need to take into account.That is the hard part. Sifting through all that data and responding to it require a system of immense complexity.In some cases, engineers will write specific rules that define how a car should respond in a particular situation. If a Waymo car detects a red light, for example, it is programmed to stop.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But a team of engineers could never write rules for every situation a car could encounter. So companies like Waymo and Uber are beginning to rely on “machine learning” systems that can learn behavior by analyzing vast amounts of data describing the country’s roadways.Waymo now uses a system that learns to identify pedestrians by analyzing thousands of photos that contain people walking or running across or near roads.AdvertisementIt is unclear what happened in Tempe. But these cars are designed so that if one system fails, another will kick in. In all likelihood, the Uber cars used lidar and radar as well as cameras to detect and respond to nearby objects, including pedestrians.Self-driving cars can have difficulty duplicating the subtle, nonverbal communication that goes on between pedestrians and drivers. An autonomous vehicle, after all, can’t make eye contact with someone at a crosswalk.“It is still important to realize how hard these problems are,” said Ken Goldberg, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, who specializes in robotics. “That is the thing that many don’t understand, just because these are things humans do so effortlessly.”These cars are designed to work at night, when some sensors can operate just as well in the daytime. Some companies even argue that it is easier for these cars to operate at night.But there are conditions that these cars are still struggling to master. They do not work as well in heavy precipitation. They can have trouble in tunnels and on bridges. And they may have difficulty dealing with heavy traffic.Follow Cade Metz on twitter: @CadeMetz.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CADE METZMARCH 15, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — There is little doubt that the Defense Department needs help from Silicon Valley’s biggest companies as it pursues work on artificial intelligence. The question is whether the people who work at those companies are willing to cooperate.On Thursday, Robert O. Work, a former deputy secretary of defense, announced that he is teaming up with the Center for a New American Security, an influential Washington think tank that specializes in national security, to create a task force of former government officials, academics and representatives from private industry. Their goal is to explore how the federal government should embrace A.I. technology and work better with big tech companies and other organizations.There is a growing sense of urgency to the question of what the United States is doing in artificial intelligence. China has vowed to become the world’s leader in A.I. by 2030, committing billions of dollars to the effort. Like many other officials from government and industry, Mr. Work believes the United States risks falling behind.“The question is, how should the United States respond to this challenge?” he said. “This is a Sputnik moment.”AdvertisementThe military and intelligence communities have long played a big role in the technology industry and had close ties with many of Silicon Valley’s early tech giants. David Packard, Hewlett-Packard’s co-founder, even served as the deputy secretary of defense under President Richard M. Nixon.AdvertisementBut those relations have soured in recent years — at least with the rank and file of some better-known companies. In 2013, documents leaked by the former defense contractor Edward J. Snowden revealed the breadth of spying on Americans by intelligence services, including monitoring the users of several large internet companies.Two years ago, that antagonism grew worse after the F.B.I. demanded that Apple create special software to help it gain access to a locked iPhone that had belonged to a gunman involved in a mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif.“In the wake of Edward Snowden, there has been a lot of concern over what it would mean for Silicon Valley companies to work with the national security community,” said Gregory Allen, an adjunct fellow with the Center for a New American Security. “These companies are — understandably — very cautious about these relationships.”The Pentagon needs help on A.I. from Silicon Valley because that’s where the talent is. The tech industry’s biggest companies have been hoarding A.I. expertise, sometimes offering multimillion-dollar pay packages that the government could never hope to match.Mr. Work was the driving force behind the creation of Project Maven, the Defense Department’s sweeping effort to embrace artificial intelligence. His new task force will include Terah Lyons, the executive director of the Partnership on AI, an industry group that includes many of Silicon Valley’s biggest companies.Mr. Work will lead the 18-member task force with Andrew Moore, the dean of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University. Mr. Moore has warned that too much of the country’s computer science talent is going to work at America’s largest internet companies.With tech companies gobbling up all that talent, who will train the next generation of A.I. experts? Who will lead government efforts?Advertisement“Even if the U.S. does have the best A.I. companies, it is not clear they are going to be involved in national security in a substantive way,” Mr. Allen said.Google illustrates the challenges that big internet companies face in working more closely with the Pentagon. Google’s former executive chairman, Eric Schmidt, who is still a member of the board of directors of its parent company, Alphabet, also leads the Defense Innovation Board, a federal advisory committee that recommends closer collaboration with industry on A.I. technologies.Last week, two news outlets revealed that the Defense Department had been working with Google in developing A.I. technology that can analyze aerial footage captured by flying drones. The effort was part of Project Maven, led by Mr. Work. Some employees were angered that the company was contributing to military work.Google runs two of the best A.I. research labs in the world — Google Brain in California and DeepMind in London.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Top researchers inside both Google A.I. labs have expressed concern over the use of A.I. by the military. When Google acquired DeepMind, the company agreed to set up an internal board that would help ensure that the lab’s technology was used in an ethical way. And one of the lab’s founders, Demis Hassabis, has explicitly said its A.I. would not be used for military purposes.Google acknowledged in a statement that the military use of A.I. “raises valid concerns” and said it was working on policies around the use of its so-called machine learning technologies.Among A.I. researchers and other technologists, there is widespread fear that today’s machine learning techniques could put too much power in dangerous hands. A recent report from prominent labs and think tanks in both the United States and Britain detailed the risks, including problems with weapons and surveillance equipment.Google said it was working with the Defense Department to build technology for “non-offensive uses only.” And Mr. Work said the government explored many technologies that did not involve “lethal force.” But it is unclear where Google and other top internet companies will draw the line.“This is a conversation we have to have,” Mr. Work said.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Pentagon Looks to Silicon Valley for Help on Artificial Intelligence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byThe ShiftBy Kevin RooseIn 2007, a young Mark Zuckerberg stood on a stage in San Francisco and announced that Facebook was throwing open its doors.No longer, he said, would Facebook be a closed-off software product like every other social network. Instead, it would become an open platform and invite outside developers to build apps and programs on top of it.“We want to make Facebook into something of an operating system,” Mr. Zuckerberg told a reporter.At the time, the announcement drew little notice outside the programming world. Developers quickly went to work making fun and quirky apps that plugged into Facebook — early hits included “Rendezbook,” a kind of proto-Tinder that allowed users to match with each other for “random flings,” and CampusRank, which allowed college students to nominate their peers for yearbook-type awards.Later, popular games like FarmVille arrived, and apps like Tinder and Spotify began allowing their users to log in using their Facebook credentials. In some ways, it was a fair trade. Facebook got to weave itself more deeply into users’ internet habits, and the outside app developers got access to a big audience and valuable data about their users. In all, millions of apps have been created with Facebook’s open platform tools.Through it all, Facebook’s users were mostly unfazed. Sure, these apps collected data about their lives. But they seemed convenient and harmless, and, really, what could go wrong?Today, more than a decade later, the consequences of Facebook’s laissez-faire approach are becoming clear. Over the weekend, The New York Times reported that Cambridge Analytica, a British consulting firm, improperly acquired the private data of about roughly 50 million Facebook users, and used it to target voters on behalf of the Trump campaign during the 2016 presidential election.What happened with Cambridge Analytica wasn’t technically a data breach, since this trove of personal information wasn’t stolen from Facebook’s servers. Rather, it was given away freely to the maker of a Facebook personality quiz app called “thisisyourdigitallife.”That app, which was developed by a University of Cambridge professor, collected data about the 270,000 people who installed it, along with data about their Facebook friends, totaling 50 million people in all. The professor, Aleksandr Kogan, then gave the data he had harvested to Cambridge Analytica.Technically, only this last step violated Facebook’s rules, which prohibit selling or giving away data collected by a third-party app. The rest was business as usual. Third-party apps collect vast amounts of detailed personal information about Facebook users every day, including their ages, location, pages they’ve liked and groups they belong to. Users can opt out of sharing specific pieces of information, but it’s unclear how many do.This kind of broad data collection is not only allowed but encouraged by Facebook, which wants to keep developers happily building on top of its platform. Permissiveness is a feature, as they say, not a bug.But in the wake of incidents like the data leak to Cambridge Analytica, some are questioning the costs of such loose policies on an influential platform with 2.2 billion registered users.“It seems insane that you can make haphazard decisions about so many people’s data,” said Can Duruk, a technology consultant and software engineer. Facebook, he said, was “extremely lax with what kind of data they allowed people to get.”In a Facebook post on Monday, Andrew Bosworth, a Facebook vice president, admitted that that thinking may have been a mistake.“We thought that every app could be social,” Mr. Bosworth wrote. “Your calendar should have your events and your friends birthdays, your maps should know where your friends live, your address book should show their pictures. It was a reasonable vision but it didn’t materialize the way we had hoped.”An early clue about the potential for misuse of Facebook’s third-party developer tools came in 2010 when my colleague Emily Steel, then at The Wall Street Journal, reported that an online tracking company, RapLeaf, was collecting and reselling data it had gathered from third-party Facebook apps to marketing firms and political consultants. In response, Facebook cut off RapLeaf’s data access and said it would “dramatically limit” the misuse of its users’ personal information by outside parties.But preventing data-hungry developers from exploiting Facebook’s treasure trove of personal information remained challenging. In 2015, Facebook removed the ability of third-party developers to collect detailed information about the friends of users who had installed an app, citing privacy concerns. (Cambridge Analytica’s data trove, which included this type of information, was gathered in 2014, before the change.) Facebook has also taken away tools used by developers to create games and quizzes that barraged users with annoying notifications.But the core functions of Facebook’s open platform tool are still intact. There are still many third-party apps like “thisisyourdigitallife” out there, vacuuming up intimate data about Facebook users. That data doesn’t disappear, and Facebook has no real recourse to stop it from falling into the wrong hands.Not all open data access is used irresponsibly. Researchers and nongovernmental organizations have used Facebook’s third-party development tools to respond to natural disasters. And many of the functions that internet users depend on — for example, the ability to import their digital address books into a new messaging app — are possible thanks only to the tools that allow for third-party development known as application programming interfaces, or A.P.I.s.“Everything we depend on uses A.P.I.s,” said Kin Lane, a software engineer who maintains a website called API Evangelist. “They’re in your home, in your business, in your car. It’s how these platforms innovate and do cool, interesting things.”In Facebook’s case, permissive data policies were also good for business. Third-party developers built millions of apps on top of Facebook’s platform, giving Facebook users more reasons to spend time on the site and generating more ad revenue for the company. Restricting access to data would limit Facebook’s usefulness to developers and could drive them to build on a rival platform instead, making those products better.In this context, it’s even less surprising that Dr. Kogan and Cambridge Analytica were able to use a silly personality quiz to collect information about millions of Americans. After all, why else would the quiz be there?Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Cade MetzKERNERSVILLE, N.C. — As soon as the first robot arrived at a FedEx shipping hub in the heart of North Carolina tobacco country early last year, talk of pink slips was in the air.Workers had been driving the “tuggers” that navigated large and irregular items across the vast concrete floor of the 630,000-square-foot freight depot since it opened in 2011.Their initial robotic colleague drew a three-dimensional digital map of the place as it tugged freight around. A few months later, three other robots — nicknamed Lucky, Dusty and Ned in a nod to the movie “¡Three Amigos!” — arrived, using the digital map to get around on their own.By March, they were joined by two others, Jefe and El Guapo. Horns honking and warning lights flashing, the autonomous vehicles snaked through the hub, next to about 20 tuggers that still needed humans behind the wheel.The robot team, part of the automation trend rippling through the worlds of shipping and online retailing, was the first significant deployment of mobile robots inside a FedEx hub. Amazon and our e-commerce shopping habits are big reasons it’s happening.In 2012, Amazon acquired a robotics company called Kiva. Since then, it has moved many of that company’s robots into its network of more than 210 fulfillment and package-sorting centers. Now, many Amazon partners and competitors are moving in the same direction, including big shipping and logistics operations like FedEx and DHL.But what has happened at the FedEx hub may be a surprise to people who fear that they are about to be replaced by a smart machine: a robot might take your role, but not necessarily your job.Yes, the robots replaced a few jobs right away. And in time, they will replace about 25 jobs in a facility that employs about 1,300 people. But the hub creates about 100 new jobs every year — and a robot work force still seems like the distant future.“Everyone will have a job,” said Galen Steele, the senior manager who oversees the depot. “It just might be in a different place.”As people have become more comfortable buying online, big and bulky goods like car tires, canoes and boxes as big as a coffin have accounted for an increasing percentage of the packages flowing through FedEx’s distribution centers, said Ted Dengel, who oversees operations technology for the FedEx Ground network, which includes 35 shipping hubs across the United States and Canada, including the facility in North Carolina.These ungainly items can’t fit on a conveyor belt. That’s where the robots, which cost several thousand dollars and are made by a Massachusetts company called Vecna, come in.Kernersville, the home of the FedEx hub, sits in the middle of the North Carolina Piedmont, the plateau between the coastal lowlands in the east and the mountains in the west, in an area that used to be known as the Tobacco Road. In the 20th century, it embraced textile and apparel manufacturing. But as automation has increased inside factories and textile work has moved overseas, the local economy has sputtered.“In the middle of a boom elsewhere, things really aren’t that great here,” said Andrew Brod, senior research fellow at the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, who tracks the local economy. The local unemployment rate is 4.6 percent, modestly above the 4.1 percent national rate.Mr. Brod estimates that the arrival of distribution centers like the one FedEx opened in 2011 has provided a boost, creating as many as 120,000 jobs, a majority of which go to workers with no more than a high school education.And Mr. Steele, the manager of the FedEx facility in Kernersville, did not envision pink slips when he saw the first Vecna robot.“I understand people thinking this will take their jobs,” Mr. Steele said on a recent Monday morning inside the hub. “But over time, they realize that is not the case at all.”But those fears were not unfounded. In a recent report, the McKinsey Global Institute, a business research organization, predicted that about one-third of workers in the United States will have to switch occupations because of technology-driven automation by 2030.“What people underestimate is the time needed for this to happen,” said Michael Chui, a partner with McKinsey.Workers who once spent part of their time driving tuggers might spend more time lifting boxes onto trailers or stacking those boxes inside delivery trucks bound for other parts of the country. But over all, the work force inside the hub will grow, not shrink, Mr. Steele said.For Mr. Steele, a 24-year FedEx veteran, this is just another step on a long and gradual climb toward greater automation — a march that began decades ago with automatic scanners and sorters. The North Carolina hub is already highly automated; more than 80 percent of packages move across the facility through a system of conveyor belts, scanners and sorters that needs no human labor.When a truck filled with packages arrives, workers load the bulky items onto trailers hitched to a robot. Once these trailers are full, they press a button that sends the vehicle on its way. Equipped with laser-based sensors, cameras and other navigation tools, the robots stop when people or other vehicles get in the way. In some cases, they even figure out a new way to go.But most of the work in this facility still requires human dexterity. Modern robots are not nimble enough to unload a truck filled with randomly sized boxes or pack those boxes onto a truck at the other end of the hub.“People are remarkably good at handling lots of different shapes and amazingly good at fitting those things into tight spaces,” said Dave Clark, who oversees robotics work at Amazon. “Machines, today, can’t keep pace.”These companies, however, will continue to automate as much of the process as they can. The online retail and shipping markets continue to grow, and with Amazon setting new standards for fast and inexpensive delivery, everyone else has to keep up. That means more shipping centers and more workers — both machines and humans.The need for automation is particularly acute in areas with low unemployment. RK Logistics, a small company that runs a shipping warehouse in Livermore, Calif., — with the help of three mobile robots — has had trouble hiring. The pool of available workers is low — the local unemployment rate is around 2.7 percent — and it is hard to keep up with the salaries Amazon is paying in nearby Tracy. “We have 30 positions open at any given time,” said Rock Magnan, the company’s president.And the desire of companies to rely on robots isn’t abating. FedEx is already exploring the use of robotics in the concrete yards outside its hubs, where workers move freight with forklifts and other vehicles, Mr. Dengel said. On the second floor of the North Carolina hub, where most packages race down conveyor belts, the company is preparing to install a system that can automatically recognize packages that need special handling. In the past, that also required a paid worker.After testing five Vecna robots over the past several months, FedEx said it will begin testing 20 more with an eye toward replacing all the existing tuggers. It may then expand the program into other hubs across the country. DHL has reached a similar point, after putting mobile robots from two start-ups, Locus and Fetch, into two small parts of its worldwide operations.With a six-year head start, Amazon is much further along. Mr. Clark said the company has deployed more than 100,000 Kiva robots across 26 distribution centers in the United States, Canada, Europe and Japan. And about 30 robotic arms, built by outside companies, are helping to lift and stow standard containers in a handful of facilities.But even inside Amazon, the need for human labor is growing much faster than the robot work force. Since acquiring Kiva and deploying its first robots, Amazon has expanded its work force by 300,000 people.“The biggest problem is not having enough people and I don’t think that is going to change,” Mr. Clark said.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetzAdvertisement
Bits By                     
 KEVIN ROOSE
 
MARCH 16, 2018
Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Hi, it’s me again. Let’s get to it.The biggest story in tech this week was the Security and Exchange Commission’s announcement of fraud charges against Theranos, the smoke-and-mirrors biotech company; its founder, Elizabeth Holmes; and its former president, Ramesh Balwani. As part of a settlement, Holmes has agreed to pay a $500,000 fine; surrender much of her stake in Theranos, which was once valued at $4.5 billion; and accept a decade-long ban on being an officer or a director of a public company. The settlement doesn’t involve any jail time or admission of guilt, although the company is also facing a separate criminal investigation.The complaint, which you should really read if you’re interested in the anatomy of a corporate downfall, contains stunning accusations. They include:■ Theranos exaggerated its revenue by 1,000 times, telling at least one potential investor that it had made $108 million in 2014, when its actual revenue was around $100,000.■ Theranos employees wrote flattering reports about the company’s own products, put the logos of pharmaceutical companies on them and used them to imply that those companies had endorsed Theranos’s technology.Advertisement■ Theranos was paid millions of dollars by Walgreens (in the complaint, it’s listed as “Pharmacy A”) to roll out testing services at its stores. When its own diagnostic tools weren’t ready in time, Theranos passed third-party testers off as its own.Advertisement■ Theranos repeatedly lied to reporters from publications like Wired, Fortune and The Wall Street Journal about how many tests its proprietary machines were capable of running, and gave those misleading articles to investors as proof of the company’s accomplishments.This is juicy, Hollywood-ready stuff, and the complaint makes it clear that Theranos — which was once a legitimate Silicon Valley darling, with more than $700 million in venture capital raised from prominent investors — is one of the biggest scandals to hit the tech industry in years.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The complaint also helped explain the precise nature of Theranos’s deception, and how it differed from other Silicon Valley companies that have struggled to bring their products to market.Unlike a shady cryptocurrency initial coin offering, Theranos didn’t start off as a sham. Holmes was trying to create something real and useful, a blood-testing machine that would be able to run hundreds of different tests on a machine roughly the size of a desktop computer, using much smaller samples of blood than a traditional machine. Had it worked, it would have been a legitimately important innovation.The problem is that the miniLab, as Theranos’s testing machine came to be called, didn’t work. Or, at least, it wasn’t capable of handling all the tests Theranos had promised it would, within the time frame it had agreed to. According to the complaint:But as September 2013 approached — the date for the launch of the first phase of the rollout of Theranos services in Pharmacy A stores — it became clear to Holmes that the miniLab would not be ready. At the time, Theranos had not fully integrated other testing methods into the miniLab and had not completed the scientific verification steps needed to make any of its blood tests available on the miniLab for patient testing.On its own, this is nothing unusual. Production delays, especially of complex hardware products, are common in Silicon Valley, and overeager marketing and sales departments often get ahead of engineering teams. Apple is notorious for tinkering with new iPhone designs right up until the factory deadline, and practically every major hardware company has shown off products in onstage demos that weren’t yet shelf-ready.But according to the complaint, instead of asking Walgreens for more time, Theranos decided to lie. Holmes and Balwani told their engineers to modify standard blood-testing machines to make them look like the company’s new miniLabs. They then misled Walgreens executives and potential investors about how their tests were being performed, the regulators said, while furiously trying to get the miniLabs ready.What’s so odd about the Theranos story is that failure and delays are not just common in the tech industry, they’re practically expected. Apps routinely die on arrival, hardware doesn’t pan out, partnerships fall through. Ideally, these things happen before you raise hundreds of millions of dollars in venture capital and strike distribution deals with major retail chains, but even if they don’t, they’re generally not the end of the world. (For an example of a company that raised millions of dollars for an overhyped product and then imploded without accusations of fraud, look at Clinkle.)AdvertisementIt would have been embarrassing, and possibly career-damaging, for Holmes to admit to her investors that the miniLab was not going to work out, renege on the deals she had struck with chains like Walgreens and give back some of the money she had already raised. But it was an option, and one that might have kept her out of the legal mess that followed.Instead, according to the complaint, she constructed an elaborate fiction that she would spend the rest of her tenure trying to keep alive, and that would lead her down the path to this week’s charges. In other words, Holmes’s mistake was that she refused to do what so many other entrepreneurs do every day, and come to terms with failure.Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer-at-large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DON CLARKMARCH 13, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — President Trump appeared to bail out Qualcomm on Monday by blocking Broadcom’s hostile takeover attempt of the chip maker, citing national security fears about China.But Qualcomm’s management team may not be out of the woods.Another arm of the United States government, the Federal Trade Commission, contends that some of Qualcomm’s key business practices are illegal. So does Apple, the most influential trendsetter in wireless phones.Such legal threats, and some signs of shareholder support for Broadcom’s $117 billion bid, suggest that Qualcomm’s chief executive, Steven Mollenkopf, may still be in the hot seat. That means the company, which is based in San Diego, may need to take new steps to assuage investors unhappy with its performance.“The feedback on the ground was a manifest dissatisfaction with the management team,” Edward Snyder, an analyst at Charter Equity Research, said of what he had heard from Qualcomm’s shareholders. “Qualcomm is in a tight spot at this point.”AdvertisementA Qualcomm spokeswoman declined to comment. Directors will likely give Mr. Mollenkopf more time to execute on promises to increase Qualcomm’s profits, said a person close to the company who declined to be named because discussions are confidential.AdvertisementChanges have already been taking place. This month, Qualcomm’s board had announced the replacement of Paul Jacobs, a son of one of the company’s founders, as executive chairman in favor of an independent chairman. It has also made plans to trim $1 billion in expenses and raise its dividend by 9 percent, further attempts to convince shareholders that management intends to improve returns.Qualcomm had earlier decided to reshape its business by buying NXP Semiconductors, a $44 billion transaction that would take Qualcomm into many chips used in cars and other products. Regulators in China have yet to approve that transaction, and Mr. Trump’s order could prompt them to delay or block the deal, said Chris Caso, an analyst at Raymond James.The chip maker will also be closely scrutinized for any progress on the legal front — particularly making peace with Apple, which has been withholding patent payments after starting a court battle over Qualcomm’s licensing practices. The company is also under the microscope for how well it can exploit the next generation of cellular networks, based on a technology known as 5G.Qualcomm has led cellular transitions before. The technology pioneer’s chips manage communications and run apps in smartphones. But the company earns most of its profits by licensing patents to handset makers, using a royalty formula based on a percentage of the wholesale price of the phones.That two-part structure has triggered many scraps with antitrust authorities over the years. Hock Tan, Broadcom’s chief executive, repeatedly said Qualcomm’s business model was broken, vowing to move quickly to change it and end the company’s legal woes.But Qualcomm says patent royalties are essential to allow the company to fund development of new wireless technologies years before chips incorporating them hit the market. The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, a government panel that recommended that Mr. Trump block the deal, argued that Broadcom’s strategy of limiting spending on long-term research and development could impede Qualcomm’s leadership and aid Chinese rivals like Huawei.“Changes to Qualcomm’s business model would likely negatively impact the core R&D expenditures of national security concern,” the committee, known as Cfius, wrote in a March 5 letter to the companies.AdvertisementThe Federal Trade Commission attacked some patent-related practices in an antitrust suit filed against Qualcomm in January 2017. The suit said, among other things, that Qualcomm got an unfair advantage in negotiating patent licenses because its customers feared it could cut off supplies of chips they needed to keep making handsets. As a result, the F.T.C. argued, the company can press for higher royalties than other patent holders charge.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Qualcomm has denied wrongdoing, and is vigorously contesting the F.T.C. and Apple cases, as well as others in Europe, South Korea, Japan and Taiwan.Broadcom may face fewer repercussions after its apparent loss in the four-month takeover battle. The company, which specializes in buying chip makers and selling off less-profitable pieces, may turn to other acquisition targets soon, analysts said.Broadcom is scheduled to report quarterly financial results on Thursday. The company did not immediately return a request for comment.Beyond the two chip giants, Mr. Trump’s blocking of the Broadcom bid raises already high barriers to foreign takeovers in the industry.Cfius has repeatedly blocked semiconductor acquisitions by companies in China since 2016. But Mr. Trump broke new ground by taking action against a Singapore-based company that was in the process of moving its headquarters to the United States.Members of Congress are now considering even tougher legislation to impede American companies looking to set up joint ventures in China, a frequent requirement for doing business there but one that critics feel can transfer sensitive technology to foreign rivals.“The entire system is going to be under a lot more scrutiny,” said Robert Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a policy think tank. “I think we’re living in a new world now.”Follow Don Clark on Twitter: @donal888.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Qualcomm Remains ‘in a Tight Spot’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DON CLARK and CECILIA KANGMARCH 6, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Being at the forefront of a new technology often provides a strategic advantage. That helps explain why there is so much scrapping now by companies and countries over a next wave of wireless technology known as 5G.5G is shorthand for fifth-generation wireless technology, and it essentially brings ultrafast wireless speeds to people. By sending billions of bits of data per second, up from peaks of hundreds of millions today, 5G could cut the time to download a movie to seconds. Other 5G features would allow autonomous cars and industrial equipment to reliably exchange short bursts of data at blinding speed.Technology companies including Qualcomm, Intel and China’s Huawei have been working on developing 5G technology and standards. But even with 5G still in its infancy, the United States government underscored its importance with an unprecedented move this week to intervene in Broadcom’s $117 billion bid for Qualcomm.In a letter on Monday, the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States said it would investigate the proposed deal, partly because it was concerned that if Broadcom bought Qualcomm, it would weaken Qualcomm and “leave an opening for China to expand its influence on the 5G standard-setting process.”AdvertisementBroadcom, which is based in Singapore but is planning a move to the United States, swiftly rejected the idea that it would push 5G development less aggressively. “There can be no question that an American Broadcom-Qualcomm combination will provide far more resources for investments and development to that end,” a Broadcom spokesman said.AdvertisementCompanies still have room to influence 5G technology because it has not yet been deployed. As of now, a group called 3GPP — staffed by engineers from many companies — has been defining the specifications so that devices that operate with 5G technology can “talk” to one another. The group delivered its first major set of standards in December.Mike Thelander, an analyst with Signals Research Group, predicted that American carriers will have some 5G services operating in late 2018 but that smartphones that use the technology won’t be ready until 2019.Qualcomm has long been one of the most active contributors of cellular technology, playing a particularly influential role in 3G technology as well as current 4G networks. Yet the effort to develop 5G standards has brought many new players to the fore, including Huawei, a relative newcomer to the field.Huawei, which makes gear like cellular base stations and other key equipment to operate 5G networks, has been largely blackballed from the United States on national security grounds. But the Chinese company’s sales have surged elsewhere, such as Europe, and Huawei has taken a leading role in submitting technology for inclusion in 5G technical standards.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cfius letter estimated that Huawei owned 10 percent of the patents essential for 5G networks. A Huawei spokesman said it had been working on 5G since 2009, having spent $600 million on related research already and committing $800 million more in 2018 alone.Many American carriers also buy cellular equipment from Sweden’s Ericsson, which has long helped set cellular standards and estimates that it has been working on 5G for a decade. Erik Ekudden, the company’s chief technology officer, said its technical contributions had topped those of any other company.Other major contributors include South Korea’s Samsung Electronics, Finland’s Nokia and several companies in Japan. Intel, which has been determined to reduce Qualcomm’s market dominance in wireless chips, has also significantly stepped up efforts to influence 5G standards.AdvertisementOfficials appointed by President Trump have pointed to regulatory barriers that have kept the United States behind nations like China, which has a national plan for 5G networks using technology by Huawei and other Chinese companies like ZTE.Last month, Brendan Carr, a Republican member of the Federal Communications Commission, announced a regulatory plan that would allow wireless carriers to bypass environmental assessments for the construction of 5G wireless infrastructure.“The rest of the world is very conscious of our leadership in 4G, and they are questioning whether we will have the resolve to take the deregulatory steps necessary to extend our leadership into 5G,” Mr. Carr said.Ajit Pai, the commission’s chairman, said last week in a speech to global telecommunications executives and regulators that the agency was prepared to make more spectrum available for those networks. The airwaves would need to be approved by Congress before companies could use them.At last week’s Mobile World Congress, which is one of the biggest wireless trade shows, companies were quick to provide evidence of their leadership in 5G. Huawei, for example, demonstrated the first cellular base station that complies with the new 3GPP specifications, said Will Townsend, an analyst at Moor Insights and Strategy, a research firm.Still, others at the event, which was held in Barcelona, Spain, said it was hard to top Qualcomm’s presence. The San Diego company, which gets much of its profits from licensing patents rather than selling chips, listed a string of technologies that it has shaped for 5G, with obscure descriptions like “Massive Mimo,” “flexible slot-based framework” and “scalable O.F.D.M.-based air interface.”“If you walked through Qualcomm’s booth at Mobile World Congress, it is an amazing thing, in terms of the breadth of the technology they show and the quality of people they have staffing it,” said Robert DiFazio, a vice president in the research arm of InterDigital, another company that contributes to cellular standards.Follow Don Clark and Cecilia Kang on Twitter: @donal888 and @ceciliakang.Don Clark reported from San Francisco, and Cecilia Kang from Washington.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2018, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: A Struggle To Shape The Future Of Wireless.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

 Kevin Roose
 

THE SHIFT
MARCH 14, 2018
Several years ago, a plastic figurine began appearing around Google’s offices, an aging alien with gray hair, a Google Glass headset and a sign that read, “Get Off My Lawn!”The doll, a special edition of Google’s Android mascot, was a jokey tribute to the Greyglers, a group for the 40-and-over crowd at Google, and the doll hinted at how it felt to be an older worker in tech: funny, self-conscious, a little out of place.The Greyglers still exist, but they’re no longer such an anomaly. Sundar Pichai, Google’s 45-year-old chief executive, would fit in the group. So would Larry Page and Sergey Brin, who co-founded the search engine as graduate students two decades ago; Susan Wojcicki, an early employee who runs YouTube; and most of the company’s other high-ranking executives.For years, the self-appointed leaders of Silicon Valley were young people — mostly men — with age-appropriate behavior. They adopted brash mottos like “move fast and break things” and eschewed work-life balance in favor of all-night hacking sessions in offices that looked more like college dorms. Their successes were cheered, and their sins were shrugged off as the cost of innovation.Advertisement“Young people are just smarter,” Mark Zuckerberg crowed back in 2007, when he was the 22-year-old wunderkind behind a fledgling social network.AdvertisementNow, of course, Facebook is a global powerhouse, and the company’s pursuit of growth at all costs has led to some truly dire consequences around the world and fueled a larger backlash against tech. At the same time, Mr. Zuckerberg has disproved his own theory. Now 33, he is still not old by any measure (except perhaps his own). But he is a smarter and more self-aware leader than he was a decade ago, and he has shown more willingness to accept responsibility for the company’s mistakes. After years of moving fast and breaking things, Facebook is at least acknowledging its flaws and trying, albeit clumsily, to fix them. That’s a start.There’s a lot of growing up happening in today’s tech industry, where former whiz kids made their fortunes and are now settling down, starting families and starting to think about their legacies. Tech’s work force remains young — according to PayScale, the median employee at the five largest tech companies is around 30, roughly a decade younger than the median American worker — but the industry’s leaders have gotten older, and are seemingly more attuned to the power they wield.“Five years ago, there was no talk of empathy or moral responsibility,” said Om Malik, a venture capitalist who has written about the tech industry for years.Certain corners of the start-up world, such as cryptocurrency ventures, are still filled with reckless renegades. But the industry’s largest companies are now mature, bureaucratic businesses whose daily decisions are heavily scrutinized. That’s a good thing, since the issues many of these companies now face — global information wars, regulation and privacy concerns, diversity and sexual harassment challenges, and worries about technology’s effects on billions of people’s brains — will require thoughtful, grown-up solutions.In recent weeks, I spoke to numerous industry insiders about this coming of age. Here’s what I learned.Tech leaders are becoming more realistic and introspective.Gregor Hochmuth, 33, an early engineer at Instagram, said some of today’s internet giants had grown up with positive-thinking cultures that left them vulnerable to abuse.“The idea that a product could make your life worse was not in anyone’s perception,” said Mr. Hochmuth, who left Instagram in 2014.AdvertisementThat perspective helps explain the shock many founders felt when the internet grew into the foundation of global culture and commerce, and products they had built as quirky experiments became pieces of critical infrastructure.“No one was thinking about ‘Wow, in 15 years, billions of people are going to be using this site every day,’” said Andrew McCollum, 34, one of Facebook’s founders, who left the company in 2006 and is now the chief executive of Philo, an internet TV company. “The goal was ‘How do we create something great?’ — not ‘What’s our plan for world domination?’”Twitter, another company started by young idealists, is the latest tech giant to put itself under the microscope. In a series of tweets early this month, Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, said the company was trying to improve the health and civility of its platform after years of neglect.“We didn’t fully predict or understand the real-world negative consequences,” Mr. Dorsey, 41, wrote. “We acknowledge that now, and are determined to find holistic and fair solutions.”You could chalk these statements up to self-interest. But Maureen Taylor, a leadership communication expert who frequently coaches tech executives, said this kind of earnest self-examination was becoming more frequent among founders.“As you get older, you realize your responsibilities are bigger,” she said. “People are becoming very thoughtful about the ramifications of technology, and remembering that the whole point was to make the world a better place.”Their new outlook is making them more protective and risk-averse.The tech industry’s stereotypical accessory used to be the hoodie. Today, it might as well be the Baby Bjorn. There are a lot of new parents among tech elites, including Mr. Zuckerberg and Kevin Systrom, 34, a co-founder of Instagram. (Evan Spiegel, the 27-year-old chief executive of Snap, is expecting his first child this year.) And parenthood seems to be shaping their attitudes. In an interview with The New York Times this year, Mr. Zuckerberg cited his children as one of the reasons he was so focused on fixing Facebook.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s important to me that when Max and August grow up that they feel like what their father built was good for the world,” Mr. Zuckerberg said.AdvertisementChamath Palihapitiya, 41, an early Facebook executive who now leads the venture capital firm Social Capital, told me that becoming a father had transformed his outlook on technology. He avoids screen time for his children, and is more wary of the tools he helped build.“Before fatherhood, I believed that enabling my children to grow and explore through technology would be an obvious edge and something I’d support,” Mr. Palihapitiya said. “Increasingly, what I see is a detached generation of kids living behind screens.”As their executives pursue personal growth, some of Silicon Valley’s large companies are also professionalizing their workplaces by cutting back on frivolous perks and enforcing stricter rules on sexual harassment and other forms of employee misconduct. (You could call this the “Uber effect.”)Industries run by older executives aren’t necessarily paragons of virtue, either. (See: Wall Street.) But there is something to be said for caution, and tech companies now seem aware that they’re playing with live ammunition.“You become more responsible when you have more to lose,” Mr. Malik said.It also may make their companies more vulnerable.Silicon Valley works a bit like a forest — as old trees decay and die, they decompose and fertilize the next generation of growth. And today’s largest tech companies are beginning to show their age. Facebook is 14 years old, and Twitter is 12. Google, at 20, is now nearly as old as Microsoft was in 1998, when Google was started.The tech industry’s maturity may be a sign of cyclical renewal. Fifteen years ago, Larry Ellison — the billionaire co-founder of Oracle, and the enfant terrible of an earlier generation of tech moguls — denounced what he saw as Silicon Valley’s slow-footed stagnation. (The tech industry was “as large as it’s going to be,” he predicted.)Mr. Ellison was wrong, of course. Tech wasn’t stagnant, but the generation of mature companies that included Oracle was on its way to being eclipsed by newer and scrappier ventures.If history is any indication, that cycle will repeat itself and a new crop of young tech leaders will emerge. But hopefully they’ll learn from the mistakes made by their predecessors. Technology is too important now, and we can’t afford another generation of naïveté.Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Whiz Kids Grow Up, for the Better.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CECILIA KANGMARCH 15, 2018
WASHINGTON — How you watch “Game of Thrones” and CNN is about to have its day in court.The Justice Department’s bid to block AT&T’s $85 billion merger with Time Warner is set to head to trial next week, in one of the most anticipated antitrust battles in years.The deal, if approved, would create a media giant that combines AT&T’s nationwide mobile and satellite distribution networks with Time Warner’s huge collection of popular movies and television offerings, including “Game of Thrones” on HBO, news on CNN and college and professional basketball on TNT. The central question of the trial: Would that combination hurt consumers or help them?How the judge rules in the case has the potential to shape the fast-changing business of video, as consumers increasing turn to streaming services instead of traditional cable TV. AT&T, a nationwide satellite TV and wireless provider, argues that pairing up with a major content company is necessary to compete against the reach and resources of tech giants like Netflix and Amazon. But the Justice Department says the deal would hurt upstart streaming services and lead to higher prices for consumers.The decision will frame the competition among Silicon Valley, Hollywood and Madison Avenue, while also establishing what kinds of corporate mergers — in the media industry and beyond — will be permitted in the years to come.Advertisement“This court case is so important it is hard to know where to start,” said Amy Yong, a research analyst at the investment firm Macquarie. “This case is at the heart of what we do in our everyday lives.”AdvertisementThe Justice Department’s move to block the deal in November took Wall Street and the entertainment industry by surprise. Many executives and lawyers thought President Trump’s administration would usher in a hands-off approach to antitrust enforcement, despite Mr. Trump’s criticism of the deal on the campaign trail.Instead, the Justice Department, under its antitrust chief Makan Delrahim, moved aggressively, demanding the sale of major parts of the businesses before a deal could go through. AT&T responded by suggesting that Mr. Delrahim’s decision was politically motivated and not based on established antitrust law.In recent weeks, though, the judge overseeing the case, Richard Leon of the United States District Court of the District of Columbia, has rejected moves by AT&T to inject politics into the arguments.Unless the two sides settle — and there have been no signs of that happening — the trial is expected to showcase two starkly different visions of the country’s video future. Drama is also in the cards: Executives from AT&T and Time Warner, as well as competing cable, satellite, tech and media firms, are expected to take the stand over the course of several weeks — and possibly reveal details about the inner workings of the industry.The Justice Department argues that the merged company’s combination of distribution and content would give it too much leverage in negotiations with the rest of the industry. It also says that the new company would demand higher licensing fees from other cable and satellite firms for what the government calls “must-watch” programming. Those higher charges would immediately trickle down to consumers at an estimated cost of 45 cents a month, or a combined $436 million annually for cable and satellite subscribers, the agency said.The government’s case will be led by Craig Conrath, a plain-spoken and longtime litigator who has worked on merger cases for several administrations. He is expected to argue that if the merger is approved, AT&T and Comcast, a corporation that owns distribution and programming — the same combination that AT&T is seeking — would have the incentive to raise prices for access to their shows. That would hurt other cable companies and online streaming businesses.Judge Leon oversaw the final approval of Comcast’s merger with NBC Universal in 2011, the deal that added programming to Comcast’s holdings.Advertisement“Either important video content will be available through a competitive market to all distributors, including up-and-coming innovators,” the Justice Department said in pretrial filings with the court. “Or it will likely only be available through vertically integrated, well-funded silos.”AT&T scoffs at the government’s predictions of price increases. And even if the analysis is accurate, the company has said, it would amount to the price of a fancy cup of coffee for each consumer. Contrary to the government’s theory that it would withhold content, AT&T says it wants to make sure its shows and movies are as widely distributed as possible.Leading AT&T’s defense is Daniel Petrocelli, a Los Angeles-based lawyer with a long track record in high-profile cases but not someone who is considered an antitrust expert. Two decades ago, he won a wrongful death case against O. J. Simpson on behalf of the family of Ron Goldman. In 2006, he lost a case defending Jeffrey Skilling, the chief executive of Enron, of fraud and conspiracy.Mr. Petrocelli is expected to argue that the government is missing the bigger picture. AT&T says that Silicon Valley companies like Netflix, Amazon, and Google have disrupted the entertainment industry by spending billions of dollars a year on original content and pushing the programming through their own distribution systems. Facebook and Google dominate the market for advertisements that run with those videos.AT&T argues that a merger with Time Warner would add a new competitor against those giants, instead of reducing competition. AT&T will also promise to work out any contract disputes with cable and satellite companies through a third-party arbitrator, he is expected to argue.“The new video revolution is defined by the spectacular rise of Netflix, Amazon, Google and other vertically integrated, direct-to-consumer technology companies,” AT&T said in its pretrial brief.The merger is opposed by several Democratic lawmakers and many consumer groups, who say that AT&T’s control of more than 100 million mobile phone subscriptions gives it unparalleled power. Google, Facebook and Netflix, though mighty, don’t own the pipes that connect people to the internet, they say.Streaming competition is the “best hope consumers have, but network operators will kill that competition if they are not stopped,” said Mark Cooper, the director of research at the Consumer Federation of America.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many Wall Street analysts, however, say the government’s intervention in the deal will eventually harm consumers, because it will limit true competitors to the big tech companies.Advertisement“The government is about three years behind reality and is defining the marketplace as it was about three years ago,” said Laura Martin, an analyst at Needham & Company.AT&T had asked for detailed communications logs between the White House and Justice Department staff members, including Mr. Delrahim, a former Trump White House lawyer. Judge Leon rejected those demands, and AT&T ultimately decided to exclude its concerns of potential presidential interference — which it described as “selective enforcement” — from the case.But even without arguments of political interference entering the trial, many on Wall Street will be looking for clues about the kinds of corporate deals that will pass muster during the Trump administration.The decision to block a merger between companies that don’t directly compete is rare. Mr. Delrahim has said that one of the common regulatory remedies to prevent anticompetitive behavior in such deals — getting companies to promise they’ll be on their best behavior — is not effective.That view may ripple across merger and acquisition plans in other sectors, including the drugstore chain CVS’s $69 billion bid for the health insurance provider Aetna — as well as proposed media deals like Disney’s acquisition of Fox and Sinclair Broadcasting’s purchase of Tribune Media. Wall Street analysts expect the results of the trial will determine if more telecom and entertainment companies will pursue ambitious vertical mergers.“This could direct the future path of the industry,” said Steven Salop, a professor of economics and law at Georgetown University Law School. “If it is permitted, vertical integration will continue.”A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: TV’s Future In the Balance  In Court Fight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CECILIA KANG and ALAN RAPPEPORTMARCH 12, 2018
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday blocked Broadcom’s $117 billion bid for the chip maker Qualcomm, citing national security concerns and sending a clear signal that he was willing to take extraordinary measures to promote his administration’s increasingly protectionist stance.In a presidential order, Mr. Trump said “credible evidence” had led him to believe that if Singapore-based Broadcom were to acquire control of Qualcomm, it “might take action that threatens to impair the national security of the United States.” The acquisition, if it had gone through, would have been the largest technology deal in history.Mr. Trump’s decision to prohibit the blockbuster deal underscored the lengths that he is willing to go to shelter American companies from foreign competition. In recent weeks, the president has turned to an arsenal of tools — including tariffs and an obscure government review panel — to ward off foreign control in American industries and, in particular, thwart the rise of China.The president has focused many of these actions on the technology industry. While the United States has long claimed an advantage in tech, it is now facing emboldened rivals in China, where the government has heavily invested in everything from semiconductors to wireless networks to artificial intelligence. Through its recent actions, the White House has revealed its view that the country’s national security is tied to its advancement of those technologies.AdvertisementNational security was also cited by Mr. Trump last week when he approved stiff and sweeping tariffs on imported steel and aluminum, saying those imports were a threat to American manufacturing. Mr. Trump singled out Chinese steel as a key factor in his decision; he has said that China has routed steel through other countries and flooded the United States with cheap metal.Advertisement“There is a perception within the administration that China does not economically engage fairly with the United States and this action shows it will exercise various remedies to adjust the playing field to even the Sino-U.S. economic relationship,” said Tony Balloon, the head of the China corporate consulting practice at the law firm Alston & Bird.Mr. Trump was given an opening to block Broadcom’s bid for San Diego-based Qualcomm earlier this month. That was when the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or Cfius, a government panel that typically works behind closed doors and reviews deals only after they are announced, said it would stall Broadcom’s bid because of national security concerns while it examined the deal.Broadcom said it was reviewing Mr. Trump’s order, and disputed the notion that the bid posed a security threat.“Broadcom strongly disagrees that its proposed acquisition of Qualcomm raises any national security concerns,” a company spokesman said in a statement.While Broadcom is based in Singapore, China was the main concern that drove Mr. Trump’s decision over the Qualcomm deal, because allowing an American technology company to be acquired would cede its primacy in the semiconductor and wireless industry.Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury Secretary, said in a statement that the decision was part of the administration’s “commitment to take all actions necessary to protect the national security of the United States.”He said the order was based “on the facts and national security sensitivities related to this particular transaction only and is not intended to make any other statement about Broadcom or its employees, including its thousands of hard working and highly skilled U.S. employees.”AdvertisementYet the order will undoubtedly raise questions about the extent to which the Trump administration is willing to intervene in private-sector decisions. While Qualcomm opposed Broadcom’s bid and had reached out to the foreign investment committee for a review, the proposal was nonetheless headed to the company’s shareholders for a vote. The foreign investment committee intervened before that could happen, refusing to let the shareholder meeting take place until after it had a chance to investigate.John P. Kabealo, an attorney who specializes in foreign investment matters, said it was “extraordinary” that Mr. Trump would intervene in the transaction before a full investigation by the government panel was complete.“It certainly aligns with the administration’s willingness to be more active in trade and implementing protectionist policies,” he said. “It is definitely a much more activist policy than the previous administration.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kabealo said the president’s order could dramatically change the world of mergers and acquisitions and open the door to the possibility that more bankers and lawyers would use reviews by the foreign investment committee to block hostile takeovers on national security grounds.The president said his decision to block Broadcom’s bid had been based on the review by the foreign investment committee. The panel had said that the leadership of Qualcomm, which makes wireless chips and also licenses key wireless patents, was too important to let go of. The committee argued that economic leadership in next-generation high-speed mobile networks known as 5G, in which Qualcomm is a key player, was also a national security interest.“China would likely compete robustly to fill any void left by Qualcomm as a result of this hostile takeover,” a United States Treasury official wrote in a letter to the companies last week.As part of the presidential order, the United States also barred the 15 individuals who Broadcom had proposed for Qualcomm’s board from running, saying they were “disqualified from standing for election as directors of Qualcomm.”Qualcomm acknowledged receiving the presidential order and said it had been told to reconvene its shareholder meeting at the earliest possible date, March 23.READ MORE:Why Countries and Companies Are Battling for Ascendancy in 5G (March 6, 2018)Broadcom’s Other Regulatory Hurdle: How It Treats Customers (March 7, 2018)AdvertisementA presidential action against foreign investment in an American company is rare and has only taken place four times in the past 30 years, according to the law firm Ropes & Gray. Scrutiny of foreign companies buying United States assets ramped up under President Barack Obama, including a presidential order barring a Chinese company from purchasing Aixtron, a German company with American assets, on national security grounds in 2016.Under Mr. Trump, several deals involving foreign buyers have been squelched after a review by the foreign investment committee, including Moneygram’s sale to an affiliate of the Alibaba Group and Lattice Semiconductor’s sale to an investment firm with reported ties to the Chinese government. But the action against Broadcom was unusual because mergers are rarely killed before a publicly traded company’s shareholders are given the chance to decide on the offer for themselves.The decision was a blow to Broadcom, which under its chief executive, Hock Tan, has built itself up through several acquisitions. Mr. Tan had gone to great lengths to deflect concerns by American regulators and the Trump administration, including appearing in a televised speech at the White House with Mr. Trump last November, during which Mr. Tan promised to redomicile Broadcom in the United States.Broadcom had at one point in its negotiations with Qualcomm also offered to raise its offer to acquire the company. After the foreign investment committee announced its investigation into the Qualcomm bid this month, Broadcom hastened plans to move its headquarters to the United States and sent a letter to lawmakers promising it would not slow research and development in 5G networking technology if the merger were approved.Follow Cecilia Kang and Alan Rappeport on Twitter: @ceciliakang and @arappeportMichael de la Merced contributed reporting from New York.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Blocks Overseas Takeover of Qualcomm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech We’re Using By                     
 BROOKS BARNES
 
MARCH 14, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Brooks Barnes, who covers the entertainment industry from Los Angeles, discussed the tech he’s using.As our Hollywood reporter, what are some of your favorite tech tools for staying on top of your beat?Confession: When I saw this question, I had a minor panic attack and typed “tech I should be using now” into Google. I’m one of those reporters who still take notes by hand. Appointments are written down in a planner that I haul everywhere. The TVs in my home office and on my desk in the bureau are those 700-pound box models with built-in VCRs, the kind that Goodwill won’t accept anymore. (Sneer all you want. They work just fine.)But there are a few iPhone apps that I use frequently. One is Feedly, which collects articles from across the web in real time. I started relying on it when Google Reader went kaput in 2013, and I find Feedly easier to use than Twitter when keeping tabs on certain areas of my beat. I cover Disney, for example, and there are tons of obscure theme park blogs. I follow about 40 of them with Feedly, which makes it easy to swipe through dozens of items (headline plus the top of the story) in a few seconds.AdvertisementThe encrypted messaging app Signal is a standard tool for reporters these days. The sexual misconduct scandals that have engulfed Hollywood and the resulting Time’s Up movement have made a lot of people inside entertainment companies willing to be sources as long as they trust that they are communicating in a secure way.AdvertisementThe other app I use a lot is IMDBpro, which is a subscription database with contact information for about 300,000 people in Hollywood. You can’t look up Dwayne Johnson’s mobile number, but you can quickly locate his agent, lawyer and publicist. I don’t know how this is possible, but IMDBpro, which is owned by Amazon, became available as an app only in December.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How have you seen tech change Hollywood in the years that you've covered entertainment?Immeasurably. I started covering the entertainment business 14 years ago. There was no YouTube. Netflix was still a tiny DVD-by-mail company. Buying a movie ticket online was not the norm. Video-on-demand was called pay-per-view and mostly existed for boxing matches and porn.Now companies like Disney are racing to build streaming services as consumers, in particular the younger ones, whom Hollywood cares about most, disconnect their cable subscriptions. Film studios, reeling from the collapse of the DVD business (digital movie sales and rentals are not as lucrative), have had to downsize and rely more on ticket sales, which has made them focus almost entirely on branded “tent-pole” movies that can play globally. Ratings for traditional TV networks have imploded to a once-unthinkable degree, as people spend more time watching videos, playing video games and tending their Instagram, Facebook and Twitter feeds.One of the biggest and more interesting changes, at least to me, involves institutional arrogance — a deep-seated belief at studios, formed over decades of undisputed dominance, that nobody tells them what to do, including their customers. We will cast whom we want. We will tell the stories we want. And you will buy tickets, even if that means tricking you with marketing that makes something unwatchable look like a masterpiece.But that era is over. Social networks and sites like Rotten Tomatoes have empowered the masses. And Hollywood is still coming to grips with that. I ran into a studio executive a couple weeks ago who was fuming that she wasn’t able to “cheat” an opening weekend — using marketing to cloak a bad movie — because angry ticket buyers immediately started spreading the word to their friends on Facebook and Snapchat.In the past few years, movie and TV viewers have talked a lot about racial and gender diversity on social media. There was #OscarsSoWhite, #ThisIs2016 (in response to Asian-American issues) and, of course, #MeToo. Do you think social media has a measurable impact on how Hollywood is addressing diversity?It’s a cliché because it’s true: In Hollywood, image is everything. The only thing studios care about more than profits is looking bad in public, and these online movements have shamed the industry into taking action — finally — on matters like sexual harassment and diversity. It takes so long to make most movies, though, that the impact is still hard to see. Disney put “Black Panther” on its assembly line in 2014, and it came out last month.Beyond your job, what tech product are you currently obsessed with using in your daily life?About two months ago, my partner and I decided to cut the cord. No more cable. Our monthly bill from Spectrum went from nearly $200 a month to less than $70, which is how much they charge for stand-alone internet service. The total comes up to about $120 with subscriptions to streaming services like Netflix, Hulu and HBO Now. (Oh, fine: I also subscribe to CBS AllAccess because I watch “The Young and the Restless.”)AdvertisementWe love it. There is nothing about cable we miss. We have the latest iteration of Apple TV, which magically pulls together shows and movies from across the streaming services we use. Its integration of Siri is fantastic, allowing you to start watching almost anything with a voice command.And we love to go searching through free services like Pluto TV, which recreates the traditional cable experience with internet channels. Pluto has some well-known news networks like Cheddar and CNBC, but the thrill lies in flipping through one offbeat channel after another — one the other night had just a live stream view of a pond, and another seemed to consist of nothing but videos of buxom women posing next to dirt bikes.What don’t you like about streaming services?I hate the Hulu interface. It feels counterintuitive to me. And every time we turn it on, “American Dad!” — not something we would ever watch — seems to pop up as a suggested viewing option.With Netflix, I wish there was an easy way to zap straight back to MyList rather than having to scroll through the whole roster of suggestions every time. (“Because you watched ‘London Spy,’” or whatever.) I have no real complaints about HBO Now except that the series offerings sometimes feel a bit sparse next to Netflix.The CBS app freezes up the most. Maybe it’s the cosmos telling me that there are better ways to decompress than watching a soap opera? At any rate, I generally solve it by rebooting the Apple box.Follow Brooks Barnes on Twitter: @brooksbarnesNYT.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Connecting to Hollywood, Cutting Cord at Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NATASHA SINGERMARCH 8, 2018
A former superintendent of Baltimore County Public Schools, the 25th-largest district in the United States, pleaded guilty on Thursday to four counts of perjury related to payments totaling about $147,000 that he received for consulting and speaking engagements.The state said the former superintendent, Shaun Dallas Dance, had made false statements on his financial disclosure forms “to conceal the nature and extent of his outside business interests and conflicts of interest.” Among other sources of income, the state said, Mr. Dance received payments from a school leadership training company that he had helped win an $875,000 no-bid contract from his school district.After his financial relationship with that school vendor became known, the state said, Mr. Dance falsely told a Baltimore County Public Schools ethics panel that he had not been paid by the company while it was doing business with the district. He also provided the ethics panel with what the state described as a “sham” service agreement with the company supporting his false claims.Prosecutors have asked for a five-year sentence and said they wanted Mr. Dance to serve 18 months of it. A sentencing hearing was scheduled for April 20.AdvertisementAndrew Jay Graham, a lawyer representing Mr. Dance, declined to comment on the case.Verletta White, the interim superintendent of Baltimore County schools, said in a statement, “We are saddened by the news but trust the judicial process.”AdvertisementMr. Dance has been at the center of questions about close relationships between Baltimore County school officials and education technology companies seeking the district’s business. An article in The New York Times in November profiled the district as a case study in how tech companies court and cultivate relationships with school officials.Mr. Dance, who became superintendent in 2012 and announced his resignation 11 months ago without citing a reason, was no longer employed by the district and was already under investigation by the state when The Times’s article was published. His actions have been also been the focus of reporting by The Baltimore Sun.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Baltimore County’s schools had embarked on an ambitious technology makeover, committing more than $200 million to providing laptops for students and millions more on no-bid contracts for learning apps. The Times found that tech industry-funded groups or vendors paid for flights to conferences, as well as hotels and dinners, for school officials.In court documents, the state said Mr. Dance had concealed about $12,000 in payments he received through his consulting work in 2015, including $4,600 from the Education Research and Development Institute — ERDI for short — an organization that pays superintendents to attend meetings with educational tech companies.ERDI has charged companies $13,000 to organize a meeting with five superintendents or other school leaders to discuss products, according to documents obtained by The Times. After Mr. Dance participated in confidential meetings with two of his district’s tech vendors at an ERDI conference last year, the district extended both companies’ contracts.A state senator and county representatives have asked the state to audit certain Baltimore County Public Schools tech contracts.The district continues to pursue large technology deals — with a $140 million contract for student and staff laptops awaiting a vote from the school board.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIMARCH 6, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — More than a year after Uber’s self-driving trucks made their first commercial delivery — 2,000 cases of Budweiser beer on a 120-mile hop in Colorado — the company says it has taken its robot big rigs to the highways of Arizona.Uber said on Tuesday that its self-driving trucks had been carrying cargo on highways in Arizona for commercial freight customers over the past few months. The trucks operate with a licensed truck driver at the wheel, ready to take over in the case of an emergency. But Uber said the eventual goal was to eliminate human drivers inside the cab.In a video, Uber laid out its vision for the future of trucking — tapping autonomous systems to navigate long highway hauls and relying on human drivers to handle shorter drives, like the final few miles to a customer’s loading dock.The ride-hailing service is one of the first companies to begin commercializing self-driving trucks, integrating — albeit slowly — the technology into its shipment-booking service, Uber Freight.AdvertisementAt the heart of Uber’s vision are transfer hubs where trucks can pick up and drop off trailers. At those locations, autonomous trucks would grab trailers for long-haul drives, while human drivers would grab ones earmarked for closer delivery — with Uber’s network meshing the supply and demand of both behind the scenes.AdvertisementUber’s self-driving truck emerged from its 2016 acquisition of Otto, an autonomous trucking start-up founded by a former Google engineer. The acquisition was at the heart of an intellectual property lawsuit against Uber that was brought by Waymo, the self-driving car unit from Google’s parent company, Alphabet. The two sides settled the case last month.While that legal case dragged out, the company continued to refine its driverless truck technology to find its place in an increasingly crowded field. Waymo has also said it is considering using its driverless car technology for trucks, while Tesla said it plans to introduce an electric truck with a self-driving mode built in.Trucking is a natural target for automation. In theory, automated trucks can stay on the road longer than those with human drivers and, over time, are expected to be less prone to accidents because they don’t get sleepy or distracted. Eventually, these factors are expected to make self-driving trucks a cheaper alternative.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We think self-driving technology has tremendous potential to solve some of the big problems that the trucking industry has today,” said Alden Woodrow, the product manager for Uber’s self-driving truck unit.Uber launched Uber Freight, an app that matches truckers and trucking companies with loads to haul, in May 2017. In a business model that is similar to its ride-hailing service, Uber doesn’t actually handle the deliveries but works behind the scenes to create a marketplace for truckers and shippers.The company said it was working out of two primary transfer hubs in Arizona — one in Sanders near the border with New Mexico and another in Topock near the California border.Uber isn’t saying much about its self-driving trucks. It won’t disclose how many trucks it is using, how many miles they’ve driven or how often the human safety drivers had to intervene and assist the autonomous system. It is also not revealing many details about how the transfer hubs would work — including what they would look like, where they would be located and how the company planned to roll them out.When it comes to the politically sensitive question of whether Uber’s technology will eventually eliminate trucking jobs, the company walks a fine line. For now, Uber said it believed the introduction of self-driving trucks would bring about more driving jobs, not fewer, in part because of greater demand as delivery costs fall. However, the nature of a trucker’s job may change — becoming something akin to a parcel delivery driver, shuttling trailers between the hub and local destinations.While autonomous systems may one day be able to do everything a human truck driver does, Uber said it was not training its trucks to do it all, like back up to a loading dock or navigate around a busy industrial area.Advertisement“That is beyond the window of what we’re looking at,” Mr. Woodrow said. Uber is choosing to “focus the development of our technology on the highway only.”Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Self-Driving Trucks Hit Highway, but the Last Mile Is More Complex.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Cecilia KangWASHINGTON — Politics have been at the center of the public debate about the Justice Department’s lawsuit to block AT&T’s $85 billion purchase of Time Warner. But the trial itself, starting later this month, is shaping up to be a fight focused on classic issues in antitrust law.In court filings on Friday, the Justice Department and AT&T laid out the arguments that they plan to make in the trial. Regulators will argue that the deal will hurt competition and lead to higher prices. AT&T and Time Warner will counter those arguments by saying that even with a merger, it is an underdog against online giants like Facebook and Google.“If TV-program distributor AT&T acquires TV-program producer Time Warner, American consumers will end up paying hundreds of millions of dollars more than they do now to watch their favorite programs on TV,” the Justice Department said in its brief submitted on Friday evening.In its brief, AT&T countered by saying, “This merger has never been about making Time Warner programs less accessible or more expensive. Just the opposite: It is about making Time Warner and AT&T more competitive during a revolutionary transformation that is occurring in the video programming marketplace.”The trial, one of the biggest antitrust showdowns in decades, will begin March 19 in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. It is expected to last about three weeks.Noticeably absent in AT&T’s filing was an earlier argument it had made: that the government singled out the company’s deal because of presidential politics. President Trump was a vocal critic of the deal during his presidential campaign, and while in office, he has consistently blamed CNN, a channel owned by Turner and part of Time Warner’s television business, for unfair coverage of his administration.AT&T originally argued to the court that the Justice Department’s suit was a case of “selective enforcement” — that the government was essentially blocking the deal because the president was against it.But late last month, Judge Richard J. Leon, who is overseeing the trial, rejected demands by AT&T for detailed email and phone logs between the White House and the Justice Department related to the deal. AT&T and Time Warner has dropped “selective enforcement” as a defense, according to the new filings.Even absent the question of presidential interference in the deal, the trial is pivotal for the telecom and media industries, providing a clue about the chances of other industry deals, like Disney’s bid for 21st Century Fox. AT&T’s chief executive, Randall Stephenson, and Time Warner’s chief executive, Jeffrey Bewkes, are expected to take the stand.“This is the single most important decision this year” for technology, telecom and media firms, said Amy Yong, a research analyst at Macquarie Group in New York. “It will frame regulation and mergers and acquisitions going forward and raise questions about all the consolidation in the past, too.”If the judge sides with AT&T and Time Warner, he would usher in the creation of a new kind of corporate behemoth — one with nationwide reach via wireless and satellite television service that would also have control over a movie studio and channels like HBO, CNN and TNT, which has valuable basketball sports rights.The company would have a leading position to negotiate licensing deals with rival telecom and media firms. It would also be in a stronger position against fast-growing streaming video services like Netflix and Amazon Prime Video.If the Justice Department prevails in this suit, it would signal a new era of scrutiny for the media and telecom industries. In 2011, Comcast won approval for its purchase of NBCUniversal that also created an enormous telecom and media company. The Justice Department insisted on several conditions that restricted Comcast from anti-competitive business practices.The trial will also reveal much about the state of the industry. Rivals such as Comcast, Dish and Sony are expected to be called as witnesses to reveal details about their business dealings with AT&T and Time Warner in the past. The Justice Department is expected to argue that a combined AT&T and Time Warner would have the incentive to make it harder for competing media companies to distribute their programming through AT&T, and for Time Warner brands to limit their distribution outside of AT&T.The Justice Department will also present economic analysis suggesting that the new company is likely to raise prices for consumers.“As will be shown at trial, the government is challenging this merger to address the real concerns of real people who populate the real marketplace today,” the Justice Department said in its brief.AT&T said it would challenge the government’s arguments that the merger would increase consumer prices and hamper competition by raising licensing fees for Time Warner content. The company said it would argue that the merger of two companies that do not compete would be a stronger competitor in a market that had many new companies from Silicon Valley, like Facebook and Netflix.“As will be demonstrated at trial, the new video revolution is defined by the spectacular rise of Netflix, Amazon, Google, and other vertically integrated, direct-to-consumer technology companies as market leaders in both video programming and video distribution,” AT&T said in its brief.Follow Cecilia Kang on Twitter: @ceciliakangAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Raymond ZhongHONG KONG — When top tech minds sat down to set the global standards underpinning today’s cellphone networks, China was left largely on the sidelines. Companies in the West owned much of the crucial technology, and they prospered.Now, as the world prepares for a new generation of mobile internet that could let you download a feature-length movie in mere seconds, a Chinese company is determined to lead, putting it at the center of an international fight over the technology’s future.Huawei, the giant maker of telecommunications equipment, has been pouring money into research on 5G, or fifth-generation, wireless networks and patenting key technologies. It has hired experts from foreign rivals and pushed them to guide international groups that are deciding the technical standards for tomorrow’s wireless gear.But the company has also been a top concern of Washington officials. It was effectively shut out of the United States after a 2012 congressional report said Beijing could use Huawei’s equipment to spy on Americans. And this week, a United States Treasury official flagged Huawei’s 5G push as the American government investigates the proposed takeover of Qualcomm, a San Diego-based chip maker, by Broadcom, a rival based in Singapore.In a letter, the official, Aimen N. Mir, deputy assistant secretary for investment security, said that being bought by Broadcom would sap Qualcomm’s ability to influence worldwide standards for 5G. Broadcom’s statements suggest that it would slash investment in research and development, Mr. Mir wrote, and focus instead on short-term profitability.As a result, he wrote, Chinese companies such as Huawei could get the technological edge.“A shift to Chinese dominance in 5G would have substantial negative national security consequences for the United States,” Mr. Mir wrote. Broadcom sought to assuage the concerns on Wednesday by pledging to increase research spending.With the first phase of 5G standards due to be completed this year, the outcome of the Broadcom deal may not affect the complicated protocols themselves much. One major set of standards was already delivered in December.It is clear, though, that Huawei, which is not state-run, wants to drive the global charge toward 5G — and that Washington would rather it didn’t.Huawei has evolved, over the last three decades, from a seller of cheap telephone switches to a powerhouse partner to cell networks around the world. Yet until recently, it had lagged behind Western companies like Qualcomm, Intel, Nokia and Ericsson in taking part in wireless standard-setting, and in owning crucial technology.“It’s part of China’s technological coming-of-age,” said Chris Lane, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein in Hong Kong. “They’re saying: ‘We’re a technological powerhouse. We should be sitting at the table with the Germans, the British, the Americans, the Japanese and the Koreans and doing our part.’”The United States government has pushed back before. In 2011, Washington blocked Huawei from buying a California tech start-up, 3Leaf Systems. Huawei is also under investigation by the Treasury and Commerce Departments over whether it broke American trade sanctions in countries including Iran and North Korea.Officials in Washington have also watched with trepidation as Huawei has become a major international smartphone brand. In January, after lawmakers wrote to the Federal Communications Commission to reiterate the security worries, AT&T ended a deal to sell Huawei’s new flagship phones in the United States.A Huawei spokesman on Wednesday called the company “an early driver and leader in 5G research and development,” as well as “a key architect and contributor” to 5G standards. The company has previously said it complies with the law wherever it operates. It has denied that its products carry security risks.For China, taking a top role in 5G is no mere matter of national pride. The new technology will not only permit ultrafast video streaming and communication between, say, a self-driving car and a traffic control system. It is also meant to accommodate simultaneous connections with large numbers of devices — everything from consumer wearables to industrial sensors.That dovetails with China’s aim, outlined in its most recent five-year plan, to transform its cities and upgrade its manufacturing capabilities using the so-called internet of things.Chinese companies’ efforts in earlier generations of wireless technology mostly flopped. Despite government-inspired efforts by state-run China Mobile — the world’s largest cellular provider — during the development of 4G, few carriers in other countries chose to rely on China Mobile’s preferred standard.With 5G, Chinese companies started developing know-how early. Huawei has invested $600 million in 5G research since 2009, according to a company spokesman, and has committed an additional $800 million for this year. The company is testing 5G equipment with European telecom operators including BT, Deutsche Telekom and Vodafone.As of early 2017, 10 percent of the 1,450 patents essential for 5G networks were in Chinese hands, according to analysts with Jefferies, who wrote that they expected the figure to rise. That number includes intellectual property rights held by Huawei; another Chinese equipment maker, ZTE; and others. Qualcomm alone owned 15 percent of 5G patents, Nokia 11 percent and Ericsson 8 percent.As of 2011, Huawei and ZTE owned a combined 7 percent of 4G patents, according to Jefferies’s estimates. Qualcomm, at the time, owned 21 percent.Chinese companies have also been increasing their influence at 3GPP, or the Third-Generation Partnership Project, the international body that decides wireless standards and includes representatives from telecom operators, equipment makers and more. The work of deciding technical matters at 3GPP is divided among different groups and subgroups, and Chinese organizations have expanded their presence in the top ranks.The number of Chinese representatives serving as chair or vice chair of a group or subgroup was 10 last year, up from eight in 2013, according to Jefferies. There are almost 60 leadership positions in total. Huawei holds five top spots among the different groups; China Mobile has three. The chair and vice chair are elected by each group’s members.Some of Huawei’s representatives were hired from other global telecom players, such as Nokia and Nortel, according to their LinkedIn profiles. Other companies well represented atop the standards groups are Ericsson (six representatives), Samsung (five) and Qualcomm (four).In 2015, Georg Mayer, a Huawei executive born in Germany, was elected chairman of the group responsible for core network equipment and network terminals, a position he still holds. In an important  subgroup that sets specifications related to radio transmission, however, Qualcomm’s representative beat out Huawei’s last year for the chairmanship.Once 5G networks begin to be built and deployed, the technical protocols will help determine which companies win lucrative equipment contracts.“If you own a significant portion of the patents in the underlying technology, then you should be able to very cost-effectively bid for network projects,” said Mark Natkin, managing director of Marbridge Consulting in Beijing.“It’s a commercial advantage which parlays itself into a security advantage,” he added. “Whoever controls the technology knows, intimately, how it was built and where all the doors and buttons are.”Follow Raymond Zhong on Twitter: @zhonggg.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Don ClarkSAN FRANCISCO — Broadcom’s $117 billion bid for the rival computer chip maker Qualcomm is being investigated by a federal government committee concerned about giving foreign countries power over American technology vital to national security.But some people in the technology industry believe Broadcom’s chief executive, Hock Tan, already wields too much power of a different kind, as illustrated by a harshly worded two-page document in a San Francisco court file.The document comes from Western Digital, the largest supplier of computer disk drives. Last year, Western Digital wrote to a technology partner, Toshiba, to complain about Broadcom. The document said Broadcom had stopped shipping essential chips called preamplifiers to Western Digital. The reason? Broadcom, the document said, was retaliating because Western Digital had considered another supplier’s products.“Western Digital believes that Broadcom’s business tactics have destroyed a once positive business relationship” and “raise serious antitrust concerns,” the drive maker wrote. At the time, Western Digital was trying to persuade Toshiba to reject Broadcom as a potential buyer of Toshiba’s stake in a memory chip joint venture with Western Digital’s SanDisk unit.The previously unreported document provides a rare account of a customer’s private dealings with Broadcom. Competing chip makers say the company has repeatedly used the threat of higher prices or other pressure tactics to deter customers from turning to alternative suppliers.Such accusations help explain why the Federal Trade Commission started an investigation of Broadcom’s business practices, which was disclosed in January. They add to the reasons that Mr. Tan’s hostile bid for Qualcomm — which would be the costliest technology acquisition ever — has consumed Silicon Valley and companies on three continents.Broadcom declined to discuss the document, and a Western Digital spokesman declined to comment. A Federal Trade Commission spokeswoman also declined to comment.The fate of Broadcom’s bid for Qualcomm was expected to be settled Tuesday in San Diego. There, shareholders at Qualcomm’s annual meeting were scheduled to choose between the company’s incumbent directors and six Broadcom nominees expected to back the deal.But the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States on Sunday ordered Qualcomm to delay the meeting by 30 days so it could investigate the transaction. On Monday, Cfius sent a letter to Qualcomm and Broadcom stating it would investigate the deal for national security reasons. Broadcom is based in Singapore, though it has announced plans to move its headquarters to the United States.On Wednesday, Broadcom pledged that it would keep the United States at the forefront of emerging mobile technology if it were to acquire Qualcomm, saying it would increase Qualcomm’s research and development spending and create a $1.5 billion fund to train American engineers.Before the committee’s unusual move, antitrust authorities were the ones who paid the closest attention to the chip makers — mainly Qualcomm.Qualcomm is the biggest supplier of chips for smartphones but gets much of its profit from patent royalties. Its business practices have prompted antitrust probes in the United States, Europe and Asia and a lawsuit by Apple, a longtime customer, challenging the royalty payments. Qualcomm denies wrongdoing.Broadcom has built its market muscle by acquiring several dominant lines of chips, a mainstay of smartphones, data storage gear, set-top boxes and networking hardware. Customers include Apple, Samsung Electronics, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Dell, AT&T and Cisco.Buying Qualcomm would sharply expand Broadcom’s position in smartphones, adding technology that manages cellular communications and runs apps. For that and other reasons, Qualcomm has predicted long and risky antitrust reviews of the deal in several countries, though Broadcom has said it could navigate the process swiftly.Any Broadcom tactics that the Federal Trade Commission is studying now are not likely to affect merger reviews unless some link can be found to Qualcomm’s business, said James Rill, a lawyer at Baker Botts who once headed the Justice Department’s antitrust division.Broadcom said in January, “This F.T.C. review is immaterial to our business, does not relate to wireless and has no impact on our proposal to acquire Qualcomm.”But it has been difficult to handicap such oversight, particularly in China. The authorities there forced Qualcomm to lower patent royalty rates in 2015, and some big smartphone makers have expressed fears that Broadcom would raise chip prices if it bought Qualcomm.At a minimum, the Federal Trade Commission’s review adds another facet to the aggressive image of Mr. Tan, a Malaysian-born executive who has pleased Wall Street but alarmed tech workers by cutting jobs and long-term research after acquisitions.“He’s as tough as nails,” said Raymond Bingham, a Silicon Valley veteran who helped found the China-backed private equity fund Canyon Bridge Capital Partners.A CNBC article last week said Broadcom had used price increases and other threats to press for exclusive sales deals from customers such as Amazon, which was also hit by a Broadcom patent suit that was later settled. An Amazon spokeswoman declined to comment.Some competitors and former customers echo such stories, insisting on anonymity because the negotiations are confidential. Western Digital’s document, titled “Broadcom Matters,” provides a new level of detail.At issue were chips known as preamps, used in sending signals to and from disks that store data in drives. The document said Western Digital had no problems in acquiring them until its supplier, LSI, was acquired by Avago in 2014. Avago was renamed Broadcom after buying that company in 2016.Broadcom executives demanded that Western Digital commit to buying 100 percent of its preamps from their company, a gambit to block new rivals, the document said. Western Digital, which had been testing other chips for potential use, wrote that “a new entrant was compared to a ‘suicide bomber’ that would put downward pressure on prices.”Western Digital refused to comply with Broadcom’s demands. Broadcom then stopped preamp shipments in February 2017, Western Digital wrote, though the cutoff was temporary. Broadcom “attempted to backtrack,” citing “various excuses” for the cutoff and ultimately “admitted that it should not have withheld shipments,” the document said.Toshiba filed the document in response to a SanDisk lawsuit that unsuccessfully sought to block a sale of operations involved in their memory chip venture, which became part of a sale led by Bain Capital. The suit was settled last year.Other Broadcom customers said the chip maker had been fair. “Broadcom is a pretty good partner for us,” said Bruce McClelland, chief executive of Arris International, which makes set-top boxes using Broadcom chips.In an interview in December, Mr. Tan scoffed at the notion of raising prices or otherwise exploiting customer reliance on key Broadcom chips.“That’s not sustainable,” he said. “If you do that, customers never come back to you.”Follow Don Clark on Twitter: @donal888AdvertisementBy CADE METZMARCH 6, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Machines are starting to learn tasks on their own. They are identifying faces, recognizing spoken words, reading medical scans and even carrying on their own conversations.All this is done through so-called neural networks, which are complex computer algorithms that learn tasks by analyzing vast amounts of data. But these neural networks create a problem that scientists are trying to solve: It is not always easy to tell how the machines arrive at their conclusions.On Tuesday, a team at Google took a small step toward addressing this issue with the unveiling of new research that offers the rough outlines of technology that shows how the machines are arriving at their decisions.“Even seeing part of how a decision was made can give you a lot of insight into the possible ways it can fail,” said Christopher Olah, a Google researcher.AdvertisementA growing number of A.I. researchers are now developing ways to better understand neural networks. Jeff Clune, a professor at University of Wyoming who now works in the A.I. lab at the ride-hailing company Uber, called this “artificial neuroscience.”Understanding how these systems work will become more important as they make decisions now made by humans, like who gets a job and how a self-driving car responds to emergencies.AdvertisementFirst proposed in the 1950s, neural networks are meant to mimic the web of neurons in the brain. But that is a rough analogy. These algorithms are really series of mathematical operations, and each operation represents a neuron. Google’s new research aims to show — in a highly visual way — how these mathematical operations perform discrete tasks, like recognizing objects in photos.Inside a neural network, each neuron works to identify a particular characteristic that might show up in a photo, like a line that curves from right to left at a certain angle or several lines that merge to form a larger shape. Google wants to provide tools that show what each neuron is trying to identify, which ones are successful and how their efforts combine to determine what is actually in the photo — perhaps a dog or a tuxedo or a bird.The kind of technology Google is discussing could also help identify why a neural network is prone to mistakes and, in some cases, explain how it learned this behavior, Mr. Olah said. Other researchers, including Mr. Clune, believe they can also help minimize the threat of “adversarial examples” — where someone can potentially fool neural networks by, say, doctoring an image.Researchers acknowledge that this work is still in its infancy. Jason Yosinski, who also works in Uber’s A.I. lab, which grew out of the company’s acquisition of a start-up called Geometric Intelligence, called Google’s technology idea “state of art.” But he warned it may never be entirely easy to understand the computer mind.“To a certain extent, as these networks get more complicated, it is going to be fundamentally difficult to understand why they make decisions,” he said. “It is kind of like trying to understand why humans make decisions.”Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Google Researchers Say They’re Learning How Machines Learn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Bits By                     
 KEVIN ROOSE
 
MARCH 9, 2018
Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Hi, pals. I’m Kevin. I’m a columnist here at The Times, and I’ll be filling in for Farhad and Mike on this newsletter while they’re both “out on book leave.” (Read: tweeting and playing Fortnite in their PJs.) Mostly, I write about Silicon Valley and how technology interacts with the larger worlds of business and culture.Today, though, I want to talk about the Midwest.This week, I published a column about a recent trip I took through the Midwest with a group of Silicon Valley venture capitalists. The three-day tour, which was organized by Representative Tim Ryan, an Ohio Democrat, took us to cities like Akron, Ohio, and South Bend, Ind., and gave the investors a chance to meet local officials and case out nontraditional start-up scenes.One of my main lessons from the trip was that a lot of Silicon Valley’s elite have gotten fed up with the Bay Area for various reasons (housing prices, tech monoculture, too much money chasing too few start-ups, etc.), and are looking enviously at other parts of the country. Which I thought was a pretty obvious and uncontroversial take!AdvertisementBut the response to the piece has been, uh, opinionated. Some readers took issue with the headline (“Silicon Valley Is Over, Says Silicon Valley”) and the way the coastal investors interviewed in the piece seemed to view cities like Flint and Detroit as if they were exotic foreign countries with quirky, charming customs. Others, like Axios’ Dan Primack, doubted whether the venture capitalists on the bus were really going to relocate, or if they were just indulging in idle fantasy. And a few asked if I could bring the venture capitalists to their city next time. (I hear your pleas, Pike County, Ill.!)AdvertisementAs a native Ohioan, I’m always delighted when people want to talk about my home region. (I have a lot of feelings about Steak ’n Shake and the “pop” vs. “soda” debate.) But in this case, I think some additional explanation is in order.There are basically three things I can imagine Silicon Valley investors doing in the Midwest in the near term:1. Investing in companies based there.2. Encouraging Silicon Valley-based portfolio companies to relocate some percentage of their employees there.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.3. Moving there themselves.My guess is that No. 3 is, if not impossible, at least several years away from being realistic for most venture capitalists, many of whom have their roots planted in the Bay Area and benefit from being near dense clusters of start-ups. But Nos. 1 and 2 seem completely plausible — and, in fact, are already happening.Several regional start-up success stories have persuaded investors to add the Midwest to their scouting itineraries. And many large tech companies have already moved a significant number of jobs out of the Bay Area — Google just opened a huge office in Boulder, Colo., and Facebook is building one in Boston — and that trend seems likely to continue, given the insane cost of living in Silicon Valley for anyone who isn’t a billionaire.On the bus, I heard a lot of talk about “mid-tech” jobs — jobs at tech companies that aren’t hard-core engineering, but require some technical expertise. (Think sales, growth, design.) While executives and engineers get positive network effects from being near clusters of other executives and engineers in San Francisco, there’s no real reason that mid-tech employees can’t just as easily be in Bend, Ore., or South Bend.I saw some skepticism about this kind of thinking from people like Adam Nash, an entrepreneur in residence at Greylock Partners. He said on Twitter that the move-away-from-the-Bay phenomenon is cyclical, and that in lean times tech employees tend to stay close to their headquarters, where they are assigned to more critical projects and are less likely to be cut in a round of layoffs.But I’m not so sure. Tools like Slack and GitHub now allow tech employees to work remotely in a way that previous generations weren’t able to, and the cost-of-living differential between the Bay Area and every other city (with the exceptions of New York and L.A.) is so great these days that many employees might be willing to exchange some job security for the benefits of living elsewhere.AdvertisementIf I had to guess, I’d predict that unless Bay Area housing costs miraculously come down in the next year or two, Silicon Valley will undergo a big shake-up. Companies will feel increasingly compelled to move as many jobs as possible out of the Bay Area, and in time, the states between the coasts could effectively become Silicon Valley’s back and middle office, in much the way that Wall Street banks now have thousands of employees in cities like Columbus, Ohio, and Salt Lake City.That kind of geographic balancing would be great for cities in the Midwest, where an influx of high-paying mid-tech jobs could transform local economies. And it would arguably be good for San Francisco, which is straining to accommodate its current population and would be well served by a modest exodus.But don’t expect the same to happen with venture capital — a highly face-to-face business in which proximity and start-up density still matter. As much as the venture capitalists on the bus may have loved the Midwest, they’re probably going to remain tourists for the time being.Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer-at-large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NELLIE BOWLESMARCH 10, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — When Drew Houston played computer games like Starcraft in high school, he made some changes so the games ran more smoothly on his friends’ computers.“He created this one little application, and it would basically display everybody’s shared files, and then if you clicked on a file, it would go ahead and ask everyone else on the network if they wanted to download it as well,” said Andrew Croswell, a friend of Mr. Houston’s from Acton-Boxborough Regional High School in Acton, Mass.Mr. Houston, now 35, has since taken a version of that same concept and turned it into Dropbox, an online file storage and collaboration company that has grown rapidly since its founding in 2007.Last month, Dropbox filed  to go public, and when it does Mr. Houston will become the newest member of a small club of tech founders who steered a start-up all the way to Wall Street. (The company is expected to set a price range for its offering as soon as this coming week and trade on the stock market by the end of the month.)AdvertisementIn the process, Mr. Houston is also set to become the next bona fide tech billionaire. According to Dropbox’s initial public offering filing, he owns 25 percent of the company, making him its single largest shareholder. Dropbox was last privately valued at about $10 billion, meaning Mr. Houston’s stake was worth about $2.5 billion on paper.AdvertisementWhether Mr. Houston successfully takes Dropbox public will be closely watched, with other privately held tech companies like Uber and Airbnb also edging toward an I.P.O. Dropbox, which is based in San Francisco, is unprofitable, and Mr. Houston now has to navigate through a challenging time, both guiding his company around the tech giants that are squeezing into its space and adapting his frat guy persona to a changing culture.“He’s maybe one of the last ones of a very un-C.E.O.-like C.E.O.,” said Jeffrey Mann, a vice president at research firm Gartner, who follows the file-sharing and collaboration industry. “He was technical. He started out by coding. Most start-ups now when they get to that size, founders like him get pushed aside for someone with a finance or management background. But he managed to stay there.”Dropbox said Mr. Houston was unavailable for comment, citing the quiet period before an I.P.O. But according to interviews with more than a dozen people, Mr. Houston — a private man with a love of 1990s rock and business books — built his company with an easygoing management style and a dry sense of humor, which helped him deal with the bumps along the way.Mr. Houston grew up in Acton, a suburb outside Boston, the oldest of three children. His father, an engineer, and his mother, a librarian, noticed early on that Mr. Houston was precocious and encouraged him to explore his interest in computers, but did not want him skipping grades.“His parents wanted him to stay in first grade for socialization, and they didn’t want to use the term gifted,” said Claudia Couto, who taught at Mr. Houston’s elementary school and tutored him privately. She is now retired.As a middle schooler, Mr. Houston beta-tested computer games looking for security flaws. He worked for a robotics start-up as a teenager and repaired computers for neighbors. He got a perfect score on the SAT and attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2001.At M.I.T., he joined the Phi Delta Theta fraternity, which he has said helped him learn how to build a corporate culture.Advertisement“My first management experience was being rush chairman for my fraternity, and I learned a bunch of things,” Mr. Houston said in a New York Times interview in 2016. “You deal with a lot of the same broad questions — who do we want to be as an organization, what kind of culture do we want, what kind of people are we looking for? — that you do when you’re starting a company.”After his sophomore year, he took a year off and started an SAT prep company called Accolade with one of his former high school teachers, Andrew Crick. Upon returning to M.I.T., Mr. Houston decided to learn as much about business as he could, plowing through business books from a chair he set up on the roof of his fraternity, he has said.A Pearl Jam fan, Mr. Houston in 2005 formed a 1990s cover band called Angry Flannel, which played at venues around Boston.On a bus one day from Boston to New York, Mr. Houston forgot his USB flash stick. Frustrated, he started coding what would be the foundation of Dropbox. He became less interested in Accolade, which closed.“He was really interested in entrepreneurship, which was not a common trajectory for M.I.T. students,” said Kyle Vogt, 32, chief executive of the self-driving car company Cruise Automation, who met Mr. Houston at an M.I.T. entrepreneurship club event. “The default back then was to stay in Boston or go to New York and work for a hedge fund.”In 2007, Mr. Houston entered Dropbox into the Boston program of Y Combinator, the Silicon Valley start-up incubator. Paul Graham, who was running Y Combinator, said Mr. Houston needed a co-founder fast. Mr. Vogt referred Mr. Houston to Arash Ferdowsi, an M.I.T. student. Within two weeks, Mr. Ferdowsi became Dropbox’s co-founder; he owns a 10 percent stake of the company.The duo worked in Cambridge, Mass., but struggled to land more funding.In August 2007, Mr. Houston and Mr. Ferdowsi moved to San Francisco to get closer to the start-up scene. A month later, they raised $1.2 million from investors including Sequoia Capital.Mr. Houston and Mr. Ferdowsi moved into an apartment building in the city’s North Beach neighborhood. It was known as the Y Scraper because of how many Y Combinator company founders lived and worked there. Mr. Houston and Mr. Vogt later became roommates.Advertisement“To this day, he still likes to have people over to his apartment and do jam sessions,” Mr. Vogt said.Mr. Houston also became close to Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook. In 2013, Mr. Houston joined Mr. Zuckerberg as a co-founder of FWD.us, a group that mobilizes the tech industry for immigration reform.Running Dropbox, Mr. Houston was at first determined to aim its product — which lets people store and access their files in the cloud — at consumers rather than businesses. He spent lavishly on employee perks, totaling $25,000 a year per person by 2016. The company once paid $60,000 for a five-foot chrome panda for its headquarters, becoming a symbol of start-up excess.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then hurdles sprang up. In 2011, a security researcher complained to the Federal Trade Commission about the way Dropbox encrypted files. Mr. Houston called dealing with the criticism “a rite of passage.”Dropbox also developed a reputation as an unwelcoming workplace for women. “Some of the things they’ve been struggling with are how to balance Dropbox being a fun place to work with accusations of having a frat boy atmosphere,” Mr. Mann said.Dropbox’s business evolved in 2014 after Mr. Houston hired Dennis Woodside, a former Google executive, as chief operating officer. Now its products are primarily used for work, with businesses paying a subscription fee for the platform. A rival company, Box, which was aimed at businesses, went public in 2015.“From Day One, Dropbox has been an incredibly user-friendly product — which is a big reason why it spread virally — but it also took the company too long to realize the money was in being a business-focused company, not a consumer-focused one,” said Ben Thompson, the analyst behind the influential tech newsletter Stratechery.In 2015, investors began questioning whether high-priced start-ups were living up to their skyrocketing valuations. Dropbox, already privately valued at $10 billion, was marked down in value by some large institutional investors.AdvertisementDropbox instilled more financial discipline. In 2016, employees lost many in-office perks. (The panda remained. A note posted nearby said it would serve as “a reminder” to be thoughtful about spending.)Whether Dropbox can compete against behemoths like Microsoft, Apple, Amazon and Google, which all provide cloud storage, remains a question.“Here you have somebody who’s literally in competition with all four, except Facebook,” said Hadi Partovi, an early Dropbox investor. But he added that Mr. Houston’s even-keeled demeanor had allowed the company to work with competitors like Microsoft and Google.Today, Mr. Houston lives in the Millennium Tower, a glass high-rise in the South of Market neighborhood. His apartment floors are stone and the furniture is minimalist and modern. In the living room, he has built a midsize stage to perform music. He has a house in Hawaii where he vacations.He is a bachelor and, his friends said, lives like one.“He never cooks. He’s a snack guy all the way if that makes any sense,” Mr. Croswell said. “He definitely wants a family.”On weekends, he and his friends around the country still put on their headsets and play video games together.“He doesn’t have to do any of the hacks anymore,” Mr. Croswell said. “Software companies all fixed that kind of stuff.”Follow Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @NellieBowlesA version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: At Dropbox, From an Idea To the Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 7, 2018
Q. I want to buy a lightweight laptop, but I need to use CDs and DVDs, which none of these models have anymore. Is there any way to still use discs with these tiny computers?A. When it comes to modern laptop design, many manufacturers have tossed disc drives onto the same pile with floppy drives, Ethernet jacks and other technology considered obsolete — thanks to cloud servers and wireless networks that have taken over a laptop’s data storage and internet connection needs. The quest for smaller, lighter laptops with maximum space on the inside for a rechargeable battery has also pushed out these once-standard computer components.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, as with adding back ports to these streamlined laptops, you can get external hardware to do the job. The ports on some newer laptop models may be limited to USB-C plugs only, so make sure you know what type of connectors work with the laptop you plan to buy. (If your preferred disc drive model does not have a connector that matches your laptop, you can get an adapter.)Major hardware makers, including Apple and Dell, sell their own external disc drives designed to work with their laptops, but you can likely find less expensive hardware from other manufacturers. Some add-on drives can be a little too cheap, however, so be sure to read the reviews before buying.Wirecutter, a product recommendation site owned by The New York Times, tested a variety of external disc drives and picked a $25 portable CD/DVD burner made by LG Electronics (the LG GP65NB60 model) as its top choice. For those who want Blu-ray disc compatibility along with CD and DVD playback and recording, the site recommends the Pioneer BDR-XD05B, which sells for around $90.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »The internet giant is being sued by former employees who say the company is going too far with diversity. Other lawsuits accuse it of the opposite.By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIMARCH 9, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — In 2014, Google became one of the first technology companies to release a race and gender breakdown of its work force. It revealed — to no one’s surprise — that its staff was largely white or Asian and decidedly male.The company explained that it disclosed the figures, in part, because it wanted to be held accountable publicly for not looking “the way we wanted to.”Since then, Google has made modest progress in its plan to create a more diverse work force, with the percentage of women at the company ticking up a bit. But a spate of recent incidents and lawsuits highlight the challenges the company has faced as it has been dragged into a national discussion regarding politics, race and gender in the workplace.Google is being sued by former employees for going too far with its diversity effort. It is also being sued for not going far enough.Advertisement“My impression is that Google is not sure what to do,” said Michelle Miller, a co-executive director at Coworker.org, a workers’ rights organization that has been working with some Google employees. “It prevents the ability of a company to function when one group of workers is obstinately focused on defeating their co-workers with whatever it takes.”The division within Google spilled into the open last year when James Damore, a software engineer, wrote a memo critical of its diversity programs. He argued that biological differences and not a lack of opportunity explained the shortage of women in leadership and technical positions.Google fired Mr. Damore. He filed a lawsuit in January with another former employee, claiming that the company discriminates against white men with conservative views. In a separate lawsuit, a former recruiter for YouTube sued Google because, he said, he was fired for resisting a mandate to hire only diverse — female or black and Latino — candidates.Google’s handling of the issue was also upsetting to Mr. Damore’s critics. In another lawsuit filed last month, a former Google employee said he was fired because he was too outspoken in advocating diversity and for spending too much time on “social activism.”Inside Google, vocal diversity proponents say they are the targets of a small group of employees who are sympathetic to Mr. Damore. In some cases, screenshots of comments made on an internal social network were leaked to online forums frequented by right-wing groups, which searched for and published personal information like home addresses and phone numbers of the Google employees, they said.AdvertisementIn 2015, Google started an internal program called Respect@, which includes a way for employees to anonymously report complaints of inappropriate behavior by co-workers. Some diversity supporters say other employees are taking advantage of this program to accuse them of harassment for out-of-context statements.“Some people feel threatened by movements that promote diversity and inclusion. They think it means people are going to come for their jobs,” said Liz Fong-Jones, a Google engineer who is a vocal supporter of diversity.Many big tech companies are struggling with the challenge of creating a more diverse work force. In 2015, Facebook adopted the so-called Rooney Rule. Originally used by the National Football League to prod teams to consider coaching prospects who are black, the rule requires managers to interview candidates from underrepresented backgrounds for open positions. But last year, Facebook’s female engineers said that gender bias was still a problem and that their work received more scrutiny than men’s work.Even executives tasked with promoting diversity have had difficulties. In October, Denise Young Smith, who was Apple’s vice president of inclusion and diversity, came under fire when she said that there was diversity even among 12 white, blue-eyed, blond men because they had different backgrounds and experiences. She later apologized, saying she did not intend to play down the importance of a non-homogenous work force. She left Apple in December.The tension is elevated at Google, at least in part, by its workplace culture. Google has encouraged employees to express themselves and challenge one another. It provides many communication systems for people to discuss work and nonwork related issues. Even topics considered out of bounds at other workplaces — like sharp criticism of its own products — are discussed openly and celebrated.In January, on one of Google’s 90,000 “groups” — internal email lists around a discussion topic — an employee urged colleagues to donate money to help pay Mr. Damore’s legal fees from his lawsuit against Google to promote “viewpoint diversity,” according to a person who saw the posting but is not permitted to share the information publicly.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some Google employees who are diversity advocates said management had not taken action against people who tried to bait them into making angry statements.Last month, Tim Chevalier, who had worked at Google as an engineer until November, sued for wrongful termination, claiming that he was fired “because of his political statements in opposition to the discrimination, harassment and white supremacy he saw being expressed on Google’s internal messaging systems.” He said one employee had suggested that there was a shortage of black and Latino employees at Google because they were “not as good.”Mr. Chevalier said he had been fired shortly after saying that Republicans were “welcome to leave” if they did not feel comfortable with Google’s policies. He said he had meant that being a Republican did not exempt Google employees from following the company’s code of conduct.AdvertisementA Google spokeswoman said in a statement that the company encouraged lively debate. But there are limits.“Creating a more diverse workplace is a big challenge and a priority we’ve been working to address. Some people won’t agree with our approach, and they’re free to express their disagreement,” said the spokeswoman, Gina Scigliano. “But some conduct and discussion in the workplace crosses a line, and we don’t tolerate it. We enforce strong policies, and work with affected employees, to ensure everyone can do their work free of harassment, discrimination and bullying.”In the past, discussions about diversity in Google’s online chat groups would encounter skeptical but subtle comments or questions. The debate turned openly antagonistic after Mr. Damore’s memo, which was titled “Google’s Ideological Echo Chamber.”“The James Damore thing brought everything to a head,” said Vicki Holland, a linguist who has worked at Google for seven years. “It brought everything to the surface where everyone could see it.”Mr. Damore said he began to question Google’s diversity policies at a weekly company meeting last March. At the meeting, Ruth Porat, the chief financial officer of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, and Eileen Naughton, Google’s vice president of people operations, “pointed out and shamed” departments in which women accounted for less than half the staff, according to Mr. Damore’s lawsuit.The two female executives — who are among the company’s highest-ranking women — said Google’s “racial and gender preferences were not up for debate,” according to the lawsuit. Mr. Damore subsequently attended a “Diversity and Inclusion Summit,” where it reinforced his view that Google was “elevating political correctness over merit” with its diversity measures.Mr. Damore said he had written his memo afterward in response.Ms. Scigliano, the Google spokeswoman, said the company looked forward to fighting Mr. Damore’s lawsuit in court. Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive, said in an August blog post that he had fired Mr. Damore because his memo advanced “harmful gender stereotypes” but that “much of the memo is fair to debate.”Some employees said they were abstaining from internal debate on sensitive issues because they worried that their comments might be misconstrued or used against them. Like the broader internet, the conversations tend to be dominated by the loudest voices, they said.Google’s diversity advocates said they would like to see more moderation on internal forums with officials stepping in to defuse tensions before conversations get out of hand. Ms. Miller, the Coworker.org co-director, said Google employees had expressed concern about how this would affect an internal culture rooted in transparency and free expression.Advertisement“What’s on everyone’s mind is: Has the culture been inextricably damaged by this environment?” she said.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwakaA version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Diversity Rifts Inside Google Bring Clash Of Lawsuits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By STEVE LOHRMARCH 8, 2018
What if the scourge of false news on the internet is not the result of Russian operatives or partisan zealots or computer-controlled bots? What if the main problem is us?People are the principal culprits, according to a new study examining the flow of stories on Twitter. And people, the study’s authors also say, prefer false news.As a result, false news travels faster, farther and deeper through the social network than true news.The researchers, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, found that those patterns applied to every subject they studied, not only politics and urban legends, but also business, science and technology.AdvertisementFalse claims were 70 percent more likely than the truth to be shared on Twitter. True stories were rarely retweeted by more than 1,000 people, but the top 1 percent of false stories were routinely shared by 1,000 to 100,000 people. And it took true stories about six times as long as false ones to reach 1,500 people.MARCH 8, 2018
Software robots can accelerate the spread of false stories. But the M.I.T. researchers, using software to identify and weed out bots, found that with or without the bots, the results were essentially the same.Advertisement“It’s sort of disheartening at first to realize how much we humans are responsible,” said Sinan Aral, a professor at the M.I.T. Sloan School of Management and an author of the study. “It’s not really the robots that are to blame.”Here are other findings from the research.The research, published on Thursday in Science magazine, examined true and false news stories posted on Twitter from the social network’s founding in 2006 through 2017. The study’s authors tracked 126,000 stories tweeted by roughly three million people more than 4.5 million times. “News” and “stories” were defined broadly — as claims of fact — regardless of the source. And the study explicitly avoided the term “fake news,” which, the authors write, has become “irredeemably polarized in our current political and media climate.”The stories were classified as true or false, using information from six independent fact-checking organizations including Snopes, PolitiFact and FactCheck.org. To ensure that their analysis held up in general — not just on claims that drew the attention of fact-checking groups — the researchers enlisted students to annotate as true or false more than 13,000 other stories that circulated on Twitter. Again, a tilt toward falsehood was clear.The way information flows online — and, occasionally, spreads rapidly like a virus — has been studied for decades. There have also been smaller studies examining how true and false news and rumors propagate across social networks. But experts in network analysis said the M.I.T. study was larger in scale and well designed.“The comprehensiveness is important here, spanning the entire history of Twitter,” said Jon Kleinberg, a computer scientist at Cornell University. “And this study shines a spotlight on the open question of the success of false information online.”MARCH 8, 2018
The M.I.T. researchers pointed to factors that contribute to the appeal of false news. Applying standard text-analysis tools, they found that false claims were significantly more novel than true ones — maybe not a surprise, since falsehoods are made up.AdvertisementThe study’s authors also explored the emotions evoked by false and true stories. The goal, said Soroush Vosoughi, a postdoctoral researcher at the M.I.T. Media Lab and the lead author, was to find clues about what is “in the nature of humans that makes them like to share false news.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The study analyzed the sentiment expressed by users in replies to claims posted on Twitter. As a measurement tool, the researchers used a system created by Canada’s National Research Council that associates English words with eight emotions. False claims elicited replies expressing greater surprise and disgust. True news inspired more anticipation, sadness and joy, depending on the nature of the stories.The researchers provided an example of two business stories, and how much more time it took the true one to reach 200 retweets. The example also shows the judgment calls made by fact-checking organizations.• In 2014, the fashion chain Zara introduced children’s pajamas with horizontal stripes and a gold star. The company said the design was inspired by what a cowboy sheriff would wear. But Twitter users posted messages saying the pajamas resembled Nazi concentration camp uniforms. Snopes: True. Time to reach 200 retweets: 7.3 hours.• In 2016, a website republished a portion of a satirical article about how the Chick-fil-A restaurant chain had decided to begin a “We don’t like blacks either” marketing campaign to stir up controversy and boost sales. It came after the company’s president did say he opposed gay marriage. Snopes: False. Time to 200 retweets: 4.2 hours.The M.I.T. researchers said that understanding how false news spreads is a first step toward curbing it. They concluded that human behavior plays a large role in explaining the phenomenon, and mention possible interventions, like better labeling, to alter behavior.For all the concern about false news, there is little certainty about its influence on people’s beliefs and actions. A recent study of the browsing histories of thousands of American adults in the months before the 2016 election found that false news accounted for only a small portion of the total news people consumed. “We have to be very careful about making the inference that fake news has a big impact,” said Duncan Watts, a principal researcher at Microsoft Research.Another author of the M.I.T. study, Deb Roy, former chief media scientist at Twitter, is engaged in a project to improve the health of the information ecosystem. In fall 2016, Mr. Roy, an associate professor at the M.I.T. Media Lab, became a founder and the chairman of Cortico, a nonprofit that is developing tools to measure public conversations online to gauge attributes like shared attention, variety of opinion and receptivity. The idea is that improving the ability to measure such attributes would lead to better decision-making that would counteract misinformation.Mr. Roy acknowledged the challenge in trying to not only alter individual behavior but also in enlisting the support of big internet platforms like Facebook, Google, YouTube and Twitter, and media companies.“Polarization,” he said, “has turned out to be a great business model.”A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Why We’re Easily Seduced by False News.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byState of the ArtBy Farhad ManjooI first got news of the school shooting in Parkland, Fla., via an alert on my watch. Even though I had turned off news notifications months ago, the biggest news still somehow finds a way to slip through.But for much of the next 24 hours after that alert, I heard almost nothing about the shooting.There was a lot I was glad to miss. For instance, I didn’t see the false claims — possibly amplified by propaganda bots — that the killer was a leftist, an anarchist, a member of ISIS and perhaps just one of multiple shooters. I missed the Fox News report tying him to Syrian resistance groups even before his name had been released. I also didn’t see the claim circulated by many news outlets (including The New York Times) as well as by Senator Bernie Sanders and other liberals on Twitter that the massacre had been the 18th school shooting of the year, which wasn’t true.Instead, the day after the shooting, a friendly person I’ve never met dropped off three newspapers at my front door. That morning, I spent maybe 40 minutes poring over the horror of the shooting and a million other things the newspapers had to tell me.Not only had I spent less time with the story than if I had followed along as it unfolded online, I was better informed, too. Because I had avoided the innocent mistakes — and the more malicious misdirection — that had pervaded the first hours after the shooting, my first experience of the news was an accurate account of the actual events of the day.This has been my life for nearly two months. In January, after the breaking-newsiest year in recent memory, I decided to travel back in time. I turned off my digital news notifications, unplugged from Twitter and other social networks, and subscribed to home delivery of three print newspapers — The Times, The Wall Street Journal and my local paper, The San Francisco Chronicle — plus a weekly newsmagazine, The Economist.I have spent most days since then getting the news mainly from print, though my self-imposed asceticism allowed for podcasts, email newsletters and long-form nonfiction (books and magazine articles). Basically, I was trying to slow-jam the news — I still wanted to be informed, but was looking to formats that prized depth and accuracy over speed.It has been life changing. Turning off the buzzing breaking-news machine I carry in my pocket was like unshackling myself from a monster who had me on speed dial, always ready to break into my day with half-baked bulletins.Now I am not just less anxious and less addicted to the news, I am more widely informed (though there are some blind spots). And I’m embarrassed about how much free time I have — in two months, I managed to read half a dozen books, took up pottery and (I think) became a more attentive husband and father.Most of all, I realized my personal role as a consumer of news in our broken digital news environment.We have spent much of the past few years discovering that the digitization of news is ruining how we collectively process information. Technology allows us to burrow into echo chambers, exacerbating misinformation and polarization and softening up society for propaganda. With artificial intelligence making audio and video as easy to fake as text, we’re entering a hall-of-mirrors dystopia, what some are calling an “information apocalypse.” And we’re all looking to the government and to Facebook for a fix.But don’t you and I also have a part to play? Getting news only from print newspapers may be extreme and probably not for everyone. But the experiment taught me several lessons about the pitfalls of digital news and how to avoid them.I distilled those lessons into three short instructions, the way the writer Michael Pollan once boiled down nutrition advice: Get news. Not too quickly. Avoid social.I know what you’re thinking: Listening to a Times writer extol the virtues of print is like taking breakfast suggestions from Count Chocula. You may also wonder if I am preaching to the choir; doesn’t everyone reading this story already appreciate print?Probably not. The Times has about 3.6 million paying subscribers, but about three-quarters of them pay for just the digital version. During the 2016 election, fewer than 3 percent of Americans cited print as their most important source of campaign news; for people under 30, print was their least important source.I’m nearly 40, but I’m no different. Though I have closely followed the news since I was a kid, I always liked my news on a screen, available at the touch of a button. Even with this experiment, I found much to hate about print. The pages are too big, the type too small, the ink too messy, and compared with a smartphone, a newspaper is more of a hassle to consult on the go.Print also presents a narrower mix of ideas than you find online. You can’t get BuzzFeed or Complex or Slate in print. In California, you can’t even get The Washington Post in print. And print is expensive. Outside New York, after introductory discounts, seven-day home delivery of The Times will set you back $81 a month. In a year, that’s about the price of Apple’s best iPhone.What do you get for all that dough? News. That sounds obvious until you try it — and you realize how much of what you get online isn’t quite news, and more like a never-ending stream of commentary, one that does more to distort your understanding of the world than illuminate it.I noticed this first with the deal Democrats made to end the government shutdown late in January. On the Jan. 23 front pages, the deal was presented straight: “Shutdown Ends, Setting Up Clash Over ‘Dreamers,’” ran The Times’s headline on the news story, which appeared alongside an analysis piece that presented the political calculations surrounding the deal.Many of the opinions in that analysis could be found on Twitter and Facebook. What was different was the emphasis. Online, commentary preceded facts. If you were following the shutdown on social networks, you most likely would have seen lots of politicians and pundits taking stock of the deal before seeing details of the actual news.This is common online. On social networks, every news story comes to you predigested. People don’t just post stories — they post their takes on stories, often quoting key parts of a story to underscore how it proves them right, so readers are never required to delve into the story to come up with their own view.There’s nothing wrong with getting lots of shades of opinion. And reading just the paper can be a lonely experience; there were many times I felt in the dark about what the online hordes thought about the news.Still, the prominence of commentary over news online and on cable news feels backward, and dangerously so. It is exactly our fealty to the crowd — to what other people are saying about the news, rather than the news itself — that makes us susceptible to misinformation.It’s been clear that breaking news has been broken since at least 2013, when a wild week of conspiracy theories followed the Boston Marathon bombing. As I argued then, technology had caused the break.Real life is slow; it takes professionals time to figure out what happened, and how it fits into context. Technology is fast. Smartphones and social networks are giving us facts about the news much faster than we can make sense of them, letting speculation and misinformation fill the gap.It has only gotten worse. As news organizations evolved to a digital landscape dominated by apps and social platforms, they felt more pressure to push news out faster. Now, after something breaks, we’re all buzzed with the alert, often before most of the facts are in. So you’re driven online not just to find out what happened, but really to figure it out.This was the surprise blessing of the newspaper. I was getting news a day old, but in the delay between when the news happened and when it showed up on my front door, hundreds of experienced professionals had done the hard work for me.Now I was left with the simple, disconnected and ritualistic experience of reading the news, mostly free from the cognitive load of wondering whether the thing I was reading was possibly a blatant lie.Another surprise was a sensation of time slowing down. One weird aspect of the past few years is how a “tornado of news-making has scrambled Americans’ grasp of time and memory,” as my colleague Matt Flegenheimer put it last year. By providing a daily digest of the news, the newspaper alleviates this sense. Sure, there’s still a lot of news — but when you read it once a day, the world feels contained and comprehensible rather than a blur of headlines lost on a phone’s lock screen.You don’t need to read a print newspaper to get this; you can create your own news ritual by looking at a news app once a day, or reading morning newsletters like those from Axios, or listening to a daily news podcast. What’s important is choosing a medium that highlights deep stories over quickly breaking ones.And, more important, you can turn off news notifications. They distract and feed into a constant sense of fragmentary paranoia about the world. They are also unnecessary. If something really big happens, you will find out.This is the most important rule of all. After reading newspapers for a few weeks, I began to see it wasn’t newspapers that were so great, but social media that was so bad.Just about every problem we battle in understanding the news today — and every one we will battle tomorrow — is exacerbated by plugging into the social-media herd. The built-in incentives on Twitter and Facebook reward speed over depth, hot takes over facts and seasoned propagandists over well-meaning analyzers of news.You don’t have to read a print newspaper to get a better relationship with the news. But, for goodness’ sake, please stop getting your news mainly from Twitter and Facebook. In the long run, you and everyone else will be better off.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo.Farhad Manjoo will be taking a leave of absence from the column to write a book. He will return in June.Advertisement
Tech We’re Using By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

MARCH 7, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Ian Austen, a correspondent who is based in Ottawa, discussed the tech he’s using.How do Canadians differ from Americans in the ways they use tech, and what are the most popular homegrown apps there?Many of the apps on Canadians’ phones would be familiar to any American — they generally include Facebook, YouTube, Snapchat, Instagram and Twitter. I’m leery of cross-country comparisons because they often mix survey samples and methods. But they suggest that Canadians spend somewhat more time online, and on Facebook, than Americans.That would follow. In the pre-internet age, Canadians were often world champions when it came to long-distance telephone use, something that could be accurately measured. It’s a big and sparsely settled country.AdvertisementThere are some hometown apps. Some are predictable: Canadian banks, large Canadian retail stores, Canadian news organizations (although The Times also has a large following here) and Canadian loyalty programs. But others are more surprising. Kijiji, not Craigslist, dominates online classifieds here. It’s owned by eBay and bombed when it was also tried in the United States.AdvertisementWhat are your favorite tech tools for doing your job? My two main tools also seem to be with nearly every other reporter surrounding me in media rooms at events: a MacBook Pro and an iPhone 7. Whatever harms they’ve brought to society and general human interaction, few things have made my job easier than smartphones.Right now, I’m also experimenting with Trint, an app that shows promise at taking over the transcribing of interviews, the most dispiriting part of an otherwise great job. It’s a bit expensive, and, right now at least, its accuracy swings wildly from being very impressive to producing something that resembles experimental prose-poetry. But there aren’t any obvious factors behind its hits or misses, like the quality of the recording or the subjects’ accents.Like the three other Times reporters who cover Canada, I work throughout the country. So in my (untidy) office in Ottawa I keep a work backpack ready for leaving town. My one tip for anyone who travels frequently on short notice is to buy a second laptop charging brick and keep it in your travel pack. Yes, I came to that solution the hard way.Along with my laptop, a Leica M (Typ 262) camera and three or four lenses go into my backpack when I head out to the airport or the car. Photos supplement my notes and voice recordings. They also make their way into the weekly Canada Letter that I write (please subscribe), and they sometimes illustrate my articles.A lot of people use a smartphone for photography. Why bother carrying a dedicated camera?The adage that the best camera in the world is the one you have with you is completely true. Most smartphones can produce very nice images, and I certainly use my phone’s camera. But squeezing a camera into a phone brings many compromises.Their incredibly small image sensors don’t match up to those in dedicated cameras, especially when the light is low. The tiny sensors also mean that you can’t really take advantage of the different perspectives that different focal lengths of lenses offer on dedicated cameras. Composing on a screen held away from your face is far from ideal, and if you learn about photography, controlling the exposure and focus of the camera become a big part of it.I’ve used Leicas on and off since I was in high school, and its rangefinder cameras, of which mine is a recent digital version, were once synonymous with photojournalism and documentary photographers like Robert Frank and Henri Cartier-Bresson. Leicas are more compact than any comparable digital single lens reflex camera, and I prefer the clarity of their optical viewfinders over the magnified electronic ones of other mirrorless digital cameras. They’re also much more discreet when taking photos during interviews.AdvertisementFilm still has a few tricks that digital can’t match, and I often also take an old Leica or another film camera along on trips.Beyond your job, what tech product are you currently obsessed with using in your daily life?I drink far too much tea, so the Breville One-Touch tea maker keeps me supplied and maintains productivity at the bureau, which is the fancy term for a space in the basement of my house in Ottawa.We also came into an Instant Pot, the surprisingly successful creation of Ottawa’s tech industry. My colleague in Cooking Melissa Clark is best placed to tell you all about the wonders of the amped-up pressure cooker.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cycling is a big part of my life. Last year, I became the last person in my branch of the cycling world to get a GPS computer for my bikes that also measures, among other things, my heart rate. It was joined by a similar watch I use while running and cross-country skiing, the winter activity for cyclists around here.Google’s sister company Sidewalk Labs intends to remake Toronto in a high-tech image. What do you think about the plans?There isn’t even a plan yet. Sidewalk is spending the next year doing consultations and coming up with a final design that will need government approval. But it has already put out an ambitious list of what it hopes to build. As now proposed, the plan involves a perhaps unprecedented level of data collection from people going about their daily lives. Dealing with the obvious privacy concerns that flow from that may prove to be its greatest challenge.What is Canada’s high-tech scene like now? BlackBerry has foundered, but Canada has a lot of well-known artificial intelligence researchers, especially in Toronto.It’s now bigger and expanding more quickly than it was at any point during BlackBerry’s glory years. Except for Instant Pot, however, not a lot of what goes on in Canada is directly connected to consumer products.Several of those researchers at Canadian universities were A.I. pioneers, and that has directly played a role in turning Toronto and Montreal, particularly, into centers for that work. Canada’s immigration rules, which make it quick and easy to bring in skilled workers, have also been a major factor and spurred growth in Ottawa; Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario; Calgary, Alberta; and Vancouver, British Columbia. As for BlackBerry, it’s still around, even if it’s much smaller and no longer makes phones.Follow Ian Austen on Twitter: @ianrausten.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Canada’s Tech Scene: Much More Than the Instant Pot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byArtificial intelligence video tools make it relatively easy to put one person’s face on another person’s body with few traces of manipulation. I tried it on myself. What could go wrong? By Kevin RooseThe scene opened on a room with a red sofa, a potted plant and the kind of bland modern art you’d see on a therapist’s wall. In the room was Michelle Obama, or someone who looked exactly like her. Wearing a low-cut top with a black bra visible underneath, she writhed lustily for the camera and flashed her unmistakable smile.Then, the former first lady’s doppelgänger began to strip.The video, which appeared on the online forum Reddit, was what’s known as a “deepfake” — an ultrarealistic fake video made with artificial intelligence software. It was created using a program called FakeApp, which superimposed Mrs. Obama’s face onto the body of a pornographic film actress. The hybrid was uncanny — if you didn’t know better, you might have thought it was really her.Until recently, realistic computer-generated video was a laborious pursuit available only to big-budget Hollywood productions or cutting-edge researchers. Social media apps like Snapchat include some rudimentary face-morphing technology. But in recent months, a community of hobbyists has begun experimenting with more powerful tools, including FakeApp — a program that was built by an anonymous developer using open-source software written by Google. FakeApp makes it free and relatively easy to create realistic face swaps and leave few traces of manipulation. Since a version of the app appeared on Reddit in January, it has been downloaded more than 120,000 times, according to its creator.Deepfakes are one of the newest forms of digital media manipulation, and one of the most obviously mischief-prone. It’s not hard to imagine this technology’s being used to smear politicians, create counterfeit revenge porn or frame people for crimes. Lawmakers have already begun to worry about how deepfakes could be used for political sabotage and propaganda. Even on morally lax sites like Reddit, deepfakes have raised eyebrows. Recently, FakeApp set off a panic after Motherboard, the technology site, reported that people were using it to create pornographic deepfakes of celebrities. Pornhub, Twitter and other sites quickly banned the videos, and Reddit closed a handful of deepfake groups, including one with nearly 100,000 members.Before the Reddit deepfake groups were closed, they hosted a mixture of users trading video-editing tips and showing off their latest forgeries. A post titled “3D face reconstruction for additional angles” sat next to videos with titles like “(Not) Olivia Wilde playing with herself.”Some users on Reddit defended deepfakes and blamed the media for overhyping their potential for harm. Others moved their videos to alternative platforms, rightly anticipating that Reddit would crack down under its rules against nonconsensual pornography. And a few expressed moral qualms about putting the technology into the world. Then, they kept making more. The deepfake creator community is now in the internet’s shadows. But while out in the open, it gave an unsettling peek into the future. “This is turning into an episode of Black Mirror,” wrote one Reddit user. The post raised the ontological questions at the heart of the deepfake debate: Does a naked image of Person A become a naked image of Person B if Person B’s face is superimposed in a seamless and untraceable way? In a broader sense, on the internet, what is the difference between representation and reality? The user then signed off with a shrug: “Godspeed rebels.”After lurking for several weeks in Reddit’s deepfake community, I decided to see how easy it was to create a (safe for work, nonpornographic) deepfake using my own face.I started by downloading FakeApp and enlisting two technical experts to help me. The first was Mark McKeague, a colleague in The New York Times’s research and development department. The second was a deepfake creator I found through Reddit, who goes by the nickname Derpfakes. Because of the controversial nature of deepfakes, Derpfakes would not give his or her real name. Derpfakes started posting deepfake videos on YouTube a few weeks ago, specializing in humorous offerings like Nicolas Cage playing Superman. The account has also posted some how-to videos on deepfake creation.What I learned is that making a deepfake isn’t simple. But it’s not rocket science, either.The first step is to find, or rent, a moderately powerful computer. FakeApp uses a suite of machine learning tools called TensorFlow, which was developed by Google’s A.I. division and released to the public in 2015. The software teaches itself to perform image-recognition tasks through trial and error. The more processing power on hand, the faster it works.To get more speed, Mark and I used a remote server rented through Google Cloud Platform. It provided enough processing power to cut the time frame down to hours, rather than the days or weeks it might take on my laptop.Once Mark set up the remote server and loaded FakeApp on it, we were on to the next step: data collection.Picking the right source data is crucial. Short video clips are easier to manipulate than long clips, and scenes shot at a single angle produce better results than scenes with multiple angles. Genetics also help. The more the faces resemble each other, the better. I’m a brown-haired white man with a short beard, so Mark and I decided to try several other brown-haired, stubbled white guys. We started with Ryan Gosling. (Aim high, right?) I also sent Derpfakes, my outsourced Reddit expert, several video options to choose from.Next, we took several hundred photos of my face, and gathered images of Mr. Gosling’s face using a clip from a recent TV appearance. FakeApp uses these images to train the deep learning model and teach it to emulate our facial expressions. To get the broadest photo set possible, I twisted my head at different angles, making as many different faces as I could.Mark then used a program to crop those images down, isolating just our faces, and manually deleted any blurred or badly cropped photos. He then fed the frames into FakeApp. In all, we used 417 photos of me, and 1,113 of Mr. Gosling.When the images were ready, Mark pressed “start” on FakeApp, and the training began. His computer screen filled with images of my face and Mr. Gosling’s face, as the program tried to identify patterns and similarities. About eight hours later, after our model had been sufficiently trained, Mark used FakeApp to finish putting my face on Mr. Gosling’s body. The video was blurry and bizarre, and Mr. Gosling’s face occasionally flickered into view. Only the legally blind would mistake the person in the video for me. We did better with a clip of Chris Pratt, the scruffy star of “Jurassic World,” whose face shape is a little more similar to mine. For this test, Mark used a bigger data set — 1,861 photos of me, 1,023 of him — and let the model run overnight. A few days later, Derpfakes, who had also been training a model, sent me a finished deepfake made using the footage I had sent and a video of the actor Jake Gyllenhaal. This one was much more lifelike, a true hybrid that mixed my facial features with his hair, beard and body.Derpfakes repeated the process with videos of Jimmy Kimmel and Liev Schreiber, both of which turned out well. As an experienced deepfake creator, Derpfakes had a more intuitive sense of which source videos would produce a clean result, and more experience with the subtle blending and tweaking that takes place at the end of the deepfake process.In all, our deepfake experiment took three days and cost $85.96 in Google Cloud Platform credits. That seemed like a small price to pay for stardom.After the experiment, I reached out to the anonymous creator of FakeApp through an email address on its website. I wanted to know how it felt to create a cutting-edge A.I. tool, only to have it gleefully co-opted by ethically challenged pornographers.A man wrote back, identifying himself as a software developer in Maryland. Like Derpfakes, the man would not give me his full name, and instead went by his first initial, N. He said he had created FakeApp as a creative experiment and was chagrined to see Reddit’s deepfake community use it for ill. “I joined the community based around these algorithms when it was very small (less than 500 people),” he wrote, “and as soon as I saw the results I knew this was brilliant tech that should be accessible to anyone who wants to play around with it. I figured I’d take a shot at putting together an easy-to-use package to accomplish that.”N. said he didn’t support the use of FakeApp to create nonconsensual pornography or other abusive content. And he said he agreed with Reddit’s decision to ban explicit deepfakes. But he defended the product.“I’ve given it a lot of thought,” he said, “and ultimately I’ve decided I don’t think it’s right to condemn the technology itself — which can of course be used for many purposes, good and bad.”FakeApp is somewhat finicky and hard to use, but it’s easy to imagine it improving quickly. N. said that in the future, FakeApp could be used by all kinds of people to bring high-budget special effects to their personal projects.Deep learning algorithms, he added, were going to be important in the future, not only as stand-alone apps but as powerful components of many tech products.“It’s precisely the things that make them so powerful and useful that make them so scary,” he said. “There’s really no limit to what you can apply it to with a little imagination.”On the day of the school shooting last month in Parkland, Fla., a screenshot of a BuzzFeed News article, “Why We Need to Take Away White People’s Guns Now More Than Ever,” written by a reporter named Richie Horowitz, began making the rounds on social media.The whole thing was fake. No BuzzFeed employee named Richie Horowitz exists, and no article with that title was ever published on the site. But the doctored image pulsed through right-wing outrage channels and was boosted by activists on Twitter. It wasn’t an A.I.-generated deepfake, or even a particularly sophisticated Photoshop job, but it did the trick.Online misinformation, no matter how sleekly produced, spreads through a familiar process once it enters our social distribution channels. The hoax gets 50,000 shares, and the debunking an hour later gets 200. The carnival barker gets an algorithmic boost on services like Facebook and YouTube, while the expert screams into the void.There’s no reason to believe that deepfake videos will operate any differently. People will share them when they’re ideologically convenient and dismiss them when they’re not. The dupes who fall for satirical stories from The Onion will be fooled by deepfakes, and the scrupulous people who care about the truth will find ways to detect and debunk them. “There’s no choice,” said Hao Li, an assistant professor of computer science at the University of Southern California. Mr. Li, who is also the founder of Pinscreen, a company that uses artificial intelligence to create lifelike 3-D avatars, said the weaponization of A.I. was inevitable and would require a sudden shift in public awareness.“I see this as the next form of communication,” he said. “I worry that people will use it to blackmail others, or do bad things. You have to educate people that this is possible.”So, O.K. Here I am, telling you this: An A.I. program powerful enough to turn Michelle Obama into a pornography star, or transform a schlubby newspaper columnist into Jake Gyllenhaal, is in our midst. Manipulated video will soon become far more commonplace.And there’s probably nothing we can do except try to bat the fakes down as they happen, pressure social media companies to fight misinformation aggressively, and trust our eyes a little less every day.Godspeed, rebels. Kevin Roose is a columnist for Business Day and a writer-at-large for The New York Times Magazine. His column, “The Shift,” examines the intersection of technology, business, and culture.@kevinroose•FacebookAdvertisementBy PAUL MOZURMARCH 2, 2018
SHANGHAI — Within its digital borders, China has long censored what its people read and say online. Now, it is increasingly going beyond its own online realms to police what people and companies are saying about it all over the world.For years, China has exerted digital control with a system of internet filters known as the Great Firewall, which allows authorities to limit what people see online. To broaden its censorship efforts, Beijing is venturing outside the Great Firewall and paying more attention to what its citizens are saying on non-Chinese apps and services.As part of that shift, Beijing has at times pressured foreign companies like Google and Facebook, which are both blocked in China, to take down certain content. At other times, it has bypassed foreign companies entirely and instead directly pushed users of global social media to encourage self-censorship.This effort is accelerating as President Xi Jinping consolidates his power. The Chinese leadership is expected to officially abolish term limits at a meeting that begins next week, giving Mr. Xi outsize authority over the country’s direction.AdvertisementZhang Guanghong recently discovered the changing landscape for technology firsthand. Mr. Zhang, a Chinese human rights activist, decided last fall to share an article with a group of friends in and outside China that criticized China’s president. To do so, he used WhatsApp, an American app owned by Facebook that almost nobody uses in China.AdvertisementIn September, Mr. Zhang was detained in China; he is expected to soon be charged with insulting China’s government and the Communist Party. The evidence, according to his lawyer, included printouts of what Mr. Zhang shared and said in the WhatsApp group.That information was likely obtained by hacking his phone or through a spy in his group chat, said China tech experts, without involving WhatsApp. Mr. Zhang’s case is one of the first-known examples of Chinese authorities using conversations from a non-Chinese chat app as evidence — and it sends a warning to those on the American platform, which is encrypted, that they could also be held accountable for what’s said there.“China is increasingly throwing its weight around,” said Joshua Rosenzweig, an analyst at Amnesty International.As Mr. Xi asserts himself and the primacy of Chinese geopolitical power, China has also become more comfortable projecting Mr. Xi’s vision of a tightly controlled internet. Beijing had long been content to block foreign internet companies and police the homegrown alternatives that sprouted up to take their place, but it is now directly pressuring individuals or requesting that companies cooperate with its online censorship efforts.That puts many American tech giants in a tricky position, especially those that want access to China’s vast internet market of more than 700 million strong. In the past, these companies have typically gone to great lengths to gain a toehold in China. Facebook created a censorship tool it did not use and released an app in the country without putting its name to it. Apple is moving data storage for its Chinese customers into China and last year took down software that skirts China’s internet blocks from its China App Store. Google recently said it would open a new artificial intelligence lab in the country.Often, these companies have little recourse when pressured for help by Beijing. Going to the American government could set off retaliation from China, so many have sought to navigate the situation on their own.“I personally am not sure what the solution is for these companies,” said Mr. Rosenzweig. “I don’t see a good answer because the Chinese government is really putting them between a rock and a hard place.”AdvertisementChina leaned heavily on major internet companies when Guo Wengui, a Chinese tycoon in self-imposed exile, went on Facebook and YouTube to accuse a number of Chinese officials of corruption. Chinese officials last year complained to Google, which owns YouTube, and Facebook, according to people familiar with the events who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the issue publicly.Facebook suspended Mr. Guo’s account. In a statement, the company said the account published the personal information of others without their consent, which violated the platform’s policies. A spokeswoman declined to comment on whether Beijing’s complaints played a role.Chinese authorities have also successfully persuaded Google to pull down content that had been available around the globe.The Chinese government asked Google’s services to take down 2,290 items in the first half of last year, according to the company’s statistics. That was more than triple the number it requested in the second half of 2016, which itself had set a record.Content related to terrorism made up a substantial portion of the material China asked Google to take down, according to its data. The majority of China’s recent takedown requests focused on videos on YouTube, the data showed. A Google spokesman said the company would not comment further on specific takedown requests.Chinese officials may have even bigger censorship ambitions.At a major Chinese internet conference last year, Mei Jianming, a Chinese antiterrorism expert, said Beijing should put more pressure on companies like Twitter. The goal would be to get them to change their terms of service so they could restrict posts by groups that Beijing considers subversive, like the World Uyghur Congress, which seeks self-determination for the people of the western Chinese region of Xinjiang.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Mei called for a crackdown on tweets that “defame the party, Chinese leaders, and related national strategies.”Sometimes, Chinese people also push foreign companies to censor themselves in the country, nurtured by sentiments on China’s propaganda channels.Daimler, the German carmaker, apologized in February after its Mercedes-Benz brand posted an inspirational quote on Facebook’s Instagram that it attributed to the Dalai Lama. China’s government views the Tibetan Buddhist leader as a champion of independence for Tibet, and Mercedes-Benz faced withering criticism from Chinese online users who shared those views.AdvertisementMercedes-Benz erased the post — even though few people in China could see it because Chinese authorities block Instagram. Still, criticism continued. The People’s Daily, the official newspaper of the Communist Party, branded Mercedes-Benz an “enemy of the people.”China is Mercedes-Benz’s biggest single car market, accounting for about one-quarter of sales.“China is getting stronger,” said Lokman Tsui, a professor at the School of Journalism and Communication at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, and a former Google employee. “They’re getting more confident in putting pressure on these platforms.”China is also requiring individuals to police what they say on global social media. In a prominent conviction last year of a human-rights activist, Lee Ming-che, the Chinese police used writing that he had posted on Facebook from Taiwan as evidence against him.“The fact that China is punishing people for critical content published outside China to audiences not based in China is of course a concern,” said Mr. Rosenzweig.The case of Mr. Zhang, the Chinese individual under scrutiny for what he posted on WhatsApp, could indicate a further extension of China’s reach.The Chinese police have previously focused on activists for what they say on foreign social media, but Mr. Zhang’s case seems to be one of the first in which someone has been charged for spreading articles on WhatsApp. Because WhatsApp is encrypted and run by a foreign company, it is generally considered a safer platform than local messaging app WeChat, which has for years been closely monitored by Chinese authorities.Mr. Zhang’s lawyer, Sui Muqing, said he was surprised when the police presented him with printouts of articles and comments from Mr. Zhang.“They didn’t get the information from him, but they have it,” Mr. Sui said. “That was what we found so weird. None of us knew how they were capable of getting that data and whether WhatsApp has become unsafe.”AdvertisementExperts said the information was likely gleaned from somebody within Mr. Zhang’s WhatsApp group or by accessing Mr. Zhang’s phone directly, not by hacking WhatsApp. Chinese officials formally blocked WhatsApp in China about the time of Mr. Zhang’s detention.A spokeswoman for WhatsApp said Chinese authorities did not have backdoor access to its encrypted messages. China’s Ministry of Public Security did not respond to requests for comment.“When I talk about technology and the internet, people normally pine for them and look forward to a future that will promote liberalization,” Mr. Sui said. “But people neglect the fact that modern authoritarianism also rises with the development of technology, which makes wider and deeper control possible.”Follow Paul Mozur on Twitter: @paulmozurCarolyn Zhang contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: China Exerts Digital Control Beyond Its Borders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By ALLAN HOLMESMARCH 2, 2018
WASHINGTON — The future of cellular service is coming to a neighborhood near you.But who gets to decide when, where and how it gets delivered is still a heated fight.The new technology, known as 5G, delivers wireless internet at far faster speeds than existing cellular connections. But it also requires different hardware to deliver the signals.Instead of relying on large towers placed far apart, the new signals will come from smaller equipment placed an average of 500 feet apart in neighborhoods and business districts. Much of the equipment will be on streetlights or utility poles, often accompanied by containers the size of refrigerators on the ground. More than 300,000 cell stations now provide wireless connections, and 5G will bring hundreds of thousands — perhaps millions — more.The prospect of their installation has many communities and their officials, from Woodbury, N.Y., to Olympia, Wash., insisting that local governments control the placement and look of the new equipment. They say that the cell stations could clutter neighborhoods with eyesores and cost the communities a lot of potential revenue.Advertisement“Residents across the country are just now beginning to understand the harms that hasty and insensitive small cell deployments can inflict on their communities,” said Jim Baller, the president of Baller Stokes & Lide, a law firm in Washington that represents municipalities on communications issues.AdvertisementBut telecommunications companies — hoping to cash in on what is predicted to be $250 billion in annual service revenue from 5G by 2025 — are pushing to build the system as quickly and cheaply as possible. And they have the federal government on their side.The companies, like Verizon Communications and AT&T, say that the equipment will be safe and unobtrusive, and that it is needed to support future applications like driverless cars. Dotting them throughout neighborhoods is necessary for full coverage, they say, because the new 5G signals do not travel as far as the radio frequencies now in use.The new equipment, AT&T told the Federal Communications Commission last year, “will revolutionize the way consumers and businesses use mobile broadband services, and of the emerging internet of things.”To get their way, the telecom firms have lobbyists working state legislatures, advocating laws that restrict local oversight of 5G. Since 2016, 13 states have passed bills that limit local control, and several other states are considering similar laws. Wireless companies are also lobbying Congress, which is considering several bills on the issue.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And the F.C.C., under the leadership of Ajit Pai, its Republican chairman, has strongly encouraged weakening regulations to accelerate the deployment of new 5G technology — including reducing the role of local governments.This week, another Republican F.C.C. commissioner, Brendan Carr, announced details of a plan to streamline the environmental and historic review process for 5G infrastructure, saying it could cut costs by 80 percent. The agency will vote on the measure this month.Mr. Pai and Mr. Carr have said regulatory changes are necessary to keep pace with global competitors. But bringing high-speed service to underserved areas — closing the digital divide — has also been one of Mr. Pai’s central arguments for reining in local regulations. The money companies save from fewer regulations, he says, can be used to expand broadband into rural areas.AdvertisementCity officials are not buying it. Mobilitie, one of the nation’s largest cell-tower operators, submitted an unofficial plan in Montgomery County, Md., in the fall, designating where the company might want to place small cells. Of the 215 small-cell sites in that plan, only 11 were in areas with fewer than 1,000 people per square mile.“It is deeply disingenuous to suggest that the need to pre-empt urban areas’ ordinances is so we can bring broadband to rural areas,” said Mitsuko R. Herrera, the county’s technology special projects director. “There is zero evidence to support that premise.”Jason Caliento, a Mobilitie senior vice president, agreed. “Small cells are a tool in the toolbox, but alone are not going to solve the rural divide,” he said.In January, Mayor Sam Liccardo of San Jose, Calif., resigned his seat on an F.C.C. 5G advisory committee, saying it was rigged to give industry what it wanted “without any obligation to provide broadband access to underserved residents.”In response, Mr. Pai said the F.C.C. looked forward to working with the committee “to remove regulatory barriers to broadband deployment and to extend digital opportunity to all Americans.”The wireless industry has filed multiple comments to the F.C.C. complaining about delays from local governments. AT&T executives said officials in California, whom they did not identify, had delayed deployment of small cells by more than 800 days because they “scrutinized” antenna designs, radio-frequency exposure and effects on property values, among other things. Companies have suggested cutting local approval windows by a month or more.Cities and counties argue the delays are caused by the wireless companies themselves. Officials in Montgomery County said Mobilitie had routinely filed incomplete applications that caused months of setbacks.Mobilitie officials said their relationship with local governments was “evolving” and leading to better collaboration. “I don’t think we’ve ever seen more progress” than has occurred lately, Mr. Caliento said.AdvertisementCity officials say shortening reviews risks small-cell facilities becoming unsightly and unsafe.That is what worries Donna Baron, a 75-year-old retiree who learned a streetlight near her home on DuFief Drive in North Potomac, Md., was marked to become a small cell, as were dozens more nearby. She held up an image of a possible cell station that might replace the light.“The pole is a lot rounder, it has boxes on it and a huge fake mailbox at the bottom,” Ms. Baron said. If the F.C.C. pre-empts local rules, “you’re going to end up with a Medusa, with a bunch more stuff attached.”Wireless companies are also asking the F.C.C. to cap local fees. AT&T says that three California cities assess fees of $2,600 to $8,000 a year per attachment, and that a “Georgia municipality is considering an annual fee of $6,000 per node.”David Young, who manages infrastructure leases for Lincoln, Neb., said he understood the carriers’ frustration. But he said cities had a responsibility to charge fair rates. He has negotiated with wireless companies to pay $1,995 a year per pole. He set the rate based on market analysis, which he discussed with the companies. “They were quite happy to pay the price that we asked,” Mr. Young said.Texas cities can’t negotiate rates. Last year, the State Legislature passed a law pushed by AT&T that allows cities to charge carriers no more than $250 per pole each year. Before the law, cities often charged $1,500 to $2,500 a year per pole, and the change will cost Texas cities as much as $1 billion over eight years, the Texas Municipal League estimated.AT&T argues that charging fees not based on cost violates the federal Communications Act, which blocks local governments from prohibiting broadband services.A group of Texas cities led by the city of McAllen, near the Mexico border, filed a lawsuit last year against the state, arguing that the new cell-site law violated the state Constitution, which prohibits the Legislature from forcing cities to grant something of value to corporations.Lawyers representing Texas argue the state has the authority to cap municipalities’ pole rental fees. During oral arguments in December, a judge denied the state’s motion for dismissal, and last month denied the cities’ request for a temporary injunction. The case is expected to go to trial this year.The maneuvering in Washington has left people like Marc King, 71, a longtime resident of Germantown, Md., feeling resigned.Advertisement“A Russian woman stood up to speak at one of these public meetings, and she said that when she lived in Russia, the government slam dunked her and she had no say,” Mr. King said. “Now she lives in the United States of America, where she’s getting slam dunked by the government and she has no say. That gives you a window into what’s going on here.”Allan Holmes is a reporter for the Center for Public Integrity, a nonprofit investigative reporting organization in Washington.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: 5G Cell Service Is Coming. Critics Fear the Stations Will Look Like ‘a Medusa.’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By MAYA SALAMMARCH 2, 2018
“No means no” began to give way to “yes means yes” as the credo of sexual consent decades ago, but the shift has been swiftly propelled in recent years by legislation and, most recently, by the #MeToo and #TimesUp movements.The concept of affirmative consent — the act of giving verbal permission clearly and often during intimate encounters — was pioneered at Antioch College, where an affirmative sexual consent policy was instituted in 1990. It was widely mocked then, but similar policies have since spread to campuses nationwide, and today, the concept is acknowledged well beyond university grounds.Now, apps aiming to help partners mitigate confusion in the bedroom have emerged, the newest of which approaches consent like a legal contract. LegalFling, which was introduced to users in beta on Monday, lets users give explicit sexual consent via an agreement, or a “live contract,” a dynamic document that users can continuously interact with and update.And yes, these agreements could hold up in court, said Andrew D. Cherkasky, a former special victims prosecutor who now handles dozens of felony-level sexual assault cases each year as a criminal defense attorney. He emphasized, however, that what LegalFling offers are not technically contracts, but documentations of intent, which are legally viable.AdvertisementLegalFling aims to make the sexual dos and don’ts explicit in a “fun and clear way,” according to its website.Condom use, bondage, dirty talk, sexting: the app lets users set their boundaries before an encounter — boundaries that can be adjusted at any time with a tap and shared with a potential partner. (Sound familiar? Netflix’s twisted-tech series “Black Mirror” incorporated a similar transaction in its episode “Hang the DJ.”)Advertisement“A profile update is an event we store on the blockchain and will subsequently update the live contract,” Rick Schmitz, a co-creator of LegalFling, recently said. The transaction is encrypted, timestamped and stored. (A blockchain is a collection of digital transactions that are registered in a sequence of “blocks” of data.)Will these apps revolutionize sex? Not likely. As complex human beings with ever-changing desires, we may not fit so neatly into click-and-consent existence portrayed in that “Black Mirror” episode, or envisioned by the app developers. But they are making steps toward addressing a problem that needs solving.Dr. Michelle Drouin, a leading expert on technology and relationships, said the apps are good at documenting consent, but don’t account much for fluctuating human emotions. They don’t necessarily allow for any immediacy of one’s feelings, she said.Use of the app “has to be planned,” she said, “and it’s really difficult for us to even know how we feel in the present moment, much less trying to anticipate how we might feel an hour from now.”Mr. Schmitz said that a LegalFling agreement does not override someone changing his or her mind in the moment or being too intoxicated, for example, to consent. The company suggests you withdraw consent via the app at that moment, but, of course, that’s not always possible.If encounters leave users feeling violated, Mr. Schmitz said, they should notify the aggressor afterward in a message, and it will be added to the record.AdvertisementAlso possible with a tap: triggering cease-and-desist letters, according to the website.The creators of LegalFling, part of the blockchain company LegalThings, which digitized regulation for the Dutch government, said they decided to apply their technology to sexual consent when, in December, Sweden proposed a law that would require people to get explicit verbal consent before sexual contact.A new newsletter on women, gender and culture.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Dr. Drouin is not sold on apps as a solution to a very human problem. The requirement to interact with an app during a sexual encounter is “completely unrealistic,” she said.“It would be very awkward within the context of an intimate encounter to be like, ‘Wait a second, I’m changing my mind on the app and also with you,’” she said.More important, she said, the app could persuade someone to fulfill acts simply because they agreed to them in advance, or to overcommit in an effort to appear more sexually adventurous.These digital agreements could certainly be used as evidence of, at the time the button was pushed, what an individual’s intent or desires were, according to Mr. Cherkasky. “We already see it all the time in social media or text messages,” he said, adding that they would most likely be legally viable in cases globally, as well.But these agreements do have the potential to be used as a means of protection to an aggressor, he said, especially by a violent and premeditating criminal. It’s very common in domestic violence cases for an attacker to have a “great deal of power over the person and force them to do a number of things,” he said.Even implying that someone doesn’t have the right to change their mind is a real risk, he said. Though the risk also exists for an accused person, who may have fully gotten consent in the moment even if “the box wasn’t checked.”“It turns consent into a joke, a technicality that people think is black and white or can be recorded in a moment of time,” he said.AdvertisementBut technology is reflecting a cultural shift in respecting and understanding the idea of consent, he said.Dr. Drouin agreed: People are now communicating about these incidents in ways that are recordable and admissible in court, she said. “It’s no longer ‘he said, she said.’”While LegalFling is the newest app hoping to address the rising tide of consent awareness, it’s not the first. We-Consent, introduced in 2015 by the nonprofit Institute for the Study of Coherence and Emergence, was created for students on college campuses to help them adhere to the implementation of affirmative consent rules.In 2014, California became the first state to require colleges to use affirmative consent as the standard in disciplinary decisions, which inspired the creation of We-Consent, said Michael Lissack, director of the institute.We-Consent records a short video of two people stating their affirmative consent, according to the company, and uses facial recognition technology. That recording is encrypted and inaccessible without a legal petition.There are over 100,000 encrypted files, Mr. Lissack said, but the institute has had only two requests ever to retrieve the videos. In both instances — before We-Consent turned in the videos — the fact that they were available spurred the cases to settle, Mr. Lissack said.“From Day 1, the purpose of the app was to get people who are about do something to discuss what they’re going to do with one another,” he said.Consent can happen only from discussion, he said, “not from sending emoji back and forth, nodding your head or signing some weird legal agreement.”Follow Maya Salam on Twitter: @Maya__SalamA version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Consent in Digital Age:  Can These Apps Solve  A Very Human Problem?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech We’re Using By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

FEB. 28, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Azam Ahmed, the Mexico bureau chief, who is based in Mexico City, discussed the tech he’s using.What are the most important tech tools that you’ve found for doing your job? My phone and the various messaging apps that I use are the only truly indispensable technology I have.WhatsApp is probably the most widely used messaging service in Mexico. It’s pretty much the only way to get busy people to respond to you. Some sources use Telegram and Signal, so I do as well, like other reporters covering sensitive issues they don’t want monitored.My colleagues will laugh about this, but I also use a GPS watch when I’m going off the grid, to have my coordinates wherever I am. When I was previously in Kabul, Afghanistan, a few of the other reporters teased me for using it, but I’ve found it reassuring to always have my whereabouts available when I’m in remote areas without any service — especially if it’s a violent area or one where kidnapping is a possibility.AdvertisementOn those same trips, I take a satellite phone and a Bgan, which is essentially a small transmitter that gets you internet when you’re in the middle of nowhere. And I have come to love the extra-long charging cable — I’m talking 10 to 15 feet. You find yourself in a crappy hotel with one outlet on the other end of the room, and you’ll know why.AdvertisementAll of the above, however, are in an ideal world. Twice in the last two years I’ve been sent on breaking stories from vacation, without any of my tech tools. Once was in Haiti in 2016, after a devastating storm. And again last year, after a spate of hurricanes that passed through the Caribbean.You’ve written about how journalists in Mexico have been targeted with spyware and other tech. How, from what you’ve found, does the government in Mexico use tech?The government has a long history of heavy-handed surveillance, and its use of technology is just the latest iteration of that. There’s no doubt it is using technology for surveillance, nor is there any doubt that it is paying exorbitant sums for it, as seen by various contracts made public and emails related to the government’s purchases of Hacking Team software that leaked a few years back.How the government uses the technology, however, appears far less sophisticated. I often wonder if it even has the manpower and resources to review all the material it gathers from surveillance operations. It has this incredibly sophisticated spyware, and yet most signs indicate reckless use without real material gain. Sometimes it can feel as if the government bought a Lamborghini to race around a go-kart track.What do you do, in broad strokes, to keep your communications secure? The least tech-forward thing you can imagine: I meet face to face with people.I tend to avoid messaging or talking about specific work targets on my main Mexican phone. I’m pretty sure I was sent Pegasus, the spyware purchased by the Mexican government, and though I’ve wiped that phone and replaced it, I’m cautious. I use the typical encrypted apps for communications and maintain several phones, which I use for different purposes. It’s annoying lugging all of them around, and I get funny looks at the airport when I toss three phones into the scanner basket. It’s also a pain keeping them all charged.How has the tech landscape changed in Mexico over the years? Is there a lot of tech start-up activity?AdvertisementLots has been written about the booming tech scene in Mexico, in particular in the city of Guadalajara, which is the latest place to be given some kind of Silicon Valley moniker. There are a bunch of start-ups there, taking advantage of the tens of thousands of engineering graduates coming out of prestigious programs in Mexico every year.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Is it a game-changer? I don’t know, to be honest. The entrepreneurs and officials here were trying to drum up support for recruiting foreign-born Silicon Valley engineers, to take advantage of President Trump’s immigration policies. Not sure that went anywhere past the headlines, though.What are the most popular kinds of websites or apps or gadgets in Mexico?Waze is especially popular in Mexico. In Mexico City, where I live, traffic is a force of nature. So if you don’t find the best way to get through it, you’re going to spend some nauseating hours stuck in the car. For me, and for a ton of others living here, Waze is essential unless you’re an old-school cabby who happens to know the city.Outside work, what gadget or software do you currently find yourself using a lot and why?I live a relatively low-tech existence. I’ve never been an early adopter of the latest tech “it” item; my phones are really the only technology I can’t function without.I did get a pair of Bose SoundSport wireless earbuds that are pretty awesome. The case doubles as a charging station, and they never fall out while I’m running. It’s also worth mentioning that they don’t look as ridiculous as the Apple wireless ones.As for apps: PayPal and banking apps to send and receive money and manage my finances, which can be a pain when living abroad.Find Friends is an app I got used to using in Kabul to track colleagues as they were on trips into dangerous areas. It gives you the GPS coordinates of anyone in your group who is using the app, to monitor his or her whereabouts. I still use that on occasion.Something has to be incredibly useful and life-altering for me to fold it into my daily life, and I haven’t found an app yet that I use every single day no matter where I am or what I’m doing. One reason is I don’t really have a fixed routine, given all the travel and the nature of foreign correspondence, where you are often in different places, covering different stories. The truth is I’m not really the ideal tech consumer.Follow Azam Ahmed on Twitter: @azamsahmed.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Juggling Phones to Dodge Spyware in Mexico.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »MARCH 2, 2018
Each week, Farhad Manjoo, technology columnist at The New York Times, reviews the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Good morning, readers! Let’s talk about tech.The stock market hasn’t been kind to new consumer start-ups. Snap, the maker of Snapchat, has been dogged by sluggish user growth since it hit the market last summer; its stock price is still below its $17 I.P.O. price. Blue Apron, the meal delivery start-up, is also trading far below what investors paid for its stock last June. The apparel retailer Stitch Fix, meanwhile, has gained some ground since its I.P.O. in November, but only barely.Now Spotify thinks it can buck the trend. After months of windup, the music-streaming company filed documents this week to sell shares on the New York Stock Exchange. It isn’t doing an initial public offering but instead a novel model called a direct stock listing — but let’s forget about the mechanics for now and consider its prospects.On the surface, it looks like a tough road for Spotify. The company is beset by wealthy competitors, is losing tons of money, and its business model does not offer an obvious path to huge profits.AdvertisementBut it has one thing going for it, and it’s huge: Spotify is excellent at what it does. None of its competitors match its pace of innovation and its wide cross-platform functionality. And although many musicians remain suspicious of Spotify, it offers the best path forward for the industry — a chance to thrive outside the cross hairs of Apple, Google, Amazon and Facebook.AdvertisementSpotify’s filings suggest strong growth. The company has 159 million active users, 71 million of whom pay for a subscription to its ad-free service. Its revenue in 2017 was almost $5 billion, up 38.6 percent from the year before. But its losses also piled up; its operating loss was $461 million in 2017, up slightly from $426 million in 2016.There’s a path here to success. Spotify’s grand theory is that as it grows, it can negotiate better rates with music labels, which then increases its chance of profitability. That’s happening — its gross margin is rising — but slowly. And it’s always going to have huge content costs; Spotify has to pay for music every time it’s streamed, whereas video streaming companies like Netflix usually pay for content just once.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Spotify is worth rooting for. It’s one of few examples of a thriving consumer company that sits outside the clutches of large American tech firms. (It’s based in Sweden.) Its independence makes it great for consumers — Spotify works just about everywhere, from your iPhone to your Amazon Echo to your cheapo Android tablet. Because music streaming is all the company does, it has an incentive to keep improving its service; Spotify, I’ve noticed, adds excellent features faster than most of its bigger competitors add basic ones.That’s the best reason to hope it survives.Last month, I asked readers to send in ideas for tech stories they’d like to see covered in The Times. I expected to get a handful of responses; instead we were inundated with hundreds of thoughtful suggestions. And I read all of them! Thankfully, most of you were brief.So, what would you like to see more of? A lot of things, it turns out.Many people were interested in cryptocurrencies and the blockchains behind them. What did they want to know? The basics, really, like what’s the deal with cryptocurrencies, what is a blockchain and why is everybody suddenly talking about both? We actually have some great explainers by our Bitcoin reporter, Nathaniel Popper — and stay tuned for more.There was also a lot of interest in “algorithmic bias,” the suspicion that the computers making so many decisions about our lives might not be fair or transparent. Readers were also interested in technologies for people who aren’t thought of as a natural audience for new tech — older people, for example, or people in rural areas. “Don’t overlook the folks who are being left behind,” said Michael Starks of Zionsville, Ind.Many had concerns about security. They wondered if the cloud was really secure, and if there was anything they could do to make themselves safer online. That’s an area Times reporters are constantly digging into, but for now, the brief answer is: You’re never as safe as companies say you are.AdvertisementFinally, there was an interest in up-and-coming tech, even tech that’s way out there. Important as they are, people are sick of hearing about Google, Facebook, Apple, Amazon and Twitter. They want to know about quantum computers, flying cars (oh, look, we got you covered there), any manner of robots and the start-ups behind them. And even beyond that: “All these billionaires, yet no one is making serious ground on time machines or teleportation?” asked one reader.Good question!So, some news: This will be my last newsletter for a few months. Like my nemesis Mike Isaac, I’m going to write a book about my hobbyhorse — how Apple, Amazon, Facebook and Google are conquering the world.When I get back, I hope they put me on the time travel beat. See you then!Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Spotify’s Path to Success, and Tech Coverage Ideas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
FEB. 28, 2018
The evolution of the smartphone can be summed up by two trends: Phones just keep getting bigger. They are also getting pricier.The chief examples are phones from Apple and Samsung Electronics, the top handset makers. Samsung this week introduced the Galaxy S9, its new flagship smartphone, with starting prices of about $720 and, for a slightly larger screen, $840. Years ago, Galaxy phones started at about $650.Apple’s iPhone prices are also increasing. Last year, Apple released the iPhone 8 for $699, up from the $649 starting price of earlier iPhones. In addition, the company introduced the iPhone X, its first premium-tier handset, for $999.Rising prices make the smartphone one of the most expensive household products. But unlike televisions, which plummet in price and attract bargain hunters, many consumers are willing to up their spending on phones.Advertisement“They become more and more essential to people’s everyday life, so price sensitivity just continues to erode,” said Jared Wiesel, a partner at Revenue Analytics, a pricing and sales consulting firm.AdvertisementYet plenty of people don’t want to splurge on a fancy phone every few years. Huawei, the Chinese manufacturer, was the No. 3 phone maker in the fourth quarter last year, IDC, a research firm, said. Sales of cheaper Honor smartphones and other low-end devices contributed to the company’s growth.And there’s a silver lining for those who want to spend less: Cheaper smartphones have never been better. If you spend between $200 and $300, you can get a capable, fast smartphone for basic tasks like placing calls, using maps and sending texts. Of course, there are trade-offs, like lower-quality screens and less impressive cameras.Is a budget phone right for you? Here’s an overview on the pros and cons of going cheap, with some phone recommendations from Wirecutter, a New York Times company that tests products.Let’s start with the downsides of buying a cheaper phone.■ You won’t get the best camera. Budget phones lack the advanced camera sensors found on high-end smartphones. So if you go cheap, your phone camera probably won’t be very fast, won’t do a great job at taking photos in low light and will lack features like optical image stabilization, which helps photos remain clear even when your hands are shaky. ”The camera is a big one,” said Andrew Cunningham, a Wirecutter editor. “If you’re taking photos, especially in low light, performance is going to fall off a cliff.”■ Obviously, you won’t get cutting-edge features like the infrared face recognition system on the iPhone X or the fancy stylus on Samsung’s big-screen Galaxy Note. You also won’t get the fastest computing processor, so your phone won’t be as capable of running games with heavy graphics.■ You also won’t get the brightest and most vibrant display. The fanciest smartphones have OLED screens, which have better color accuracy and contrast.■ You won’t get many software updates, which are important because they introduce new features and security enhancements. For phone makers, the priority is issuing big software updates to more powerful smartphones. At best, with a cheap Android phone you will probably get one major software update and a few security updates over 18 months.AdvertisementWith all that said, there are plenty of benefits to buying a good budget phone.■ You will get a decent camera. Many cheaper phones have high-resolution sensors that can take clear, rich photos. “A cheap phone today is going to have a better camera than a cheap phone from three years ago,” said Nathan Edwards, a senior editor for Wirecutter. “It’s not like they’re truly awful.”Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.■ You’ll get a good enough screen for reading websites, watching videos and looking at photos. Budget phones still use LCD, an older display technology that has greatly matured and still looks quite good.■ Your phone will be fast enough for important tasks like placing calls, sending and receiving email, browsing the web and running lightweight apps. If you aren’t an app-aholic or a gamer, maybe that is all you will need.So here’s the upshot. There is a strong argument for spending more on your smartphone: If it is your most important technology tool for work and play, you should probably invest in a superior device. But if you want a phone only for basic tasks and you’re not in a hurry to adopt the latest and greatest technology, a cheaper phone may serve you well.Now comes the tough part: picking a good budget phone and avoiding the duds. Wirecutter tested 20 of the best budget smartphones over the last few years to highlight a few. Expect to spend roughly $200.Wirecutter’s top budget phone is Motorola’s Moto G5 Plus, which costs about $230. It has a high-quality camera, a good 5.2-inch screen, a fast fingerprint sensor and plenty of storage. The device also comes unlocked, meaning it works with all American carriers. (If you want to spend a bit more, you could buy the Moto X4, which is water-resistant and on sale for $300, down from $400.)Wirecutter also highlighted Huawei’s $200 Honor 7X, which has a better camera and bigger screen than the Moto G5 Plus. The downside is it runs an older version of the Android operating system, called Nougat.Another option, if you prefer iPhones, is to buy an older iPhone model. Apple is still selling the iPhone 6s, introduced in 2015, which is reasonably fast with a nice camera and a good screen. It costs $449 through Apple, but you may find it much cheaper elsewhere. What’s more, Apple typically supports its iPhones for about five years, so the 6s should continue to get software updates through 2020.“A lot of things you’d have to pay 600 or 700 bucks for three or four years ago, you’ll get for $200 or less now,” Mr. Cunningham said. “If you just want the basics, a budget phone is going to do just fine for most people.”Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes about solving tech-related problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What confuses you or makes you angry about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Some Budget Smartphones Don’t Skimp on Features.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIFEB. 26, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — California regulators have given the green light to truly driverless cars.The state’s Department of Motor Vehicles said Monday that it was eliminating a requirement for autonomous vehicles to have a person in the driver’s seat to take over in the event of an emergency. The new rule goes into effect on April 2.California has given 50 companies a license to test self-driving vehicles in the state. The new rules also require companies to be able to operate the vehicle remotely — a bit like a flying military drone — and communicate with law enforcement and other drivers when something goes wrong.The changes signal a step toward the wider deployment of autonomous vehicles. One of the main economic benefits praised by proponents of driverless vehicles is that they will not be limited by human boundaries and can do things like operate 24 hours in a row without a drop-off in alertness or attentiveness. Taking the human out of the front seat is an important psychological and logistical step before truly driverless cars can hit the road.“This is a major step forward for autonomous technology in California,” said Jean Shiomoto, director of California’s D.M.V. “Safety is our top concern and we are ready to begin working with manufacturers that are prepared to test fully driverless vehicles in California.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While most of the companies leading the race for driverless cars are based in California, some have started testing autonomous vehicles in Arizona, where the state government has taken a more hands-off approach to the technology. Arizona has not created regulations for autonomous vehicles.AdvertisementWaymo, the self-driving car unit of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, started testing autonomous vehicles without safety drivers on Arizona roads in October. Since then, it has picked up passengers in driverless vehicles and it plans to start a ride-hailing service without human drivers later this year.AdvertisementUber has also deployed autonomous vehicles in Arizona, but it uses safety drivers in those cars.“This is a significant step toward an autonomous future in the state, and signals that California is interested in leading by example in the deployment of autonomous vehicles,” Sarah Abboud, an Uber spokeswoman, said in a statement.John M. Simpson, a director for Consumer Watchdog, a frequent critic of Alphabet’s self-driving car initiative, said the new rules will threaten highway safety as remote operators try “to control the robot car from afar.” He said the oversight will turn driving these vehicles into a video game “except lives will be at stake.”California requires companies to report the number of “disengagements,” or instances when human drivers are forced to take over for the autonomous vehicle. Waymo had the fewest number of disengagements — based on a per mile basis — of all the companies testing cars on California roads.Between December 2016 and November 2017, Waymo’s self-driving cars drove about 350,000 miles and human drivers intervened 63 times — or about 5,600 miles between every disengagement. Over the last few years, Waymo has made steady progress in reducing the instances when people need to retake the wheel.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwakaA version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: California Lets Driverless Cars Leave Driver’s Seats Empty.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.An emerging field, digital phenotyping, tries to assess people’s well-being based on their interactions with digital devices.By NATASHA SINGERFEB. 25, 2018
Your digital footprint — how often you post on social media, how quickly you scroll through your contacts, how frequently you check your phone late at night — could hold clues to your physical and mental health.That at least is the theory behind an emerging field, digital phenotyping, that is trying to assess people’s well-being based on their interactions with digital devices. Researchers and technology companies are tracking users’ social media posts, calls, scrolls and clicks in search of behavior changes that could correlate with disease symptoms. Some of these services are opt-in. At least one is not.People typically touch their phones 2,617 per day, according to one study — leaving a particularly enticing trail of data to mine.“Our interactions with the digital world could actually unlock secrets of disease,” said Dr. Sachin H. Jain, chief executive of CareMore Health, a health system, who has helped study Twitter posts for signs of sleep problems. Similar approaches, he said, might someday help gauge whether patients’ medicines are working.Advertisement“It could help with understanding the effectiveness of treatments,” he said.The field is so new and so little studied, however, that even proponents warn that some digital phenotyping may be no better at detecting health problems than a crystal ball.If a sociable person suddenly stopped texting friends, for instance, it might indicate that he or she had become depressed, said Dr. Steve Steinhubl, director of digital medicine at the Scripps Translational Science Institute in San Diego. Or “it could mean that somebody’s just going on a camping trip and has changed their normal behavior,” he said.“It’s this whole new potential for snake oil,” Dr. Steinhubl said.That is not stopping the rush into the field — by start-ups and giants like Facebook — despite questions about efficacy and data privacy.One of the most ambitious efforts is being conducted by Facebook.The company recently announced that it was using artificial intelligence to scan posts and live video streams on its social network for signs of possible suicidal thoughts. If the system detects certain language patterns — such as friends posting comments like “Can I help?” or “Are you O.K.?” — it may assign a certain algorithmic score to the post and alert a Facebook review team.
            Natasha Singer discusses how tech companies are looking for ways that our online habits shed light on our physical and emotional health on WBUR’s “On Point.”        In some cases, Facebook sends users a supportive notice with suggestions like “Call a helpline.” In urgent cases, Facebook has worked with local authorities to dispatch help to the user’s location. The company said that, over a month, its response team had worked with emergency workers more than 100 times.AdvertisementSome health researchers applauded Facebook’s effort, which wades into the complex and fraught realm of mental health, as well intentioned. But they also raised concerns. For one thing, Facebook has not published a study of the system’s accuracy and potential risks, such as inadvertently increasing user distress.“It’s a great idea and a huge unmet need,” Dr. Steinhubl said. Even so, he added, Facebook is “certainly right up to that line of practicing medicine not only without a license, but maybe without proof that what they are doing provides more benefit that harm.”For another thing, Facebook is scanning user posts in the United States and some other countries for signs of possible suicidal thoughts without giving users a choice of opting out of the scans.“Once you are characterized as suicidal, is that forever associated with your name?” said Frank Pasquale, a law professor at the University of Maryland who studies emerging health technologies. “Who has access to that information?”Will Nevius, a Facebook spokesman, said Facebook deleted the algorithmic scores associated with posts after 30 days. The cases involving emergency responders are kept in a separate system that is not tied to users’ profiles, he said.Facebook said it had worked with suicide prevention groups when developing the effort. Mr. Nevius added that publishing a useful study would be complex because of the difficulty in removing personal data and “the delicate nature of the posts.”Therapists traditionally diagnose depression by observing patients and asking them how they feel. Mindstrong Health, a mental health start-up in Palo Alto, Calif., is observing people’s smartphone use.The company has developed a research platform to continuously monitor users’ phone habits, looking at changes in taps and clicks for hints about mood and memory changes associated with depression.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are building digital smoke alarms for people with mental illness,” said Dr. Thomas R. Insel, a Mindstrong co-founder and a former director of the National Institute of Mental Health.AdvertisementMindstrong’s research app tracks 1,000 smartphone-related data points — like how long it takes someone to scroll through a contact list and click on a name. The start-up recruited 200 volunteers to participate in pilot studies. Dr. Insel said a few of the signals, like changes in users’ keyboard accuracy and speed, correlated with similar motor skills changes that researchers could measure in lab tests.Now the company is participating in a large government-funded study of trauma patients. Part of it involves using the Mindstrong platform to study whether patients who go on to develop post-traumatic stress disorder also develop corresponding changes in their smartphone use.“We’ve got these really interesting statistical signals with very high correlations,” Dr. Insel said. “But whether that’s going to work in the real world of clinical care is something we’re looking at right now.”He added that Mindstrong had tapped law and ethics experts to help examine the implications of its technology and develop ethical frameworks for using it.“You want to think through all the unintended consequences early on,” Dr. Insel said, “so they don’t come back to bite you.”The traditional use of a phone — talking — is also being examined for health clues. Sharecare, a digital health company based in Atlanta, offers a wellness app with an optional feature that analyzes users’ stress levels during phone calls.The system uses pattern recognition technology to categorize users’ speech, the company said. After each call, the system delivers reports like “you seemed anxious” or “you seemed balanced.” It also characterizes users’ relationships with the people they call in terms of attitudes like “dominance” or “affection.”Jeff Arnold, a co-founder of Sharecare, described the voice scan as “an emotional selfie.”“If I can tell you your stress level in real time, it will in itself change your behavior,” said Mr. Arnold, who previously founded WebMD.Health insurers and self-insured companies use Sharecare to promote wellness and manage health care costs. Sharecare is working with the Georgia Institute of Technology to study the effectiveness of its voice analysis service.AdvertisementJiten Chhabra, a health tech researcher at the university’s Interactive Media Technology Center, said volunteers who tried the voice-scanning feature reported feeling less stressed afterward. But he said it was too soon to tell whether the stress analysis itself directly caused the change — or whether volunteers had simply become more relaxed in their daily lives.The company does not record the content of the calls it scans, it said. But the app did collect phone numbers for people on the other side of calls from Sharecare users, according to an analysis by The New York Times. The service did not inform people on the phone with Sharecare users that their relationships were being analyzed.Jennifer Martin Hall, a spokeswoman for Sharecare, said the way the company protected data “makes it practically impossible for any Sharecare employees to access a phone number in the call information.” She added that characterizing users’ voice “analysis in terms of ‘relationships’ helps contextualize the relevance of their stress and enables them to be more mindful day to day.”Other researchers said such pervasive scanning could also have the opposite effect — increasing stress on otherwise healthy people.“It’s like we’re in school forever,” Professor Pasquale said, “and we’re being graded in all these ways forever by all the companies that have the most data about us.”Aaron Krolik contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Scouring  Our Clicks  For Clues  To Our Health.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech We’re Using By                     
 SAM DOLNICK
 
JAN. 3, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Sam Dolnick, an assistant managing editor at The Times who oversees digital initiatives, discussed the tech he’s using.You oversee podcasts, virtual reality and other new digital efforts. What does a typical day look like for your media consumption?I used to begin the day scrolling through my phone while still in bed. Recently I’ve gotten better at leaving my phone in another room while I sleep — which means that now the first thing I do when I wake up is make a mad dash to retrieve my phone from the living room.I read several email newsletters, then I read The Times’s front page in print, flip to the Opinion pages and scan for other articles to read on my phone during the commute.AdvertisementMy 7-year-old daughter will usually ask Alexa to play a terrible song — the democratization of music choice is one of the untold perils of the modern era. Then, Alexa will thankfully interrupt with an alarm that it’s time to leave for the bus.I work with the team that produces The Daily, and I listen to that day’s edition as I walk to the subway; I now take a longer route so I can finish it before the train. I’m always interested in the personalized playlists Spotify makes for me — what do the algorithms say about me? I check Twitter more often than I should, but it’s the easiest way that I find unexpected and surprising stuff. I try to look for at least one weird thing made on the internet every day.AdvertisementAt night, my wife and I will often watch a streaming show. We just started “Wormwood” on Netflix. And then I read actual physical books before going to sleep.You study new opportunities for The Times to distribute its journalism. How do you decide which ventures are worth pursuing? Lots of people have referred to this past year as a “media apocalypse” because of the harsh realities of digital advertising. But from a different angle, there’s never been a more exciting time to tell important stories and reach more people in more ways. Our mission at The Times is to help people understand the world, so we pursue opportunities where we can further that in new ways.We decided to push into virtual reality because we found the immersive power of the medium to be revelatory — the feeling of being able to inhabit physical spaces was a whole new way to understand the biggest stories of the day.We started making a daily visual-first edition of The Times for Snapchat Discover for different reasons; we want to get our work in front of people who may not otherwise read The Times regularly. And we thought that the phone-friendly language of Snapchat — full-bleed images, graphics mixing with photos mixing with videos — was a language we should develop as part of our own mobile evolution.And then we made a major push into audio because we saw a giant opportunity to reinvent our journalism in a medium that is quickly rising in importance. We are living in a world where the mobile phone is dominant, and audio, which doesn’t require your eyes or your hands, is the ultimate mobile medium. We launched The Daily in February, and it immediately became our best push toward rebuilding the daily habit of print reading. It’s really working. The Daily was the top downloaded podcast in Apple podcasts in 2017.We’ve got more to come in 2018, but look for those common threads. We’ll go to places where lots of people are already spending their time and mediums that allow us to help people understand the real world in new ways.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AdvertisementWhat are some of your favorite new publishing strategies that you see The Times or other outlets experimenting with?I know some people find push alerts to be intrusive, but I’m fascinated by them. I watch N.B.A. highlights right from my phone’s lock screen: The great Bleacher Report app sends out push alerts with embedded videos of the key moments from the games, often in real time. I never even open the app, but it has totally changed how I watch basketball.I’m also seriously interested in newsletters as a lo-fi way to form a deep relationship with readers. I’m not sure I’ve ever been to the Axios site, but I spend more time with Mike Allen’s newsletter every week than I do with most publishers’ home pages.I don’t know if any media organization has quite cracked the best way to use Amazon’s Alexa on Echos and Google Home, but I have both devices and am closely watching what works.I’ve become intrigued by the trivia game HQ Trivia, which seems to be getting at a burgeoning and widespread desire for shared activities that break you out of your own siloed tech bubble. I tried to get my wife to play, but she thinks it’s creepy and dystopian that everyone opens a phone at once.Finally, streaming TV feels like a new frontier where old rules about length, format and expectations are exploding in real time. When you’re not locked into 30 minutes with commercial breaks, what other conventions can you throw out?AdvertisementWhat is your advice for people who aspire to become reporters? What new digital tools should they start using today?Reporters of the future should master the building blocks of traditional journalism. The coin of the realm, no matter the medium, is the ability to find out new facts and to uncover things that someone doesn’t want you to uncover. If you can get inside the room and explain to people what happened there, and if you can do it quickly and reliably, you’ll become a strong reporter no matter how or where you tell your stories.Technology is so deeply embedded in our lives these days that you can’t be a good reporter without being tech fluent. You will find sources and story ideas on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter. You will correspond with sources on encrypted apps like Signal and Telegram.You should start your own newsletter. You’ll want to understand what makes for a good podcast, and what makes for a good video — all the better if you develop skills to make them yourself.Outside your job, what tech product are you currently obsessed with in your personal life?I’m on a wellness kick and have been using the Strava app for running and Headspace for meditating. And we’ve jumped on the Instant Pot bandwagon, though I have to say I haven’t yet become quite as obsessed as everyone else. Our tiny kitchen has not quite adapted to its modern new resident.What are some of your favorite podcasts other than The Daily?One of the Daily producers turned me on to an insane podcast called Dissect, where a guy analyzes, at very great length, every song on a Kanye West record. It’s like going to Kanye School, which I didn’t expect to do.I’m enjoying Slow Burn, Slate’s new podcast about what it was like to live through Watergate. I loved Ear Hustle, a sharp and humane series about prison life. And “This American Life,” of course, still offers a master class in storytelling every week.Follow Sam Dolnick on Twitter: @samdolnickA version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Tapping Technology to Shape Journalism’s Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIFEB. 27, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Flying cars are just starting to inch their way out of science fiction. But that is not stopping some companies from planning for flying taxi services.A growing collection of tech companies, aircraft manufacturers, automakers and investors are betting that fleets of battery-powered aircraft will give rise to air taxi services, perhaps as soon as the next decade. Some of those taxis, the companies hope, may even use artificial intelligence to fly themselves.The deal making, technology exploration and perhaps wishful thinking around this new sort of flying transportation — please, the companies ask, don’t call them flying cars — are reminiscent of the work done on self-driving cars just a few years ago.No one can say for certain if these new vehicles will turn out to be a real business. But many companies are already worried about being left behind.AdvertisementThe European aerospace company Airbus said Tuesday that it was making an investment in Blade, an aviation start-up in New York, and forming a partnership to expand Blade’s helicopter hailing service in more cities around the world. Last week, Dara Khosrowshahi, Uber’s chief executive, said he expected the ride-hailing company to start flying passengers on a service called Uber Air in five to 10 years.AdvertisementIn November, Boeing acquired Aurora Flight Sciences, a company specializing in flight systems for pilotless aircraft, for an undisclosed sum. Before the acquisition, Aurora had been working with Uber to develop a flying taxi. And Joby Aviation, a start-up in Santa Cruz, Calif., building its own air taxi, said this month that it had raised $100 million in venture funding from a consortium of investors including the venture capital arms of Intel, Toyota Motor and JetBlue Airways.“This is the natural progression of the vehicles we make,” said Ben Bridge, head of global business for Airbus Helicopters. “We want a seat at the table and a voice in the conversation that is happening.”Flying cars even played a bit role in the recently settled legal fight over trade secrets between Uber and Waymo, the self-driving car service spun out of Google.In court testimony this month, Travis Kalanick, Uber’s former chief executive, said he had heard that Larry Page — the chief executive of Waymo’s parent company, Alphabet, who has a side project building new types of aircraft — was upset because Uber was “doing their thing” with flying cars.Whatever you imagine a flying car to be — stop. What these companies envision is something like a helicopter but much quieter and more affordable. Think of a hobbyist’s drone, but big enough to fit people. It would, in theory, be welcome in urban environments and affordable to more than well-heeled businesspeople. At least, that’s the dream.Before there can be too much enthusiasm for these flying taxi services, it’s worth noting that self-driving cars have yet to turn into a notable business for anyone, despite about a decade of research at tech giants like Google and billions in investment from Silicon Valley and the auto industry.Regulators are just starting to agree on rules for large-scale tests of self-driving cars on public roads. How would they deal with flying taxis? The details of the future service are far — very far — from being ironed out.Still, there are some reasons for the new enthusiasm. Battery improvements and the wide use of drones have spawned technological breakthroughs. The taxis would take off and land vertically like a helicopter, so they’d take up less room. Because they would be battery-powered, they would be more environmentally friendly.AdvertisementFor now, Airbus executives hope to gain from Blade’s experience with an app that allows customers to reserve a seat on a helicopter. Airbus is expected to invest up to $15 million in Blade, which would represent about a 10 percent stake in the company, according to a person who is familiar with the transaction but not permitted to discuss the investment details publicly.Both companies see helicopters as an intermediate step until a new type of aircraft and taxi service hits the market. Rob Wiesenthal, Blade’s chief executive, said a quieter and less expensive alternative to helicopters “opens up a whole new world.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Airbus said it was preparing for a test flight by year-end for its CityAirbus aircraft, which carries up to four passengers and can reach a cruising speed of about 75 miles per hour. It plans to deploy the CityAirbus in 2023.Uber has said it expects to begin testing of its urban air taxis in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, Los Angeles and Dubai in 2020. The company has landed exclusive deals for vertical takeoff and landing spots with real estate companies, including in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.Uber declared its interest with its Uber Elevate initiative in 2016, forecasting a future when it could offer 15-minute Uber Air rides from San Francisco to San Jose for $20. The 50-mile ride with Uber Pool, its car-pooling option, usually takes about two hours in rush-hour traffic and costs $83.It did not put a date on that future.In a concept video for Uber Elevate, a woman opens the Uber app, which gives her a choice of taking a ride with Uber Pool, UberX or Uber Air. She enters a nearby building and rides the elevator to the top floor, where she boards an air taxi in Uber Skyport.Uber is also establishing performance guidelines for its flying taxis, including asking that the new aircraft make only one-quarter of the noise of a small four-seat helicopter. Uber also has supplier deals in place with five manufacturers, including Textron’s Bell Helicopter.“We believe the best way to get this idea off the ground is to partner with world-class companies and stakeholders that have a diverse set of specializations,” an Uber spokesman, Matt Wing, said in a statement.AdvertisementDaniel Wiegand, a co-founder and the chief executive of the German air taxi company Lilium, said investors considered him totally crazy when he pitched the company in 2015.“It has completely changed,” Mr. Wiegand said. Like many of his competitors, he dismisses the phrase “flying cars” because other companies are working on cars that fly as well as drive on the road. In September, Lilium announced that it had raised $90 million from investors, including the Chinese internet giant Tencent.And then there is Google — or, to be more specific, Mr. Page, Google’s co-founder and Alphabet’s chief executive. He has invested part of his personal wealth in Kitty Hawk, a start-up that has demonstrated a personal aircraft that flies using propellers over water. A Kitty Hawk division called Zee Aero is also reportedly working on an air taxi concept aircraft.Mr. Kalanick said he told Mr. Page that he believed a flying service “sounds pretty cool,” even though Uber wasn’t building one. But once the aircraft are available, he said, “I will make sure that our 50 million or so customers at the time can push a button and get a flying car.”Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Flying Taxis May Be Years Away, but the Groundwork Is Accelerating.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick Wingfield and Matt PhillipsIn Silicon Valley and on Wall Street, it has long been a guessing game about which of the most richly valued technology start-ups would be next to test the public markets.On Friday, there was an answer: Dropbox, an online file storage company privately valued at about $10 billion, filed paperwork to raise up to $500 million in an initial public offering.While Dropbox may not have the glamour of a ride-hailing app like Uber or a streaming music service like Spotify — both of which are likely initial public offering prospects — the company is in the same broad group known as “unicorns,” which are start-ups valued at more than $1 billion by the private investors that have so far funded their growth. How Dropbox fares as it goes public could help determine whether other unicorns follow suit.Dropbox will be especially scrutinized after the fizzling of other buzzy tech start-ups that went public last year. Shares of Snap, the unicorn behind the popular Snapchat app,  surged when it went public last March, but it has since struggled to stay above its offering price of $17 a share. And the meal-delivery start-up Blue Apron, which went public at $10 a share last June, is now trading at just above $3 a share.Still, the public offering market has gotten off to a fast start this year, with some 34 companies raising $11.87 billion in the public markets to date, according to Dealogic, a data provider. This comes despite a bout of stock market volatility this month that briefly sent the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index down more than 10 percent from its high in late January.In total, the number of private companies worth more than $1 billion stands at 228, up from 197 last May, according to CB Insights, a firm that tracks venture capital funding and start-ups.“We’ve been hoping that 2018 and 2019 would be the big year for tech and the unicorn class,” said Matt Kennedy, an analyst at Renaissance Capital, a firm that provides data on the public offering market. “Dropbox is definitely going to be a milestone.”Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and Deutsche Bank are among the banks underwriting Dropbox’s offering. A spokeswoman for Dropbox declined to comment.Drew Houston and Arash Ferdowsi founded Dropbox in 2007 after meeting as students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. They initially named the company  Evenflow after a song by the rock band Pearl Jam. Their goal was to make it easier for people to gain access to all their digital information, including documents and photos, on any device, and to automatically keep all those files updated as they were modified.Since then, Dropbox, which is based in San Francisco, has grown into one of the leading file-syncing services, though it faces stiff competition from Google, Microsoft and others. In its filing, Dropbox said it had more than 500 million registered users, more than 11 million of whom paid for the service.In its filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday, Dropbox said it intended to use the money it raises in the offering for a variety of purposes, including potential acquisitions. Dropbox still loses money, but those deficits are narrowing, and its revenue has been rising at a double-digit rate.Last year, the company lost $112 million, compared with $210 million the previous year. Its revenue rose to $1.11 billion last year from $845 million the year before.Whether Dropbox can support a high valuation in the stock market is unclear. Its closest point of comparison, a Silicon Valley storage company called Box, has a market capitalization of about $3.2 billion on annual revenue of about $400 million.Dropbox said in its filing that it expected its expenses to rise, and it said its revenue growth rate had slowed.Still, when it goes public, Dropbox will be an important moment, including for early investors — such as venture capitalists — who have pumped billions of dollars into an array of tech ventures and expect a return when the companies reach the stock market.Sequoia Capital, a prominent Silicon Valley venture capital firm, is the largest institutional shareholder in Dropbox, with about 23 percent of its shares, and another investment firm, Accel, holds just over 5 percent, according to the company’s filing.The biggest owners of Dropbox stock are its founders. Mr. Houston, 34, holds about 25 percent of the company’s shares, and Mr. Ferdowsi, 32, holds just under 10 percent.Mr. Houston, who is now Dropbox’s chief executive, grew up in Acton, Mass., and began programming at a young age and showing early signs of interest in entrepreneurship. As a middle schooler, he beta-tested computer games looking for security flaws. As a teenager, he worked for a robotics start-up converting its code to Linux.At M.I.T., Mr. Houston, who belonged to the Phi Delta Theta fraternity, would head to the roof of the fraternity’s building and sit on a folding nylon chair reading business and marketing books.“I wasn’t planning to get my M.B.A. on the roof of Phi Delta Theta, but that’s what happened,” he said, speaking to M.I.T.’s graduating class in 2013.Mr. Houston took a year off after his sophomore year and started an SAT prep company called Accolade with his former high school teacher Andrew Crick. The start-up did not work out, and Mr. Houston went back to school. After graduating, he repeatedly forgot to carry his USB memory sticks and said that inspired him to try to store files in the cloud.So he tapped Mr. Ferdowsi, still a student at M.I.T., to be his co-founder. The team received funding from Y Combinator, a Silicon Valley start-up incubator, becoming one of the firm’s most successful investments.On Friday, in a founders’ letter that accompanied their filing, Mr. Houston and Mr. Ferdowsi wrote about how they started Dropbox with the idea “that life would be better if our most important information lived in the cloud.”As their business has grown and more people have adopted their technology, Dropbox’s mission has now become “about keeping people in sync — connecting people and their most important information,” the duo wrote.Follow Nick Wingfield and Matt Phillips on Twitter: @nickwingfield and @MatthewPhillipsNellie Bowles contributed reporting.Advertisement
Bits By                     
DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and


JACK NICAS

FEB. 23, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo, technology columnist at The New York Times, reviews the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Farhad is off this week so Daisuke Wakabayashi and Jack Nicas, tech reporters at The Times, are stepping in. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Dai: Hi everyone. Farhad is off on a family vacation this week. (We’re not sure if he took his terrifying drone.) So our editor is leaving his work to us. We’ll try our best to match Farhad’s ratio of corny dad jokes to insight. I’m taking the reins with Jack Nicas, who joined our tech team last week.Jack: Hello, readers! I now cover Apple for The Times and previously covered Google at The Wall Street Journal. Dai covers Google for The Times and used to cover Apple at The Journal. Interesting strategy by The Times.Dai: It’s sort of like the business journalism equivalent of Parent Trap — maybe we can help reunite the two companies after their ugly divorce?AdvertisementI hear you went to Apple this week. How was that?Jack: Apple Park, its new campus that is often compared to a spaceship, is imposing. Coincidentally, it reminded me of the headquarters of a powerful tech colossus from a science-fiction novel. The people were nice, too. They liked that I had the new iPhone; they weren’t impressed with my $10 watch.AdvertisementDai: Did you see any coasters for the HomePods or people walking into glass?Jack: The meeting was off the record.Jack: Well, another week, and another example of the big tech platforms promoting misleading or downright false information. On Wednesday morning, YouTube’s No. 1 trending video was a clip that seemed to push a conspiracy theory that some survivors of the Parkland, Fla., school shooting who have called for stricter gun control are actually paid actors. The video, of a TV news broadcast that included Parkland student David Hogg, carried the description: “DAVID HOGG THE ACTOR….”Dai: It’s repugnant that anyone would keep pushing these conspiracy theories about kids who have already suffered so much, but this video was a little tricky. It was a video of a legitimate news story involving the student. It wasn’t a false or doctored video, and the content itself didn’t push a conspiracy. However, the title on the video framed this otherwise innocuous video as evidence of a broader conspiracy. Even the description isn’t obviously inflammatory unless you understand the context of why this student is being called an actor. Man, YouTube can’t bring on those 10,000 human checkers fast enough.YouTube took down the video before I had my morning coffee in California, but only after it attracted more than 200,000 views. YouTube said it has been trying to make changes so things like this don’t happen, but “in some circumstances these changes are not working quickly enough.”Jack: This example also highlights another issue with YouTube: Its video recommendations can push people to misleading videos and conspiracy theories. YouTube’s video-recommendation engine is engineered to keep you on the site. It’s pretty darn good at it. YouTube said recommendations fueled a 10-fold increase in use of the site from 2012 to 2016, to more than 1 billion hours a day.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After I finished watching the trending two-minute David Hogg video on Wednesday, YouTube immediately began playing a new recommended video: a clip of Mr. Hogg speaking to reporters with the title, “David Hogg Can’t Remember His Lines When Interviewed for Florida School Shooting.” YouTube’s recommendation algorithm seeks out videos that are drawing traffic, and company engineers admit that approach can tend to reward sensational and salacious videos.YouTube can also contribute to so-called filter bubbles by feeding you videos with perspectives similar to those in videos you already watched. That also means its recommendations can be an embarrassing window into your psyche. I mean, I wouldn’t want to reveal my recommendations to thousands of readers, like clips from comically bad movies or 1990s pro wrestling.Dai: Maybe that ‘90s wrestling knowledge will be useful when President Rock is in the White House.Jack: It wasn’t just YouTube that spread false information about the shooting. There were also Facebook posts claiming survivors were so-called crisis actors, which were shared thousands of times. And your reporting with Sheera Frenkel this week showed that Twitter accounts suspected to be Russian bots mobilized to tweet about the Parkland school shooting shortly after it happened, often pushing both sides of the gun-control debate.AdvertisementDai: The sad reality is that whenever these tragic events take place in the near future, it’s going to be a test for these platforms to see how they weather the deluge of conspiratorial and false stories. It’s gotten to the point where the first instinct for tech reporters is to search for key phrases on Google, YouTube, Facebook and Twitter. Much of the time, the results are disappointing.Jack: Meantime, the executives that run these sites have been slow to acknowledge the severity of the problem. After federal prosecutors last week indicted 13 Russians and three companies for spreading misinformation online in an attempt to subvert the 2016 election, Facebook’s vice president for advertising, Rob Goldman, posted a series of tweets that downplayed their impact.Dai: Of course, he walked it back after President Trump amplified the comments to his followers, saying this was evidence that there was no collusion between his campaign and the Russians. Kevin Roose’s column on this really brought it home. Those tweets from Mr. Goldman made it look like the company’s P.R. strategy calls for prominent executives not named Zuckerberg to defend Facebook aggressively on social media — and it backfired in a major way.Jack: Before we sign off, can I pass along this additional bit of good news about the internet? Twitter and Facebook are rife with impostor accounts, and — stop me if you’ve heard this before — they are slow to crack down on them.Dai: Sometimes this feels like Sisyphus and the boulder. Farhad will be back next week with answers from many readers about the types of technology stories they want to read. I’m already preparing my five Logan Paul stories.Daisuke Wakabayashi writes about Alphabet and its many arms, including Google. Jack Nicas covers Apple. Both also write about broader technology trends and Silicon Valley. You can follow them on Twitter here: @daiwaka and @jacknicasWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »

      By CADE METZ and 
    
KEITH COLLINS

FEB. 21, 2018

Tay said terrible things. She was racist, xenophobic and downright filthy. At one point, she said the Holocaust did not happen. But she was old technology.Let loose on the internet nearly two years ago, Tay was an experimental system built by Microsoft. She was designed to chat with digital hipsters in breezy, sometimes irreverent lingo, and American netizens quickly realized they could coax her into spewing vile and offensive language. This was largely the result of a simple design flaw — Tay was programmed to repeat what was said to her — but the damage was done. Within hours, Microsoft shut her down for good.Since then, a new breed of conversational technology has emerged inside Microsoft and other internet giants that is far more nimble and effective than the techniques that underpinned Tay. And researchers believe these new systems will improve at an even faster rate when they are let loose on the internet. But sometimes, like Tay, these conversational systems reflect the worst of human nature. And given the history here, companies like Microsoft are reluctant to set them free — at least for now.These systems do not simply repeat what is said to them or respond with canned answers. They teach themselves to carry on a conversation by carefully analyzing reams of real human dialogue. At Microsoft, for instance, a new system learns to chat by analyzing thousands of online discussions pulled from services like Twitter and Reddit. When you send this bot a message, it chooses a response after generating dozens of possibilities and ranking each according to how well it mirrors those human conversations.If you complain about breaking your ankle during a football game, it is nimble enough to give you some sympathy. “Ouch, that’s not good,” it might say. “Hope your ankle feels better soon.” If you mention house guests or dinner plans, it responds in remarkably precise and familiar ways.Despite its sophistication, this conversational system can also be nonsensical, impolite and even offensive at times. If you mention your company’s C.E.O., it may assume you are talking about a man — unaware that women are chief executives, too. If you ask a simple question, you may get a cheeky reply.Microsoft’s researchers believe they can significantly improve this technology by having it chat with large numbers of people. This would help identify its flaws and generate much sharper conversational data for the system to learn from. “It is a problem if we can’t get this in front of real users — and have them tell us what is right and what isn’t,” said a longtime Microsoft researcher, Bill Dolan.But there lies the conundrum. Because its flaws could spark public complaints — and bad press — Microsoft is wary of pushing this technology onto the internet.The project represents a much wider effort to build a new breed of computing system that is truly conversational. At companies like Facebook, Amazon and Salesforce as well as Microsoft, the hope is that this technology will provide smoother and easier ways of interacting with machines — easier than a keyboard and mouse, easier than a touch-screen, easier than Siri and other digital assistants now on the market, which are still a long way from fluid conversation.For years, Silicon Valley companies trumpeted “chatbots” that could help you, say, book your next plane flight or solve a problem with your new computer tablet. But these have never lived up to the billing, providing little more than canned responses to common queries.Now, thanks to the rise of algorithms that can quickly learn tasks on their own, research in conversational computing is advancing. But the industry as a whole faces the same problem as Microsoft: The new breed of chatbot talks more like a human, but that is not always a good thing.“It is more powerful,” said Alex Lebrun, who works on similar conversational systems at Facebook’s artificial intelligence lab in Paris. “But it is more dangerous.”The new breed relies on “neural networks,” complex algorithms that can learn tasks by identifying patterns in large pools of data. Over the last five years, these algorithms have accelerated the evolution of systems that can automatically recognize faces and objects, identify commands spoken into smartphones, and translate from one language to another. They are also speeding the development of conversational systems — though this research is significantly more complex and will take longer to mature.It may seem surprising that Microsoft researchers are training their conversational system on dialogue from Twitter and Reddit, two social networking services known for vitriolic content. But even on Twitter and Reddit, people are generally civil when they really fall into conversation, and these services are brimming with this kind of dialogue.Microsoft researchers massage the conversational data they load into the system in small ways, but for the most part, they simply feed the raw dialogues into their neural networks, and these algorithms therefore learn from interactions that are very human. According to Mr. Dolan, in analyzing this data, the system learns to perform well even in the face of poor spelling and grammar. If you type “winne tonight drink resttaurant,” it might respond with: “i’m not a fan of wine.”  It can engage in a real back-and-forth dialogue, asking for everything it needs to, say, connect with you on Linkedin. And for the most part, it behaves with civility.When Microsoft’s conversational system receives a message, it generates dozens of possible responses and ranks each according to how well it mirrors human dialogue. In this case, the system knows enough about the world to identify Adele as a singer.ResponseRankshe's a singer1i don't know who adele is.2she is a singer3lana del rey4i don't know who she is but she is a singer5i don't know who she is but she's a singer6i don't know, i'm not a fan of adele7lana del ray8i don't know who she is, she's a singer9who is adele10i don't know who she is. she's a singer11i don't know who she is but she's a good singer12i don't know who she is. i'm not a fan of adele13i don't know who she is but she is a very good singer14i don't know who she is. she is a singer15i don't know her name. she's a singer16i don't know her name, she's a singer17she's not a singer18i don't know, i've never heard of her before19you don't know her20i don't know her name21i don't know, i've never heard of her22katy perry23i don't know who she is but i don't know her name24i don't really know who she is but i don't know her name25But researchers must also deal with the unexpected. Though these conversational systems are generally civil, they are sometimes rude — or worse. It is not just that the technology is new and flawed. Because they learn from vast amounts of human conversation, they learn from the mistakes we humans make, and the prejudice we exhibit.Mr. Lebrun estimated that once in every thousand responses, this new breed of chatbot will say something racist or aggressive or otherwise unwanted. Researchers can fix these problems, but that involves gathering more and better data, or tweaking the algorithms through a process of extreme trial and error.This is a problem for A.I. services in general. More than two years ago, a software developer noticed that the new Google Photos service was identifying black people as gorillas. Google promptly barred the service from identifying gorillas and similar animals, and it has yet to provide a fix.But identifying and solving problems with conversational systems is harder, just because the scope of these systems — general dialogue — is so large. Image recognition is a single task. Conversation is many tasks, because it bounces back and forth, and each response can affect all the responses to come.For this reason, Adam Coates, a partner at the venture capital firm Khosla Ventures who previously oversaw the Silicon Valley A.I. lab attached to the Chinese internet giant Baidu, warns that building a truly conversational system is far more difficult than building services that can recognize giraffes, say, or translate between German and French. “There is a huge technical barrier here. We really don’t know how to build a personal assistant,” he said. “It may not be simply a matter of more data. We may be missing a big idea.”In the short term, many believe, conversational systems will be most effective if they are limited to particular tasks, like asking for IT help or getting medical advice. That is still a long way from a bot that will respond well to anything you say. But Mr. Dolan believes these systems will continue to evolve over the next few years, provided companies like Microsoft can get them in front of the public.“We need people to forgive us when we screw up,” he said. “Pushing forward is going to involve some screw-ups.”Chat animations are based on data from Microsoft and draw from 50 possible responses for each interaction.Illustrations by Minh UongAdvertisementBy JACK NICAS and SHEERA FRENKELFEB. 23, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — On Wednesday, one week after the school shooting in Parkland, Fla., Facebook and YouTube vowed to crack down on the trolls.Thousands of posts and videos had popped up on the sites, falsely claiming that survivors of the shooting were paid actors or part of various conspiracy theories. Facebook called the posts “abhorrent.” YouTube, which is owned by Google, said it needed to do better. Both promised to remove the content.The companies have since aggressively pulled down many posts and videos and reduced the visibility of others. Yet on Friday, spot searches of the sites revealed that the noxious content was far from eradicated.On Facebook and Instagram, which is owned by Facebook, searches for the hashtag #crisisactor, which accused the Parkland survivors of being actors, turned up hundreds of posts perpetuating the falsehood (though some also criticized the conspiracy theory). Many of the posts had been tweaked ever so slightly — for example, videos had been renamed #propaganda rather than #hoax — to evade automated detection. And on YouTube, while many of the conspiracy videos claiming that the students were actors had been taken down, other videos that claimed the shooting had been a hoax remained rife.AdvertisementFacebook faced renewed criticism on Friday after it was revealed that the company showcased a virtual reality shooting game at the Conservative Political Action Conference this week. Facebook said it was removing the game from its demonstration of its new virtual reality products.AdvertisementThe resilience of misinformation, despite efforts by the tech behemoths to eliminate it, has become a real-time case study of how the companies are constantly a step behind in stamping out the content. At every turn, trolls, conspiracy theorists and others have proved to be more adept at taking advantage of exactly what the sites were created to do — encourage people to post almost anything they want — than the companies are at catching them.“They’re not able to police their platforms when the type of content that they’re promising to prohibit changes on a too-frequent basis,” Jonathon Morgan, founder of New Knowledge, a company that tracks disinformation online, said of Facebook and YouTube.The difficulty of dealing with inappropriate online content stands out with the Parkland shooting because the tech companies have effectively committed to removing any accusations that the Parkland survivors were actors, a step they did not take after other recent mass shootings, such as last October’s massacre in Las Vegas. In the past, the companies typically addressed specific types of content only when it was illegal — posts from terrorist organizations, for example — Mr. Morgan said.Facebook and YouTube’s promises follow a stream of criticism in recent months over how their sites can be gamed to spread Russian propaganda, among other abuses. The companies have said they are betting big on artificial intelligence systems to help identify and take down inappropriate content, though that technology is still being developed.The companies have in the meantime hired or said they plan to hire more people to comb through what is posted to their sites. Facebook said it was hiring 1,000 new moderators to review content and was making changes to what type of news publishers would be favored on the social network. YouTube has said that it plans to have 10,000 moderators by year’s end and that it is altering its search algorithms to return more videos from reliable news sources.Mary deBree, head of content policy at Facebook, said the company had not been perfect at staving off certain content and most likely would not be in the future.“False information is like any other challenge where humans are involved: It evolves, much like a rumor or urban legend would. It also masks itself as legitimate speech,” she said. “Our job is to do better at keeping this bad content off Facebook without undermining the reason people come here — to see things happening in the world around them and have a conversation about them.”A YouTube spokeswoman said in a statement that the site updated its harassment policy last year “to include hoax videos that target the victims of these tragedies. Any video flagged to us that violates this policy is reviewed and then removed.”AdvertisementFor many people, getting around Facebook and YouTube’s hunt to remove noxious content is straightforward. The sites have automated detection systems that often search for specific terms or images that have previously been deemed unacceptable. So to evade those systems, people sometimes can alter images or switch to different terminology.Sam Woolley, an internet researcher at the nonprofit Institute for the Future, said far-right groups had started using internet brands to describe minorities — like “Skype” to indicate Jewish people — to trick software and human reviewers.Those who post conspiracy theories also tend to quickly repost or engage with similar posts from other accounts, creating a sort of viral effect that can cause the sites’ algorithms to promote the content as a trending topic or a recommended video, said David Carroll, a professor at the New School who studies tech platforms.That duplication and repackaging of misinformation “make the game of snuffing it out Whac-a-Mole to the extreme,” he said.That game played out across the web in the past few days, after a video suggesting that one of the most vocal Parkland survivors, David Hogg, was an actor became the No. 1 trending video on YouTube. After a public outcry, YouTube removed the video and said it would take down other “crisis actor” videos because they violated its ban on bullying. YouTube has since scrubbed its site of many such videos.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet some of the videos remained, possibly because they used slightly different terminology. One clip that had drawn more than 77,000 views by Friday described the shooting survivors as “disaster performers” instead of “crisis actors.”Other videos that were not about the Parkland survivors but that called the entire shooting into question also stayed online. A video posted last week by Alex Jones, the founder of the conspiracy theory site Infowars, titled “Red Alert! Evidence Mounts Florida Attacks Is a Giant False Flag” had attracted more than 300,000 views by Friday.AdvertisementOn Facebook, some of the posts the social network had vowed to ban were still gaining traction. One lengthy post had been shared more than 3,800 times by early Friday. The post included a photo of Mr. Hogg and his classmate Emma Gonzalez with the text “Globalist Deep State Crisis Actors.”After The New York Times contacted the author of the post, a self-described political analyst named John Miranda, the post disappeared. It is unclear if Facebook removed it. Mr. Miranda did not respond to a request for comment.The tech companies’ increasing efforts to remove misinformation have a side effect: angering some of their most active users.Moe Othman, a comedian and commentator on YouTube who has about 60,000 subscribers, said that within 10 minutes of posting a video on Wednesday that suggested some Parkland students were actors, YouTube removed it and placed a strike on his account. YouTube terminates accounts after three strikes.Mr. Othman said in a private message on Twitter: “I’m not surprised. We live in a world where information is one of the most important tools.” He added, “In this case, I see YouTube as a censoring machine.”Would he stop using YouTube? No, he said, “mainly because I’m still a comedian who simply wants to make people laugh.”Follow Jack Nicas and Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @jacknicas and @sheerafA version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2018, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Lies Elude the Promises of Online Giants to Do Better in Stamping Them Out.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech We’re Using By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

FEB. 21, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Natasha Singer, a technology reporter for The Times in New York, discussed the tech she’s using.You report on digital privacy, health and education technology. What are your most important tools for doing your job? We’re living in a surveillance economy where sites and apps can track and categorize our every online move. In that ecosystem, encrypted communication services have become some of my most important reporting tools.For people who would rather not reach me through my corporate Gmail account at The Times, I use ProtonMail, an encrypted email service. I also use Signal, an encrypted text messaging and calling service. And I do some online research through Tor, a browser that masks your online address so sites can’t track your physical location. I also use DuckDuckGo, a search engine that doesn’t store your search history.AdvertisementMy wariness of tracking developed when I was a cub reporter in Moscow. On one of my first stories there, I invited a Russian legislator, who was a democracy advocate, to lunch at a restaurant near the Kremlin. She arrived and immediately started combing through a vase of flowers on the table, checking for government listening devices. After that, I often interviewed Russian democracy activists during walks in local parks and forests.AdvertisementIt made an impression on me that even the mere idea of being surveilled can chill people’s behavior.Now I view privacy not so much as the ability to keep your personal details away from prying government agencies or companies. Privacy is the right to choose which entities access information about you, control how those entities use your data, check the fairness of data-based decisions made about you, and correct errors.Since American consumers currently lack those kinds of rights over most of their data, I’ve grown fond of tools that lift the hood on online tracking and profiling.One tool I use on my laptop is Disconnect, a service that shows you the third parties tracking you on every site. When I was reading articles this morning about the Trump administration, Disconnect counted 78 advertising networks, analytics services and others tracking me on HuffPost; 24 trackers on The New York Times site, and 19 on The Washington Post.What could be better about some of these tools?ProtonMail can be cumbersome. The service encrypts your emails before they reach the ProtonMail server. As a result, you can’t search the texts of your emails for keywords if you use the free service. You can search only the subject lines.It’s a constant reminder that ceding to online surveillance is much more frictionless than trying to limit it. Recently Apple investors raised concerns about smartphone addiction and children. Is this a problem and are there adequate solutions?AdvertisementI’ve heard from many parents, including a few physicians, concerned about the amount of time their kids are spending online at school and at home. It’s so difficult to find the right balance between making sure our children are fluent with online tools and protecting them from getting sucked in by habit-forming video platforms and social networks. Many parents feel they are up against a powerful, interlocking ecosystem, designed to hook their kids on constant scrolling, watching, and clicking.Given the vast ecosystem, however, singling out Apple as the culprit seems to me a little bit like blaming only soda can manufacturers for Americans’ addiction to sugary beverages. Yes, it would be terrific if Apple introduced new control options for parents. But if shareholders want to fault companies for manipulating or addicting users, they should also be taking a hard look at Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, Snapchat, Netflix and many more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even small user-interface changes could make a big difference. Imagine if the default setting for streaming video services wasn’t autoplay.On a larger level, we’ve seen over the past year how some Big Tech companies initially refused to take responsibility for the spread of fake news and other side effects of their innovations. In that context, platforms that nudge children and adults to stay online are merely one symptom of a much bigger problem.You wrote a series last year examining tech industry influence in American public schools. Now you’re looking into Silicon Valley’s increasing footprint in the health sector. What are the similarities and differences?There’s huge hype around the idea that tech can improve education. Same goes for health.So far, however, there’s not much rigorous evidence that learning apps on their own improve students’ educational results. Likewise, there is little hard evidence that health apps by themselves reduce disease.Still, I’m optimistic about the potential for software in health.That’s partly because a few tech companies are participating in rigorous studies, called randomized controlled trials. In these studies, researchers randomly select some volunteers to try a new intervention. By comparing the results in the treated and untreated groups, researchers could identify apps that do make significant health contributions.Beyond your job, what tech product are you currently obsessed with in your daily life? Every weekend, I try out a new recipe from NYT Cooking. And while I’m cooking, I listen to podcasts.I’m currently devouring Uncivil, a history podcast on the Civil War. It unfolds like a detective story. And while you’re engrossed in the plot twists, it neatly obliterates the standard American narrative of the Civil War.AdvertisementRight now, my family is on a bit of a Brit TV binge. We just watched the second season of “The Crown,” the fictional series on Queen Elizabeth II, and “The Coronation,” a glowing documentary featuring the real QE2. And we raced through “Prime Suspect: Tennison,” the prequel to the classic TV police procedural that starred Helen Mirren.I also just took an audio boot camp course at Columbia University School of Journalism. Now I’m teaching myself to use Hindenburg, a radio editing program.Are you doing anything unusual to limit the spread of your data?It may seem quaint, but I still relish the idea that people in a democratic society have the right to be anonymous in public. I think Americans should be able to attend political protests or drive to the grocery store in our pajamas without being recognized by government agencies or companies.The recent proliferation of face recognition software, however, poses huge risks to public anonymity. In simple terms, face recognition software works by scanning a photo of your face and then converting your facial topography into a unique code, called a face print. The benefit — as well as the hazard — is that a company that takes a face print from one photo of you could potentially use it to identify you in any other photo or video frame.I may be particularly attuned to the fragility of public anonymity because, like many journalists, I’ve been doxed.So, as an experiment, I’ve been limiting photos of myself online to see whether I have any control over how they spread. As a kind of inside joke, my Twitter avatar is an illustration that Minh Uong, the art director in the Times’s Business section, created for an article I once wrote about the risks of facial recognition.Follow Natasha Singer on Twitter: @natashanytA version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Limiting Influence of Tech While Reporting on It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Cade MetzSAN FRANCISCO — A Silicon Valley start-up recently unveiled a drone that can set a course entirely on its own. A handy smartphone app allows the user to tell the airborne drone to follow someone. Once the drone starts tracking, its subject will find it remarkably hard to shake.The drone is meant to be a fun gadget — sort of a flying selfie stick. But it is not unreasonable to find this automated bloodhound a little unnerving.On Tuesday, a group of artificial intelligence researchers and policymakers from prominent labs and think tanks in both the United States and Britain released a report that described how rapidly evolving and increasingly affordable A.I. technologies could be used for malicious purposes. They proposed preventive measures including being careful with how research is shared: Don’t spread it widely until you have a good understanding of its risks.A.I. experts and pundits have discussed the threats created by the technology for years, but this is among the first efforts to tackle the issue head-on. And the little tracking drone helps explain what they are worried about.The drone, made by a company called Skydio and announced this month, costs $2,499. It was made with technological building blocks that are available to anyone: ordinary cameras, open-source software and low-cost computer chips.In time, putting these pieces together — researchers call them dual-use technologies — will become increasingly easy and inexpensive. How hard would it be to make a similar but dangerous device?“This stuff is getting more available in every sense,” said one of Skydio’s founders, Adam Bry. These same technologies are bringing a new level of autonomy to cars, warehouse robots, security cameras and a wide range of internet services.But at times, new A.I. systems also exhibit strange and unexpected behavior because the way they learn from large amounts of data is not entirely understood. That makes them vulnerable to manipulation; today’s computer vision algorithms, for example, can be fooled into seeing things that are not there.“This becomes a problem as these systems are widely deployed,” said Miles Brundage, a research fellow at the University of Oxford’s Future of Humanity Institute and one of the report’s primary authors. “It is something the community needs to get ahead of.”The report warns against the misuse of drones and other autonomous robots. But there may be bigger concerns in less obvious places, said Paul Scharre, another author of the report, who had helped set policy involving autonomous systems and emerging weapons technologies at the Defense Department and is now a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security.“Drones have really captured the imagination,” he said. “But what is harder to anticipate — and wrap our heads around — is all the less tangible ways that A.I. is being integrated into our lives.”The rapid evolution of A.I. is creating new security holes. If a computer-vision system can be fooled into seeing things that are not there, for example, miscreants can circumvent security cameras or compromise a driverless car.Researchers are also developing A.I. systems that can find and exploit security holes in all sorts of other systems, Mr. Scharre said. These systems can be used for both defense and offense.Automated techniques will make it easier to carry out attacks that now require extensive human labor, including “spear phishing,” which involves gathering and exploiting personal data of victims. In the years to come, the report said, machines will be more adept at collecting and deploying this data on their own.A.I. systems are increasingly adept at generating believable audio and video on their own. This will accelerate the progress of virtual reality, online games and movie animation. It will also make it easier for bad actors to spread misinformation online, the report said.This is already beginning to happen through a technology called “Deepfakes,” which provides a simple way of grafting anyone’s head onto a pornographic video — or put words into the mouth of the president.Some believe concerns over the progress of A.I. are overblown. Alex Dalyac, chief executive and co-founder of a computer vision start-up called Tractable, acknowledged that machine learning will soon produce fake audio and video that humans cannot distinguish from the real thing. But he believes other systems will also get better at identifying misinformation. Ultimately, he said, these systems will win the day.To others, that sounds like an endless cat-and-mouse game between A.I. systems trying to create the fake content and those trying to identify it.“We need to assume that there will be advances on both sides,” Mr. Scharre said.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. My new Mac laptop has a headphone jack and one USB-C port for everything else. What’s the best way to connect an H.D.M.I. cable or my camera’s Secure Digital memory card without having to haul around a bunch of adapters when I travel?A. As cloud-based file storage and wireless connections have become common, Apple’s MacBook family (and some Windows-based ultrabooks) have been shedding ports and slots, all to make a more lightweight laptop. Apple and other vendors sell individual USB-C adapters (also called dongles) to convert the port for use with standard USB connectors, H.D.M.I. video cables, Secure Digital card readers and other gear.Individual adapters can cost as little as $10, and you have to buy them only for ports you actually need. If you have more than two jacks to convert, investing a bit more money in a USB-C dock or hub simplifies things. One way to shop for a multiport dock is to make a list of all the connections you need to use with the laptop — like multiple standard USB ports, H.D.M.I. or V.G.A. cables, and additional USB-C hardware — and then look for a model that has places to plug in everything.If you need a portable dock that has both an H.D.M.I. port and an SD card reader, the OWC USB-C Travel Dock is one option; it sells for $50 and is about the size of a thick beverage coaster. The $200 Henge Stone dock is bigger and more expensive, but offers more ports. Other companies offer similar multiport docks, so shop around and compare reviews.Wirecutter, a product-recommendation site owned by The New York Times, has a guide to picking the best USB-C hub based on specific connection needs. The site also has suggestions for Thunderbolt docks for MacBook Pro laptops and other models that use the Thunderbolt 3 technology with USB-C connectors.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy CADE METZFEB. 19, 2018
MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. — If you want to understand the priorities of a technology company, first look at the seating chart.At Google’s Silicon Valley headquarters, the chief executive, Sundar Pichai, now shares a floor with Google Brain, a research lab dedicated to artificial intelligence.When Facebook created its own artificial intelligence lab at its offices about seven miles away, it temporarily gave A.I. researchers desks next to the fish bowl of a conference room where its chief executive and founder, Mark Zuckerberg, holds his meetings.“I can high-five Mark and Sheryl from my desk, and the A.I. team was right next to us,” said Facebook’s chief technology officer, Mike Schroepfer, referring to Mr. Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer.AdvertisementEven Overstock.com, the online retailer based in the Salt Lake City area, now runs a mini-research operation called OLabs. It sits directly outside the office of the company’s chief executive, Patrick Byrne.AdvertisementA growing number of tech companies are pushing research labs and other far-reaching engineering efforts closer to the boss. The point is unmistakable: What they are doing matters to the chief executive. It may even be the future of the company.“The world is moving faster and faster. It is being driven by technology and innovation,” said John Kotter, an emeritus professor at Harvard Business School who has written several books on business leadership. “And a lot of these businesses are concluding that the speed of technological innovation should be the heart of everything.”A year ago, the Google Brain team of mathematicians, coders and hardware engineers sat in a small office building on the other side of the company’s campus. But over the past few months, it switched buildings and now works right beside the loungelike area where Mr. Pichai and other top executives work.Jeffrey Dean, the celebrated Google engineer who oversees the Brain lab, is a short walk from Mr. Pichai. So are Ian Goodfellow, the researcher behind a new A.I. technique that generates lifelike images on its own, and Norm Jouppi, who explores ways of accelerating A.I. research through a new breed of computer chip.“Any C.E.O. thinks a lot about where people are sitting — who they can walk around and have casual conversations with,” said Diane Greene, who oversees Google’s cloud computing team and sits on the board of Alphabet, Google’s parent company. “It is a very significant statement that he has moved that group right next him.”Google is placing big bets on the A.I. being explored by researchers like Mr. Goodfellow. Many questions still hang over the progress of this research. But Mr. Pichai and the rest of the Google leadership hope it will accelerate the evolution of everything from smartphones and home appliances to internet services and robotics.To Mr. Byrne, shaking up the seating chart at Overstock was a bit like a common management tactic in the military, when an officer will work closely with a small “command initiatives group” that is considerably more nimble than the rest of the organization.Advertisement“We were getting bureaucratic,” Mr. Byrne said. “And this was a way of creating added competition outside the bureaucracy.”These big companies are trying to duplicate the vibe of a Silicon Valley start-up, where the boss is next to everyone. As start-ups grow, they often put key technology teams next to the chief executive. Ms. Greene, who was the chief executive of the software company VMware, said she had always made a point of sitting beside the top engineers because they saw the company’s future.There are limits to these arrangements. When Facebook built a team to explore the future of virtual reality on its vast social network, it made a similar desk move. The group is no longer seated next to Mr. Zuckerberg. Facebook said this was because the group had grown too large. But across Silicon Valley, virtual reality is no longer the buzziest of topics. That honor belongs to artificial intelligence.Where you sit has mattered for years at Facebook. The company’s ad group traditionally sat far away from Mr. Zuckerberg. But after Facebook went public and started a big push for revenue, important members of the ad team moved next to the boss, said Antonio García Martínez, who wrote a book about his experiences inside Facebook.At Overstock, Mr. Byrne walks past his small research team every time he leaves his office. Like Ms. Greene, he sees this as an opportunity for spontaneous interaction. The team members can discuss their work with him, and Mr. Byrne, a doctor of philosophy with a long history of unorthodox business choices, will share his far-reaching ideas with them. And he gets to hear, without the pressure of a formal presentation, what the engineers are excited about.“It was undeniable that proximity sparked conversation,” said Judd Bagley, a kind of roving technologist and strategist who once worked in this group. “Patrick prides himself on being able to walk up to anyone at the company, say ‘hello,’ and occasionally even eat french fries off the plate on their desk.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Through OLabs, Overstock became the first major retailer to accept payment in the Bitcoin digital currency, and the lab eventually produced a company spinoff that seeks to apply the Bitcoin ethos to financial trading. Now, in an echo of the A.I. labs at Google and Facebook, the operation is focused on machine learning, which involves systems that can learn tasks on their own by analyzing large amounts of data.If a chief executive is close to these researchers, he or she is learning from them. But the boss is also showing them how important they are to the company. That is enormously valuable for engineers and mathematicians who are not necessarily generating immediate revenue, said Kevin Quennesson, a start-up executive who ran an A.I. team at Twitter.He also warned that companies risked putting too much pressure on researchers to produce results from work that was, by definition, a trip into the unknown. Amid so much spontaneous conversation with the chief executive, Mr. Bagley said, it is sometimes difficult to tell the difference between “the formal direction and informal brainstorming.”Status at Facebook was defined by how close your desk was to Mr. Zuckerberg, Mr. Martínez said. And if you were close to the boss, other groups resented you.Priorities also tend to ebb and flow. At Overstock, a new Bitcoin project will squeeze in beside OLabs. And at Facebook, the A.I. lab is no longer side by side with Mr. Zuckerberg because it also grew too large.AdvertisementStill, this work is particularly important to the company as it works to ensure “the safety and integrity of our community” — which has become Facebook code for guarding against false, misleading or dangerous activity on its social network, Mr. Schroepfer said. And the A.I. team is still only a short walk from Mr. Zuckerberg.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Desk Near the Boss’s Heart.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE and GABRIEL J.X. DANCEFEB. 20, 2018
When Hilary Mason, a data scientist and entrepreneur, discovered that dozens of automated “bot” accounts had sprung up to impersonate her on Twitter, she immediately set out to stop them.She filed dozens of complaints with Twitter, repeatedly submitting copies of her driver’s license to prove her identity. She reached out to friends who worked at the company. But days later, many of the fake accounts remained active, even though virtually identical ones had been shut down.Millions of accounts impersonating real people roam social media platforms, promoting commercial products and celebrities, attacking political candidates and sowing discord. They spread fake images and misinformation about the school shooting last week in Parkland, Fla. They were central to Russian attempts to sway the 2016 presidential election in favor of Donald J. Trump, according to a federal grand jury indictment on Friday. And American intelligence officials believe they will figure in Russian efforts to shape the coming midterm elections, too.Yet social media companies often fail to vigorously enforce their own policies against impersonation, an examination by The New York Times found, enabling the spread of fake news and propaganda — and allowing a global black market in social identities to thrive on their platforms.AdvertisementFacebook and Twitter require proof of identity to shut down an impostor account but none to set one up. And even as social media accounts evolve into something akin to virtual passports — for shopping, political activity and even gaining access to government services — technology companies have devised their own rules and standards, with little oversight or regulation from Washington.Advertisement“These companies have, in a lot of ways, assigned themselves to be validators of your identity,” said Jillian York, an official at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, which advocates digital privacy protections. “But the vast majority of users have no access to any due process, no access to any kind of customer service — and no means of appealing any kind of decision.”Some impostor accounts are set up as pranks. Millions of them are controlled by private companies that sell fake followers and other forms of social media engagement to celebrities, professional athletes and authors. Many others are deployed in systematic information warfare campaigns waged by governments.In congressional hearings last week, some lawmakers questioned whether social media businesses were doing enough.“I think the companies themselves were slow to recognize this threat,” said Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia. “I think they’ve still got more work to do.”Leaders of some social media companies have said they are trying hard to grapple with impersonation. In an earnings call this month, Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, said the company was expanding what it calls “information quality” efforts, including ways of elevating credible and authentic content on the platform.Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, wrote in a Facebook post in January that the company had nearly doubled the number of workers who review content for fake news and abuse, including impersonation.Facebook’s terms of service prohibit impersonation and require that account holders generally use their real names. Twitter, however, allows parody accounts and pseudonyms, and only forbids impersonation when that account portrays another user “in a misleading or deceptive manner.” The company does not proactively review accounts for impersonation.AdvertisementThat policy can leave real users mystified or enraged. In December, Firoozeh Dumas, an Iranian-American memoirist who lives in Germany, repeatedly reported to Twitter at least four accounts impersonating hers. “They have my photos, they tweet things from my books,” she said. “One of them seems to be selling things.”Yet each time Ms. Dumas reported them, emails show, Twitter’s support team told her the accounts did not meet its definition of abusive impersonation.A Times investigation last month found that many real accounts are copied and turned into automated “bots” sold by companies like Devumi, a firm now based in Colorado that is under investigation by attorneys general in Florida and New York. (Through a spokesman, Devumi has denied selling fake accounts.)One victim was Erin Barnes, a publicist and writer in Colorado. A bot sold by Devumi used not only her name and portrait, but also a background photograph of her husband and young daughter. “It makes my skin crawl,” Ms. Barnes said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The account was suspended only recently, after Ms. Barnes — alerted by The Times — reported it to Twitter. “If you’re using somebody’s photos and name together, then that’s impersonation,” she complained.Twitter appears to be tracking Devumi’s network of bots. Since the Times investigation was published, dozens of Devumi’s most prominent clients — actors, reality TV stars, authors, business executives and others seeking to buy followers and retweets — have lost more than three million followers. Close to 55,000 impostor accounts sold by Devumi have been restricted or suspended.Twitter has declined to say whether Devumi’s bots violate its impersonation policy, or how many of its employees are focused on rooting out impersonation. The company’s first line of defense against impersonation is the countermeasures that flag accounts that run afoul of Twitter policies on spam — violations that can be easier for the platform to identify and stop at large scale.But impostor accounts are still relatively easy to find on Twitter. The Times identified hundreds more of them through Twitter’s own automated “who to follow” feature: When a user views a known impostor account, Twitter routinely recommends other impostor accounts to follow.One real Twitter account, belonging to Jasmine Artis, a health care worker from North Carolina, was cloned dozens of times. At least 75 of those impostor accounts still exist — though some have recently been restricted — each using her picture, her name and a brief bio that refers to the school she was attending when her account was copied. Most of the clones have made only a handful of posts, some in Russian or Japanese. Ms. Artis said she had not been aware of the accounts.AdvertisementEven Twitter’s “verified” users, many of them well known, are being impersonated. There are active fake accounts impersonating the Democratic senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, the White House adviser Kellyanne Conway and the journalist April D. Ryan. None appeared to be obvious parodies. Instead, each posted content that mimicked what the real account might tweet.Both Facebook and Twitter rely in part on their users to report impostors and abuse. But the companies’ enforcement decisions can seem arbitrary. In January, Antonia Caliboso, a social worker in Seattle, discovered an impostor Facebook account using her name, biographical information and a photo, all lifted from a 2013 news release about a fellowship she had won.Ms. Caliboso and dozens of her friends reported the fake account to Facebook over a period of weeks. But Facebook representatives repeatedly told her the account did not violate the company’s impersonation policies, she said. Eventually, to protect herself, Ms. Caliboso deleted her real account.“I can’t risk that a client or employer — past, present or future — might find that profile,” she said.Last week, Facebook reversed its position: The account was shut down, according to an email Ms. Caliboso received on Feb. 10, “because it goes against our community standard on identity and privacy.”Social media companies succeed in the marketplace by amassing as many active users as possible, so most make it relatively easy to create new accounts. Neither Facebook nor Twitter requires proof of identity to open a new account, but both require it when reporting impostors. Decisions about whether to take down or suspend an account are automated wherever possible, or farmed out to teams of low-level employees and contractors around the world.As a result, on most social media platforms it is far easier to build a bot than to kill one.“The reason that they’re so bad at this is that it conflicts with their business model,” said Zeynep Tufekci, a sociologist and technology expert at the University of North Carolina. “They try to come up with one set of rules that applies to two billion people, and then simplify it so that a contractor in a warehouse in the Philippines can go click-click-click and apply the policy.”Ms. Mason, the data scientist, eventually took matters into her own hands. After she filed dozens of impersonation reports to Twitter in 2015, the company suspended many of the impostors, but left dozens untouched.So she created more than 100 bots of her own, using as many variations of her name as she could think of. Each linked back to her real account, with the message “the real hmason is over there.” Eventually, Ms. Mason’s homegrown bots, and Twitter’s own efforts, seemed to overwhelm the impostors, she said, and the surge in fake accounts stopped.Advertisement“With Twitter, it was easy” to make bots, Ms. Mason said. “I was shocked by how easy it was.”A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: How Lax Enforcement Breeds Impostors Online.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By SHEERA FRENKEL and KATIE BENNERFEB. 17, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — In 2014, Russians working for a shadowy firm called the Internet Research Agency started gathering American followers in online groups focused on issues like religion and immigration. Around mid-2015, the Russians began buying digital ads to spread their messages. A year later, they tapped their followers to help organize political rallies across the United States.Their digital instrument of choice for all of these actions? Facebook and its photo-sharing site Instagram.The social network, more than any other technology tool, was singled out on Friday by the Justice Department when prosecutors charged 13 Russians and three companies for executing a scheme to subvert the 2016 election and support Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign. In a 37-page indictment, officials detailed how the Russians repeatedly turned to Facebook and Instagram, often using stolen identities to pose as Americans, to sow discord among the electorate by creating Facebook groups, distributing divisive ads and posting inflammatory images.While the indictment does not accuse Facebook of any wrongdoing, it provided the first comprehensive account from the authorities of how critical the company’s platforms had been to the Russian campaign to disrupt the 2016 election. Facebook and Instagram were mentioned 41 times, while other technology that the Russians used was featured far less. Twitter was referred to nine times, YouTube once and the electronic payments company PayPal 11 times.AdvertisementIt is unprecedented for an American technology company to be so central to what the authorities say was a foreign scheme to commit election fraud in the United States. The indictment further batters Facebook’s image after it has spent months grappling with questions about how it was misused and why it did not act earlier to prevent that activity.AdvertisementJonathan Albright, research director at Columbia University’s Tow Center for Digital Journalism, said the indictment laid bare how effectively Facebook could be turned against the country.“Facebook built incredibly effective tools which let Russia profile citizens here in the U.S. and figure out how to manipulate us,” Mr. Albright said. “Facebook, essentially, gave them everything they needed.” He added that many of the tools that the Russians used, including those that allow ads to be targeted and that show how widespread an ad becomes, still pervade Facebook.Facebook, with more than two billion members on the social network alone, has long struggled with what its sites show and the kind of illicit activity it may enable, from selling unlicensed guns to broadcasting live killings. The company’s business depends on people being highly engaged with what is posted on its sites, which in turn helps make it a marquee destination for advertisers.When suggestions first arose after the 2016 election that Facebook may have influenced the outcome, Mark Zuckerberg, the company’s chief executive, dismissed the concerns. But by last September, Facebook had disclosed  that the Internet Research Agency had bought divisive ads on hot-button issues through the company. It later said 150 million Americans had seen the Russian propaganda on the social network and Instagram.The resulting firestorm has damaged Facebook’s reputation. Company officials, along with executives from Google and YouTube, were grilled by lawmakers last fall. Facebook has since hired thousands of people to help monitor content and has worked with Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel leading the investigation into Russian election interference. It has also changed its advertising policy so that any ad that mentions a candidate’s name goes through a more stringent vetting process. Mr. Zuckerberg has vowed to not let Facebook be abused by bad actors.Yet Facebook’s multiple mentions in Friday’s indictment renew questions of why the world’s biggest social media company didn’t catch the Russian activity earlier or do more to stop it. How effective the company’s new efforts to reduce foreign manipulation have been is also unclear.Rob Goldman, Facebook’s vice president of advertising, waded into the discussion on Friday with a series of tweets that argued that Russia’s goal was to sow chaos among the electorate rather than to force a certain outcome in the election. On Saturday, President Trump cited those tweets as evidence that Russia’s disinformation campaign was not aimed at handing him a victory.
            “I have seen all of the Russian ads and I can say very definitively that swaying the election was *NOT* the main goal.”Rob GoldmanVice President of Facebook Ads https://t.co/A5ft7cGJkE In Silicon Valley, where Facebook has its headquarters, some critics pilloried the company after the indictment became public.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Advertisement“Mueller’s indictment underscores the central role of Facebook and other platforms in the Russian interference in 2016,” said Roger McNamee, a Silicon Valley venture capitalist who had invested early in Facebook. “In its heyday, television brought the country together, giving viewers a shared set of facts and experiences. Facebook does just the opposite, enabling every user to have a unique set of facts, driving the country apart for profit.”Joel Kaplan, Facebook’s vice president of global policy, said in a statement that the company was grateful the government was taking action “against those who abused our service and exploited the openness of our democratic process.”He added that Facebook was working with the Federal Bureau of Investigation ahead of this year’s midterm elections to ensure that a similar manipulation campaign would not take place. “We know we have more to do to prevent against future attacks,” he said.Facebook has previously questioned whether law enforcement should be more involved in helping to stop the threat from nation state actors. Facebook said it worked closely with the special counsel’s investigation.YouTube did not respond to a request for comment, while Twitter declined to comment. PayPal said in a statement that it has worked closely with law enforcement and “is intensely focused on combating and preventing the illicit use of our services.”According to the indictment, the Internet Research Agency, created in 2014 in St. Petersburg and employing about 80 people, was given the job of interfering with elections and political processes.AdvertisementThe group began using American social media to achieve those aims in 2014, when it started making Facebook pages dedicated to social issues like race and religion. Over the next two years, the indictment said, the Russians stole the identities of real Americans to create fake personas and fake accounts on social media. The group then used those to populate and promote Facebook pages like United Muslims of America, Blacktivist and Secured Borders.By 2016, the indictment said, the size of some of these Russian-controlled Facebook groups had ballooned to hundreds of thousands of followers.
                Thirteen Russian nationals have been charged with illegally trying to disrupt the American political process through inflammatory social media posts and organized political rallies.            The Russians then used these groups to push various messages, including telling Americans not to vote in the 2016 election for either Mr. Trump or his opponent, Hillary Clinton. In October 2016, according to the indictment, one Russian-controlled Instagram account called Woke Blacks posted a message saying: “Hatred for Trump is misleading the people and forcing Blacks to vote Killary. We cannot resort to the lesser of two devils. Then we’d surely be better off without voting AT ALL.”Around 2015, according to the indictment, the Russians also started purchasing ads on Facebook and other social media sites like Twitter, targeting specific communities within the United States. The group used stolen PayPal accounts to pay for the ads and to promote posts, spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on the outreach.In one ad, published to promote a Facebook event called “Down with Hillary,” an image of Mrs. Clinton was shown with a black “X” painted across her face. The text read, “Hillary Clinton is the co-author of Obama’s anti-police and anti-Constitutional propaganda.”By mid-2016, according to the indictment, the Russians were using their fake Facebook personas to organize political rallies in the United States. That June, for example, posing as the United Muslims of America on Facebook, they promoted a rally called “Support Hillary. Save American Muslims.” For an August 2016 event organized through Facebook, the Russians also paid for a cage to be built that was large enough to hold an actress depicting Mrs. Clinton in a prison uniform.At every step, the Russians used Facebook’s own tools to make sure their propaganda was as effective as possible. Those tools allowed them to get real-time results on which types of ad campaigns were reaching their target audience or which posts were getting the most engagement with viewers.Researchers said that those tools are still widely available and that while the company has worked to remove fake accounts and stem the flow of disinformation, it has refused to let outside researchers examine the data on how Russian actors used the platform so effectively.“They’re taking steps to fix this, but there’s no easy solution,” Anton Vuljaj, a Republican media strategist who has advised campaigns and media groups, said of Facebook and other social media companies. “This also shows that the public needs to be more vigilant about what is real and what is not online.”Sheera Frenkel reported from San Francisco, and Katie Benner from Washington.Follow Sheera Frenkel and Katie Benner on Twitter: @sheeraf and @ktbennerA version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: To Create Rifts, Russians Liked Facebook Most.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO
 
FEB. 16, 2018
Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo, technology columnist at The New York Times, reviews the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Happy Friday, readers! Let’s review the week’s tech news.Netflix signed Ryan Murphy, the hitmaking producer behind “Glee” and the “American Crime Story” and “American Horror Story” anthology series, to a huge deal. An absolutely gigantic one, to be exact — roughly $300 million over five years, besting even the $100 million deal that Netflix made with Shonda Rhimes last year.Also, YouTube announced an expansion of its streaming TV service, adding several networks from Turner networks but also increasing its price. Now you can get its full lineup of channels streamed online for $40 per month, up from $35; that brings it to price parity with other streaming TV services, including Hulu’s.All this got me wondering: What’s the point of cable TV anymore?For a time, cutting the cord was one of those hipster affectations that came with sacrifices. A kind of asceticism was implied in the name. The cord, the familiar cable bundle of yore, required paying a whole lot for a bunch of bad TV you’d never watch, just so you could have very convenient access to the handful of shows you sometimes did watch.AdvertisementThen along came DVDs and the internet, and now you could unbundle — you’d pay a lot less for just the things you really wanted to see, provided you were O.K. hazarding some minor inconveniences.AdvertisementBut as Netflix keeps driving trucks of money to TV’s top producers — it plans to spend $8 billion on new content this year — the script has flipped. More and more, it’s the people who haven’t cut the cord who are missing out. Today, if you subscribe just to regular TV and don’t bother with Netflix, Amazon, Hulu and other online services, you’re missing some of TV’s biggest and most acclaimed shows. Plus, you’re paying more.Cable subscriptions have been declining for years, and last year the decline accelerated. But the YouTube expansion shows that cutting the cord keeps getting easier, and the Netflix deal shows how non-cable services keep getting more attractive. This suggests an even faster pace of decline for cable. The bottom is going to fall out of the market, probably very soon.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chrome, Google’s popular web browser, can now block ads. This seems weird because Google is the internet’s largest advertising company. So how does an advertising company design ad-blocking software? Very, very carefully, it turns out, in a process rife with conflicts.Google argues that over all, the internet ad business has been great for the economy and society, but that a few bad apples are ruining it all. Google, then, wants to “maintain a balance,” because “if left unchecked, disruptive ads have the potential to derail the entire system,” the company said in a blog post this week. (In a recent column, I took a different view, arguing that the digital ad business is at the root of most of the internet’s problems.)So Google’s new ad blocker is designed to block some ads, not all of them. The software will eliminate a dozen types of ads that the company deems intrusive or disruptive. But most ads, including most from Google, would skate through just fine.But how does Google decide which ads are too disruptive? The company says it relied on input from an ad-industry group, the Coalition for Better Ads. But as the The Wall Street Journal reported, the group’s membership and its research were heavily influenced by Google. This has led to recriminations in the industry, with rivals charging that Google is using the veil of self-regulation to diminish its competitors.It’s an interesting fight, but it may also be an irrelevant one. What’s unclear is whether Google’s limited ad blocker will stem the rising popularity of more restrictive ad blockers. For many people who hate online ads, it could already be too late for half measures.AdvertisementThe New York Times’s tech reporting team is gathering in San Francisco this week for a team-building offsite. I’m looking forward to forgetting to catch Mike Isaac in a trust fall. We’ll also be talking about some of the major themes we’re aiming to cover in the tech world this year — artificial intelligence, crypto and the responsibility of tech companies, for example.But enough about us. What would you like to read more about? Which technologies, people and ideas in the tech world do you think deserve more scrutiny, investigation or wider notice?Send your thoughts — but, please, not pitches for your company — to bits_newsletter@nytimes.com.Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Netflix Gets a Star, and Google’s Conflicted Ad Blocker.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CADE METZFEB. 10, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Nearly a year after accusing Uber of stealing its driverless car technology, Waymo agreed on Friday to settle a closely watched lawsuit filed against the ride-hailing company.Now for Waymo, which grew out of Google’s seminal autonomous vehicle project and is nearly a decade into an effort that aims to change the very nature of transportation, a much bigger fight looms outside the courtroom.Waymo’s competition extends well beyond Uber — and a good part of that competition is directed by engineers it used to employ. Much of the artificial intelligence technology that has come out of Waymo’s work and from research run by Google’s parent company, Alphabet, is now available from other sources, making it easier for companies, even start-ups, to compete.“Waymo may have a technical advantage,” said Jason Doran, who helped run the delivery service Sidecar and joined General Motors when the carmaker acquired the start-up. “But they have to figure out a business model.”AdvertisementIt is not uncommon for a tech pioneer to miss out on becoming the company that cashes in on the technology it has been working on. The industry is littered with stories of people with a great idea that someone else turned into a great business.AdvertisementThe concept for the databases used by most of the world’s big corporations came out of IBM. But another company, Oracle, turned that software into a big business. Researchers at the Silicon Valley lab of Xerox famously pioneered the technology that went into many of Apple’s computers.And executives at Alphabet would certainly remember that Google was hardly the first internet search engine. It was just better than anything that came before it.Other than an ownership stake in Uber, worth about $245 million, that came with settling the lawsuit, Waymo has not made substantial money from those years of research.That is worth noting, because so many of the companies competing with Waymo are relying on the brainpower of its former employees. Dave Ferguson, a former Waymo engineer, oversees a start-up called Nuro, which is building a driverless car for shipping and delivering goods. Chris Urmson, a longtime Waymo engineer, is the chief executive of a start-up called Aurora. Brian Salesky, a third Waymo engineer, is now at Argo, an autonomous vehicle start-up backed by $1 billion in funding from Ford Motor.With that brain drain in mind, the Uber lawsuit can also be seen as a fight against a former Google engineer, Anthony Levandowski, who also took his services elsewhere — first to Otto, a start-up he created, and then to Uber just six months later.The question was whether he took trade secrets with him. Waymo accused Uber of conspiring with Mr. Levandowski to steal its trade secrets and feed them into a driverless car project already underway inside the ride-hailing company. With Friday’s settlement, Uber has promised that its cars will operate without the help of Waymo’s intellectual property.There are other issues for Waymo. Unlike Ford, General Motors or Toyota, Waymo does not manufacture and sell cars. Unlike Uber and Lyft, it does not operate a vast ride-hailing services where it could readily deploy vehicles equipped with its own self-driving technology.AdvertisementAs the big automakers and the ride-hailing companies accelerate their self-driving projects, Waymo may need to find a way of inserting itself into these efforts or to build and operate a new self-driving service of its own.“There’s the self-driving tech. But you also have to scale that tech. And you have to offer a service that people really want to use,” Mr. Ferguson said. “You have to get all of that right.”The competition still tips its hat to Waymo, and agrees that after nine years of work on autonomous vehicles, it leads the technology race. But the gap is closing. Recent changes in the way driverless cars are built and the rise of readily available hardware that can help these vehicles understand and respond to what is happening around them, have made it easier to compete.Waymo executives were not available for interviews for this article. John Krafcik, Waymo’s chief executive, is scheduled to speak on Monday evening at a conference on artificial intelligence hosted by The New York Times.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Waymo has the partnerships and technology needed to launch the world’s first self-driving service this year,” a Waymo spokesman said in a statement, pointing to how the company has fully self-driving cars on some public roads, has secured vehicles from Fiat Chrysler and has partnered with Avis, AutoNation, Lyft and others. “After years of research and development, Waymo is now focused on operations and deployment.”When Waymo was still operating under Google, its head start in this race was obvious. Google began testing its self-driving prototypes on public roads in 2010, and this is what set off so many other efforts.In the years since, the technology that drives these vehicles has changed in enormous ways thanks to the rise of “neural networks,” which are complex systems that can learn tasks on their own by analyzing vast amounts of data. By analyzing thousands of images, a neural network can, for example, learn to identify a pedestrian. Using these methods, engineers can build and improve self-driving cars at a far more rapid pace.“This is profoundly important,” said Mr. Urmson of Aurora, which is supplying self-driving technology to Volkswagen, Audi and Hyundai. “We can build on top of that revolution.”In 2011, Google was among the first companies to build a research lab dedicated to these rapidly evolving techniques, and a number of researchers from this lab eventually moved on to the Google self-driving car project. Google has also built the vast network of specialized hardware needed to drive this kind of “machine learning,” even building a new computer chip suited to the task.AdvertisementThese techniques are spreading across the industry. And anyone can immediately tap into enormous amounts of computing power through cloud services operated by the likes of Amazon, Microsoft and, yes, Google.Many car manufacturers believe they will eventually catch up because they can deploy so many more cars equipped with sensors that can record real-world activity.“What the car companies have is the potential to harvest more data than anyone else,” Gill Pratt, chief executive of the Toyota Research Institute, the Silicon Valley research and development operation created by the Japanese car company, said in an interview last fall. “It may be this that matters the most.”Waymo is unlikely to manufacture its own cars. But it may end up running its own self-driving service. Alphabet recently led a $1 billion investment in Lyft, and it could deploy its driverless cars through this existing ride-hailing option. Waymo is also running a private trial of its cars near Phoenix, and it has long hinted that it will offer some sort of undefined public service in the area.Operating this kind of service is no small thing, and some question whether Waymo is equipped to do so. “This is where the Ubers and the Lyfts have an advantage,” Mr. Ferguson said.He cautioned that the departures from Waymo may have an unintended consequence for the entire industry: Many smart people are needed in the same place to figure things out.“You need to have a lot of the best minds together to solve it,” he said. “One of my fears is that we have spread the field a little thin. As a result, we have actually slowed down the speed with which we can solve this problem.”Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: After Uber, Waymo May Need to Find Its Place in a Self-Driving World.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By STEVE LOHRFEB. 9, 2018
Facial recognition technology is improving by leaps and bounds. Some commercial software can now tell the gender of a person in a photograph.When the person in the photo is a white man, the software is right 99 percent of the time.But the darker the skin, the more errors arise — up to nearly 35 percent for images of darker skinned women, according to a new study that breaks fresh ground by measuring how the technology works on people of different races and gender.These disparate results, calculated by Joy Buolamwini, a researcher at the M.I.T. Media Lab, show how some of the biases in the real world can seep into artificial intelligence, the computer systems that inform facial recognition.
            Facial recognition algorithms made by Microsoft, IBM and Face++ were more likely to misidentify the gender of black women than white men.        Gender was misidentified in up to 1 percent of lighter-skinned males in a set of 385 photos.Gender was misidentified in up to 7 percent of lighter-skinned females in a set of 296 photos.Gender was misidentified in up to 12 percent of darker-skinned males in a set of 318 photos.Gender was misidentified in 35 percent of darker-skinned females in a set of 271 photos.In modern artificial intelligence, data rules. A.I. software is only as smart as the data used to train it. If there are many more white men than black women in the system, it will be worse at identifying the black women.AdvertisementOne widely used facial-recognition data set was estimated to be more than 75 percent male and more than 80 percent white, according to another research study.AdvertisementThe new study also raises broader questions of fairness and accountability in artificial intelligence at a time when investment in and adoption of the technology is racing ahead.Today, facial recognition software is being deployed by companies in various ways, including to help target product pitches based on social media profile pictures. But companies are also experimenting with face identification and other A.I. technology as an ingredient in automated decisions with higher stakes like hiring and lending.Researchers at the Georgetown Law School estimated that 117 million American adults are in face recognition networks used by law enforcement — and that African Americans were most likely to be singled out, because they were disproportionately represented in mug-shot databases.Facial recognition technology is lightly regulated so far.“This is the right time to be addressing how these A.I. systems work and where they fail — to make them socially accountable,” said Suresh Venkatasubramanian, a professor of computer science at the University of Utah.Until now, there was anecdotal evidence of computer vision miscues, and occasionally in ways that suggested discrimination. In 2015, for example, Google had to apologize after its image-recognition photo app initially labeled African Americans as “gorillas.”Sorelle Friedler, a computer scientist at Haverford College and a reviewing editor on Ms. Buolamwini’s research paper, said experts had long suspected that facial recognition software performed differently on different populations.“But this is the first work I’m aware of that shows that empirically,” Ms. Friedler said.Ms. Buolamwini, a young African-American computer scientist, experienced the bias of facial recognition firsthand. When she was an undergraduate at the Georgia Institute of Technology, programs would work well on her white friends, she said, but not recognize her face at all. She figured it was a flaw that would surely be fixed before long.But a few years later, after joining the M.I.T. Media Lab, she ran into the missing-face problem again. Only when she put on a white mask did the software recognize hers as a face.AdvertisementBy then, face recognition software was increasingly moving out of the lab and into the mainstream.“O.K., this is serious,” she recalled deciding then. “Time to do something.”So she turned her attention to fighting the bias built into digital technology. Now 28 and a doctoral student, after studying as a Rhodes scholar and a Fulbright fellow, she is an advocate in the new field of “algorithmic accountability,” which seeks to make automated decisions more transparent, explainable and fair.Her short TED Talk on coded bias has been viewed more than 940,000 times, and she founded the Algorithmic Justice League, a project to raise awareness of the issue.In her newly published paper, which will be presented at a conference this month, Ms. Buolamwini studied the performance of three leading face recognition systems — by Microsoft, IBM and Megvii of China — by classifying how well they could guess the gender of people with different skin tones. These companies were selected because they offered gender classification features in their facial analysis software — and their code was publicly available for testing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She found them all wanting.To test the commercial systems, Ms. Buolamwini built a data set of 1,270 faces, using faces of lawmakers from countries with a high percentage of women in office. The sources included three African nations with predominantly dark-skinned populations, and three Nordic countries with mainly light-skinned residents.The African and Nordic faces were scored according to a six-point labeling system used by dermatologists to classify skin types. The medical classifications were determined to be more objective and precise than race.Then, each company’s software was tested on the curated data, crafted for gender balance and a range of skin tones. The results varied somewhat. Microsoft’s error rate for darker-skinned women was 21 percent, while IBM’s and Megvii’s rates were nearly 35 percent. They all had error rates below 1 percent for light-skinned males.Ms. Buolamwini shared the research results with each of the companies. IBM said in a statement to her that the company had steadily improved its facial analysis software and was “deeply committed” to “unbiased” and “transparent” services. This month, the company said, it will roll out an improved service with a nearly 10-fold increase in accuracy on darker-skinned women.AdvertisementMicrosoft said that it had “already taken steps to improve the accuracy of our facial recognition technology” and that it was investing in research “to recognize, understand and remove bias.”Ms. Buolamwini’s co-author on her paper is Timnit Gebru, who described her role as an adviser. Ms. Gebru is a scientist at Microsoft Research, working on its Fairness Accountability Transparency and Ethics in A.I. group.Megvii, whose Face++ software is widely used for identification in online payment and ride-sharing services in China, did not reply to several requests for comment, Ms. Buolamwini said.Ms. Buolamwini is releasing her data set for others to build upon. She describes her research as “a starting point, very much a first step” toward solutions.Ms. Buolamwini is taking further steps in the technical community and beyond. She is working with the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, a large professional organization in computing, to set up a group to create standards for accountability and transparency in facial analysis software.She meets regularly with other academics, public policy groups and philanthropies that are concerned about the impact of artificial intelligence. Darren Walker, president of the Ford Foundation, said that the new technology could be a “platform for opportunity,” but that it would not happen if it replicated and amplified bias and discrimination of the past.“There is a battle going on for fairness, inclusion and justice in the digital world,” Mr. Walker said.Part of the challenge, scientists say, is that there is so little diversity within the A.I. community.Advertisement“We’d have a lot more introspection and accountability in the field of A.I. if we had more people like Joy,” said Cathy O’Neil, a data scientist and author of “Weapons of Math Destruction.”Technology, Ms. Buolamwini said, should be more attuned to the people who use it and the people it’s used on.“You can’t have ethical A.I. that’s not inclusive,” she said. “And whoever is creating the technology is setting the standards.”Because of an editing error, two picture captions with an earlier version of this article misstated the number of photos used by researchers to study artificial intelligence software’s accuracy in identifying two groups of people by gender. There were 385 photos of lighter-skinned men, not 296, and 296 of lighter-skinned women, not 385.Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter @SteveLohrA version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Facial Recognition Works Best If You’re a White Guy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »

      By FARHAD MANJOO

FEB. 13, 2018

It’s 2035, the Second American Civil War has been won by the other side, and you find yourself in a heap of trouble with Attorney General Logan Paul. (The future is very troubling.) He has dispatched an all-seeing eye-in-the-sky to tail you, an agile flying machine equipped with 13 cameras and a top speed of 25 miles per hour.The drone knows your face, your gait and your clothing. It hovers persistently behind your back, moving when you move, stopping when you stop, resisting every effort to shake it. You run into the woods, but you still can’t lose it.So now what? Clip this article and save it as a guide for surviving our airborne future. In a woodsy park in San Francisco last week, I had an encounter with just such a self-flying drone, and I found only one trick for escape. Hint: It involved the indignity of repeatedly running around a tree.As the hapless chump in its cross hairs, I will tell you this: Being tailed by a 13-eyed flying machine has a way of focusing the mind.The drone chasing me, the R1, was created by a start-up called Skydio; it sells for $2,499 and will begin shipping to customers in two to three weeks, the company says. It is the closest thing to a fully autonomous drone you can buy today.Autonomous drones have long been hyped, but until recently they’ve been little more than that. The technology in Skydio’s machine suggests a new turn. Drones that fly themselves — whether following people for outdoor self-photography, which is Skydio’s intended use, or for longer-range applications like delivery, monitoring and surveillance — are coming faster than you think.They’re likely to get much cheaper, smaller and more capable. They’re going to be everywhere, probably sooner than we can all adjust to them.Most consumer drones rely on some degree of automation in flight. DJI, the Chinese drone company that commands much of the market, makes several drones that can avoid obstacles and track subjects.But these features tend to be less than perfect, working best in mostly open areas. Just about every drone on the market requires a pilot.“Our view is that almost all of the use cases for drones would be better with autonomy,” said Adam Bry, Skydio’s chief executive.Skydio was founded by Mr. Bry and Abe Bachrach — who met as graduate students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and later started Google’s drone program, Project Wing — along with Matt Donahoe, an interface designer.In 2014, with funding from the venture firm Andreessen Horowitz, the company began working on what would become the R1. Skydio has since raised $70 million from Andreessen and several other investors, including Institutional Venture Partners, Playground Global and the basketball player Kevin Durant.Skydio’s basic goal was a drone that requires no pilot. When you launch the R1 using a smartphone app, you have your subject stand in front of the drone, then tap that person on the screen — now it’s locked on. You can also select one of several “cinematic modes,” which specify the direction from which the drone will try to record its subject. (It can even predict your path and stay ahead of you to shoot a selfie from the front.)After takeoff, it’s hands off. The drone operates independently. In the eight-minute flight I saw — through a wooded trail sparsely populated with runners and dogs — the R1 followed its target with eerie determination, avoiding every obstacle as naturally as an experienced human pilot might, and never requiring help. It lost its subject — me — only once, but I had to really work to make that happen.Watch this clip, recorded by the R1’s main camera, showing the drone following Mr. Bry. When he runs, it immediately follows him, ducking behind trees, speeding up to catch him, then slowing when he slows. Much of the rest of the clip goes like that; every step he takes, the R1 is watching him.Time for some caveats: Skydio’s technology is far from perfect. It doesn’t work well in inclement weather or at night. It also requires a very high-powered processor, which gobbles up battery life; the R1 gets 16 minutes per flight, compared with around 20 for competing drones (but it will ship with two batteries, allowing for another flight after a quick swap out).Skydio’s drone is also entering a crowded marketplace that hasn’t been kind to new players. A parade of drone start-ups have gone belly up in the last couple of years, unable to compete with DJI’s technical innovation and manufacturing scale.Some of the most spectacular blowups, like that of the drone start-up Lily, involved overpromising and never delivering on autonomous features. Skydio’s founders say they’re keen to avoid that mistake. The company showed me the assembly line in its headquarters in Redwood City, Calif., where teams of technicians are finishing production-ready R1s by hand. The small-scale operation is meant to ensure quality, but it comes at a price. DJI’s latest feature-packed drone, the well-reviewed Mavic Air, sells for $800, a third of the price of the R1.“I know this technology is so much smarter, but I’m just not sure it’s enough to overtake the behemoth that is DJI,” said Sally French, a journalist who covers the drone industry at her site, The Drone Girl. She was also shown a preview of the R1 last week.Yet whatever happens to Skydio as a company, its flavor of autonomous tech seems likely to become ubiquitous. How Skydio has achieved autonomy is, at bottom, a marvel of software rather than hardware, and the software is likely to get cheaper and better quite quickly.There are two basic ways for computers to process the visual world. They can use cameras alone, or they can also use depth sensors, like lasers or radar, that precisely determine where objects are in space.Most self-driving car systems use expensive laser sensors, known as lidar, a spinning disk that sits on the car’s roof like a propeller beanie. Lidar was the key technology at issue in Waymo’s now-settled trade secrets lawsuit against Uber. The trial surfaced a note from Travis Kalanick, Uber’s former chief executive, that underscored lidar’s importance: “Laser is the sauce,” he wrote.But to Skydio, laser wasn’t the sauce. Lasers aren’t only expensive; they’re also heavy and bulky. (That’s why Elon Musk also isn’t a fan.) Cameras, meanwhile, are plentiful and cheap. Several years ago, Skydio took a gamble: It would use only cameras, arranged in eyelike pairs on every side of the drone, and hope that it could get laserlike accuracy using ever-improving artificial intelligence techniques.“A bird doesn’t need lidar to fly,” Mr. Bry told me.The scheme worked better than the team was expecting. Because an artificial intelligence technique known as deep learning has been improving much more quickly than insiders predicted, Skydio said, it is further along at key perceptual tasks than it had hoped to be, and Mr. Bry said the tech was still advancing.What this means is ubiquity. As I watched the R1 tail Mr. Bry, I played the scene forward in my mind: What happens when dozens or hundreds of runners and bikers and skiers and hikers and tourists begin setting out their own self-flying GoPros to record themselves? Our society has proved in thrall to photography; if you can throw up a camera and get a shot of you reaching the summit, who’s not going to do it?Even regulations may not be ready for the R1. Colin Snow, a drone industry analyst, pointed out to me that federal regulations require users to keep drones in their line of sight — and a drone that follows you is technically not in your line of sight.Mr. Bry disputed this characterization. He argued that regulations allow for momentary periods when the drone is not in the line of sight, as long as the vehicle does not interfere with manned aircraft.As for other social disruptions that autonomous drones might cause, Mr. Bry was guarded. “Obviously, we tell our users to be responsible,” he said.Which brings me to the escape plan. How do you lose an R1 that has been told to follow you? Here’s what worked for me: Find a tree. Run around it very precisely, just fast enough to stay exactly opposite the drone, so the tree trunk blocks its view of you for seconds at a time. Do it just right and the bird will lose you, stopping in its tracks, confused.But I don’t imagine this trick will work for long.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo. | Illustration by Doug Chayka.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Cade MetzMOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. — A few years ago, Google created a new kind of computer chip to help power its giant artificial intelligence systems. These chips were designed to handle the complex processes that some believe will be a key to the future of the computer industry.On Monday, the internet giant said it would allow other companies to buy access to those chips through its cloud-computing service. Google hopes to build a new business around the chips, called tensor processing units, or T.P.U.s.“We are trying to reach as many people as we can as quickly as we can,” said Zak Stone, who works alongside the small team of Google engineers that designs these chips.Google’s move highlights several sweeping changes in the way modern technology is built and operated. Google is in the vanguard of a movement to design chips specifically for artificial intelligence, a worldwide push that includes dozens of start-ups as well as familiar names like Intel, Qualcomm and Nvidia.And these days, companies like Google, Amazon and Microsoft are not just big internet companies. They are big hardware makers.As a way of cutting costs and improving the efficiency of the multibillion-dollar data centers that underpin its online empire, Google designs much of the hardware inside these massive facilities, from the computer servers to the networking gear that ties these machines together. Other internet giants do much the same.In addition to its T.P.U. chips, which sit inside its data centers, the company has designed an A.I. chip for its smartphones.Right now, Google’s new service is focused on a way to teach computers to recognize objects, called computer vision technology. But as time goes on, the new chips will also help businesses build a wider range of services, Mr. Stone said.At the end of last year, hoping to accelerate its work on driverless cars, Lyft began testing Google’s new chips.Using the chips, Lyft wanted to accelerate the development of systems that allow driverless cars to, say, identify street signs or pedestrians. “Training” these systems can take days, but with the new chips, the hope is that this will be reduced to hours.“There is huge potential here,” said Anantha Kancherla, who oversees software for the Lyft driverless car project.T.P.U. chips have helped accelerate the development of everything from the Google Assistant, the service that recognizes voice commands on Android phones, to Google Translate, the internet app that translates one language into another.They are also reducing Google’s dependence on chip makers like Nvidia and Intel. In a similar move, it designed its own servers and networking hardware, reducing its dependence on hardware makers like Dell, HP and Cisco.This keeps costs down, which is essential when running a large online operation, said Casey Bisson, who helps oversee a cloud computing service called Joyent, which is owned by Samsung. At times, the only way to build an efficient service is to build your own hardware.“This is about packing as much computing power as possible within a small area, within a heat budget, within a power budget,” Mr. Bisson said.A new wave of artificial intelligence, including services like Google Assistant, are driven by “neural networks,” which are complex algorithms that can learn tasks on their own by analyzing vast amounts of data. By analyzing a database of old customer support phone calls, for example, a neural network can learn to recognize commands spoken into a smartphone. But this requires serious computing power.Typically, engineers train these algorithms using graphics processing units, or G.P.U.s, which are chips that were originally designed for rendering images for games and other graphics-heavy software. Most of these chips are supplied by Nvidia.In designing its own A.I. chips, Google was looking to exceed what was possible with these graphics-oriented chips, speed up its own A.I. work and lure more businesses onto its cloud services.At the same time, Google has gained some independence from Nvidia and an ability to negotiate lower prices with its chip suppliers.“Google has become so big, it makes sense to invest in chips,” said Fred Weber, who spent a decade as the chief technology officer at the chip maker AMD. “That gives them leverage. They can cut out the middleman.”This does not mean that Google will stop buying chips from Nvidia and other chip makers. But it is altering the market. “Who’s buying and who’s selling has changed,” Mr. Weber said.Over the years, Google has even flirted with the possibility of designing its own version of the chips it buys from Intel.Mr. Weber and other insiders question whether Google would ever do this, just because a C.P.U. is so complex and it would be so much more difficult to design and maintain one of these chips. But at a private event in San Francisco last fall, David Patterson, a computer science professor at the University of California, Berkeley, who now works on chip technologies at Google, was asked if the company would go that far.“That’s not rocket science,” he said.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.AdvertisementBy THE NEW YORK TIMESFEB. 12, 2018
Leading innovators, investors and policymakers offered their visions for artificial intelligence at the New York Times's New Work Summit conference.In Phoenix, cars are self-navigating the streets. In many homes, people are barking commands at tiny machines, with the machines responding. On our smartphones, apps can now recognize faces in photos and translate from one language to another.Artificial intelligence is here — and it’s bringing new possibilities, while also raising questions. Do these gadgets and services really behave as advertised? How will they evolve in the years ahead? How quickly will they overhaul the way we live and change the way we do business?The Times is exploring these matters this week at our annual New Work Summit, featuring technology executives, A.I. researchers, investors and others. Here are some of the key moments coming out of the conference, plus a rundown of some of our recent A.I. stories. — Cade MetzA month after the Chinese electronics giant Huawei suffered a big setback in its quest to sell its high-end smartphones to Americans, the company’s chief for consumer devices, Richard Yu, said he was still optimistic about Huawei’s prospects in the United States.Advertisement“We have won global consumers’ trust, in over 170 countries,” Mr. Yu said at the New Work Summit. “We very strictly protect consumers’ privacy.”AdvertisementHuawei is the world’s third-largest seller of smartphones and one of the planet’s biggest suppliers of telecommunications equipment. But it has struggled for years to break into the United States.A 2012 congressional report said that Huawei’s network gear could be used by Beijing to spy on Americans, effectively cutting the company off from big buyers in the United States. In January, after lawmakers reiterated those concerns in a letter to the Federal Communications Commission, AT&T and Verizon walked away from deals to sell Huawei’s latest phones.At the conference on Tuesday, Mr. Yu said that Huawei had no ties to the Chinese government. “We are a globalized company, just headquartered in China,” he said. “We are not part of any government. We have to be a company that is independent from every country.”Huawei would not be able to do business in so many places around the world without that independence, he said. “If we do something for one government, we will lose the trust of all governments.” — Raymond ZhongMike Schroepfer, Facebook’s chief technology officer, offered a glimpse of how the social network is applying artificial intelligence to ward off bad actors and keep its platform free of toxicity.Calling the fight against rules violators a “cat and mouse game,” Mr. Schroepfer said at the New Work Summit on Tuesday that Facebook’s A.I. efforts had succeeded at certain types of content moderation, such as image classifier algorithms that find and automatically remove nude photos and videos.Now on Facebook, he said, “the vast majority of nudity and pornography reporting is automatic.”But what about using A.I. to curb the spread of fake news? Facebook’s director of artificial intelligence, Yann LeCun, said in 2016 that machine learning algorithms would one day be able to weed out false news on Facebook.AdvertisementBut the company has since added thousands of human content moderators and struck partnerships with human fact-checking organizations. Mr. Schroepfer implied Facebook has learned that A.I. alone would not do the trick, given the sophistication of bad actors who find ways around the platform’s filters.Mr. Schroepfer also said that human judgment would be required in certain situations, like a comment (“nice jacket”) that could be either an earnest compliment or a sarcastic insult, depending on the context. And when it comes to some of Facebook’s thornier problems, like trying to enforce consistent hate speech policies, human intervention may always be necessary.“Whenever you are debating what your policy is, you’re unlikely to build an A.I. that works well for that,” he said. — Kevin RooseMichael Kratsios, a deputy chief technology officer at the White House, said at the New Work Summit on Tuesday that regulators should get out of the way of advances in emerging technologies.He cited progress toward a repeal of some regulations on commercial drones, such as rules prohibiting them from flying at night.“For us, it’s key to get ahead of those regulatory hurdles,” said Mr. Kratsios, who previously worked as chief of staff to Peter Thiel, the libertarian venture capitalist. These regulations, he said, are “putting us at a disadvantage.”Unlike some experts who believe China is poised to dominate the A.I. age, Mr. Kratsios said he wasn’t worried about overseas competition. The United States, he said, has a “30-year head start” in A.I. development.And despite the White House’s reputation for chaos and tumult, he maintained that it was “a great place to work.” — Kevin RooseMarc Benioff, the chief executive of Salesforce, blasted companies like Facebook on Tuesday for addicting children to their products and renewed his calls for more government regulation of the tech industry.AdvertisementMr. Benioff compared a new Facebook Messenger product for children to candy cigarettes, which he used to pretend to smoke as a boy.“What do you think they were trying to get us to do with those?” Mr. Benioff asked onstage at the New Work Summit. “I don’t think this is any different now. They’re focused on the addictive nature of these user interfaces. At some point, we have to say, ‘Hold on.’”Silicon Valley is nearing the point where moral lines will have to be drawn by the government since the industry is not regulating itself and does not seem to be guided by a “strong hand of ethics,” he said.There is a “crisis of trust,” he added, that will become a “tidal wave” among American consumers who are growing wary of tech giants.“I’m trying to protect our industry,” said Mr. Benioff, whose company sells access to business software over the internet. “If companies aren’t able to regulate themselves, they should have external regulations.”One of the solutions he suggested was to move decision-making away from algorithms and back toward humans. He cited Facebook’s decision to disband its trending news curation team as an example.“Facebook had a team promoting, sorting and focusing stories, 100 curators that they removed and put an algorithm in their place, and that started the downward spiral that they’re in today,” Mr. Benioff said.AdvertisementHe also spoke about the recent ban on kegs of beer at Salesforce offices after he recently stumbled across one while visiting a company he had acquired.“I view alcohol as a drug,” he said. “The keg is not there anymore — well, actually who knows, but I hope it’s not. I took a photo of the keg and put it on our social network and said, ‘This is not who we are.’” — Nellie BowlesFei-Fei Li, a chief scientist at Google and a Stanford professor, has called on technologists to take a more “human centered” approach to the creation of artificial intelligence. On Tuesday at the New Work Summit, Ms. Li said that researchers must work to ensure that A.I. embodied human qualities and that it would ultimately operate alongside humans, not replace them.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I often tell my students not to be misled by the name ‘artificial intelligence’ — there is nothing artificial about it,” she said. “A.I. is made by humans, intended to behave by humans and, ultimately, to impact humans lives and human society.”At Stanford, Ms. Li was instrumental in the recent rise of “computer vision” systems that can recognize people and objects entirely on their own. At Google, she is working to package and sell these and other systems as cloud computing services, delivering the latest A.I. technology to a wide range of businesses.But she said that as Google and other internet giants pushed these techniques forward, academia and the government must help ensure that A.I. evolved into something that enhanced our humanity, created as many jobs as it replaced and operated in safe and predictable ways.In particular, Ms. Li said, academic institutions can help ensure that computer scientists work alongside social scientists in building this new breed of technology.“A.I. has outgrown its origin in computer science,” she said.Ultimately, said Ms. Li, who was born in China, A.I. reflects the people who build it more than other technologies do. For that reason and others, she said, A.I. researchers must work in a way that spans not only many industries but many cultures as well.Advertisement“I really believe there are no borders for science,” she said. — Cade MetzTuesday’s first speaker at the New Work Summit was Kai-Fu Lee, who used to lead Google in China and knows a thing or two about American tech giants in China. His prognosis about whether companies like Facebook will ever be able to crack the world’s largest internet market?“The American products are simply uncompetitive in the China market,” said Mr. Lee, who is now chief executive of Sinovation Ventures, a venture capital firm focused on Chinese technology. Even if internet titans from the United States could operate in China, he said, the local competition means they would have a hard time thriving.“Messenger is a much worse product than WeChat,” he said, referring to Facebook’s messaging app and Tencent’s ubiquitous app for chatting, social networking, making payments and other tasks.“Amazon in China is substantially worse than Taobao, JD and Tmall,” he said, referring to three leading Chinese e-commerce sites. And, he said, “Apple Pay is much narrower and much harder to use than WeChat or Alipay.”Mr. Lee sees other issues that augur against a big Facebook or Google renaissance in China. Multinational companies tend not to hire local managers to lead their China operations. “They’re not concerned about winning in the local market,” he said.Also, young Chinese these days would rather work for national champions like Alibaba or Tencent. Pitted against Chinese start-ups and big companies, where the hours tend to be long and the work culture cutthroat, the leading lights of American tech would get “get eaten for lunch.” — Raymond ZhongLast year, the Chinese government unveiled a plan to become the world leader in artificial intelligence by 2030, vowing to create a domestic industry worth $150 billion. This manifesto read like a challenge to the United States, and in many ways it echoed policies laid down by the Obama administration in 2016.But as China pushes ahead in this area, many experts are concerned that the Trump administration is not doing enough to keep the United States ahead in the future. Although the big United States internet giants are leading the A.I. race, these experts believe the country as a whole could fall behind if does not do more to nurture research inside universities and government labs. — Cade MetzAdvertisementJohn Krafcik, chief executive of the self-driving car company Waymo, took the stage at the New Work Summit on Monday night and spoke out for the first time since his company reached a settlement last week with Uber in a lawsuit over trade secrets that riveted Silicon Valley.“We were really happy with the outcome that we engineered,” Mr. Krafcik said. “We spent a lot of time in that case talking about the hardware, but the extra benefit we got from that suit was the ability to understand and ensure that Uber wasn’t using any of our software.”He called the software Waymo’s “secret sauce.”Waymo and Uber spent only four days at trial last week before settling, with Uber agreeing to provide Waymo 0.34 percent of its stock, worth about $245 million. The dispute between the companies started in 2016 when Uber bought Otto, a start-up founded by Anthony Levandowski, an early member of Google’s self-driving car program. Waymo, which was spun out of Google, accused Mr. Levandowski of stealing technology before leaving and accused Uber of using the misappropriated knowledge.“This was a really special case with a really special set of circumstances,” Mr. Krafcik said. “For us, this was always about, and really just about, the fact that we needed to ensure Uber wasn’t using our trade secrets.” He added that he did not foresee Waymo suing other former employees.Mr. Krafcik also discussed how Waymo was looking to start a ride-hailing service, which it is testing in Phoenix with thousands of driverless Pacifica minivans.“We have a plan to move from city to city,” he said. “We’re not going to be launching with a 25 mile-per-hour product. We’re talking about a full-speed service that will serve a very large geographic area with essentially unlimited pickup and drop-off points.” — Nellie BowlesJeff Wilke, Amazon’s chief executive of its consumer business, which includes its e-commerce operations, doesn’t often make public appearances. But on Monday night, he joined the New Work Summit to discuss the internet retailer’s move into artificial intelligence.His key message: A.I. is everywhere, but that doesn’t mean it will take our jobs.“If you look at the evolution of technology over the course of decades, tech doesn’t eliminate work; it changes work,” Mr. Wilke said.He said that over the last five years, since Amazon bought a robot maker called Kiva Systems, it had built 100,000 of the robots — and also hired 300,000 people. “We still need human judgment,” he said.AdvertisementAmazon has also embedded A.I. throughout the company, he added, with technologists working together with people who run businesses. The company is using machine learning and deep learnings, which are different flavors of A.I., to upgrade internal algorithms, he said.As to how Amazon might use A.I. at Whole Foods, the grocery store chain that it said it would acquire last year, Mr. Wilke said little. When asked whether Amazon would integrate its cashier-less and A.I.-driven convenience store concept, called Amazon Go, with Whole Foods, he said, “I don’t foresee the format of Whole Foods changing very much.” — Pui-Wing TamAs A.I. technology barrels ahead in Silicon Valley, it’s also starting to pick up steam as a political issue in Washington.Over the weekend, I wrote about Andrew Yang, a former tech executive who has decided to run for president in 2020 as a Democrat on a “beware the robots” platform. He thinks that with innovations like self-driving cars and grocery stores without cashiers just around the corner, we’re about to move into a frightening new era of mass unemployment and social unrest.So he’s proposing a universal basic income plan called the “Freedom Dividend,” which would give every American adult $1,000 a month to guarantee them a minimum standard of living while they retrain themselves for new kinds of work.Mr. Yang’s campaign is a long shot, and there are significant hurdles to making universal basic income politically feasible. But the conversation about automation’s social and economic consequences is long overdue. Even if he doesn’t win the election, Mr. Yang may have hit on the next big political wedge issue. — Kevin RooseIn modern artificial intelligence, data rules. A.I. software is only as smart as the data used to train it, as Steve Lohr recently wrote, and that means that some of the biases in the real world can seep into A.I.If there are many more white men than black women in the system, for example, it will be worse at identifying the black women. That appears to be the case with some popular commercial facial recognition software.Joy Buolamwini, a researcher at the M.I.T. Media Lab, found that the software can now tell if a white man in a photograph is male or female 99 percent of the time. But for darker skinned women, it is wrong nearly 35 percent of the time. — Joseph PlambeckWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIFEB. 9, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Waymo and Uber settled their legal fight on Friday, nearly a year after Waymo first accused the ride-hailing company of plotting to steal important self-driving car technology.After four days of arguments and testimony in Federal District Court here, Uber agreed to provide Waymo, the self-driving car unit under Google’s parent company, Alphabet, with 0.34 percent of its stock. According to Waymo, the settlement’s terms value Uber at $72 billion, meaning the Alphabet unit’s stake is worth about $245 million.The settlement closes a legal fight that riveted Silicon Valley. It pitted the most successful company from the dot-com era against this generation’s biggest start-up in a fight over autonomous vehicles — a potentially trillion-dollar industry that is expected to transform transportation.The trial also offered a peek into how Silicon Valley really works: the rise of promising start-ups that challenge incumbents; the inner workings of rich, but often chaotic, technology companies; the complicated rivalries among billionaire tech entrepreneurs; and the costly competition for engineering talent.AdvertisementThe dispute between the two companies started in 2016 after Uber acquired Otto, a start-up making self-driving trucks that was founded by Anthony Levandowski, an early member of Google’s self-driving car project. Uber agreed to pay a reported $590 million for Otto just six months after it was founded.AdvertisementBut Waymo — which was spun out from Google in late 2016 — claimed the deal was part of a plan to steal its laser-sensor technology, a key component for operating self-driving cars. Mr. Levandowski had begun talking with Travis Kalanick, Uber’s chief executive at the time, about the possibility of working together on autonomous-vehicle technology while he was still employed at Google, according to evidence presented at the trial.Mr. Levandowski was accused of downloading thousands of Google files related to self-driving car technology before he left the company. Uber learned about what he had done but still went ahead with the deal, Waymo claimed. That was the basis of Waymo’s claim that Uber had misappropriated eight trade secrets related mainly to lidar — an abbreviation for “light detection and ranging” — sensors that help self-driving cars see the world around them.The first few days of the trial revealed a number of embarrassing details connecting Uber with Mr. Levandowski. However, Waymo had yet to deliver on the substantive legal part of the argument that Uber knowingly stole Waymo’s trade secrets for use in its products. The judge, William Alsup, admonished Waymo’s lawyers on Wednesday for not having made much progress on its trade secret misappropriation claims.Before the trial started, Uber offered to settle with Waymo in exchange for 0.68 percent of the company’s equity, or about $500 million, but its board of directors pulled the offer and allowed Mr. Kalanick to testify, according to two people familiar with Uber’s thinking who were not authorized to speak publicly on the matter.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After testimony on Thursday, settlement talks restarted, and Uber offered the lower percentage, these people said. For Waymo, the financial terms were not as important as scoring concessions on not using Waymo’s technology, said a person familiar with Waymo’s deliberations who was not authorized to discuss them.The settlement included an agreement that none of Waymo’s confidential information was being incorporated in Uber’s autonomous vehicle technology.After almost a decade of work on self-driving cars, the Uber stake may be the first substantial money that Waymo has made from the technology. Alphabet was already a major investor in Uber through its venture capital arm, GV. It has also made a billion-dollar investment in Uber’s main rival in the United States, Lyft.AdvertisementAlthough it settled the lawsuit, Waymo’s court fight may have succeeded in embarrassing a rival while delivering a unspoken warning to former and current employees to be cautious about leaving the company with know-how developed there. It also struck a deal before Larry Page, Alphabet’s chief executive, who rarely speaks in public, had to testify in court next week.Waymo’s lawyers presented evidence that entertained the throngs of technology reporters gathered to cover the trial including texts and emails between Mr. Levandowski and Mr. Kalanick using chest-puffing terms like “burn the village” and “second place is first” loser. There were also pictures of notes on whiteboards from a brainstorming “jam sesh” led by Mr. Kalanick, declaring, among other things, that “laser is the sauce.”The settlement helps resolve one of Uber’s many lingering issues from Mr. Kalanick’s tumultuous time as chief executive, which ended in June. His successor, Dara Khosrowshahi, has said he hopes to change the perception that Uber has been too quick to break rules.The settlement also clears away a significant legal risk as Uber prepares for an expected initial public offering. It is still dealing with a Department of Justice investigation into its business practices. Although the company insists it did not take any Waymo trade secrets, Mr. Khosrowshahi said in a statement that he regretted the events that led to the litigation.“My job as Uber’s C.E.O. is to set the course for the future of the company: innovating and growing responsibly, as well as acknowledging and correcting mistakes of the past,” he said in the statement. “The prospect that a couple of Waymo employees may have inappropriately solicited others to join Otto, and that they may have potentially left with Google files in their possession, in retrospect, raised some hard questions.”Mr. Kalanick released a statement that was not nearly as conciliatory.“No trade secrets ever came to Uber,” the statement said. “The evidence at trial overwhelmingly proved that, and had the trial proceeded to its conclusion, it is clear Uber would have prevailed.”The loser in the legal proceeding may be Mr. Levandowski, who was fired by Uber over his refusal to cooperate with the company’s defense. An Uber spokesman, Matt Kallman, said the company had fired Mr. Levandowski in May before Otto could meet any of its performance targets. As a result, he lost out on an estimated $250 million worth of equity in Uber — almost exactly how much Uber paid Waymo.Judge Alsup referred Mr. Levandowski’s case to the Justice Department, although it was not clear whether a criminal case was being pursued against him. Mr. Levandowski, who received a $120 million bonus for his work on Google’s self-driving car, was expected to refuse to answer questions if he had taken the stand as scheduled next week.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Settlement, Waymo Gets $245 Million in Uber Stock.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NICOLE PERLROTHFEB. 12, 2018
A cyberattack caused the internet disruptions during the Winter Olympics’ opening ceremony on Friday night, Olympic officials and security experts said.Jihye Lee, a spokesman for the Pyeongchang Organizing Committee, confirmed Sunday that “the technology issues experienced Friday night were caused by a cyberattack.”Mr. Lee did not elaborate on the cause but said that the attack had been quickly addressed and that systems had been stabilized by Sunday.The cyberattack took out internet access and telecasts, grounded broadcasters’ drones, shut down the Pyeongchang 2018 website, and prevented spectators from printing out reservations and attending the ceremony, which resulted in an unusually high number of empty seats.AdvertisementSecurity experts said they had uncovered evidence that the attack had been in the works since late last year. It was directed at the Pyeongchang Organizing Committee and incorporated code that was specifically designed to disrupt the Games or perhaps even send a political message.Advertisement“This attacker had no intention of leaving the machine usable,” a team of researchers at Cisco’s Talos threat intelligence division wrote in an analysis Monday. “The purpose of this malware is to perform destruction of the host” and “leave the computer system offline.”In an interview, Talos researchers noted that there was a nuance to the attack that they had not seen before: Even though the hackers clearly demonstrated that they had the ability to destroy victims’ computers, they stopped short of doing so. They erased only backup files on Windows machines and left open the possibility that responders could still reboot the computers and fix the damage.“Why did they pull their punch?” asked Craig Williams, a senior technical leader at Talos. “Presumably, it’s making some political message” that they could have done far worse, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Talos’s findings matched those of other internet security companies, like CrowdStrike, which determined on Monday that the attacks had been in the works since at least December. Adam Meyers, vice president of intelligence at CrowdStrike, said his team had discovered time stamps that showed the destructive payload that hit the opening ceremony was constructed on Dec. 27 at 11:39 a.m. Coordinated Universal Time — which converts to 6:39 a.m. Eastern Time, 2:39 p.m. in Moscow and 8:39 p.m. in South Korea.Attackers clearly had a target in mind: The word Pyeongchang2018.com was hard-coded into their payload, as was a set of stolen credentials belonging to Pyeongchang Olympic officials. Those stolen credentials allowed attackers to spread their malware throughout the computer networks that support the Winter Games on Friday, just as the opening ceremony was timed to begin.Security companies would not say definitively who was behind the attack, but some digital crumbs led to a familiar culprit: Fancy Bear, the Russian hacking group with ties to Russian intelligence services. Fancy Bear was determined to be the more brazen of the two Russian hacking groups behind an attack on the Democratic National Committee ahead of the 2016 presidential election.Beginning in November, CrowdStrike’s intelligence team witnessed Fancy Bear attacks that stole credentials from an international sports organization, Mr. Meyers said. He declined to identify the victim but suggested that the credential thefts were similar to the ones that hackers would have needed before their opening ceremony attack.On Wednesday, two days before the ceremony, the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs made an apparent attempt to pre-empt any accusations of Russian cyberattacks on the Games. In a statement, released in English, German and Russian, the agency accused Western governments, press and information security companies of waging an “information war” accusing Russia of “alleged cyber interference” and “planning to attack the ideals of the Olympic movement.”This was not the first Olympic opening ceremony that was a target for hackers. In the lead-up to the 2012 London Games, investigators uncovered attack tools and the blueprints to the Olympic stadium’s building management systems on a hacker’s computer.AdvertisementIt appeared that hackers planned to take out the power to the stadium, said Oliver Hoare, who led cybersecurity matters for the London Games. But officials successfully prevented an attack.Follow Nicole Perlroth on Twitter: @nicoleperlroth.Motoko Rich contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2018, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Hackers Caused Disruptions at Opening Ceremony.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO
 
FEB. 9, 2018
Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo, The Times’s technology columnist, reviews the week’s news, offering analysis (and maybe a joke or two) about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Good morning! Let’s talk about tech.The HomePod reviews are in, and the verdict is: It’s middling!Apple’s smart speaker was originally due to ship last year. Now, after a delay and lots of speculation that it would face a rough go against Amazon’s Echo, Apple’s device is finally on sale.But most reviewers appraising the device this week suggested that it was best to wait. There are some interesting features in HomePod, but it has a long way to go to beat the competition.AdvertisementWhat does it do well? It sounds great. Every reviewer — among them Nilay Patel at The Verge, Joanna Stern at The Wall Street Journal and my New York Times colleague Brian X. Chen — found that HomePod beat Echo, Google Home and a comparable Sonos device in audio quality.AdvertisementWhat doesn’t it do well? Pretty much everything else, reviewers said. It’s expensive — $349 versus $85 for an Echo. It’s locked into Apple’s music service, while competing systems let you play songs from a variety of sources.And most frustratingly, it’s not very smart. Where Amazon’s and Google’s devices can answer a variety of questions and perform lots of different tasks (like order up an Uber or Lyft), HomePod’s brain, Siri, needs evolution. Brian was particularly upset that the device kept playing music he didn’t like. And for Nilay, the biggest complaint was that HomePod couldn’t set two timers at once — basically table stakes in the smart speaker game.None of these are fatal. Siri is a cloud-based service, which means Apple can keep improving it from afar. Echo, too, wasn’t so great to begin with. So I wouldn’t count Apple out. The smart assistant war has barely started.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Travis Kalanick took the stand, drank a whole lot of water, offered his thoughts on greed and Google, and introduced the world to the crazy lexicon of tech bros: “unpumped,” “angsty” and, most mysteriously of all, “laser is the sauce.”These are the highlights from Waymo’s big trade-secrets lawsuit against Uber, which, after months of legal maneuvering, finally hit a San Francisco courtroom this week. Kalanick, Uber’s co-founder and ousted C.E.O., was the first high-profile witness to take the stand.At the heart of the case is one question: Did Uber steal trade secrets from Waymo, Google’s self-driving car spin-off, when it purchased Otto, a self-driving company founded by former employees of Waymo?The trial is expected to go on for weeks, but early on, Waymo seemed to score some wins. Kalanick conceded that during a “jam sesh” with Anthony Levandowski, the former Waymo engineer alleged to have stolen its secrets, he discussed the key technology at issue in the case, laser sensors. That’s apparently when Kalanick jotted a note that included his conclusion that “laser is the sauce” — it suggested Levandowski had convinced Kalanick of the importance of Waymo’s tech.AdvertisementI’m sure Uber’s lawyers were unpumped about that.Here’s something noteworthy from social media land. Snap and Twitter have long appeared at a disadvantage to the 800-pound social media gorilla, Facebook, and the smaller companies’ financial results often proved it.But this week — surprise! — Snap reported robust revenue and user growth, and Twitter posted its first quarterly profit as a public company.Elon Musk, the billionaire founder of SpaceX and Tesla, launched a huge rocket into space! Not only that, but he also put a cherry red Tesla in it, and a mannequin wearing a space suit inside the Tesla. The whole thing will orbit the sun.There’s some serious stuff here. This is the biggest rocket ever launched by a private company, and it paves the way for an even-larger rocket planned by Musk, called B.F.R., which could help realize Musk’s dream of colonizing Mars. (As my colleague Kenneth Chang explained in this family-friendly newspaper about B.F.R.: “The B stands for big; the R for rocket.”)But let’s forget the serious stuff for a second. Look at the video of the Tesla’s flight. What a world!Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NATHANIEL POPPERFEB. 8, 2018
BERKELEY, Calif. — While the price of Bitcoin has dropped since Christmas, the virtual currency boom has shown no signs of cooling off in the more august precincts of America’s elite universities.Several top schools have added or are rushing to add classes about Bitcoin and the record-keeping technology that it introduced, known as the blockchain.Graduate-level classes this semester at Carnegie Mellon, Cornell, Duke, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the University of Maryland, among other places, illustrate the fascination with the technology across several academic fields, and the assumption that it will outlast the current speculative price bubble.“There was some gentle ribbing from my colleagues when I began giving talks on Bitcoin,” said David Yermack, a business and law professor at New York University who offered one of the first for-credit courses on the topic back in 2014. “But within a few months, I was being invited to Basel to talk with central bankers, and the joking from my colleagues stopped after that.”AdvertisementFor a class this semester, Mr. Yermack originally booked a lecture hall that could fit 180 students, but he had to move the course to the largest lecture hall at N.Y.U. when enrollment kept going up. He now has 225 people signed up for the class.A course about virtual currencies created by a Princeton computer science professor, Arvind Narayanan, has been the fifth-most-popular class on Coursera, an online learning site.AdvertisementAnd last month at the University of California, Berkeley, students were lining the walls and sitting in the aisles for the first lecture of “Blockchain, Cryptoeconomics and the Future of Technology, Business and Law.”“This is a very precious opportunity for you to be able to sit in this class,” Dawn Song, a computer science professor, told the students. “There are a bazillion other students who are waiting for your spot.”Because developments in the field are moving so fast, the business school professor also teaching the class, Greg La Blanc, said the students would have to forgive the teachers if they got things wrong on occasion.“We aren’t waiting until we perfect it,” he said. “Don’t compare it to the perfect blockchain course. Compare it to having no blockchain course at all.”The 75 spots in the Berkeley class were divided evenly among the law school, the business school and the engineering department, and faculty from the three departments are teaching the course together. Ms. Song said she had around 100 students vying for the 25 places set aside for her department.The interest is a fueled by the rising price of virtual currencies over the last year. But they have created a host of issues that are worthy of study even apart from the price, professors in a variety of fields said.AdvertisementFor lawyers, virtual currency projects have challenged traditional legal categories and definitions of what constitutes a security or a commodity.Regulators have been caught flat-footed as entrepreneurs have raised billions of dollars by selling virtual currencies without going through the traditional fund-raising channels, taking advantage of the legal fuzziness surrounding them.For economists and business school professors, Bitcoin and other digital tokens have raised questions about the nature of money. The first lecture in the Berkeley class, for example, considered the development of Bitcoin against the history of money.Several business school classes are also focusing on the decentralized methods of record keeping and decision making introduced by Bitcoin.Bitcoin is given credit for creating the first blockchain, a ledger of transactions that is updated by a network of computers without relying on any central company or government.Many big companies are now looking at how blockchains independent of Bitcoin might be used to do things like track music royalties or cargo containers with input from the many parties involved.“The students in my class are from every possible discipline,” said Campbell Harvey, a professor at Duke’s business school, who is teaching a class with 231 students this semester. “They understand that this is going to disrupt many different areas of business, and they want to be the disrupters, not the disruptees.”The computer scientists, meanwhile, are digging into the cryptography that virtual currencies use to secure their wallets and transaction data, as well as the design of the distributed computer networks that make blockchains possible.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last week, Stanford University hosted a three-day conference on the architecture and security of blockchain software, part of a new cottage industry in academic conferences and journals that have sprung up.Advertisement“Let’s assume that tomorrow the price of Bitcoin drops down to $2,” said Nicolas Christin, a computer science professor at Carnegie Mellon, who is teaching a course on “Cryptocurrencies, Blockchains and Applications” this semester. “I still think it’s very cool from a technical standpoint.”Professors and students alike said that aside from the academic possibilities, familiarity with blockchain technology was becoming much more useful on the job market.The job site Indeed.com has reported a spike in job listings that mention the blockchain, and there is now an entire site, Crypto Jobs List, dedicated to opportunities in the young industry.Vinny Tuminelli, a business school student sitting at the back of the Berkeley class, said that during an internship at Anheuser-Busch last summer, the blockchain had come up in an “innovation team” he was on. When he met with his supervisor more recently, the topic came up again.“My original understanding was that it was just thrown out there as a buzzword,” Mr. Tuminelli said. “But now it seems like it has some legs behind it, and people are putting real resources toward it.”Students appear to have caught on to the opportunity faster than their professors. Berkeley students have created a campus club that offers multiple courses on blockchain technology, taught by the students themselves.The director of M.I.T.’s Digital Currency Initiative, Neha Narula, said that when it didn’t schedule a course for this semester, she got constant requests from students. So she put one together and is now co-teaching it.“Students are just fascinated with this area,” she said. “They want to learn about it desperately.”Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopper.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Bitcoin Comes to Campus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Daisuke WakabayashiSAN FRANCISCO — Basketball players have pickup games. Rappers have freestyle cyphers. Tech entrepreneurs, according to the former chief executive of Uber, riff on big ideas in something they call a “jam sesh.”Travis Kalanick, the former chief executive of Uber, who is known for pushing boundaries in business, kept his answers short and his demeanor neutral as he testified on Tuesday in a high-profile court fight between Waymo and his former employer over intellectual property.Waymo, the self-driving-car unit of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, called Mr. Kalanick to the stand during the first full day of testimony in the federal trial. It hoped to reveal how Uber’s win-at-all-costs attitude had pushed the company to acquire Otto, an autonomous-vehicle start-up created by a former Google engineer, Anthony Levandowski.Waymo contends — and Uber denies — that the deal was part of Uber’s plan to steal intellectual property from Google’s self-driving-car project, which would later be renamed Waymo, in order to close the gap in an area of technology essential to its business.As he waded through questions from Waymo’s lawyers, Mr. Kalanick, who resigned in June as Uber’s chief executive, offered unusual insight into how deals get done in Silicon Valley and the freewheeling — some might say self-parodying — business culture at the biggest technology start-ups.Mr. Kalanick said he and other Uber executives had a “jam sesh,” or jam session, with Mr. Levandowski on a Sunday while Mr. Levandowski was still employed by Google. In fact, Mr. Kalanick was such a fan of these sessions that a 2015 profile of him revealed that his home was called a “Jam Pad.”A jam sesh, as Mr. Kalanick explained it, is a business meeting akin to a session in which a jazz ensemble spontaneously works out music. Creative people come in with their own ideas and create “beautiful music.” Or business plans. The group discussed laser sensor technology that was critical to the operation of self-driving cars. A handwritten note on a whiteboard read, “Laser is the sauce.”Mr. Kalanick, wearing a dark-gray suit, a blue shirt and a silver tie in court Tuesday, didn’t deny that Uber had wooed Mr. Levandowski and met with him at Uber’s offices before he left Google. He said he was “a big fan” of the engineer, one of the first employees at Google’s self-driving-car project, and wanted to hire him.But there was a hangup: Mr. Levandowski wanted to venture out on his own.“I wanted to hire Anthony and he wanted to start a company, so I tried to come up with a situation where he could feel like he started a company and I could feel like I hired him,” Mr. Kalanick said, choosing his words carefully between long sips of water. He polished off four bottles of water in less than an hour on the witness stand.Uber acquired Otto for a reported $590 million in 2016, just six months after it was started. It is unclear how much Mr. Levandowski, already a wealthy man thanks to a $120 million bonus from his time at Google, personally made in the deal. An Uber spokesman, Matt Kallman, said the company had fired Mr. Levandowski in May before Otto could meet any of its performance targets. As a result, he lost out on an estimated $250 million worth of equity in Uber.Waymo contends that the clever solution — let Mr. Levandowski create his own company and then buy it — was simply obfuscation for a plot to steal important technology from Waymo.While the deal was unusual, it’s not rare for an executive to want to ensure his independence inside a larger company. Technology giants often have to sell founders of start-ups on the idea that they will maintain some independence, as well as a big payday, in an acquisition. Facebook, for example, acquired Instagram and kept the photo-sharing app a separate unit within the company.Otto is still an independent unit within Uber and is technically a separate defendant in this case.Waymo is trying to portray Mr. Kalanick and Mr. Levandowski as a pair of aggressive, money-hungry conspirators who worked together to steal Google’s intellectual property.Before Mr. Kalanick testified, Uber’s lawyers objected to Waymo’s presenting a text message that Mr. Levandowski sent to Mr. Kalanick with a clip from the movie “Wall Street” in which Gordon Gekko, played by Michael Douglas, passionately argues that “greed, for the lack of a better word, is good.” No ruling was made.On Wednesday, Mr. Kalanick is expected to be asked how much he revealed to Uber’s board about Mr. Levandowski and what the engineer had taken with him from Google.In deposition testimony before the trial, Bill Gurley, an investor and a former board member at Uber, said the company’s board had not been shown a due diligence report before the acquisition of Otto.Mr. Gurley, who stepped down from Uber’s board in June, said he wouldn’t have voted in favor of the acquisition had he known the report indicated that Mr. Levandowski possessed files from Google.Nathan Ballard, a spokesman for Mr. Levandowski, said after the session in the federal courthouse in San Francisco that “although a great many things have been said about Anthony over the last two days, we are confident that he will eventually be vindicated.”Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIFEB. 7, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Uber and Waymo, the self-driving car unit of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, used to be like brothers. Google invested in Uber. The internet giant’s top lawyer even served on Uber’s board of directors.But that “big brother, little brother” relationship deteriorated into paranoia as both companies pursued the creation of autonomous vehicles, Travis Kalanick, Uber’s former chief executive, said on Wednesday.In the second full day of testimony in a federal trial that could last a month, Mr. Kalanick said the ride-hailing service’s acquisition of Otto, a start-up founded by a former Google engineer, had been spurred in part by concern that the search giant would create a rival, robot-powered service.Waymo, which filed the lawsuit that is being heard, contends that Uber’s purchase of Otto in August 2016 was part of a plot to collude with former Google engineers to steal the company’s trade secrets.AdvertisementThe dissolution of Uber’s relationship with Google demonstrates the finicky nature of the ties that bind — or break — tech conglomerates and promising start-ups.AdvertisementIt’s something Google understands well. Years ago, Google was tightly aligned with Apple. But the relationship soured as Google started developing smartphone software. Steve Jobs, who was Apple’s chief executive, rightly believed that Google’s Android would become a competitive threat to the iPhone.When Google initially invested in Uber in 2013, Larry Page, Google’s chief executive at the time, and David Drummond, Alphabet’s top lawyer, were mentors, Mr. Kalanick said. Alphabet remains an investor in Uber.The two companies, he said, had a “little brother, big brother” dynamic because Uber was “trying to get more of their time than they were willing to give.”After Mr. Page repeatedly spurned meetings to discuss combining Uber’s ride-hailing service with Google’s work on self-driving vehicles in some sort of partnership, Mr. Kalanick said, his company started to develop its own autonomous car technology.Uber hired a team of robotics experts from Carnegie Mellon University, deepening the division between the two companies.“Generally, Google was super not happy, unpumped about us doing this,” said Mr. Kalanick, who stepped down as Uber’s chief executive in June. He recalled that Mr. Page had been “angsty” and asked him: “Why are you doing my thing?”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Mr. Kalanick said the engineers from Carnegie Mellon were not enough to catch up to Google’s self-driving car project, which would become Waymo. So Uber started talking to the Otto founder Anthony Levandowski, who was still working at Google, about helping Uber develop its laser sensor technology — an essential component for self-driving cars.AdvertisementAs Mr. Kalanick and Mr. Levandowski discussed ways to work together, they exchanged hundreds of text messages. The messages were presented in court on Wednesday and were mostly a variation on how important it was to win the race for self-driving cars.Mr. Levandowski told Mr. Kalanick that “second place is first” loser. Mr. Kalanick said this wasn’t the first time he had heard this; it was something his high school football coach had said.Mr. Kalanick said he did not recall, however, what he had meant by some of the text messages he sent to Mr. Levandowski, including one that read, “Burn the village.”In another exchange, Mr. Levandowski sent Mr. Kalanick a link to a scene from the movie “Wall Street” in which Gordon Gekko, played by Michael Douglas, argues “greed, for the lack of a better word, is good.”When asked whether he had watched the scene, Mr. Kalanick said he thought so. His emoji response was a hint. “I mean there is a winky-face there,” he said.Once Uber and Otto struck a basic agreement for an acquisition in April 2016, months before the deal was announced, Mr. Kalanick told Uber executives in a meeting that “golden time is over — it’s now wartime.” At another meeting, he discussed how it was necessary for Uber to find and use “cheat codes.”Mr. Kalanick explained that this phrase was not as nefarious as it sounded. Cheat codes “are elegant solutions to problems that haven’t been thought of,” he said. Tesla, for example, has customers pay tens of thousands for cars but loads those vehicles with sensors that provide data to support its self-driving car efforts.Mr. Kalanick said he had another testy conversation with Mr. Page in October 2016, after Uber announced its acquisition of Otto. Interestingly, Mr. Page was worried that Uber was developing its own flying car technology.AdvertisementMr. Page has personally invested in flying car technology, although it is not clear whether Alphabet is working on it.Mr. Kalanick insisted that Uber wasn’t working on flying cars, but he said Mr. Page was mad that Uber was hiring Google employees and taking its intellectual property. To which, Mr. Kalanick said, he responded, “Your people are not your IP.”IP is an abbreviation for intellectual property.As Uber’s lawyers questioned him, Mr. Kalanick recalled how he had had so much fun as the company’s chief executive. He liked “being in the trenches” with small teams. But when asked about the Otto acquisition and the hiring of Mr. Levandowski, Mr. Kalanick was understated.“It’s not as great as we had thought at the beginning,” he said.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber’s Ex-Chief Describes Souring Ties With Google.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIFEB. 5, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — It is not often that a sports metaphor becomes the news of the day in a legal fight over intellectual property theft accusations between two tech industry titans.In federal court on Monday, lawyers for Waymo, the self-driving-car unit of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, compared Uber to Rosie Ruiz, the runner who was accused of cutting onto the course near the end of the 1980 Boston Marathon to finish first among women in the race. She was eventually stripped of the title.In the long-awaited opening statements of a jury trial expected to last three to four weeks, Waymo claimed that Uber, knowing that it was trailing in the race to develop self-driving cars, took a shortcut by stealing technology from Waymo, which was spun out of Google in late 2016.Waymo contended that Uber had done so by colluding with Anthony Levandowski, a former Google engineer, to take his former employer’s intellectual property and bring it to the ride-hailing service.AdvertisementIn Boston sports vernacular, that sort of cheating is called “pulling a Rosie Ruiz.” It is not a compliment.AdvertisementThe legal drama has gripped Silicon Valley since Waymo filed its lawsuit nearly a year ago. Waymo is considered a leader in autonomous vehicles, and was pouring resources into research and development long before other companies.But in the last few years, competitors have been hiring former Google engineers for their own self-driving-car projects. Among them, Uber is considered formidable because it has billions to spend and can test the technology using its vast ride-sharing network.In an indication of how closely this case is being followed, a line to get into the courtroom at the federal courthouse in San Francisco started forming an hour before the trial was scheduled to begin at 7:30 a.m.The witness list includes technology billionaires like Travis Kalanick, Uber’s former chief executive, and Larry Page, chief executive of Alphabet. The judge, William Alsup, even said he had been informed that someone was impersonating him on Twitter.Waymo argues that Uber has misappropriated eight trade secrets pertaining mainly to lidar — an abbreviation for “light detecting and ranging” — sensors that help the cars navigate on their own. The company is asking for an injunction preventing Uber from developing an autonomous vehicle using its lidar technology. In addition, it wants financial compensation for Uber’s use of the technology.Waymo’s lawyers repeatedly drew a comparison to Ms. Ruiz, one of the most brazen cheaters in sports history. Charles K. Verhoeven, Waymo’s lawyer, said Uber, like the disgraced marathoner, wanted to win no matter what and realized that it couldn’t win playing by the rules.“We’re bringing this case because Uber is cheating,” said Mr. Verhoeven, who is a partner at the law firm Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan. “They took our technology to win at all costs.”AdvertisementHe highlighted internal communications from Uber executives talking about how winning was an imperative and saying that the company needed to find “cheat codes.” The internal messages also noted that the lidar technology being developed by Mr. Levandowski was essential for Uber’s success in self-driving cars and that there was no substitute.In their opening statements, Uber’s lawyers countered that the company had developed its technology on its own and that any similarities were due to the information’s being generally known or easy to figure out for Uber’s engineers. And there is no evidence that any of Google’s technology made its way to Uber, they said.So why, then, has Waymo dragged Uber into court? To kill a competitive threat, said Bill Carmody, Uber’s lawyer.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That was quite a story, but I’m going to tell you right upfront: It didn’t happen. Period. End of story,” said Mr. Carmody, who is a partner at the law firm Susman Godfrey. “Like most conspiracy theories, it doesn’t make sense when you hear the whole story.”In Mr. Carmody’s version of events, when Uber hired a team of self-driving engineers in 2015 from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Google’s management became concerned that it would become a footnote in the history of self-driving cars.To emphasize that the files downloaded by Mr. Levandowski before leaving Google were never found at Uber, Mr. Carmody reverted to the Ms. Ruiz comparison: Waymo was actually a race official who looked for evidence of cheating but couldn’t find any.In a day of sports metaphors, Uber countered with a Bay Area favorite. Mr. Carmody said the hiring of Mr. Levandowski, a pioneer in the field of self-driving vehicles, wasn’t an act of desperation. Instead, it was the act of a strong team trying to land the best available talent — the way the Golden State Warriors signed the basketball star Kevin Durant in 2016 to an already championship-caliber lineup.At the same time, Uber also distanced itself from Mr. Levandowski, who is expected to exercise his Fifth Amendment right to avoid self-incrimination when he is called to testify. Mr. Carmody said Uber regretted hiring him and noted that it had fired him in May — almost two months after Mr. Levandowski had refused to cooperate with Uber’s case.AdvertisementJohn Krafcik, Waymo’s chief executive and the first witness called by the company, said he and Mr. Levandowski had had disagreements about the direction of Google’s self-driving-car project. He said Mr. Levandowski had wanted faster progress even if it came at the expense of safety features.Before his departure from Google, Mr. Levandowski sent an email in January 2016 to Mr. Page, Alphabet’s chief executive, saying the self-driving-car project was “broken.” He argued for permission to create a rogue team to compete against their co-workers, because the company was moving too slowly.“He went from someone I called a friend to someone I considered an enemy,” Mr. Krafcik said.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Cheater or Champion? Uber Swipes Back in Court.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

      By FARHAD MANJOO

FEB. 9, 2018

The pioneers of social media have begun grumbling that their technology might be irresistible. But they have few ideas about how to tame the beast they built.
The pioneers of social media have begun grumbling that their technology might be irresistible. But they have few ideas about how to tame the beast they built.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018Your phone buzzes. A message, an Instagram post, a tweet — some bit of digital effluvia has come in, and it’s right there, promising a brief but necessary hit of connection. All you have to do is look.But, just as an experiment, how long can you resist looking? A minute? Two? If you make it that long, how do you start to feel? Can you concentrate? Does your mind wander at what you’re missing? And if you give in — as you surely will, as you probably do many times a day — how do you feel about yourself?The internet was born in text. Now, video and audio are ascendant, writing is being left behind, and everything will be different.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018I’ll make this short: The thing you’re doing now, reading prose on a screen, is going out of fashion.We’re taking stock of the internet right now, with writers who cover the digital world cataloging some of the most consequential currents shaping it. If you probe those currents and look ahead to the coming year online, one truth becomes clear. The defining narrative of our online moment concerns the decline of text, and the exploding reach and power of audio and video.The distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan have closed. Now simple, guttural digital messages, often with multimedia, are big in politics.By Nellie Bowles FEB. 14, 2018Political memes have gone mainstream as the distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan has closed.President Trump has frequently retweeted his fans’ meme work, #MeToo jumped from social media to every workplace, and political campaigns started to invest in the form more seriously. The political meme — text over an image, sometimes short videos or digital clip art meant to spread and be imitated — is often a guttural, simple message couched in humor, like the doctored video from September of Hillary Clinton being hit with his golf ball.There are now more ways to tell if your tweet was bad. That’s because of the ratio.By Mike Isaac FEB. 14, 2018It’s easy to tell when you’ve nailed a good tweet — just watch the likes and retweets pile up as the post goes viral.Now there are also more ways to tell if a tweet was bad. That’s because a new barometer for Twitter blahness has taken hold: the ratio.It’s harder to ignore harassment, or retaliate against accusers, when reports are bolstered by the stories of many others and the public is watching.By Claire Cain Miller FEB. 14, 2018Susan Fowler had tried going to human resources. She had tried going to her managers. She had tried transferring departments. But nothing changed. The sexual and sexist comments she received as an engineer at Uber kept coming.So she went online and wrote a 3,000-word blog post exposing the behavior.Major companies have been forced to rethink how they advertise online after coming under fire when their digital ads appeared next to racist or fake-news content.By Sapna Maheshwari FEB. 14, 2018For advertisers, one of the internet’s great promises has been the ability to automatically target people based on their interests and demographics, with little regard to the websites they are visiting.But these days, major brands have been forced to rethink how they advertise online. Companies from Kellogg to AT&T have come under fire for inadvertently funding bigotry, hate speech and misinformation, often because they were using automated ad technology to reach groups of people across a vast number of sites and videos.Instead of perfectly polishing their feeds, photographers and brands are now showing what women, in particular, actually look like.By Amanda Hess FEB. 14, 2018For all the talk about the internet’s power to democratize the media, Instagram can present an awfully traditional picture of what a woman is supposed to be. The images that rise on the platform are a hellscape of white feminine conformity, with top influencers sporting the same matte lips and contoured cheeks, their bodies whittled and waxed and contorted into the same poses. (Hey, @kyliejenner.)But perfectly polished Instagram feeds have now given way to real ones, in which women in particular are showing what they actually look like. And because they have demanded to be seen, brands have taken notice, too.Advertisement

 Kevin Roose
 

THE SHIFT
FEB. 10, 2018
Among the many, many Democrats who will seek the party’s presidential nomination in 2020, most probably agree on a handful of core issues: protecting DACA, rejoining the Paris climate agreement, unraveling President Trump’s tax breaks for the wealthy.Only one of them will be focused on the robot apocalypse.That candidate is Andrew Yang, a well-connected New York businessman who is mounting a longer-than-long-shot bid for the White House. Mr. Yang, a former tech executive who started the nonprofit organization Venture for America, believes that automation and advanced artificial intelligence will soon make millions of jobs obsolete — yours, mine, those of our accountants and radiologists and grocery store cashiers. He says America needs to take radical steps to prevent Great Depression-level unemployment and a total societal meltdown, including handing out trillions of dollars in cash.“All you need is self-driving cars to destabilize society,” Mr. Yang, 43, said over lunch at a Thai restaurant in Manhattan last month, in his first interview about his campaign. In just a few years, he said, “we’re going to have a million truck drivers out of work who are 94 percent male, with an average level of education of high school or one year of college.”“That one innovation,” he continued, “will be enough to create riots in the street. And we’re about to do the same thing to retail workers, call center workers, fast-food workers, insurance companies, accounting firms.”AdvertisementAlarmist? Sure. But Mr. Yang’s doomsday prophecy echoes the concerns of a growing number of labor economists and tech experts who are worried about the coming economic consequences of automation. A 2017 report by McKinsey & Company, the consulting firm, concluded that by 2030 — three presidential terms from now — as many as one-third of American jobs may disappear because of automation. (Other studies have given cheerier forecasts, predicting that new jobs will replace most of the lost ones.)Perhaps it was inevitable that a tech-skeptic candidate would try to seize the moment. Scrutiny of tech companies like Facebook and Google has increased in recent years, and worries about monopolistic behavior, malicious exploitation of social media and the addictive effects of smartphones have made a once-bulletproof industry politically vulnerable. Even industry insiders have begun to join the backlash.To fend off the coming robots, Mr. Yang is pushing what he calls a “Freedom Dividend,” a monthly check for $1,000 that would be sent to every American from age 18 to 64, regardless of income or employment status. These payments, he says, would bring everyone in America up to approximately the poverty line, even if they were directly hit by automation. Medicare and Medicaid would be unaffected under Mr. Yang’s plan, but people receiving government benefits such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program could choose to continue receiving those benefits, or take the $1,000 monthly payments instead.AdvertisementThe Freedom Dividend isn’t a new idea. It’s a rebranding of universal basic income, a policy that has been popular in academic and think-tank circles for decades, was favored by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the economist Milton Friedman, and has more recently caught the eye of Silicon Valley technologists. Elon Musk, Mark Zuckerberg and the venture capitalist Marc Andreessen have all expressed support for the idea of a universal basic income. Y Combinator, the influential start-up incubator, is running a basic income  experiment with 3,000 participants in two states.Despite its popularity among left-leaning academics and executives, universal basic income is still a leaderless movement that has yet to break into mainstream politics. Mr. Yang thinks he can sell the idea in Washington by framing it as a pro-business policy.“I’m a capitalist,” he said, “and I believe that universal basic income is necessary for capitalism to continue.”Mr. Yang, a married father of two boys, is a fast-talking extrovert who wears the nu-executive uniform of a blazer and jeans without a tie. He keeps a daily journal of things he’s grateful for, and peppers conversations with business-world catchphrases like “core competency.” After graduating from Brown University and Columbia Law School, he quit his job at a big law firm and began working in tech. He ran an internet start-up that failed during the first dot-com bust, worked as an executive at a health care start-up and helped build a test-prep business that was acquired by Kaplan in 2009, netting him a modest fortune.He caught the political bug after starting Venture for America, an organization modeled after Teach for America that connects recent college graduates with start-up businesses. During his travels to Midwestern cities, he began to connect the growth of anti-establishment populism with the rise of workplace automation.“The reason Donald Trump was elected was that we automated away four million manufacturing jobs in Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin,” he said. “If you look at the voter data, it shows that the higher the level of concentration of manufacturing robots in a district, the more that district voted for Trump.”Mr. Yang’s skepticism of technology extends beyond factory robots. In his campaign book, “The War on Normal People,” he writes that he wants to establish a Department of the Attention Economy in order to regulate social media companies like Facebook and Twitter. He also proposes appointing a cabinet-level secretary of technology, based in Silicon Valley, to study the effects of emerging technologies.Critics may dismiss Mr. Yang’s campaign (slogan: “Humanity First”) as a futurist vanity stunt. The Democratic pipeline is already stuffed with would-be 2020 contenders, most of whom already have the public profile and political experience that Mr. Yang lacks — and at least one of whom, Senator Bernie Sanders, has already hinted at support for a universal basic income.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Opponents of universal basic income have also pointed to its steep price tag — an annual outlay of $12,000 per American adult would cost approximately $2 trillion, equivalent to roughly half of the current federal budget — and the possibility that giving out free money could encourage people not to work. These reasons, among others, are why Hillary Clinton, who considered adding universal basic income to her 2016 platform, concluded it was “exciting but not realistic.”Advertisement“In our political culture, there are formidable political obstacles to providing cash to working-age people who aren’t employed, and it’s unlikely that U.B.I. could surmount them,” Robert Greenstein, the president of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a Washington research group, wrote last year.But Mr. Yang thinks he can make the case. He has proposed paying for a basic income with a value-added tax, a consumption-based levy that he says would raise money from companies that profit from automation. A recent study by the Roosevelt Institute, a left-leaning policy think-tank, suggested that such a plan, paid for by a progressive tax plan, could grow the economy by more than 2 percent and provide jobs for 1.1 million more people.“Universal basic income is an old idea,” Mr. Yang said, “but it’s an old idea that right now is uniquely relevant because of what we’re experiencing in society.”Mr. Yang’s prominent supporters include Andy Stern, a former leader of Service Employees International Union, who credited him with “opening up a discussion that the country’s afraid to have.” His campaign has also attracted some of Silicon Valley’s elites. Tony Hsieh, the chief executive of Zappos, is an early donor to Mr. Yang’s campaign, as are several venture capitalists and high-ranking alumni of Facebook and Google.Mr. Yang, who has raised roughly $130,000 since filing his official paperwork with the Federal Election Commission in November, says he will ultimately raise millions from supporters in the tech industry and elsewhere to supplement his own money.Mr. Yang has other radical ideas, too. He wants to appoint a White House psychologist, “make taxes fun” by turning April 15 into a national holiday and put into effect “digital social credits,” a kind of gamified reward system to encourage socially productive behavior. To stem corruption, he suggests increasing the president’s salary to $4 million from its current $400,000, and sharply raising the pay of other federal regulators, while barring them from accepting paid speaking gigs or lucrative private-sector jobs after leaving office.And although he said he was socially liberal, he admitted that he hadn’t fully developed all his positions. (On most social issues, Mr. Yang said, “I believe what you probably think I believe.”)The likelihood, of course, is that Mr. Yang’s candidacy won’t end with a parade down Pennsylvania Avenue. Still, experts I spoke with were glad to have him talking about the long-term risks of automation, at a time when much of Washington is consumed with the immediate and visible.AdvertisementErik Brynjolfsson, the director of M.I.T.’s Initiative on the Digital Economy and a co-author of “The Second Machine Age,” praised Mr. Yang for bringing automation’s economic effects into the conversation.“This is a serious problem, and it’s going to get a lot worse,” Mr. Brynjolfsson said. “In every election for the next 10 or 20 years, this will become a more salient issue, and the candidates who can speak to it effectively will do well.”Mr. Yang knows he could sound the automation alarm without running for president. But he feels a sense of urgency. In his view, there’s no time to mess around with think-tank papers and “super PACs,” because the clock is ticking.“We have five to 10 years before truckers lose their jobs,” he said, “and all hell breaks loose.”Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2018, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: His 2020 Slogan: Beware of Robots.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »

      By NELLIE BOWLES

FEB. 9, 2018

The distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan have closed. Now simple, guttural digital messages, often with multimedia, are big in politics.
The distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan have closed. Now simple, guttural digital messages, often with multimedia, are big in politics.By Nellie Bowles FEB. 14, 2018Political memes have gone mainstream as the distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan has closed.President Trump has frequently retweeted his fans’ meme work, #MeToo jumped from social media to every workplace, and political campaigns started to invest in the form more seriously. The political meme — text over an image, sometimes short videos or digital clip art meant to spread and be imitated — is often a guttural, simple message couched in humor, like the doctored video from September of Hillary Clinton being hit with his golf ball.The internet was born in text. Now, video and audio are ascendant, writing is being left behind, and everything will be different.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018I’ll make this short: The thing you’re doing now, reading prose on a screen, is going out of fashion.We’re taking stock of the internet right now, with writers who cover the digital world cataloging some of the most consequential currents shaping it. If you probe those currents and look ahead to the coming year online, one truth becomes clear. The defining narrative of our online moment concerns the decline of text, and the exploding reach and power of audio and video.There are now more ways to tell if your tweet was bad. That’s because of the ratio.By Mike Isaac FEB. 14, 2018It’s easy to tell when you’ve nailed a good tweet — just watch the likes and retweets pile up as the post goes viral.Now there are also more ways to tell if a tweet was bad. That’s because a new barometer for Twitter blahness has taken hold: the ratio.It’s harder to ignore harassment, or retaliate against accusers, when reports are bolstered by the stories of many others and the public is watching.By Claire Cain Miller FEB. 14, 2018Susan Fowler had tried going to human resources. She had tried going to her managers. She had tried transferring departments. But nothing changed. The sexual and sexist comments she received as an engineer at Uber kept coming.So she went online and wrote a 3,000-word blog post exposing the behavior.The pioneers of social media have begun grumbling that their technology might be irresistible. But they have few ideas about how to tame the beast they built.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018Your phone buzzes. A message, an Instagram post, a tweet — some bit of digital effluvia has come in, and it’s right there, promising a brief but necessary hit of connection. All you have to do is look.But, just as an experiment, how long can you resist looking? A minute? Two? If you make it that long, how do you start to feel? Can you concentrate? Does your mind wander at what you’re missing? And if you give in — as you surely will, as you probably do many times a day — how do you feel about yourself?Major companies have been forced to rethink how they advertise online after coming under fire when their digital ads appeared next to racist or fake-news content.By Sapna Maheshwari FEB. 14, 2018For advertisers, one of the internet’s great promises has been the ability to automatically target people based on their interests and demographics, with little regard to the websites they are visiting.But these days, major brands have been forced to rethink how they advertise online. Companies from Kellogg to AT&T have come under fire for inadvertently funding bigotry, hate speech and misinformation, often because they were using automated ad technology to reach groups of people across a vast number of sites and videos.Instead of perfectly polishing their feeds, photographers and brands are now showing what women, in particular, actually look like.By Amanda Hess FEB. 14, 2018For all the talk about the internet’s power to democratize the media, Instagram can present an awfully traditional picture of what a woman is supposed to be. The images that rise on the platform are a hellscape of white feminine conformity, with top influencers sporting the same matte lips and contoured cheeks, their bodies whittled and waxed and contorted into the same poses. (Hey, @kyliejenner.)But perfectly polished Instagram feeds have now given way to real ones, in which women in particular are showing what they actually look like. And because they have demanded to be seen, brands have taken notice, too.Advertisement

      By FARHAD MANJOO

FEB. 9, 2018

The internet was born in text. Now, video and audio are ascendant, writing is being left behind, and everything will be different.
The internet was born in text. Now, video and audio are ascendant, writing is being left behind, and everything will be different.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018I’ll make this short: The thing you’re doing now, reading prose on a screen, is going out of fashion.We’re taking stock of the internet right now, with writers who cover the digital world cataloging some of the most consequential currents shaping it. If you probe those currents and look ahead to the coming year online, one truth becomes clear. The defining narrative of our online moment concerns the decline of text, and the exploding reach and power of audio and video.The distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan have closed. Now simple, guttural digital messages, often with multimedia, are big in politics.By Nellie Bowles FEB. 14, 2018Political memes have gone mainstream as the distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan has closed.President Trump has frequently retweeted his fans’ meme work, #MeToo jumped from social media to every workplace, and political campaigns started to invest in the form more seriously. The political meme — text over an image, sometimes short videos or digital clip art meant to spread and be imitated — is often a guttural, simple message couched in humor, like the doctored video from September of Hillary Clinton being hit with his golf ball.There are now more ways to tell if your tweet was bad. That’s because of the ratio.By Mike Isaac FEB. 14, 2018It’s easy to tell when you’ve nailed a good tweet — just watch the likes and retweets pile up as the post goes viral.Now there are also more ways to tell if a tweet was bad. That’s because a new barometer for Twitter blahness has taken hold: the ratio.It’s harder to ignore harassment, or retaliate against accusers, when reports are bolstered by the stories of many others and the public is watching.By Claire Cain Miller FEB. 14, 2018Susan Fowler had tried going to human resources. She had tried going to her managers. She had tried transferring departments. But nothing changed. The sexual and sexist comments she received as an engineer at Uber kept coming.So she went online and wrote a 3,000-word blog post exposing the behavior.The pioneers of social media have begun grumbling that their technology might be irresistible. But they have few ideas about how to tame the beast they built.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018Your phone buzzes. A message, an Instagram post, a tweet — some bit of digital effluvia has come in, and it’s right there, promising a brief but necessary hit of connection. All you have to do is look.But, just as an experiment, how long can you resist looking? A minute? Two? If you make it that long, how do you start to feel? Can you concentrate? Does your mind wander at what you’re missing? And if you give in — as you surely will, as you probably do many times a day — how do you feel about yourself?Major companies have been forced to rethink how they advertise online after coming under fire when their digital ads appeared next to racist or fake-news content.By Sapna Maheshwari FEB. 14, 2018For advertisers, one of the internet’s great promises has been the ability to automatically target people based on their interests and demographics, with little regard to the websites they are visiting.But these days, major brands have been forced to rethink how they advertise online. Companies from Kellogg to AT&T have come under fire for inadvertently funding bigotry, hate speech and misinformation, often because they were using automated ad technology to reach groups of people across a vast number of sites and videos.Instead of perfectly polishing their feeds, photographers and brands are now showing what women, in particular, actually look like.By Amanda Hess FEB. 14, 2018For all the talk about the internet’s power to democratize the media, Instagram can present an awfully traditional picture of what a woman is supposed to be. The images that rise on the platform are a hellscape of white feminine conformity, with top influencers sporting the same matte lips and contoured cheeks, their bodies whittled and waxed and contorted into the same poses. (Hey, @kyliejenner.)But perfectly polished Instagram feeds have now given way to real ones, in which women in particular are showing what they actually look like. And because they have demanded to be seen, brands have taken notice, too.Advertisement

      By CLAIRE CAIN MILLER

FEB. 9, 2018

It’s harder to ignore harassment, or retaliate against accusers, when reports are bolstered by the stories of many others and the public is watching.
It’s harder to ignore harassment, or retaliate against accusers, when reports are bolstered by the stories of many others and the public is watching.By Claire Cain Miller FEB. 14, 2018Susan Fowler had tried going to human resources. She had tried going to her managers. She had tried transferring departments. But nothing changed. The sexual and sexist comments she received as an engineer at Uber kept coming.So she went online and wrote a 3,000-word blog post exposing the behavior.The internet was born in text. Now, video and audio are ascendant, writing is being left behind, and everything will be different.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018I’ll make this short: The thing you’re doing now, reading prose on a screen, is going out of fashion.We’re taking stock of the internet right now, with writers who cover the digital world cataloging some of the most consequential currents shaping it. If you probe those currents and look ahead to the coming year online, one truth becomes clear. The defining narrative of our online moment concerns the decline of text, and the exploding reach and power of audio and video.The distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan have closed. Now simple, guttural digital messages, often with multimedia, are big in politics.By Nellie Bowles FEB. 14, 2018Political memes have gone mainstream as the distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan has closed.President Trump has frequently retweeted his fans’ meme work, #MeToo jumped from social media to every workplace, and political campaigns started to invest in the form more seriously. The political meme — text over an image, sometimes short videos or digital clip art meant to spread and be imitated — is often a guttural, simple message couched in humor, like the doctored video from September of Hillary Clinton being hit with his golf ball.There are now more ways to tell if your tweet was bad. That’s because of the ratio.By Mike Isaac FEB. 14, 2018It’s easy to tell when you’ve nailed a good tweet — just watch the likes and retweets pile up as the post goes viral.Now there are also more ways to tell if a tweet was bad. That’s because a new barometer for Twitter blahness has taken hold: the ratio.The pioneers of social media have begun grumbling that their technology might be irresistible. But they have few ideas about how to tame the beast they built.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018Your phone buzzes. A message, an Instagram post, a tweet — some bit of digital effluvia has come in, and it’s right there, promising a brief but necessary hit of connection. All you have to do is look.But, just as an experiment, how long can you resist looking? A minute? Two? If you make it that long, how do you start to feel? Can you concentrate? Does your mind wander at what you’re missing? And if you give in — as you surely will, as you probably do many times a day — how do you feel about yourself?Major companies have been forced to rethink how they advertise online after coming under fire when their digital ads appeared next to racist or fake-news content.By Sapna Maheshwari FEB. 14, 2018For advertisers, one of the internet’s great promises has been the ability to automatically target people based on their interests and demographics, with little regard to the websites they are visiting.But these days, major brands have been forced to rethink how they advertise online. Companies from Kellogg to AT&T have come under fire for inadvertently funding bigotry, hate speech and misinformation, often because they were using automated ad technology to reach groups of people across a vast number of sites and videos.Instead of perfectly polishing their feeds, photographers and brands are now showing what women, in particular, actually look like.By Amanda Hess FEB. 14, 2018For all the talk about the internet’s power to democratize the media, Instagram can present an awfully traditional picture of what a woman is supposed to be. The images that rise on the platform are a hellscape of white feminine conformity, with top influencers sporting the same matte lips and contoured cheeks, their bodies whittled and waxed and contorted into the same poses. (Hey, @kyliejenner.)But perfectly polished Instagram feeds have now given way to real ones, in which women in particular are showing what they actually look like. And because they have demanded to be seen, brands have taken notice, too.Advertisement
FEB. 9, 2018

Major companies have been forced to rethink how they advertise online after coming under fire when their digital ads appeared next to racist or fake-news content.
Major companies have been forced to rethink how they advertise online after coming under fire when their digital ads appeared next to racist or fake-news content.By Sapna Maheshwari FEB. 14, 2018For advertisers, one of the internet’s great promises has been the ability to automatically target people based on their interests and demographics, with little regard to the websites they are visiting.But these days, major brands have been forced to rethink how they advertise online. Companies from Kellogg to AT&T have come under fire for inadvertently funding bigotry, hate speech and misinformation, often because they were using automated ad technology to reach groups of people across a vast number of sites and videos.The internet was born in text. Now, video and audio are ascendant, writing is being left behind, and everything will be different.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018I’ll make this short: The thing you’re doing now, reading prose on a screen, is going out of fashion.We’re taking stock of the internet right now, with writers who cover the digital world cataloging some of the most consequential currents shaping it. If you probe those currents and look ahead to the coming year online, one truth becomes clear. The defining narrative of our online moment concerns the decline of text, and the exploding reach and power of audio and video.The distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan have closed. Now simple, guttural digital messages, often with multimedia, are big in politics.By Nellie Bowles FEB. 14, 2018Political memes have gone mainstream as the distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan has closed.President Trump has frequently retweeted his fans’ meme work, #MeToo jumped from social media to every workplace, and political campaigns started to invest in the form more seriously. The political meme — text over an image, sometimes short videos or digital clip art meant to spread and be imitated — is often a guttural, simple message couched in humor, like the doctored video from September of Hillary Clinton being hit with his golf ball.There are now more ways to tell if your tweet was bad. That’s because of the ratio.By Mike Isaac FEB. 14, 2018It’s easy to tell when you’ve nailed a good tweet — just watch the likes and retweets pile up as the post goes viral.Now there are also more ways to tell if a tweet was bad. That’s because a new barometer for Twitter blahness has taken hold: the ratio.It’s harder to ignore harassment, or retaliate against accusers, when reports are bolstered by the stories of many others and the public is watching.By Claire Cain Miller FEB. 14, 2018Susan Fowler had tried going to human resources. She had tried going to her managers. She had tried transferring departments. But nothing changed. The sexual and sexist comments she received as an engineer at Uber kept coming.So she went online and wrote a 3,000-word blog post exposing the behavior.The pioneers of social media have begun grumbling that their technology might be irresistible. But they have few ideas about how to tame the beast they built.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018Your phone buzzes. A message, an Instagram post, a tweet — some bit of digital effluvia has come in, and it’s right there, promising a brief but necessary hit of connection. All you have to do is look.But, just as an experiment, how long can you resist looking? A minute? Two? If you make it that long, how do you start to feel? Can you concentrate? Does your mind wander at what you’re missing? And if you give in — as you surely will, as you probably do many times a day — how do you feel about yourself?Instead of perfectly polishing their feeds, photographers and brands are now showing what women, in particular, actually look like.By Amanda Hess FEB. 14, 2018For all the talk about the internet’s power to democratize the media, Instagram can present an awfully traditional picture of what a woman is supposed to be. The images that rise on the platform are a hellscape of white feminine conformity, with top influencers sporting the same matte lips and contoured cheeks, their bodies whittled and waxed and contorted into the same poses. (Hey, @kyliejenner.)But perfectly polished Instagram feeds have now given way to real ones, in which women in particular are showing what they actually look like. And because they have demanded to be seen, brands have taken notice, too.AdvertisementBy MIKE ISAACFEB. 9, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — For weeks, Dara Khosrowshahi, Uber’s chief executive, and some of his lieutenants had worked behind the scenes to repair the ride-hailing company’s fractious relationship with Waymo, the self-driving business spun out of Google.A Waymo lawsuit over autonomous car technology, in which it accused Uber of stealing trade secrets, was about to go to trial in a San Francisco courtroom for all to see. So Mr. Khosrowshahi, who was appointed Uber C.E.O. late last year, leaned on his history with Google from his previous job as chief executive of the travel site Expedia.Mr. Khosrowshahi worked to coax Google’s founders, Larry Page and Sergey Brin, and to let them know that Uber had turned over a new leaf, according to two people briefed on the situation, who asked not to be identified because the details were confidential. Tony West, Uber’s recently appointed general counsel and a former Department of Justice official, also jumped into the negotiations, these people said.The actions helped lead to a compromise. On Friday, four days after the trial began and revealed some embarrassing testimony, Uber and Waymo announced they had settled the trade secrets dispute. Under the agreement, Waymo dropped the suit and will receive 0.34 percent of stock in Uber. Uber also said that it could have handled some past actions around driverless car tech differently.AdvertisementThe settlement signified something else, too: Uber is Mr. Khosrowshahi’s company now. Since stepping inside Uber’s doors last fall, the 48-year-old has made it clear he wants to put the company’s checkered past behind it as fast as possible. With the Waymo deal, he showed the many tactics that he plans to use to accomplish that — expressions of regret, accompanied by conciliation, compromise and efficiency. Call him the diplomat in chief.AdvertisementMr. Khosrowshahi’s modus operandi is to clear the way for the big tasks ahead for Uber, said the people who were briefed on the matter. One of those tasks is taking the ride-hailing company public next year, in what is likely to be a blockbuster initial public offering. As a private company, Uber is valued at around $70 billion.“My job as Uber’s C.E.O. is to set the course for the future of the company: innovating and growing responsibly, as well as acknowledging and correcting mistakes of the past,” Mr. Khosrowshahi said in a company blog post.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His fans applauded the Waymo compromise. “This is what real leadership looks like,” Chris Sacca, a venture capitalist who was an early investor in Uber, said in a tweet. “Acknowledgement, apology, commitment, optimism.”The deal with Waymo is the latest maneuver by Mr. Khosrowshahi to shed the baggage of Uber’s past. For months, he has been on a mea culpa tour to mend fences with legislators around the world for how Uber often barreled into markets while flouting local laws. He has publicly apologized for an enormous hack that briefly compromised the information of 57 million drivers and riders. And he has introduced a new set of cultural values for Uber, replacing a list created by Travis Kalanick, the former chief executive who was pushed out last June.Internally at Uber, Mr. Khosrowshahi has also made changes, including bringing on a new slate of lieutenants. In December, the ride-hailing company said Barney Harford, a former chief executive of the travel site Orbitz, would become its chief operating officer. In October, Uber hired Mr. West, a former federal prosecutor, from PepsiCo. Mr. West has since been restructuring the company’s legal department.Mr. Khosrowshahi’s style is markedly different from that of Mr. Kalanick, who took a no-holds-barred approach to the business world. In court this week for the trade secrets trial, Mr. Kalanick testified that he had moved from seeing Google as a potential partner for Uber to an existential threat. Google’s self-driving vehicle research, he said, could eventually have crushed Uber.Mr. Kalanick also testified that he became friendly with Anthony Levandowski, a former top self-driving researcher at Google. Mr. Levandowski started a self-driving trucking start-up, Otto, with the help of other Google engineers he took with him, while downloading proprietary information from the company. Mr. Kalanick bought Otto in 2016, an acquisition that led to Waymo’s case against Uber. (Uber has since fired Mr. Levandowski.)AdvertisementOn Friday, Mr. Kalanick struck a defiant tone about the settlement. “Our sole objective was to hire the most talented scientists and engineers to help lead the company and our cities to a driverless future,” he said in a statement. “The evidence at trial overwhelmingly proved that, and had the trial proceeded to its conclusion, it is clear Uber would have prevailed.”For now, Mr. Khosrowshahi has appeared to smooth over the sore spots with Waymo. Waymo will still be able to pursue a separate legal proceeding against Mr. Levandowski, which is unfolding as a closed-door arbitration.“While I cannot erase the past, I can commit, on behalf of every Uber employee, that we will learn from it, and it will inform our actions going forward,” Mr. Khosrowshahi said in his blog post.Follow Mike Isaac on Twitter: @MikeIsaacA version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber Chief Gives Peek at Future by Leaving the Past Behind.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

      By MIKE ISAAC

FEB. 9, 2018

There are now more ways to tell if your tweet was bad. That’s because of the ratio.
There are now more ways to tell if your tweet was bad. That’s because of the ratio.By Mike Isaac FEB. 14, 2018It’s easy to tell when you’ve nailed a good tweet — just watch the likes and retweets pile up as the post goes viral.Now there are also more ways to tell if a tweet was bad. That’s because a new barometer for Twitter blahness has taken hold: the ratio.The internet was born in text. Now, video and audio are ascendant, writing is being left behind, and everything will be different.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018I’ll make this short: The thing you’re doing now, reading prose on a screen, is going out of fashion.We’re taking stock of the internet right now, with writers who cover the digital world cataloging some of the most consequential currents shaping it. If you probe those currents and look ahead to the coming year online, one truth becomes clear. The defining narrative of our online moment concerns the decline of text, and the exploding reach and power of audio and video.The distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan have closed. Now simple, guttural digital messages, often with multimedia, are big in politics.By Nellie Bowles FEB. 14, 2018Political memes have gone mainstream as the distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan has closed.President Trump has frequently retweeted his fans’ meme work, #MeToo jumped from social media to every workplace, and political campaigns started to invest in the form more seriously. The political meme — text over an image, sometimes short videos or digital clip art meant to spread and be imitated — is often a guttural, simple message couched in humor, like the doctored video from September of Hillary Clinton being hit with his golf ball.It’s harder to ignore harassment, or retaliate against accusers, when reports are bolstered by the stories of many others and the public is watching.By Claire Cain Miller FEB. 14, 2018Susan Fowler had tried going to human resources. She had tried going to her managers. She had tried transferring departments. But nothing changed. The sexual and sexist comments she received as an engineer at Uber kept coming.So she went online and wrote a 3,000-word blog post exposing the behavior.The pioneers of social media have begun grumbling that their technology might be irresistible. But they have few ideas about how to tame the beast they built.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018Your phone buzzes. A message, an Instagram post, a tweet — some bit of digital effluvia has come in, and it’s right there, promising a brief but necessary hit of connection. All you have to do is look.But, just as an experiment, how long can you resist looking? A minute? Two? If you make it that long, how do you start to feel? Can you concentrate? Does your mind wander at what you’re missing? And if you give in — as you surely will, as you probably do many times a day — how do you feel about yourself?Major companies have been forced to rethink how they advertise online after coming under fire when their digital ads appeared next to racist or fake-news content.By Sapna Maheshwari FEB. 14, 2018For advertisers, one of the internet’s great promises has been the ability to automatically target people based on their interests and demographics, with little regard to the websites they are visiting.But these days, major brands have been forced to rethink how they advertise online. Companies from Kellogg to AT&T have come under fire for inadvertently funding bigotry, hate speech and misinformation, often because they were using automated ad technology to reach groups of people across a vast number of sites and videos.Instead of perfectly polishing their feeds, photographers and brands are now showing what women, in particular, actually look like.By Amanda Hess FEB. 14, 2018For all the talk about the internet’s power to democratize the media, Instagram can present an awfully traditional picture of what a woman is supposed to be. The images that rise on the platform are a hellscape of white feminine conformity, with top influencers sporting the same matte lips and contoured cheeks, their bodies whittled and waxed and contorted into the same poses. (Hey, @kyliejenner.)But perfectly polished Instagram feeds have now given way to real ones, in which women in particular are showing what they actually look like. And because they have demanded to be seen, brands have taken notice, too.Advertisement

      By AMANDA HESS

FEB. 9, 2018

Instead of perfectly polishing their feeds, photographers and brands are now showing what women, in particular, actually look like.
Instead of perfectly polishing their feeds, photographers and brands are now showing what women, in particular, actually look like.By Amanda Hess FEB. 14, 2018For all the talk about the internet’s power to democratize the media, Instagram can present an awfully traditional picture of what a woman is supposed to be. The images that rise on the platform are a hellscape of white feminine conformity, with top influencers sporting the same matte lips and contoured cheeks, their bodies whittled and waxed and contorted into the same poses. (Hey, @kyliejenner.)But perfectly polished Instagram feeds have now given way to real ones, in which women in particular are showing what they actually look like. And because they have demanded to be seen, brands have taken notice, too.The internet was born in text. Now, video and audio are ascendant, writing is being left behind, and everything will be different.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018I’ll make this short: The thing you’re doing now, reading prose on a screen, is going out of fashion.We’re taking stock of the internet right now, with writers who cover the digital world cataloging some of the most consequential currents shaping it. If you probe those currents and look ahead to the coming year online, one truth becomes clear. The defining narrative of our online moment concerns the decline of text, and the exploding reach and power of audio and video.The distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan have closed. Now simple, guttural digital messages, often with multimedia, are big in politics.By Nellie Bowles FEB. 14, 2018Political memes have gone mainstream as the distance between the White House and subcultures like 4Chan has closed.President Trump has frequently retweeted his fans’ meme work, #MeToo jumped from social media to every workplace, and political campaigns started to invest in the form more seriously. The political meme — text over an image, sometimes short videos or digital clip art meant to spread and be imitated — is often a guttural, simple message couched in humor, like the doctored video from September of Hillary Clinton being hit with his golf ball.There are now more ways to tell if your tweet was bad. That’s because of the ratio.By Mike Isaac FEB. 14, 2018It’s easy to tell when you’ve nailed a good tweet — just watch the likes and retweets pile up as the post goes viral.Now there are also more ways to tell if a tweet was bad. That’s because a new barometer for Twitter blahness has taken hold: the ratio.It’s harder to ignore harassment, or retaliate against accusers, when reports are bolstered by the stories of many others and the public is watching.By Claire Cain Miller FEB. 14, 2018Susan Fowler had tried going to human resources. She had tried going to her managers. She had tried transferring departments. But nothing changed. The sexual and sexist comments she received as an engineer at Uber kept coming.So she went online and wrote a 3,000-word blog post exposing the behavior.The pioneers of social media have begun grumbling that their technology might be irresistible. But they have few ideas about how to tame the beast they built.By Farhad Manjoo FEB. 14, 2018Your phone buzzes. A message, an Instagram post, a tweet — some bit of digital effluvia has come in, and it’s right there, promising a brief but necessary hit of connection. All you have to do is look.But, just as an experiment, how long can you resist looking? A minute? Two? If you make it that long, how do you start to feel? Can you concentrate? Does your mind wander at what you’re missing? And if you give in — as you surely will, as you probably do many times a day — how do you feel about yourself?Major companies have been forced to rethink how they advertise online after coming under fire when their digital ads appeared next to racist or fake-news content.By Sapna Maheshwari FEB. 14, 2018For advertisers, one of the internet’s great promises has been the ability to automatically target people based on their interests and demographics, with little regard to the websites they are visiting.But these days, major brands have been forced to rethink how they advertise online. Companies from Kellogg to AT&T have come under fire for inadvertently funding bigotry, hate speech and misinformation, often because they were using automated ad technology to reach groups of people across a vast number of sites and videos.AdvertisementBy DON CLARKFEB. 5, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Over 28 years at the giant computer chip maker Intel, Renée James climbed to its No. 2 position, becoming one of Silicon Valley’s prominent female leaders.Now she is taking aim at Intel’s most lucrative business, one that she helped build.Ms. James, who announced in 2015 that she would resign from Intel, on Monday revealed a start-up backed by the private equity firm Carlyle Group to sell chips to handle calculations in servers. Those computers run most internet services and corporate back-office operations.Intel dominates that market, accounting for 98 percent of the microprocessor chips sold for the most popular variety of server, the research firm IDC estimates. The group that sells such chips generated about $19 billion in revenue last year and nearly half of Intel’s operating profit.Ms. James emphasized her respect for her former employer and played down potential competition. She said her new company, Ampere, was designing chips for new, specialized jobs at cloud services that aren’t Intel’s primary focus.Advertisement“I think they're the best in the world at what they do,” Ms. James said of Intel. “I just don’t think they’re doing what comes next.”An Intel spokesman declined to comment. Analysts said the company had developed a variety of products to serve the kinds of companies that Ampere is courting.Intel, whose chips helped drive the personal computer revolution, was once the underdog in the data center. In the 1990s, the company gradually increased the power of its chips and added features needed for servers. The rising performance and much lower price of such machines eventually supplanted hardware from companies like IBM.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. James, 53, who received business degrees from the University of Oregon and started in marketing jobs at Intel, aided the server push by encouraging development of software needed to thrive in the market, among other efforts.“She's known as the person who put software on the map at Intel,” said Patrick Moorhead, an industry analyst at Moor Insights & Strategy.AdvertisementMs. James later spearheaded major Intel software acquisitions, including a $7.68 billion purchase of the security specialist McAfee in 2010. Six years later, Intel agreed to sell a majority stake of that business to the investment firm TPG.Ms. James was considered a candidate to succeed Paul Otellini, who stepped down as Intel chief executive in May 2013. Instead, she and Brian Krzanich successfully pitched Intel directors on a joint plan to run the company.She was named president, the highest-ranking job ever held by a woman at the company, and Mr. Krzanich became chief executive. Ms. James later decided to seek a chief executive spot elsewhere, opting in early 2016 to first become an operating executive at Carlyle.Ms. James learned management skills from Andrew Grove, the acclaimed former Intel chief. Before he died in 2016, she said, Mr. Grove encouraged her to follow her dream of a chip start-up — a plan with parallels to the 1968 founding of Intel as a breakaway from a chip pioneer, Fairchild Semiconductor.“He said, ‘I just want you to know, this is a really hard job,’” Ms. James recalled. “I said: ‘I know. But it’s so much fun.’”Her venture is the latest in a series of largely unsuccessful attempts, dating back more than seven years, to shake up the server market with technology licensed by ARM Holdings that is used as a mainstay of smartphones. One selling point is reduced power consumption, a hot topic in data centers.Ampere’s underlying technology originated at Applied Micro Circuits, which built three generations of ARM-based server chips. The Silicon Valley company was acquired in early 2017 by Macom Technology Solutions, which in October agreed to sell the business to what is now Ampere. Essentially all of Applied Micro’s 300-person development team joined the new venture, Ms. James said.She declined to disclose how much Carlyle was investing but said Ampere was well funded. It has recruited Intel veterans and other engineers and completed its first chip, which is available in sample quantities, she said. The start-up is based not far from Intel’s headquarters.AdvertisementAmpere won’t lack for competition. Besides Intel, a longtime rival, Advanced Micro Devices, has a new line of server chips that have landed some customers. Qualcomm, the biggest mobile chip maker, unveiled an ARM-based server chip in November. Marvell Technology and Cavium, which have agreed to merge, also sell ARM server chips.Ms. James sounds undaunted. She said Ampere’s chips topped rival products on price, speedy connections to retrieve data from memory and other features. More broadly, she said, the market has changed because of advances in software, manufacturing technology and renewed investor interest in start-ups pursuing specialties such as machine learning.“There's a lot of excitement around silicon again,” she said.Follow Don Clark on Twitter: @donal888.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Intel’s Former No. 2 Aims At Lucrative Chip Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicole PerlrothThe Department of Homeland Security is warning Americans planning to attend the 2018 Winter Olympic Games in Pyeongchang that cybercriminals are likely to be targeting the Games.Officials in South Korea are facing a double threat. At the Olympic Committee’s Security Command Center in an unmarked facility in Pyeongchang, security experts from around the world are monitoring threats from North Korean hackers who have been probing the computer networks that manage South Korean finance, media and critical infrastructure systems for years.And while some people believe that diplomatic efforts may have eased the North Korean threat to the Games, others are bracing for the impact of a hacking campaign by Russian groups retaliating for a ban on Russian athletes. Security companies said these groups had successfully targeted the computer systems of Olympic-related organizations months ago.Just how those hacks could lead to broader attacks is not clear. But cybersecurity researchers said the Olympic Games — more digitized than ever — are ripe targets for hackers searching for embarrassing information on everyone from athletes to organizers or simply looking to cause trouble by manipulating scoring or lighting systems.More than 300 Olympics-related computer systems have already been hit, with many of them compromised, the security company McAfee said last month, in what its investigators described as a preliminary hacking campaign. On Friday, the second stage of that attack appeared to be underway, as assailants siphoned data from victims’ machines back to their own computers systems, McAfee’s researchers said.Who was doing it and why they were doing it could take several months to figure out. Ryan Sherstobitoff, a senior analyst at McAfee, said the hacks had appeared to be well organized and backed by substantial resources, with “the hallmarks of a nation state.” What that nation state planned to do with the stolen data and its foothold in victims’ machines, Mr. Sherstobitoff said, was still anyone’s guess.A spokesman for the International Olympic Committee declined to comment on how the organization was addressing the heightened threats.Security researchers often discuss risks with a level of informed paranoia. Some of their warnings are based on what is possible but has not actually occurred in the real world. On other occasions, their warnings are based on what has already happened, and where those incidents could lead.But cyberattacks on international events have become common. The 2015 nuclear negotiations in Geneva and the 2009 climate talks in Copenhagen, for example, were plagued by hackers from various nation states. The Olympics are another alluring target — but with wall-to-wall television coverage.“The Olympics involve so many countries, and so many sports, many of which have their own infrastructure, that it has become a rich target environment for many adversaries,” said John Hultquist, director of threat intelligence at the security firm FireEye.He has been tracking the activities of Russian hackers and other groups as they lay the groundwork for attacks on Olympic organizations. In the past few months, Mr. Hultquist said, his team at FireEye has seen several examples of Russian groups tampering with the computers of Olympic-related organizations. The activity is “obviously meant to drag Olympics-related organizations through the mud and discredit them,” he said.The Russian cyberespionage group known as Fancy Bear, which has been tied to the 2016 hack of the Democratic National Committee and has links to Russia’s main military intelligence unit, has already started posting hacked emails intended to highlight discord among global sports officials and investigators who exposed systemic Russian doping.Last month, the group posted emails and other documents online from the International Luge Federation, claiming they demonstrated violations of antidoping rules. And earlier in January, the group released hacked emails and documents from the International Olympic Committee, which it advertised as proof “the Europeans and the Anglo-Saxons are fighting for power and cash in the sports world.”Trend Micro, the Tokyo-based security company, said its researchers had also witnessed Fancy Bear attacks on the International Ice Hockey Federation, the International Ski Federation, the International Biathlon Union, and the International Bobsleigh and Skeleton Federation in the final months of 2017. The attacks occurred while an International Olympic Committee disciplinary panel was preparing bans for dozens of Russian athletes caught doping in the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.“The Kremlin has its fingerprints on cyberattacks that were retribution for exposing the Russians’ Sochi games doping scheme, which was a fraud on the purity of sport,” said Doug DePeppe, a founder of Sports ISAO, a nonprofit cybersecurity organization in Colorado Springs. The group is trying to help sports associations, including Olympic organizations, combat threats.“Their goal is to say, ‘No one is following the rules, and Russia shouldn’t be singled out,’” Mr. DePeppe said.FireEye, McAfee and other security companies said that over the past few months they had seen attack groups from Russia, and others of unknown origin, dispatch hundreds of “spearphishing” emails, laced with malicious links and attachments, to target Olympic-related groups.They also have seen the groups set up computer servers under the names of some of their targets and seemingly innocuous organizations like the South Korean Ministry of Forestry. They warn that those activities could be a prelude for a broader Russian campaign.In 2016, Russian hackers targeted the World Anti-Doping Agency after it recommended that Russian athletes be banned from the 2016 Rio Games because of doping. The personal data of more than 40 athletes was leaked not long after.The worst-case scenario would be attacks in which hackers tried to shut off lights in a stadium during an event, or perhaps even tampered with electronic timing results, warned Betsy Cooper, the executive director at the Center for Long-Term Cybersecurity at the University of California, Berkeley.To protect the Olympics, South Korea has mobilized tens of thousands of security personnel, including cybersecurity analysts and 50,000 soldiers, in what has been described as one of the most militarized security forces in Olympic history.Over the past few weeks, the United States State Department has set up a temporary security monitoring operation on one floor of its embassy in Seoul. Analysts from the State Department, the intelligence community and the Department of Homeland Security are scheduled to arrive there this week.But an official who was briefed on the State Department-led operation, and who was not allowed to discuss it publicly, worried that the operation was too focused on combating traditional threats like physical attacks on venues.The State Department did not reply to a request for comment.Elsewhere in Pyeongchang, an alliance of security personnel from South Korea, various Olympic sponsors, technology suppliers and cybersecurity sleuths from around the world are monitoring computer screens and potential threats at the unmarked Security Command Center.Each country participating in the Olympics also has its own security delegation on the ground, with those from the United States and Israel among the largest. Those delegations are busy conducting their own threat assessments and receiving daily threat briefings from South Korean law enforcement authorities.While cybersecurity experts believe the North Korean threat was lessened by the last-minute addition of a North Korean delegation to the Games, they have not ruled out that North Korea may be looking to embarrass its southern neighbor.“One thing is for certain: We can’t simply rely on these actors to behave themselves in this context,” Mr. Hultquist said. “They’ve proven, again and again, over the past few years that they are not afraid to flout international norms and create chaos.”Follow Nicole Perlroth on Twitter: @nicoleperlroth.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 5, 2018
Q. I am blind, and I do not subscribe to any streaming video services at the moment. How would you suggest I determine, quickly, whether a good percentage of the original content and current popular third-party content on Netflix and Amazon Prime, for starters, is audio-described and/or dubbed?A. A good place to start is the Audio Description Project page on the website of the American Council of the Blind. The page, optimized for screen-reader software, has a running list of streaming services that offer videos with “audio descriptions” — added narration about scenes, characters, costumes and more — for people who cannot see what is happening. The list, which is updated regularly, is available at www.acb.org/adp/streaming.html.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to the council, Netflix has more than “500 audio-described TV series, documentaries, original programming and children’s shows in the U.S.A.,” including most of the company’s original productions, like “House of Cards.” Although you must be a member to get access to Netflix’s full list of current videos with audio descriptions, the council’s site has compiled its own alphabetized list of audio-described Netflix content at www.acb.org/adp/netflixad.html.Amazon Prime Video has about 350 movies and TV shows with audio descriptions, including “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” and a number of popular theatrical films. The council’s own tally of Amazon Prime shows is at acb.org/adp/amazonad.html.The Audio Description Project page notes several other streaming services and broadcast shows that are accessible, including Apple’s iTunes Store for purchased and rented video. The WatchABC app for mobile devices and some set-top boxes has audio-described content.Some other video services have been slow to add audio descriptions, but as technology enables more accessibility with television, expect to hear of more available content. For the curious, sample clips with audio description can be found on YouTube.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Videos That Offer Access to the Blind.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech We’re UsingBy The New York TimesHow do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Talya Minsberg, a social strategy editor for The Times who is in Pyeongchang, South Korea, to cover the Winter Olympics, discussed the tech she’s using.As a social strategy editor for The Times, what tech do you use on the job the most?The short answer isn’t an exciting one: It’s my iPhone. An iPhone 7 at that.Part of the job of a social editor is thinking about how readers find news where they already are — on social channels like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Snapchat. So I try to consume news like we know many of our readers do, from their phones.When I’m in charge of what goes out on our social channels, I use a MacBook and one extra monitor, nothing too fancy. The key is having a handful of listening tools at the ready. That means I’m one of those people who have an obnoxious amount of tabs up at once. Crowdtangle, a social media analytics tool, Chartbeat, Tweetdeck, Facebook … I could go on.I also listen to a good amount of music that can help me zone in on my work. So I’m a frequent user of Spotify and live performances I have favorited on YouTube.How much social media do you consume for work, what forms of it do you consume the most, and how do you handle the deluge?As most social media editors can attest, the job demands consuming a lot of media in all forms. Day to day, Twitter takes up most of my time and energy. I also dedicate a good amount of my attention to Facebook, Reddit and Instagram at the office.I’m very much still working on how I handle the deluge. Some days it feels like I’m always taking in information, from the moment I wake up and start listening to NPR. Creating methods to narrow down the “need to know” helps me cut out some of the noise. That could be a zooming in on sources pertinent to a story I’m working on or top news. Either way, creating lists and advanced searches on Twitter is invaluable. I also follow specific subreddits, track trending terms, and use Google Alerts.That being said, I’ve found it’s helpful for my mental well-being to take one day a week off from social media. For me, that’s Saturday. It feels like a weekly cleanse and sometimes it’s truly a challenge, which makes me realize just how much I really need to push myself to do it. For one day a week, I try to use my phone as one thing and one thing only: a way to text and call family and friends. Radical, isn’t it?You’re at the Winter Olympics as part of a team to cover the event. What tech preparations did you need to make to be ready for coverage?My first priority was ensuring I have a secure backup for everything. If something happens to my phone or computer, I wanted to make sure that wouldn’t completely derail my work. I use a password manager, have two-step verification on everything that allows it, and keep lots of stuff in the cloud.I’ve also kicked my listening tools usage into high gear. That means a wealth of new lists, alerts and threads I’m watching that are Olympics- and sport-specific.Do you have to keep any tech gear warm in the chilly temperatures in Pyeongchang, and how do you plan to do so? Yes! As many have experienced, phones can die quickly in the cold. Since temperatures have been hovering between zero and 30 degrees Fahrenheit, I thought about creative ways to keep my gear warm and charged. I ordered dozens and dozens of hand warmers that I plan on also using as phone warmers. The backup plan to that backup plan is having more than one phone on me, and more than one external charger on me.That being said, none of my gear will do me any good if I’m an ice cube. So I thought about keeping myself warm too. SmartWool socks are my Olympic fashion staple.What is our social media strategy set to be at the Winter Olympics?I’ll tell you about the tool I’m most excited about — a new messaging system with one of our sports editors, Sam Manchester. Sam will be sending messages from the Olympics to readers within The New York Times app.There are a handful of exciting things you’ll see on the messaging app. But perhaps most exciting is the fact that you will actually be able to talk to Sam, who is a real-life human and not a bot! He’s going to be your man on the ground who will take you behind the scenes of the Games in all their excitement and quirkiness.Outside of work, what tech product are you in love with using in your daily life right now?MoviePass, which provides a subscription plan so members get movie tickets at a cheaper price. I wasn’t a big moviegoer and this has completely transformed my habits overnight.What could be better about it?The most frustrating feature is that you have to be within 100 yards of a theater to reserve tickets. I wish you could reserve tickets in advance without being there. I don’t see a reason against it, especially if there was a penalty for not showing up at the movie after reserving tickets to dissuade no shows, à la ClassPass.What do you do to get away from social media?I get moving. I’ve been an avid runner since I was a little kid, and there’s nothing that makes me happier than a good long run. I’m hoping to get in some runs in the very early mornings in Pyeongchang, SmartWool included.Follow Talya Minsberg on Twitter: @tminsbergAdvertisementBy NATHANIEL POPPERFEB. 5, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — You did not have to be a technophobe to worry that the virtual-currency boom of the past year papered over plenty of problems.The scale of those problems is starting to become clear as digital tokens have slid more than 50 percent in value from their peaks in early January, with steep drops on Monday pushing the value of Bitcoin specifically below $7,000.Hackers draining funds from online exchanges. Ponzi schemes. Government regulators unable to keep up with the rise of so-called cryptocurrencies. Signs of trouble have appeared at nearly every level of the industry, from the biggest exchanges to the news sites and chat rooms where the investment frenzy has been discussed.On Tuesday, the leaders of the two main regulatory agencies in the United States that oversee the technology, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, are to testify before the Senate banking committee about their efforts to police virtual currency markets. In the past two weeks, both have brought major cases, but people in the young industry said regulators had barely made a dent.AdvertisementSome virtual currency enthusiasts argue that the problems are no different from what has happened in other booms, like the internet bubble of the 1990s. But even true believers say the design of virtual currencies — meant to cut out middlemen and government authorities — has made bad behavior more prevalent amid this particular bubble.Advertisement“Cryptocurrencies are almost a perfect vehicle for scams,” said Kevin Werbach, a professor at University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School. “The combination of credulous buyers and low barriers for scammers were bound to lead to a high level of fraud, if and when the money involved got large. The fact that the money got huge almost overnight, before there were good regulatory or even self-regulatory models in place, made the problem acute.”The fall from the peaks of early January has been dizzying. The value of all outstanding virtual currencies has been cut by more than half, down over $400 billion as of Monday, according to the website Coinmarketcap.com.In January, the heads of the main regulators wrote  in The Wall Street Journal that the situation presented an unprecedented challenge. “These markets are new, evolving and international,” Jay Clayton, the Securities and Exchange Commission’s chairman, and J. Christopher Giancarlo, his counterpart at the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, wrote. “As such they require us to be nimble and forward-looking.”Government agencies in the United States have shut down a few notable frauds. Early last month, securities regulators in Texas and North Carolina issued cease-and-desist orders to BitConnect, an operation that had grown to be worth $3 billion.But those moves only came after BitConnect had operated openly for months, collecting hundreds of millions of dollars from people around the world despite being labeled a Ponzi scheme by many prominent people in the virtual currency industry. BitConnect offered tokens on a decentralized network, similar to Bitcoin, but promised regular payouts to coin holders.In January, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission shut down  My Big Coin, a purported swindle that had attracted $6 million.But regulators have not gotten near most of the brazen schemes that have popped up in the past year, many of which had been attacked by hackers first, or simply shut down by their operators after money had been raised.AdvertisementA new virtual currency, Proof of Weak Hands Coin, whose creators referred to it as a Ponzi scheme on Twitter and use a pyramid as a website logo, raised $800,000 before hackers got into its systems last week and drained its funds. Another pyramid scheme, MMM, which was shut down in an earlier incarnation by the Russian government, has been revived thanks to the popularity of Bitcoin and is operating openly, with particular success in Africa.One challenge facing regulators is that it is unclear how much of the deceptive activity they can legally control.Some online groups openly try to manipulate the prices of digital tokens in what are known as pump-and-dump schemes. Similar schemes involving stocks are illegal, but people operating the groups recently told BuzzFeed that they did not think the same rules applied to virtual currencies.Many schemes have been able to expand quickly because they do not use bank accounts and therefore do not have to win approval from established institutions. Instead, they are able to use virtual currency “wallets” without any approvals. And virtual currency transactions cannot be reversed like normal bank or even PayPal transfers.With regulators slow to crack down, the private sector has taken on a more important role. Facebook announced last week that it would no longer allow advertisements for virtual currency projects. On Friday, JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America said they would bar customers from using credit cards to purchase virtual currencies; Citigroup followed suit on Monday.For investors, some of what has caused the most concern are well-intentioned businesses set up in a hurry with little outside oversight or time to work out kinks.Coincheck, which until last month was one of the largest exchanges in Japan, announced on Jan. 26 that it had lost nearly half a billion dollars of a virtual currency known as NEM, in what appeared to be the largest hack to hit the industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Traders have been particularly worried about the largest Bitcoin exchange in the world, Bitfinex, an unregulated operation that has provided few details about its operations, raising concerns about whether it is insolvent or involved in price manipulation.In the United States, even the most widely used virtual currency company, Coinbase, has struggled to keep up with demand, shutting down trading for hours at particularly important moments, and attracting widespread complaints about its customer service.AdvertisementBut the biggest number of incidents have cropped up around so-called initial coin offerings, in which entrepreneurs sell custom virtual currencies to investors to raise money for software they are building. About 890 projects raised over $6 billion last year, a 6,000 percent increase over the year before, according to Icodata.io, which tracks the offerings.The $240 million raised through one of the most successful initial coin offerings last year, Tezos, is already frozen in a dispute between the founders of the project and the board they created in Switzerland.Even established companies like Kodak have ended up chasing the riches without doing proper due diligence. The company delayed its own initial coin offering after it was revealed that the people assisting the venture had problematic histories and little relevant experience.Most of the newer virtual currency projects borrow their basic design from Bitcoin, which uses a network of computers to maintain its records so that no central government or authority is needed.That design has allowed Bitcoin and other virtual currencies to grow as fast as they have with no regard for international borders, attracting followers from Zimbabwe to South Korea. It has also allowed some of the most talked-about uses of the technology, helping people escape hyperinflation in Venezuela or transfer money across borders with lower fees. But it has also allowed in a lot of bad actors.“It is a perfect storm for the kind of scammy activity we are seeing, and it’s not obvious to me how that is easily removed,” said Fred Wilson, a partner at the venture capital firm Union Square Venture and one of the earliest advocates of Bitcoin in Silicon Valley. “Regulation, ideally prudent and informed regulation, can help. But we may also need to have a big correction to really clean things up.”A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Plunge in Value Makes the Frauds and Flaws in Virtual Currencies Harder to Ignore.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
FEB. 7, 2018
You could almost hear the trumpets blaring in the background of Mark Zuckerberg’s announcement last week that Facebook would now promote local news stories in its news feed.“People who know what’s happening around them are more likely to get involved and help make a difference,” the Facebook chief wrote, espousing an eat-your-vegetables view of local news that jibes with his new effort to turn Facebook into a force for global good.There’s little reason to doubt Mr. Zuckerberg’s noble-sounding intentions. The internet has decimated the business model for large and small metropolitan newspapers, and Facebook, like other tech giants before it, just wants to help.Still, when it comes to the news business, hasn’t Facebook already done enough? Just last month, the social network said it would play down national news in its feed. Considering all that has gone wrong with Facebook’s half-decade dalliance with news — the rise of filter bubbles, clickbait, rampant misinformation and propaganda, and in some places the very unmooring of democratic society — the new embrace of local news arouses instant suspicion. Picture Godzilla, having thoroughly savaged Tokyo and New York, now turning a hungry eye toward Peoria and Palo Alto.AdvertisementThere may be another way to save local news. Over the last few weeks, I chatted with Jessica Lessin of The Information and Ben Thompson of Stratechery, two of my favorite sites for understanding what’s going on in the technology business. In different ways, both talked through a new way of thinking about local news, and a novel business model for funding it, one that doesn’t depend on the beneficence of Facebook or Google (which also has a new plan for local coverage).AdvertisementThe plan, for any would-be entrepreneur brave enough to try it, goes like this: Hire some very good journalists; just one or two are O.K. to start. Turn them loose on a large metropolitan area — try San Francisco, Los Angeles, Houston or any other city going through waves of change, and whose local press has been gutted by digital disruption.Have your reporters cover stuff that no one else is covering, and let them ignore stuff that everyone else is covering. Don’t do movie reviews, stock market analysis, Super Bowl coverage or anything else that isn’t local. Instead, emphasize coverage that’s actionable, that residents deem necessary and valuable for short- and long-term planning — especially an obsessive focus on housing and development, transportation, education and local politics.Package it all in a form that commands daily attention — probably a morning email newsletter — and sprinkle it with a sense of community, like offline and online networking events for readers.How will you fund all of this? This is the most important part: Shun advertising. Instead, ask readers to pay for it with real money — $5 or $10 a month, or perhaps even more. It will take time, but if you build it right, you just might create the next great metropolitan news organization.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This plan may sound simplistic, almost like a joke. Wait, Sherlock, your big idea is to create a really good product and charge people money for it? Haven’t people tried this before?Less than you might think. The short history of digital media is lousy with advertising, which promotes all the wrong incentives for online news — volume over curation, aggregation over original coverage, speed over accuracy.More recently, there has been a surge in online subscriptions. Netflix is doing it for TV, Spotify for music, and Patreon for podcasters and YouTubers. And many news outlets — big companies like The New York Times and start-ups like The Athletic, which covers sports — are making subscriptions the center of their journalism.AdvertisementYet few entrepreneurs have jumped on the subscription bandwagon for local news. The reluctance makes sense; local markets are by definition small, and journalism is expensive.But after studying Ms. Lessin’s and Mr. Thompson’s methods, I suspect there’s a market for subscription-based local coverage. Someone just has to build it.How? Consider Ms. Lessin’s plan for The Information, the tech news service she started in 2013 after spending eight years at The Wall Street Journal. Back then, online subscriptions seemed antiquated; many companies had experimented with charging users, but most had failed to win large numbers of subscribers, and the big money in media was in ad-supported sites aiming for rapid expansion through viral traffic.“People thought no one would pay for news, especially tech news,” Ms. Lessin told me last month. “The problem was the news business hadn’t been focused on a key question: How do I deliver a differentiated product that people would pay for?”Her idea for differentiation was to charge a lot for The Information — a subscription is $399 a year, close to what The Wall Street Journal charges for print delivery — but she would offer readers quality instead of volume.The Information publishes just two or three stories a day, often scoops and analysis, including a handy daily roundup of the most important stories in tech that day.The effect is like that of a filter, and a necessary one. And The Information has broken many big industry stories, including last year’s news of sexual harassment allegations against the venture capitalist Justin Caldbeck and Roy Price, Amazon’s former entertainment chief.Mr. Thompson, who worked in the tech industry at companies like Microsoft, started Stratechery in 2013. It offers a daily newsletter featuring strategic analysis of developments in the tech industry. (Here’s one example: Mr. Thompson’s argument for why subscriptions are the best answer for local news.) In 2014, he began charging for the analysis. Now he publishes one article a week for free; to read the others, you have to pay $100 a year for the service.AdvertisementMr. Thompson’s overhead is low: He is the only writer of Stratechery, which has become required reading among tech executives and many others in the industry. He declined to divulge any subscriber numbers, other than to say he’s doing very well.A high-priced subscription site may well have a natural audience ceiling. Ms. Lessin declined to divulge her subscriber base but said it was “significantly north of 10,000,” which is lower than the audience for many ad-based digital publications.Still, two years ago, she said, the site became cash-flow positive — that is, it pays for expansion from its subscriptions — and it plans to hire a half-dozen more journalists this year, adding to a work force of 31 full-time employees. It has also started an “accelerator” program that invests $25,000 in new subscription news businesses; one of them, Detour Detroit, is a planned news service aimed at covering the Motor City.Sure, there are reasons to be skeptical that this model could work in local news. Many subscribers to The Information and Stratechery think of the publications as a business expense — they work in tech or finance, wealthy industries that will pay just about anything for business intelligence.Yet there are striking overlaps between what those publications do and what a subscription-based local news start-up would look like. For one thing, a lot of those wealthy people also live in undercovered urban and suburban areas; if they’re paying for news about tech, wouldn’t they also pay for in-depth investigations into their kids’ school district, their city’s mayoral race or the traffic clogging their commute?There’s also the opportunity to pay for a sense of community. The Information — through the Slack chat service, conference calls and in-person meet-ups — constantly brings subscribers together to talk about the industry. A local news start-up could do the same, selling not just news but a sense of belonging.“When you’re in the subscription news business, you’re not selling articles,” Mr. Thompson said.Why do they pay?“News happens in tech every day, and I do the thinking for them,” he said. A subscription-based local news business would offer the same value: “You’re selling people a feeling of being informed, of being good citizens — that’s what you’re selling.”Now we just need someone to build it.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Save Local News: Make People Pay for It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By REUTERSFEB. 2, 2018
The computer maker Dell Technologies said on Friday that it was considering a public offering of its common stock or a combination with its publicly held subsidiary VMware, a maker of business software, as it seeks new avenues for growth.Dell, the world’s largest privately held technology company, is under pressure to increase profits after its debt-laden, $67 billion acquisition of the data-storage  provider EMC Corporation in 2016.Dell also faces increased competition in its core hardware businesses — personal computers, servers and storage equipment — from cloud-based services provided by Amazon, Microsoft and others.“As part of our ongoing multiyear strategic planning, Dell Technologies is evaluating a number of potential business opportunities,” Michael Dell, the company’s founder, said in a blog post.AdvertisementReuters reported on Thursday that Dell planned to consider a possible reverse merger with VMware among other options, including an initial public offering or sales of assets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dell, which is based in Round Rock, Tex., went private five years ago in a $24.9 billion deal with private equity firm Silver Lake Partners. The company said on Friday that nothing had been decided and that the company might end up continuing to operate under its current structure.Shares in VMware, 82 percent of which is owned by Dell, were essentially flat in trading as of midday on Friday.AdvertisementVMware said in a statement that it would not speculate on the outcome of Dell’s review."The board of directors follows sound corporate governance practices, and will continue to do so in connection with any potential transaction involving our controlling stockholders,” Paul Sagan, the company’s lead director, said in the statement.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CECILIA KANG and MARK LANDLERJAN. 29, 2018
WASHINGTON — Federal regulators and major telecommunications companies pushed back on Monday against a proposal circulating in the White House that would put the government in control of a next-generation mobile broadband network to address economic and security concerns related to China.The chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, Ajit Pai, said he opposed the idea. He argued that the federal government taking control of developing 5G networks, as the mobile technology is called, could hurt the private sector and the economy.“The market, not the government, is best positioned to drive innovation and investment,” Mr. Pai, a Republican, said in a statement. “Any federal effort to construct a nationalized 5G network would be a costly and counterproductive distraction from the policies we need to help the United States win the 5G future.”USTelecom, the trade group that represents telecommunications and cable broadband providers, said any government-run plan would set back the industry.Advertisement“There is nothing that would slam the brakes more quickly on our hard-won momentum to be the leader in the global race for 5G network deployment,” Jonathan Spalter, chief executive of USTelecom, said in a statement.The strong reaction was in response to reports that the Trump administration, on a recommendation from the National Security Council, was contemplating using federal money for a 5G network. The proposal was first reported by Axios, the online news organization, on Sunday.AdvertisementThe White House said the idea was very preliminary. The administration has thrown its support behind the development of more secure wireless networks using 5G technology, according to two administration officials who would speak only on the condition of anonymity because the discussions were at an early stage. Some White House officials have pushed for greater federal involvement in the private sector’s efforts, but the administration doesn’t prefer the idea of the government building a network on its own with public funding, the people said.Discussions on the government’s involvement in 5G networks are likely to take at least six months before reaching the president for consideration. In a news conference on Monday, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, said any discussion was at its “earliest stages.”The Trump administration is becoming increasingly concerned about the economic and security threats posed by China’s development of mobile technology and 5G networks. Among the concerns is the ability of the Chinese government to spy on American citizens and businesses.The American government has long been suspicious of Huawei, a giant Chinese technology company that is behind much of the 5G network development in that country. This month, AT&T dropped its plan to carry a new phone model from Huawei. The company has declined to comment on its reasons for dropping the deal, although government officials have expressed concerns over security on those phones.The introduction of 5G, or fifth-generation wireless technology, is expected to make browsing and streaming over mobile phones much faster. It is also expected to promote the adoption of what is known as the internet of things, where all sorts of machines and appliances — such as refrigerators, cars and health monitors — connect to the internet with nearly zero lag time.Wireless companies said that they had already started building their 5G networks and that any government-run network would be disruptive.Advertisement“Industry standards have been set, trials have been underway since 2016, and later this year AT&T is set to be the first to launch mobile 5G service in 12 U.S. locations,” AT&T said in a statement.Any nationalization project could be a difficult sell politically, since the Trump administration and other Republicans have strongly criticized big government projects. But it lays bare the differences between two camps in the administration that have been present since Mr. Trump’s inauguration: economic nationalists and China hawks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Among those officials aggressively pushing the 5G network are two China hard-liners: Gen. Robert S. Spalding II, the senior director for strategic planning at the National Security Council, and Peter Navarro, the director of the White House national trade council.On trade issues, Mr. Navarro has faced off against officials who favor a more free-market approach, like Gary D. Cohn, the president’s chief trade adviser. The national security adviser, Gen. H. R. McMaster, has also opposed aggressive trade moves against China, in part because the administration needs China’s support to rein in North Korea.White House officials said the debate over a 5G network had not yet developed enough to pit the two camps against each other. But one official said that if the telecommunications industry was not able to agree on plans to rapidly develop a network, it could yet lead to such a split.Stephen K. Bannon, Mr. Trump’s former chief strategist, is among those concerned about China and the development of 5G technology. When he was still in the White House, Mr. Bannon met with American telecommunications executives about what would be needed to develop a robust 5G network. He has told associates that he fears China could dominate the technology.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: White House Proposal for Federal 5G Network Is Panned by F.C.C. and Industry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By MICHAEL CORKERY and NICK WINGFIELDFEB. 4, 2018
Allen Gillespie is one lonely stock analyst.Of the dozens of Wall Street analysts covering Amazon, he is the only one tracked by Bloomberg who recommends that investors sell the company’s shares.Mr. Gillespie, a partner at FinTrust Investment Advisors, a wealth management firm in Greenville, S.C., questions whether Amazon deserves such a stratospheric share price.“Everybody thinks I am crazy,” said Mr. Gillespie, who also serves on the board overseeing South Carolina’s pension fund. “I have had people I’ve never met email me to ask if I was serious.”It is a bold call indeed. Since Mr. Gillespie put a sell rating on the company last July, Amazon’s shares have increased 37 percent, to $1,429. On Friday, one day after Amazon reported the biggest quarterly profit in its history, Amazon’s market value briefly crossed the $700 billion mark, and its share price increased 3 percent even as the Dow fell 2.5 percent.AdvertisementFor most analysts, the end is not yet in sight. When the investment firm D.A. Davidson & Company predicted last month that Amazon’s shares could rise to $1,800, Morgan Stanley upped the ante the next day, forecasting a possible $2,100 share price.
            Early on, Amazon figured out how to tame Wall Street and its fixation on short-term results. The company has persuaded investors to evaluate its performance not based on its quarter-to-quarter profits, but on its long-term potential.        AMAZON STOCK PRICEJAN. 31Monthly, adjusted for splits$1,450.89$1,200$900$600$300’98’00’05’10’15’18REVENUE$180billion1501209060300’97’07’17NET INCOME+$3billion+2+10+1+2’97’07’17FREE CASH FLOW*$12billion86420’97’07’17JAN. 31AMAZON STOCK PRICE$1,450.89Monthly, adjusted for splitsJUNE ’17Amazon announces it is buying Whole Foods.$1,200$900JUNE ’00Bond analyst issues report that Amazon could run out of cash in a year.JAN. ’02Amazon announces a quarterly profit for the first time ever.NOV. ’07Amazon releases the Kindle e-reader.APRIL ’15Amazon discloses cloud computing profits for the first time.$600$300$0’98’00’05’10’15’18REVENUENET INCOMEFREE CASH FLOW*$180billion+$3billion$12billion150+28120+16900460+12300+20’97’07’17’97’07’17’97’07’17FEB. 4, 2018
“It’s an infatuation,” said Scott Galloway, a professor of marketing at New York University’s Stern business school, who recently published a book about Amazon, Google and other tech giants.AdvertisementHow that infatuation developed is the story of a company that figured out how to tame Wall Street. In a business environment that demands, and rewards, quarterly profits and short-term strategic thinking, Amazon showed extraordinary resolve in focusing on long-term goals, somehow persuading investors to go along.Over its first decade in existence, including long stretches where it consistently reported losses, Amazon enjoyed a luxury afforded few companies: leeway.“I think it comes down to a consistent message and consistent strategy, one that doesn’t deviate when the stock goes down or goes up,” said Bill Miller, the chief investment officer at Miller Value Partners, whose largest holding is Amazon.In part, Amazon has inured itself to pressure from Wall Street by ignoring it. While many chief executives devote significant time to fielding questions from investors, Amazon’s founder and chief executive, Jeff Bezos, is famously stingy about the time he spends with major stockholders. He hasn’t appeared on an Amazon earnings calls in years.In a 2014 interview with Business Insider, Mr. Bezos said he spent a measly six hours a year on investor relations and then only with long-term shareholders, who have been willing to weather the company’s ups and downs. Mr. Miller is one of them.Mr. Bezos has constantly reminded the market of his philosophy. Each year in the company’s annual letter to shareholders, Amazon attaches a copy of the very first letter from 1997, its first as a publicly traded company.“We will continue to make investment decisions in light of long-term market leadership considerations rather than short-term profitability considerations or short-term Wall Street reactions,” Mr. Bezos wrote in a section of the letter titled, “It’s All About the Long Term.’’AdvertisementMr. Bezos has been true to his word. Amazon has reported an annual profit in only 13 of the 21 years that it has operated as a publicly traded company, according to FactSet, a financial data firm.And its profit margins, already low by some measures, have fluctuated from year to year — hardly moving in the straight upward line that Wall Street usually likes to see.Yet investors have rewarded Amazon for plowing its profits back into growing its businesses, whether in online retail, cloud computing or, most recently, in grocery stores, with the acquisition of Whole Foods Market.An Amazon spokesman declined to comment.It may sound like a Pollyanna view of stock investing, particularly in a market increasingly dominated by trading algorithms and macro bets on the direction of interest rates. But in the case of Amazon, it is actually true.“If Wall Street would allow more companies to reinvest like Amazon, it would create great benefits for the economy,” said Henry Blodget, a former stock analyst, who first came to prominence in 1998 by setting a $400 price target for Amazon shares. (He is now editorial director of the online publication Business Insider, in which Mr. Bezos was an investor.)The reality of the economy, however, is that most other companies are still playing by Wall Street’s old rules, which demand consistent profit growth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And to compete with Amazon and meet those profit expectations, many retailers and manufacturers are laying off workers, closing stores and shedding factories. Last month, Kimberly-Clark, under pricing pressure from Amazon and Walmart, said it was laying off more than 5,000 workers and closing or selling 10 of its factories.It wasn’t always so easy for Amazon. During the tech boom of the late 1990s, Amazon was one of a number of promising tech start-ups that were losing money. But it showed the potential for longer term profit, as it moved from selling books into music and toys.AdvertisementBut like the rest of the tech sector, Amazon’s shares tumbled in 2000 and 2001 as investors began to wonder if these companies could ever make money. A young debt analyst at Lehman Brothers warned in June 2000 that Amazon might soon run out of cash, causing investors to worry about its survival.Mr. Bezos had squirreled away enough capital to get through those dark days. But it took many years for investors who had been burned by the dot-com crash to give Amazon a second chance.For long stretches from 2002 to 2006, Amazon’s stock price languished, while it invested in researching and developing new technologies and businesses.Mark Mahaney, a tech analyst at RBC Capital Markets, looked at the company’s slipping profit margins during that period and warned investors to stay away.Mr. Mahaney said he failed to realize “that all that spending on R.&D. was a bullish sign for the future.” He has had a buy rating on the company for more than a decade.Those long-term investments, which Amazon didn’t detail at the time, eventually gave rise to some of the company’s most profitable businesses, like its cloud computing unit, Amazon Web Services.The success of the cloud computing business proved a tipping point. If investors allowed Amazon to spend time and money investing, patience would pay off.Investors are now awaiting the payoff from Amazon’s foray into groceries with its $13 billion acquisition of Whole Foods last spring. How it plans to integrate hundreds of brick and mortar stores with its core e-commerce business is far from clear.AdvertisementBy now, Wall Street has been well trained to believe that Amazon has a strategy for Whole Foods and it will take time to carry it out.“What the market finally figured out is Amazon is extremely good at investing those dollars,” said Mr. Miller, the investment officer at Miller Value Partners.Ultimately, much of the investor confidence in Amazon reflects a belief in its future opportunity — what investors frequently call a company’s “addressable market.”For Amazon, the addressable market in retail is roughly $5 trillion in the United States and many times that globally, Mr. Miller said. And that’s not even including the traditional information technology market that Amazon Web Services is attacking. “I asked Jeff what the addressable market is for A.W.S.,” Mr. Miller said. “He just looked at me and said, ‘Trillions and trillions.’”Online spending represents less than 10 percent of total retail spending, and Amazon captures almost half of every dollar spent in online shopping by Americans.Even Mr. Gillespie, the skeptic, acknowledges that Amazon is “operating extremely well.” But he questions whether years of low interest rates have helped inflate Amazon’s value because investors are so starved for return, they are willing to overlook some of the risks.Those risks, he said, include regulators deciding the company is growing too large or not paying its fair share in taxes.“People tend to assume away these things,” he said.Stephen Grocer contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Vast Patience In Amazon Was a Virtue For Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech We’re UsingBy The New York TimesHow do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Andrew Ross Sorkin, DealBook columnist for The Times, discussed the tech he’s using.What are your favorite tech tools for keeping track of mergers, acquisitions and everything in between?First, you need to know I’m a gadget junkie. I love technology. I live on an iPhone X and a MacBook Pro.The single best device I use, by a mile, is AirPods, Apple’s wireless headphones. I wear them all day, switching between phone calls and music — and sometimes I just leave them in my ears during conversations (looking ridiculous). Still, the amount of time you’ll save no longer untangling wires is real.As for information, I’m on Twitter too much; it is still the best news feed out there. (I have two Twitter accounts; one that’s very public and one under another name I use only to follow people for work. I find it works better than creating “lists.”) I occasionally use Buffer to coordinate social media posts when we're launching something new or trying to push out a particular story.For talking to sources, I find that more of my conversations are happening on encrypted messaging apps like Signal, Telegram and Confide, though when it is even remotely sensitive, I still always get on the phone.I sometimes use a service called Relationship Science, which is a fascinating way to understand the connections between the people I cover. Think Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon, or in this case, Six Degrees of Jamie Dimon.Despite being an unabashed Apple aficionado — I also have an Apple Watch — I happen to use Google apps for much of my life since it’s so easy to collaborate on documents with colleagues and coordinate calendars. (And yes, Google Maps is still better than Apple Maps.) I use Slack to communicate with everyone at work, especially when I’m traveling and not in the office.I’m on airplanes too much, so I’m also a devotee of Bose noise-canceling headphones. Other key pieces of travel technology: Hearos Xtreme earplugs for overnight flights are the best on the market (trust me, I’ve tried them all); if you need to block out light to sleep on a flight or you’re stuck in a hotel room that has terrible shades, get yourself a Lonfrote sleep mask, which is so much better than the freebie on your flight. I carry a handful of extra portable power packs to charge devices on the road. And I always keep a stash of RxBars (blueberry, pumpkin or peanut) with me; they're about as healthy as you can get when it comes to packaged and packable food.What could be better?I still want a bigger, longer lasting battery on the iPhone. I can never get enough battery life — and I have battery anxiety looking at the percentage icon dwindle throughout the day if I haven’t found a place to plug in. Same for the AirPods, though I’ve found that’s less of an issue for me.On my Apple Watch, I desperately want to be able to adjust the sensitivity that activates the screen when I turn my wrist to look at it. (Hey, Apple Watch team: I’d make it a bit more sensitive so it turns on more frequently, even at the cost of battery life.)In your years of writing about deals, which tech merger do you think has had the most significant impact on people’s lives?Google’s acquisition of YouTube in 2006 was game changing. It was the single biggest accelerant of the use of video online. It's probably the most underappreciated deal of all time in any industry. The price tag was $1.65 billion and YouTube was losing money at the time, so it seemed crazy for Google. But today, the deal looks like a brilliant heist.You also appear on CNBC’s “Squawk Box.” How has technology changed live broadcasting and your experience as an anchor?It has probably changed the most on the production side of TV. It used to be that you needed a truck and satellite hookup wherever you’d go. We’d travel with an army of production and technical personnel. But these days you can use services like LiveU, which basically puts an entire satellite truck in a shoe box that connects to the internet or wirelessly using cellular towers. I was just in China and Saudi Arabia, and we broadcast entire three-hour live shows with only a handful of people and no satellite connection.What tech product are you currently obsessed with using in your daily life?Sonos is pretty great. We have a handful of Sonos speakers in our home for music and TV. We also have an Echo and Google Home speaker. I’m thinking about getting the Sonos One, which is supposed to incorporate Alexa, Google Assistant and ultimately access to Apple all in one device.I read magazines on an app I love called Texture; it’s like Netflix for magazines. If you’re a magazine junkie, it is so worth it.I’m into sleep trackers like Autosleep on the Apple Watch, but I want to find a device that tracks sleep without wearing anything on my wrist or body. (Or keeping a phone in bed, which I refuse to do.) I also use Nokia’s Withings wireless scale, which is a pretty good way to keep you honest about food consumption — and much easier than constantly entering what you eat in MyFitnessPal or LoseIt, though I’ve used both and they're good. And I have a Braun Series 7 electric razor that for years I’ve told every male friend is the best thing I use daily, though Braun came out with a new one last year so I don’t know if I’m right about that anymore.Apple has more than $250 billion in cash. Which companies do you think it should buy, and why?I used to think they should make a big deal, but these days I’m less certain. The next big thing in computing is clearly going to be artificial intelligence and health care. I imagine I’d be investing in those spaces aggressively — but the potential takeover targets are less obvious.Follow Andrew Ross Sorkin on Twitter: @andrewrsorkinAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Sui-Lee Wee and Paul MozurBEIJING — Amazon and two other American titans are trying to shake up health care by experimenting with their own employees’ coverage. By Chinese standards, they’re behind the curve.Technology companies like Alibaba and Tencent have made health care a priority for years, and are using China as their laboratory. After testing online medical advice and drug tracking systems, they are now focused on a more advanced tool: artificial intelligence.Their aggressive push underscores the differences between the health care systems in China and the United States.Chinese hospitals are overburdened, with just 1.5 doctors for every 1,000 people — barely half the figure in the United States. Along with a rapidly aging population, China also has the largest number of obese children in the world, as well as more diabetes patients than anywhere else.The companies’ technological push is encouraged by the government. Beijing has said it wants to be a leader in A.I. by 2030 and pledged to take on the United States in the field. While officials have emphasized the use of artificial intelligence in areas like defense and self-driving cars, they have also aggressively promoted its use in health care.Alibaba and Tencent, which already dominate China’s e-commerce and mobile payments sectors, are at the forefront. Among their goals: building diagnostic tools that will make doctors more efficient.Amazon and its partners, JPMorgan Chase and Berkshire Hathaway, see technology as a way to provide simplified, affordable medical services. Although the alliance is still in the early stages, it could create online services for medical advice or use its overall heft to negotiate for lower drug prices.“It’s fair to say that across the board, the Chinese tech companies have all embraced being involved in and being active in the health care space, unlike the U.S., where some of them have and some have not,” said Laura Nelson Carney, an Asia-Pacific health care analyst at Bernstein Research.“Few of them have made moves as big as in China,” Ms. Carney said, referring to Alibaba and Tencent’s American rivals.Those big moves have had varying degrees of success.In 2014, Alibaba announced a “future hospital” plan intended to make treatment more efficient by allowing patients to consult with doctors online and order drugs via the internet. But two years later, Chinese regulators stopped the sale of over-the-counter drugs on Tmall, Alibaba’s e-commerce website. They also suspended a drug-monitoring system that the company had created. And last year, the search engine company Baidu scrapped its internet health care service, which allowed patients to book doctors appointments through an app, in a bid to focus solely on A.I.But some of the more recent initiatives have made inroads. Last year, Alibaba’s health unit introduced A.I. software that can help interpret CT scans and an A.I. medical lab to help doctors make diagnoses. About a month later, Tencent unveiled Miying, a medical imaging program that helps doctors detect early signs of cancer, in the southwestern region of Guangxi. It is now used in nearly 100 hospitals across China.Tencent has also invested in WeDoctor Group, which has opened its own take on Alibaba’s “future hospital” in northwestern China. The service allows patients to video chat with doctors and fill their prescriptions online.Advances in artificial intelligence have already been transformative for China’s overworked doctors.Dr. Yu Weihong, an ophthalmologist at Peking Union Medical College Hospital, said she used to take up to two days to analyze a patient’s eyes by scrutinizing grainy images before discussing her findings with colleagues and writing up a report. Artificial intelligence software currently being tested by the hospital helps her do all that dramatically faster.“Now, you don’t even need a minute,” she said.The software has been developed by VoxelCloud, a start-up has raised about $28.5 million from companies including Tencent and the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Sequoia Capital. It specializes in automated medical image analysis, helping eye doctors like Dr. Yu screen patients for diabetic retinopathy, the leading cause of blindness among China’s working-age population.There are just 20 eye doctors for every million people here, a third of the proportion in the United States. In April, Beijing announced an ambitious plan for the country’s 110 million diabetics to undergo eye tests.“It’s impossible for one person to read that many images,” said Dr. Yu.Ding Xiaowei, whose grandparents were doctors, founded VoxelCloud in 2016, three months after completing his doctorate in computer science at U.C.L.A. The company, which has offices in Los Angeles and the Chinese cities of Shanghai and Suzhou, is awaiting the green light from China’s version of the F.D.A. for five diagnostic tools for CT scans and retina disease.The sheer size of China’s population — nearly 1.4 billion people who could provide a vast number of images to feed into their systems — provides a potential advantage for the development of artificial intelligence. Also helping: China has fewer concerns about privacy, allowing for easier collection of data that could result in smarter and more efficient A.I. systems. Regulation here isn’t as strict as in the United States, either.In all, more than 130 companies are applying A.I. in ways that could increase the efficiency of China’s health care system, according to Yiou Intelligence, an industry consultancy based in Beijing. They range from behemoths like Alibaba and Tencent to domestic champions iFlyTek, which invented a robot that passed a Chinese medical licensing exam, and an array of smaller start-ups.Money is flowing in. As of last August, venture capitalists such as Sequoia and Matrix Partners had invested at least $2.7 billion in such businesses, according to Yiou. Analysts at Bernstein estimated that spending in China’s health tech industry will reach $150 billion by 2020.Behind this push is a realization that the country’s health care system is in crisis. With no functioning primary care system, patients flock to hospitals in major cities, sometimes camping out overnight just to get treatment for a fever. Doctors are overworked, and reports of stabbings and assaults by frustrated patients and their relatives are not uncommon.Yunfeng, the personal investment fund of the Alibaba founder Jack Ma, has invested in one company, Yitu, that hopes to address the shortfall of resources. Yitu is working with Zhejiang Provincial People’s Hospital, the best medical facility in eastern Zhejiang province, to develop software that automates the identification of early stages of lung cancer.While it initially focused on facial recognition, Yitu has branched out into more complex image-recognition challenges, like cancer scans. Lin Chenxi, who left Alibaba to establish the company in 2012, said he hoped to use the technology to ensure equal access to medical treatment across China.“In China, medical resources are very scarce and unequally distributed so that the top resources are concentrated in provincial capitals,” he said. “With this system, if it can be used at hospitals in rural cities, then it will make the medical experience much better.”Trying to identify cancer nodes — shifting black-and-white splotches that look something like a Rorschach test — is grueling work, and China’s doctors have far less time and resources than their counterparts in the United States and elsewhere. Gong Xiangyang, the head of the hospital’s radiology department, likened the process to a factory, where burnout and mistakes from overwork can happen.“We have to deal with a vast amount of medical images everyday,” he said. “So we welcome technology if it can relieve the pressure while boosting efficiency and accuracy.”Follow Sui-Lee Wee and Paul Mozur on Twitter: @suilee and @paulmozur.Sui-Lee Wee reported from Beijing and Paul Mozur from Hangzhou. Carolyn Zhang contributed research from Shanghai and Hangzhou and Zhang Tiantian from Beijing.AdvertisementBy RAYMOND ZHONGFEB. 1, 2018
HONG KONG — The Alibaba Group, the Chinese online shopping giant, has become so big that it is looking for growth by forging into new territory: the offline world.Alibaba has snapped up stakes in grocers and in an electronics chain over the last three years, a perhaps counterintuitive series of moves for a company that helps consumers in China buy products with their smartphones. In part, the push is driven by the eventual maturation of its online business.For now, however, online shopping still rules the roost.Alibaba on Thursday reported a one-third rise in profit for the three months that ended in December, on revenue that rose by more than half. The revenue growth rate was its slowest in a year but still came in better than expected.Investors are betting that Alibaba’s run will continue. The company’s stock more than doubled last year, installing it firmly in the technology world’s major league. Alibaba’s market capitalization now exceeds half a trillion dollars, making it smaller than Alphabet and Amazon but comparable to Facebook and China’s other internet colossus, Tencent Holdings.AdvertisementStill, a pullback in growth is inevitable for a company with Alibaba’s reach.The company will have a harder time finding Chinese consumers who aren’t already online. Smartphone sales are flattening out. Although economic growth still looks strong — at least if the Chinese government’s figures are to be believed — Alibaba will have to work harder to rake in more revenue from its online marketplaces. Its other businesses outside retail, like online video and cloud computing, still lose money, and its overseas expansion hasn’t yet paid off.AdvertisementThe company has lifted its recent results by offering more and better services to the vendors on its platforms. But it is also eyeing the 84 percent of physical goods sales that still take place offline in China.Alibaba has been pouring cash into experiments in what its founder, Jack Ma, calls “new retail”: a kind of teched-up re-envisioning of how people shop in store. In particular, it hopes to gather more detailed user data, which could help it offer more personalized services and ads to its customers online and off.In that respect, the company has a head start on Amazon, which paid more than $13 billion for Whole Foods last year. In 2015, Alibaba struck a deal to buy a stake in Suning, an electronics retailer. It took control of Intime Retail, which runs department stores and malls, early last year. In November, it bought a $2.9 billion slice of Sun Art, one of China’s largest grocery operators.These brick-and-mortar partners are being fitted with Alibaba’s technology. At the same time, the company is building its own chain of stores, called Hema Xiansheng — the name is a Chinese pun on “Mr. Hippopotamus” — that combine a fresh-food market, a restaurant and facilities for home deliveries. Alibaba also debuted a cashier-free minimart last July — well before Amazon opened its own automated convenience store last month.“Some of Alibaba’s ‘new retail’ initiatives have shown quite promising signs of initial success,” said Jialong Shi, an analyst with Nomura, singling out Hema. Still, he said, “these initiatives may require a few more years of incubation before we can see profits.”Another challenge: Tencent, Alibaba’s biggest rival, is getting into fresh food and traditional retail, too.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tencent is the world’s largest video game company. It also runs WeChat, China’s most popular messaging and social media app.But Tencent is also charging into the old-fashioned shopping business. In December, it bought a stake in Yonghui Superstores, a large supermarket chain. It is weighing an investment in the China operations of Carrefour, the grocer and retailer headquartered in France. It is also leading the purchase of a $5.4 billion stake in Dalian Wanda Commercial Properties, a mall operator and part of the troubled Dalian Wanda conglomerate.AdvertisementFor now at least, analysts do not expect Alibaba and Tencent to end up owning rival alliances of stores. Tencent primarily seems to want to create more opportunities for people to use its mobile payment service, WeChat Pay. It is also hunting for new clients for its cloud computing business.“It’s very hard for me to imagine that Tencent would fully own and operate a supermarket on its own,” Mr. Shi of Nomura said.For both Alibaba and Tencent, though, creating more points of contact with their customers helps them amass more user data. This is one reason the companies are investing heavily in artificial intelligence, which helps them make sense of the boatloads of user information they are hauling in every minute.“They not only have the largest data sets, but they have data sets tied to customers that they can identify,” Kirk Boodry, an analyst with New Street Research, said. “The potential for A.I.-led monetization growth, we think, is still at a very early stage.”Also on Thursday, Alibaba said it would acquire a one-third stake in the parent company of Alipay, one of China’s two main online payment services. The two sides agreed in 2014 to give Alibaba the right to acquire the stake. The two companies used to be one until Mr. Ma took the Alipay operations out and formed a separate company.Follow Raymond Zhong on Twitter: @zhonggg.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: As Online Growth Surges, Alibaba Expands to Retail.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byThe ShiftBy Kevin RooseAn eon or two ago, Eastman Kodak was a bleeding-edge technology company. It hired the smartest engineers and put them to work racking up patents, pioneering new chemical processes and building a globe-spanning camera and film business that, at its peak, employed 145,000 people.But the digital photo age passed Kodak by, and today, the Rochester, N.Y., company exists mostly in the past tense. Many of the patents have been sold, buildings have been rented out or demolished, and the company has continued to shrink since it filed for bankruptcy in 2012.Now, the 130-year-old company is trying an unlikely sort of comeback — one built by betting on cryptocurrency. It’s a bold gamble that has excited some investors, perplexed others and raised questions about how closely Kodak vetted its cryptocurrency business partners, who now include a paparazzi photo agency, a penny-stock promoter and a company offering what has been called a “magic money making machine.”This month, Kodak lent its name to a digital currency called KodakCoin, which is billed as “a photo-centric cryptocurrency to empower photographers and agencies to take greater control in image rights management.” The basic idea behind KodakCoin is to use the blockchain to help photographers manage their collections by creating permanent, immutable records of ownership. The company also struck a licensing deal for a Bitcoin-mining computer called the Kodak KashMiner, which allows users to generate their own cryptocurrency.Kodak’s stock rose more than 200 percent following the announcements, and has not fallen much since.That’s partly because the blockchain — the mathematical ledger system that forms the basis of digital currencies — has a kind of talismanic effect in today’s stock market. As investors seek to capitalize on the popularity of currencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum, a number of struggling companies have reversed their fortunes, at least temporarily, simply by adding “blockchain” to their names or announcing a new cryptocurrency venture unrelated to their previous line of work. (The most notorious example is Long Island Iced Tea Corp., a beverage company that tripled its value overnight after it rebranded itself “Long Blockchain Corp.”)These sudden, brazen moves have also attracted the attention of regulators. In a recent speech, Jay Clayton, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said that the agency was “looking closely at the disclosures of public companies that shift their business models to capitalize on the perceived promise of distributed ledger technology.”Kodak is the most prominent old-line company to enter the cryptocurrency game so far, and maybe the most controversial. Almost immediately, critics pounced on the company’s plans, characterizing them as a desperate money grab.“It feels like a publicly traded company issuing a token to raise its stock price from the grave,” said Kyle Samani, a partner at the cryptocurrency trading firm Multicoin Capital.“I would not be sleeping very well if I was involved in this,” said Jill Carlson, a blockchain consultant.In an interview, Jeff Clarke, Kodak’s chief executive, said that the company’s blockchain ambitions were genuine. He began looking into blockchain technology last summer, he said, and realized that it could solve a perennial problem for photographers — proving ownership of their images, tracking down copyright violators, and getting paid.“This is not a dog food company that’s creating a currency,” Mr. Clarke said. “This is a real solution around digital rights management that Kodak has been involved in for many years.”In theory, photographers will be able to upload their images to a platform called KodakOne, create a blockchain-based license for each image, and use web-crawling software to scour the internet looking for copyright violations. Instead of using dollars, photographers can have clients pay them in KodakCoins.KodakCoin’s initial offering, scheduled for Wednesday, is expected to raise as much as $20 million. (On Tuesday night, KodakCoin’s website said that it would delay the offering by “several weeks” to verify the credentials of potential investors.) But there are few details about what that money will be used for, or why a similar system could not be built without the blockchain. There is also a more obvious question: Why would photographers want to be paid in digital tokens, rather than cash?In several calls with KodakCoin leaders, I couldn’t get straight answers to these questions. And KodakCoin’s white paper, a technical document that details the plans for the currency, is a 40-page mishmash of marketing buzzwords and vague diagrams, like the one below:Make no mistake: Digital rights management is a real issue for photographers, and the blockchain does, in theory, offer a compelling solution. But the specific attributes of KodakCoin present some red flags.First, despite the name, KodakCoin is not actually a Kodak project. The company behind the offering, WENN Digital, is a California-based affiliate of a British photo agency that specializes in paparazzi photo licensing. Under their licensing agreement, Kodak will not receive any direct revenue from the public offering. It will receive a minority stake in WENN Digital, 3 percent of all KodakCoins issued and a royalty on future revenue.Cameron Chell, a lead adviser to the KodakCoin project, told me that the initial offering represented a “seminal moment” for Kodak, and that the company’s interest in blockchain technology was a savvy long-term investment.“The real story is that it’s about to be a renaissance,” he said.But Mr. Chell, a Canadian entrepreneur and motivational speaker who once opened for Tony Robbins, has a troubled track record. In 1998, Mr. Chell agreed to a five-year ban from the Alberta Stock Exchange in Canada and paid a $25,000 fine in connection with a violation of the exchange’s rules. A previous company of his ended in ignominy after its chairman was  charged with fraud.Asked about these incidents, Mr. Chell said that he was “young, inexperienced and was irresponsible in my actions,” and that he had “learned a lot since 1998 and work hard to conduct myself in a manner that does not reflect that poor judgment.” A Kodak spokesman did not return a request for comment about Mr. Chell and whether it knew about the ban.Mr. Chell has refashioned himself as a blockchain expert in recent years, and KodakCoin is his biggest project so far. He is the chairman of Appcoin Innovations, which was registered as a literary agency — Redstone Literary Agents — until last year, when it became a consulting firm that provides “a turnkey set of services for companies to develop and integrate blockchain and cryptocurrency technologies,” according to securities filings.The company, which trades over the counter as a penny stock, earned no revenue in 2015 or 2016, according to S.E.C. filings. Appcoin Innovations is slated to receive 20 percent of all KodakCoins issued and a portion of the offering proceeds, a stake that could amount to millions if the offering is successful.“Once formally launched,” Mr. Chell wrote to me in an email, “the company will hopefully provide shareholders a traditional and transparent place to participate in the crypto space with projects that are regulatory compliant.”Now, about those coins. You might think that a digital currency that is trying to “democratize photography and make licensing fair to artists,” in Mr. Clarke’s words, would be easily accessible. But because of regulatory requirements, KodakCoins will be available only to so-called accredited investors in the United States. An accredited investor is defined as a person with a net worth of $1 million or more, or an annual income above $200,000.How many cryptocurrency-obsessed millionaire photographers do you know?Even if photographers do meet the requirements to participate, they could have a hard time spending their KodakCoins, or redeeming them for cash. The S.E.C. has warned that securities sold in private offerings, such as KodakCoins, may be difficult to resell — and that investors may be required to hold on to them “indefinitely.” A KodakCoin representative told me that the company believes its tokens will eventually be freely traded, and that it may issue other types of tokens in the future that will not be subject to the same restrictions.KodakCoin’s white paper says that token holders may receive other benefits, such as a share of KodakOne’s revenue and access to a “marketplace” that will allow them to spend their KodakCoins on camera equipment, studios for photo shoots, and travel expenses. But these benefits could fail to materialize.Cryptocurrency experts also do not seem impressed with the Kodak KashMiner, a Bitcoin-mining machine advertised at this year’s CES electronics trade show. According to the advertisement, users will pay $3,400 to rent the machine, a Kodak-branded computer that solves complex math equations to unlock new Bitcoin, for two years. Half the Bitcoins successfully mined with the Kashminer will go back to Spotlite, the company licensing Kodak’s name, and the user will keep the other half.Kodak hasn’t shared many details about its KashMiner deal. But renting the machines could be a hard sell. In its CES advertisement, KashMiner estimates that each renter will earn $9,000 from mining Bitcoin over the two-year contract window. Experts told me that figure was most likely inflated, because Bitcoin mining gets harder over time. And they pointed out that the KashMiner itself appears to simply be a rebranded version of a popular Bitcoin-mining machine that can be purchased outright for less than the rental cost.All of this — the origins of KodakCoin, the currency itself and the lofty claims about the KashMiner’s moneymaking potential — adds up to a big question mark, and points to the possibility that Kodak may be in over its head.“The best-case scenario is that they believe that the technology will eventually be able to deliver what they’ve pitched,” said Ms. Carlson, the blockchain consultant. “The worst-case scenario is that they are just being very opportunistic.”Mr. Clarke, Kodak’s chief executive, characterized the blockchain projects as a small part of the company’s overall strategy, and said it was “ironic” that critics were faulting Kodak for embracing a young technology like cryptocurrency, given that its past problems were caused by a failure to innovate.“This isn’t speculative,” Mr. Clarke said. “We’re taking an emerging new technology in blockchain, and we’re using it to solve a real problem.”Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.Advertisement

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
JAN. 31, 2018
Pretend you are the lead detective on a hit new show, “CSI: Terrible Stuff on the Internet.” In the first episode, you set up one of those crazy walls plastered with headlines and headshots, looking for hidden connections between everything awful that’s been happening online recently.There’s a lot of dark stuff. In one corner, you have the Russian campaign to influence the 2016 presidential election with digital propaganda. In another, a rash of repugnant videos on YouTube, with children being mock-abused, cartoon characters bizarrely committing suicide on the kids’ channel and a popular vlogger recording a body hanging from a tree.Then there’s tech “addiction,” the rising worry that adults and kids are getting hooked on smartphones and social networks despite our best efforts to resist the constant desire for a fix. And all over the internet, general fakery abounds — there are millions of fake followers on Twitter and Facebook, fake rehab centers being touted on Google and even fake review sites to sell you a mattress.So who is the central villain in this story, the driving force behind much of the chaos and disrepute online?AdvertisementThis isn’t that hard. You don’t need a crazy wall to figure it out, because the force to blame has been quietly shaping the contours of life online since just about the beginning of life online: It’s the advertising business, stupid.AdvertisementAnd if you want to fix much of what ails the internet right now, the ad business would be the perfect perp to handcuff and restrain — and perhaps even reform.Ads are the lifeblood of the internet, the source of funding for just about everything you read, watch and hear online. The digital ad business is in many ways a miracle machine — it corrals and transforms latent attention into real money that pays for many truly useful inventions, from search to instant translation to video hosting to global mapping.But the online ad machine is also a vast, opaque and dizzyingly complex contraption with underappreciated capacity for misuse — one that collects and constantly profiles data about our behavior, creates incentives to monetize our most private desires and frequently unleashes loopholes that the shadiest of people are only too happy to exploit.And for all its power, the digital ad business has long been under-regulated and under-policed, both by the companies that run it and by the world’s governments. In the United States, the industry has been almost untouched by oversight, even though it forms the primary revenue stream of two of the planet’s most valuable companies, Google and Facebook.“In the early days of online media, the choice was essentially made — give it away for free, and advertising would produce the revenue,” said Randall Rothenberg, the chief executive of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, a trade association that represents companies in the digital ad business. “A lot of the things we see now flow out from that decision.”Mr. Rothenberg’s organization has long pushed for stronger standards for online advertising. In a speech last year, he implored the industry to “take civic responsibility for our effect on the world.” But he conceded the business was growing and changing too quickly for many to comprehend its excesses and externalities — let alone to fix them.“Technology has largely been outpacing the ability of individual companies to understand what is actually going on,” he said. “There’s really an unregulated stock market effect to the whole thing.”AdvertisementFacebook, which reported its earnings on Wednesday, said its advertising principles hold that ads should “be safe and civil.” It defended the targeted ad business’s overall value, arguing that digital advertising connects people to products and services from small businesses and “creates jobs and helps the economy.”The company also pointed to several steps it had taken recently. “We’ve tightened our ad policies, hired more ad reviewers, and created a new team to help detect and prevent abuses,” said Rob Goldman, Facebook’s vice president of advertising. “We’re also testing a tool that will bring more transparency to ads running on our platform. We know there is more work to do, but our goal is to keep people safe.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokesman for Google, whose parent company, Alphabet, reports earnings on Thursday, said it was constantly policing its ad system, pointing out recent steps it has taken to address problems arising from the ad business, including several changes to YouTube.The role of the ad business in much of what’s terrible online was highlighted in a recent report by two think tanks, New America and Harvard’s Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy.“The central problem of disinformation corrupting American political culture is not Russian spies or a particular social media platform,” two researchers, Dipayan Ghosh and Ben Scott, wrote in the report, titled “Digital Deceit.” “The central problem is that the entire industry is built to leverage sophisticated technology to aggregate user attention and sell advertising.”The report chronicles just how efficient the online ad business has become at profiling, targeting, and persuading people. That’s good news for the companies that want to market to you — as the online ad machine gets better, marketing gets more efficient and effective, letting companies understand and influence consumer sentiment at a huge scale for little money.But the same cheap and effective persuasion machine is also available to anyone with nefarious ends. The Internet Research Agency, the  troll group at the center of Russian efforts to influence American politics, spent $46,000 on Facebook ads before the 2016 election. That’s not very much — Hillary Clinton’s and Donald J. Trump’s campaigns spent tens of millions online. And yet the Russian campaign seems to have had enormous reach; Facebook has said the I.R.A.’s messages — both its ads and its unpaid posts — were seen by nearly 150 million Americans.How the I.R.A. achieved this mass reach likely has something to do with the dynamics of the ad business, which lets advertisers run many experimental posts to hone their messages, and tends to reward posts that spark outrage and engagement — exactly the sort that the Russians were pushing.“You can’t have it both ways,” Mr. Scott said. “Either you have a brilliant technology that permits microtargeting to exactly the people you want to influence at exactly the right time with exactly the right message — or you’re only reaching a small number of people and therefore it couldn’t be influential.”AdvertisementThe consequences of the ad business don’t end at foreign propaganda. Consider all the nutty content recently found on YouTube Kids — not just the child-exploitation clips but also videos that seem to be created in whole or in part by algorithms that are mining the system for what’s popular, then creating endless variations.Why would anyone do such a thing? For the ad money. One producer of videos that show antics including his children being scared by clowns told BuzzFeed that he had made more than $100,000 in two months from ads on his videos.YouTube, which is owned by Google, has since pulled down thousands of such disturbing videos; the company said late last year that it was hiring numerous moderators to police the platform. It also tightened the rules for which producers can make money from its ad system.Facebook, too, has made several recent fixes. The company has built a new tool — being tested in Canada and slated to be rolled out more widely this year — that lets people see the different ads being placed by political pages, a move meant to address I.R.A.-like influence campaigns. It has also fixed holes that allowed advertisers to target campaigns by race and religion. And it recently unveiled a new version of its News Feed that is meant to cut down on passively scrolling through posts — part of Mark Zuckerberg’s professed effort to improve the network even, he has said, at the cost of advertising revenue.The tinkering continued on Tuesday, when Facebook also said it would ban ads promoting crypto currency schemes, some of which have fallen into scammy territory.Yet these are all piecemeal efforts. They don’t address the underlying logic of the ad business, which produces endless incentives for gaming the system in ways that Google and Facebook discover often only after the fact. Mr. Rothenberg said this was how regulating advertising was likely to go — a lot of fixes resembling “Whac-a-Mole.”Of course, there is the government. You could imagine some regulator imposing stricter standards for who has access to the online ad system, who makes money from it, how it uses private information and how transparent tech companies must be about it all. But that also seems unlikely; the Honest Ads Act, a proposal to regulate online political ads, has gone nowhere in Congress.One final note: In 2015, Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, warned about the dangers of the online ad business, especially its inherent threat to privacy. I wrote a column in which I took Mr. Cook to task — I argued that he had not acknowledged how ad-supported services improved his own company’s devices.AdvertisementI stand by that view, but now I also regret dismissing his warning so cavalierly. Socially, politically and culturally, the online ad business is far more dangerous than I appreciated. Mr. Cook was right, and we should have listened to him.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Villain Dangerous to Ignore: Online Ads.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIJAN. 30, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — After nearly a year of legal wrangling, dramatic last-minute delays and uncooperative witnesses, a jury will soon hear arguments in Waymo’s high-profile lawsuit accusing Uber of stealing driverless car technology.The trial, which is scheduled to start with jury selection on Wednesday in federal court in San Francisco, pits Waymo, a spinoff of Google and one of the most successful companies from the dot-com boom, against Uber, the ride-hailing giant and today’s most valuable start-up. At stake is a leading role in the intense competition among tech and auto companies to create autonomous vehicles.The dispute hinges on the actions of a former star engineer at Google who started his own company and then sold it to Uber within a year. Did he steal thousands of Google computer files as he headed out the door and bring those files with him to Uber?The courtroom fight will most likely prompt a philosophical discussion over the entrepreneurial — some would say outlaw — spirit that has long made Silicon Valley tick. Should an engineer be free to leave a company and build on the knowledge and skills he gained at the old job? Are the tech industry’s giants too eager to use lawyers to cudgel competition? And are start-ups like Uber too willing to cut corners as they scramble to turn a profit?AdvertisementThe case is a “perfect storm” because it involves two high-profile companies competing in a hotly-contested but nascent field, said Jeanne Fromer, a law professor at New York University who specializes in intellectual property. There aren’t many people with the expertise that self-driving cars demand, so the line between an engineer’s knowledge and a company’s trade secret is thinner than usual.Advertisement“Figuring out what’s on one side of the line and what’s on other side is incredibly complicated,” she said.TRADE SECRETS. Waymo has accused Uber of colluding with Anthony Levandowski — an early engineer on Google’s self-driving car team who left the company in January 2016 — to steal information about the project. Waymo’s legal argument relies on a less-traveled area of intellectual property law: trade secrets.Unlike publicly filed patents, trade secrets are, well, secret. They are defined as valuable information that is not generally known and is protected by the company from getting out, like the recipe for Coca-Cola. But because trade secrets can be hard to define, they raise questions about the line between an employee’s skill or knowledge versus intellectual property belonging to an employer.R&D. Waymo, which started under the Google banner before being spun off as a separate entity, spent years and more than $1 billion on research and development of driverless cars. The technology was so new when Waymo entered the field in 2009 that it had to devise everything from the ground up, including what sensors to use, how to move sensor data into software and how to test it all.It was a long and tedious process requiring much experimentation to see what worked and what didn’t. Some of those lessons are still considered valuable and closely guarded secrets at Waymo — secrets the company says Uber would have to tap into to meet the ambitious financial targets it has set for Mr. Levandowski.LIDAR. Waymo has said Uber misappropriated eight of its trade secrets, most of them having to do with lidar — an abbreviation for “light detection and ranging” — devices that measure distances using lasers. Such sensors are critical in the operation of autonomous vehicles. One of the eight secrets was a so-called “negative trade secret” — a term for a valuable lesson about what does and doesn’t work that was learned through time-consuming trial and error.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TRADE SECRETS. Uber says that what Waymo claims are trade secrets actually aren’t. Uber is expected to argue it developed all of its autonomous vehicle technology and know-how independently and that the information Waymo claims are trade secrets are generally known or ascertainable by Uber’s own experts.AdvertisementIt is a position that is fitting with the start-up spirit of Silicon Valley, where engineers move freely from company to company, taking what they know with them. A free flow of ideas and personnel can open the door to claims of theft or copying, but technologists often look down on companies that resort to legal action to kneecap a competitor.CHANGING JOBS. In a pretrial proceeding with lawyers for Uber and Waymo, Judge William Alsup, who will preside over the trial in federal court, pressed them on how to protect the rights of engineers to advance their careers elsewhere if their former employers designate “everything in the universe” as a trade secret. He cited a hypothetical example of an engineer who learned the best way of doing something through trial and error.When that engineer moves to another company and is assigned that same task, will that person need to “reinvent the wheel” and go through all the experiments again to make sure they are not using a former employer’s trade secrets? “Is an engineer really supposed to get a frontal lobotomy before they go to the next job? I think the answer has to be no,” Judge Alsup said.KEEPING SECRETS. Uber’s lawyers are expected to argue that even if the knowledge amounted to trade secrets, it was not misappropriated, because — among other reasons — Waymo didn’t do enough to keep its secrets secret. Besides, Uber can point out that it didn’t benefit from any potential trade secrets because autonomous vehicles are still in development.Uber will do its best to distance itself from Mr. Levandowski, who was in charge of the ride-hailing company’s autonomous vehicle team when he was fired in May 2017 for refusing to cooperate with its legal defense. Uber has said it repeatedly told Mr. Levandowski not to bring along any Google intellectual property after it bought Ottomotto, the company he started after leaving Google. Uber insists any computer files that Mr. Levandowski may have possessed from his time at Google never reached its computer servers.For all the philosophical arguments about trade secrets and the role they may play in Silicon Valley’s labor mobility, this case might boil down to the actions of Mr. Levandowski. His willingness to bend the rules seems extreme even by Silicon Valley’s standards.Waymo claims — and Uber does not dispute – that Mr. Levandowski downloaded 14,000 files before leaving Google and receiving a $120 million bonus from his former employer. At the time, he was already meeting regularly with Uber and Travis Kalanick, the company’s then-chief executive, and had not officially founded his own firm, Ottomotto. Mr. Levandowski is not a defendant in the suit.In a deposition in July, Larry Page, chief executive of Alphabet, the parent company of Google and Waymo, was asked about the decision to pay Mr. Levandowski a massive bonus. Mr. Page acknowledged that Mr. Levandowski had played “a significant role” in the history of the project, but was a headache for management by the time he left.AdvertisementWhen Uber announced the acquisition of Ottomotto for a reported $680 million, Mr. Levandowski had already been consulting with Uber for months. Even during his nine-month stint with the ride-hailing company, Mr. Levandowski demonstrated a willingness to push the envelope when he defied state regulators and forged ahead with autonomous vehicle testing on the streets of San Francisco.When called to testify, Mr. Levandowski is expected to exercise his Fifth Amendment right to avoid self-incrimination. He hasn’t cooperated with Uber’s lawyers, and Judge Alsup has referred Mr. Levandowski to the federal prosecutors for possible theft of trade secrets. While it’s not clear whether the Department of Justice is investigating his actions, federal investigators confirmed that it was looking into Uber’s business practices.After he was fired, Mr. Levandowski announced that he would start a religion worshiping a Godhead based on artificial intelligence.“Let’s stop pretending we can hold back the development of intelligence when there are clear massive short term economic benefits to those who develop it and instead understand the future and have it treat us like a beloved elder who created it,” reads the passage on the website for “Way of the Future,” the religion founded by Mr. Levandowski.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwakaA version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Secrets  Versus  Knowledge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NICK WINGFIELD and BRIAN X. CHENFEB. 1, 2018
SEATTLE — For Apple and Amazon, the holidays are the time to shine, the period when shoppers have the greatest appetite to buy their devices and, in Amazon’s case, anything else that can be stuffed into a box and delivered to homes.During the final few months of last year, neither disappointed.Both companies singled out the booming sales of their devices in the quarterly financial results that they reported on Thursday. Apple boasted of its highest revenue ever for a new lineup of iPhones, which included the high-priced iPhone X. Amazon raved about the demand for gadgets like the Echo, which runs its intelligent voice assistant, Alexa.“Our 2017 projections for Alexa were very optimistic, and we far exceeded them,” Jeff Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon, said. "We don’t see positive surprises of this magnitude very often — expect us to double down.”Amazon, a company once known for routinely posting losses, more than doubled its profit thanks to strong growth in its cloud computing division and a newer business for the company — advertising. It also benefited from a large gain resulting from changes to the United States tax code.AdvertisementFor the quarter that ended Dec. 31, Amazon said, net income rose to $1.86 billion, the highest profit in its history and more than double the $749 million from a year earlier. A big part of the increase, $789 million, came from the tax benefit. Revenue jumped 38 percent to $60.45 billion from a year earlier.AdvertisementAmazon’s shares soared nearly 6 percent in after-hours trading following the release of the results. “Amazon’s best-in-class large-cap growth story remains unchanged,” Colin Sebastian, an analyst at Robert W. Baird & Company, wrote in a research report.While Amazon’s online store sales grew 20 percent from a year earlier, the company’s total retail growth benefited from its acquisition of Whole Foods Markets. That deal, announced in June, added much of the $4.52 billion in physical store revenue for the quarter.Yet the biggest revenue growth came from a category generically named “other,” which includes advertising services and rose 62 percent to $1.74 billion from a year earlier.By far the most profitable big business for the company was Amazon Web Services, the cloud computing unit. Its revenue rose 45 percent to $5.11 billion, and its operating income increased 46 percent to $1.35 billion.Amazon kept with its tradition of secrecy by refusing to reveal exactly how many of its Echo family of devices it sold, saying only that it sold “tens of millions” of them last year. The company priced the devices aggressively over the holidays — its cheapest was only $29. The devices probably did not yield much profit, though they are an important part of Amazon’s effort to establish a technology ecosystem that could result in other benefits, such as enabling customers to make impulse purchases with their voices.Apple, in contrast, is without equal in making profits from tech hardware.For the company’s fiscal first quarter, it reported a record for quarterly net income — $20.07 billion, up 12 percent from a year earlier. Revenue rose 13 percent to $88.3 billion. The gains were notable considering that Apple’s fiscal first quarter was a week shorter than the previous year’s 14-week fiscal first quarter.While Amazon is content to price its devices near its costs for making them, Apple is known for charging a premium for its smartphones, tablets and computers. The iPhone X, which uses facial recognition to unlock the device, is the most expensive in its history, starting at almost $1,000.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Customer satisfaction is literally off the charts on iPhone X,” Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said on the company’s earnings call.AdvertisementMr. Cook noted that the iPhone X was the company’s top-selling phone in the quarter despite its November release, roughly a month and a half after Apple’s other new iPhones.The company sold 77.3 million iPhones over the quarter, which was down 1 percent from the longer quarter a year earlier. Yet revenue was higher largely because of the pricing of the new iPhones: In addition to introducing the iPhone X, Apple raised the price of the base model of its iPhone to $699, up from the $649 starting price for past iPhones.Sales in its “other products” category, which includes the Apple Watch, grew 36 percent to $5.5 billion. Apple declined to disclose sales of the Apple Watch for competitive reasons, but Mr. Cook noted on the earnings call that revenue for the Apple Watch had grown 50 percent.Apple also highlighted money generated from services, which include the App Store and Apple Music, with revenue rising 18 percent to $8.5 billion. Apple said the App Store continued to be the top destination for smartphone customers to buy apps.Apple sold 13.2 million iPads, up 1 percent — notable because iPad sales declined for many consecutive quarters over the last few years. But Mac sales shrank about 5 percent to 5.1 million units.Despite strong sales of the pricey iPhone X, some analysts remained concerned that its sales were slowing. Ahead of the earnings call, some news reports said Apple was slashing production of the iPhone X for the quarter that ends in March. The reports cited supply chain partners that said Apple had cut orders for parts.But in years past, Apple has warned investors that activities of its complex supply chain were an unreliable metric for overall sales. The company also typically slows down iPhone production after the holiday quarter, which is the peak shopping season.Last month, Apple also unveiled plans to bring the vast majority of its $252 billion in cash held abroad back to the United States, paying a one-time repatriation tax of $38 billion. Because the company had already earmarked $36.4 billion in anticipation that it would eventually have to pay taxes on its foreign earnings, Apple did not see much impact from the recent tax code changes.Luca Maestri, Apple’s chief financial officer, said that in light of the new tax code, the company would announce plans for its repatriated cash, including dividends and buybacks, in April.Follow Nick Wingfield and Brian X. Chen on Twitter: @nickwingfield and @bxchen.Nick Wingfield reported from Seattle, and Brian X. Chen from San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Amazon and Apple Holiday Sales Yield a Happy New Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NELLIE BOWLESFEB. 2, 2018
SAN JUAN, P.R. — They call what they are building Puertopia. But then someone told them, apparently in all seriousness, that it translates to “eternal boy playground” in Latin. So they are changing the name: They will call it Sol.Dozens of entrepreneurs, made newly wealthy by blockchain and cryptocurrencies, are heading en masse to Puerto Rico this winter. They are selling their homes and cars in California and establishing residency on the Caribbean island in hopes of avoiding what they see as onerous state and federal taxes on their growing fortunes, some of which now reach into the billions of dollars.And these men — because they are almost exclusively men — have a plan for what to do with the wealth: They want to build a crypto utopia, a new city where the money is virtual and the contracts are all public, to show the rest of the world what a crypto future could look like. Blockchain, a digital ledger that forms the basis of virtual currencies, has the potential to reinvent society — and the Puertopians want to prove it.For more than a year, the entrepreneurs had been searching for the best location. After Hurricane Maria decimated Puerto Rico’s infrastructure in September and the price of cryptocurrencies began to soar, they saw an opportunity and felt a sense of urgency.So this crypto community flocked here to create its paradise. Now the investors are spending their days hunting for property where they could have their own airports and docks. They are taking over hotels and a museum in the capital’s historic section, called Old San Juan. They say they are close to getting the local government to allow them to have the first cryptocurrency bank.Advertisement“What’s happened here is a perfect storm,” said Halsey Minor, the founder of the news site CNET, who is moving his new blockchain company — called Videocoin — from the Cayman Islands to Puerto Rico this winter. Referring to Hurricane Maria and the investment interest that has followed, he added, “While it was really bad for the people of Puerto Rico, in the long term it’s a godsend if people look past that.”AdvertisementPuerto Rico offers an unparalleled tax incentive: no federal personal income taxes, no capital gains tax and favorable business taxes — all without having to renounce your American citizenship. For now, the local government seems receptive toward the crypto utopians; the governor will speak at their blockchain summit conference, called Puerto Crypto, in March.The territory’s go-to blockchain tax lawyer is Giovanni Mendez, 30. He expected the tax expatriates to disappear after Hurricane Maria, but the population has instead boomed.“It’s increased monumentally,” said Mr. Mendez, who has about two dozen crypto clients. “And they all came together.”The movement is alarming an earlier generation of Puerto Rico tax expats like the hedge fund manager Robb Rill, who runs a social group for those taking advantage of the tax incentives.“They call me up saying they’re going to buy 250,000 acres so they can incorporate their own city, literally start a city in Puerto Rico to have their own crypto world,” said Mr. Rill, who moved to the island in 2013. “I can’t engage in that.”The newcomers are still debating the exact shape that Puertopia should take. Some think they need to make a city; others think it’s enough to move into Old San Juan. Puertopians said, however, that they hoped to move very fast.“You’ve never seen an industry catalyze a place like you’re going to see here,” Mr. Minor said.AdvertisementUntil the Puertopians find land, they have descended on the Monastery, a 20,000-square-foot hotel they rented as their base and that was largely unscathed by the hurricane.Matt Clemenson and Stephen Morris were drinking beer on the Monastery’s roof one recent evening. Mr. Clemenson had an easygoing affect and wore two-tone aviators; Mr. Morris, a loquacious British man, was in cargo shorts and lace-up steel-toed combat boots, with a smartphone on a necklace. They wanted to make two things clear: They chose Puerto Rico because of the hurricane, and they come in peace.“It’s only when everything’s been swept away that you can make a case for rebuilding from the ground up,” Mr. Morris, 53, said.“We’re benevolent capitalists, building a benevolent economy,” said Mr. Clemenson, 34, a co-founder of Lottery.com, which is using the blockchain in lotteries. “Puerto Rico has been this hidden gem, this enchanted island that’s been consistently overlooked and mistreated. Maybe 500 years later we can make it right.”Other Puertopians arrived on the roof as a pack, just back from a full-day property-hunting bus tour. From the middle, Brock Pierce, 37, the leader of the Puertopia movement, emerged wearing drop crotch capri pants, a black vest that almost hit his knees and a large black felt hat. He and others had arrived on the island in early December.“Compassion, respect, financial transparency,” Mr. Pierce said when asked what was guiding them here.Mr. Pierce, the director of the Bitcoin Foundation, is a major figure in the crypto boom. He co-founded a blockchain-for-business start-up, Block.One, which has sold around $200 million of a custom virtual currency, EOS, in a so-called initial coin offering. The value of all the outstanding EOS tokens is around $6.5 billion.A former child actor, Mr. Pierce got into digital money early as a professional gamer, mining and trading gold in the video game World of Warcraft, an effort funded partly by Stephen K. Bannon, the former Trump adviser. Mr. Pierce is a controversial figure — he has previously been sued for fraud, among other matters.AdvertisementDownstairs, in the Monastery penthouse, a dozen or so other expats were hanging out. The water was out that night, so the toilets and faucets were dry. Mr. Minor lounged on an alcove chaise.“The U.S. doesn’t want us. It’s trying to choke off this economy,” Mr. Minor said, referring to the difficulties that crypto investors have with American banks. “There needs to be a place where people are free to invent.”Mr. Pierce paced the room with his hands in fists. A few times a day, he played a video for the group on his phone and a portable speaker: Charlie Chaplin’s 1940 “The Great Dictator,” in which Chaplin parodies Hitler rallying his forces. He finds inspiration in lines like “More than machinery, we need humanity.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m worried people are going to misinterpret our actions,” Mr. Pierce said. “That we’re just coming to Puerto Rico to dodge taxes.”He said he was aiming to create a charitable token called ONE with $1 billion of his own money. “If you take the MY out of money, you’re left with ONE,” Mr. Pierce said.“He’s tuned in to a higher calling,” said Kai Nygard, scion of the Canadian clothing company Nygard and a crypto investor. “He’s beyond money.”The force of Mr. Pierce’s personality and his spiritual presence are important to the group, whose members are otherwise largely agnostic. Mr. Pierce regularly performs rituals. Earlier that day while scoping out property, they had stopped at a historic Ceiba tree, known as the Tree of Life.“Brock nestled into the bosom of it and was there for 10 minutes,” Mr. Nygard said.Mr. Pierce walked around the tree and said prayers for Puertopia, holding a rusted wrench he had picked up in the territory. He kissed an old man’s feet. He blessed a crystal in the water, as they all watched. He played the Chaplin speech to everyone and to the tree, Mr. Nygard said.That wrench is now in the penthouse, heavy and greasy.Later on, at a dinner in a nearby restaurant, the group ordered platters of octopus arms, fried cheese, ceviche and rum cocktails. They began debating whether to buy Puerto Rico’s Roosevelt Roads Naval Station, which measures 9,000 acres and has two deepwater ports and an adjacent airport. The only hitch: It’s a Superfund cleanup site.AdvertisementMr. Pierce had fallen asleep by then, his hat tilted down and arms crossed. He gets two hours of sleep many nights, often on a firm grounding mat to stay in contact with the earth’s electric energy. Josh Boles, a tall, athletic man who is another crypto expat, picked him up, and the group headed back to the Monastery.They walked past a big pink building in an old town square, the start of their vision for Puertopia’s downtown. Once a children’s museum, they plan on making it a crypto clubhouse and outreach center that will have the mission “to bring together Puerto Ricans with Puertopians.”Workdays are casual in Puertopia. One morning, Bryan Larkin, 39, and Reeve Collins, 42, were working at another old hotel, the Condado Vanderbilt, where they had their laptops on a pool bar with frozen piña coladas on tap.“We’re going to make this crypto land,” Mr. Larkin said.Mr. Larkin has mined about $2 billion in Bitcoin and is the chief technology officer of Blockchain Industries, a publicly traded company based in Puerto Rico.Mr. Collins, an internet veteran, had raised more than $20 million from an initial coin offering for BlockV, his app store for the blockchain, whose outstanding tokens are worth about $125 million. He had also co-founded Tether, which backs cryptocurrency tied to the value of a dollar and whose outstanding tokens are worth about $2.1 billion, though the company has generated enormous controversy in the virtual currency world.“So, no. No, I don’t want to pay taxes,” Mr. Collins said. “This is the first time in human history anyone other than kings or governments or gods can create their own money.”He had moved from Santa Monica, Calif., with just a few bags and was now starting a local cryptocurrency incubator called Vatom Factory.“When Brock said, ‘We’re moving to Puerto Rico for the taxes and to create this new town,’ I said, ‘I’m in,’” Mr. Collins said. “Sight unseen.”AdvertisementThey soon went back to work, checking out Coinmarketcap.com, a site that shows the price of cryptocurrencies.“Our market cap’s gone up $100 million in a week,” Mr. Collins said.“Congrats, man,” Mr. Larkin said.All across San Juan, many locals are trying to figure out what to do with the crypto arrivals.Some are open to the new wave as a welcome infusion of investment and ideas.“We’re open for crypto business,” said Erika Medina-Vecchini, the chief business development officer for the Department of Economic Development and Commerce, in an interview at her office. She said her office was starting an ad campaign aimed at the new crypto expat boom, with the tagline “Paradise Performs.”Others worry about the island’s being used for an experiment and talk about “crypto colonialism.” At a house party in San Juan, Richard Lopez, 32, who runs a pizza restaurant, Estella, in the town of Arecibo, said: “I think it’s great. Lure them in with taxes, and they’ll spend money.”Andria Satz, 33, who grew up in Old San Juan and works for the Conservation Trust of Puerto Rico, disagreed.“We’re the tax playground for the rich,” she said. “We’re the test case for anyone who wants to experiment. Outsiders get tax exemptions, and locals can’t get permits.”Mr. Lopez said the territory needed something to jump-start the economy. “We have to find a new way,” he said.“Sure then, Bitcoin, why not,” Ms. Satz said, throwing up her hands.Mr. Lopez said he and a childhood friend, Rafael Perez, 31, were trying to set up a Bitcoin mine in their hometown. But electricity has been inconsistent, and mining even a single Bitcoin takes a lot of power, he said.Follow Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @NellieBowles.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2018, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Dawn of a Crypto Utopia?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick Wingfield, Katie Thomas and Reed AbelsonSEATTLE — Three corporate behemoths — Amazon, Berkshire Hathaway and JPMorgan Chase — announced on Tuesday that they would form an independent health care company for their employees in the United States.The alliance was a sign of just how frustrated American businesses are with the state of the nation’s health care system and the rapidly spiraling cost of medical treatment. It also caused further turmoil in an industry reeling from attempts by new players to attack a notoriously inefficient, intractable web of doctors, hospitals, insurers and pharmaceutical companies.It was unclear how extensively the three partners would overhaul their employees’ existing health coverage — whether they would simply help workers find a local doctor, steer employees to online medical advice or use their muscle to negotiate lower prices for drugs and procedures. While the alliance will apply only to their employees, these corporations are so closely watched that whatever successes they have could become models for other businesses.Major employers, from Walmart to Caterpillar, have tried for years to tackle the high costs and complexity of health care, and have grown increasingly frustrated as Congress has deadlocked over the issue, leaving many of the thorniest issues to private industry. About 151 million Americans get their health insurance from an employer.(Why will health care be so difficult for these companies to untangle? Analysis from The Upshot.)But Tuesday’s announcement landed like a thunderclap — sending stocks for insurers and other major health companies tumbling. Shares of health care companies like UnitedHealth Group and Anthem plunged on Tuesday, dragging down the broader stock market.That weakness reflects the strength of the new entrants. The partnership brings together Amazon, the online retail giant known for disrupting major industries; Berkshire Hathaway, the holding company led by the billionaire investor Warren E. Buffett; and JPMorgan Chase, the largest bank in the United States by assets.They are moving into an industry where the lines between traditionally distinct areas, such as pharmacies, insurers and providers, are increasingly blurry. CVS Health’s deal last month to buy the health insurer Aetna for about $69 billion is just one example of the changes underway. Separately, Amazon’s potential entry into the pharmacy business continues to rattle major drug companies and distributors.(Here’s a look at how even the threat of Amazon’s entry into an industry can rattle stocks.)The companies said the initiative, which is in its early stages, would be “free from profit-making incentives and constraints,” but did not specify whether that meant they would create a nonprofit organization. The tax implications were also unclear because so few details were released.Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, said in a statement that the effort could eventually be expanded to benefit all Americans.“The health care system is complex, and we enter into this challenge open-eyed about the degree of difficulty,” Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s founder and chief executive, said in a statement. “Hard as it might be, reducing health care’s burden on the economy while improving outcomes for employees and their families would be worth the effort.”The announcement touched off a wave of speculation about what the new company might do, especially given Amazon’s extensive reach into the daily lives of Americans — from where they buy their paper towels to what they watch on television. It follows speculation that the company, which recently purchased the grocery chain Whole Foods, might use its stores as locations for pharmacies or clinics.(We asked health care experts to imagine what the three corporations might do.)“It could be big,” Ed Kaplan, who negotiates health coverage on behalf of large employers as the national health practice leader for the Segal Group, said of the announcement. “Those are three big players, and I think if they get into health care insurance or the health care coverage space, they are going to make a big impact.”But others were less sure, noting that the three companies — which, combined, employ more than one million people — might still hold little sway over the largest insurers and pharmacy benefit managers, who oversee the benefits of tens of millions of Americans.“This is not news in terms of jumbo employers being frustrated with what they can get through the traditional system,” said Sam Glick of the management consulting firm Oliver Wyman in San Francisco. He played down the notion that the three partners would have more success getting lower prices from hospitals and doctors. “The idea that they could have any sort of negotiation leverage with unit cost is a pretty far stretch.”Even the three companies don’t seem to be sure of how to shake up health care. People briefed on the plan, who asked for anonymity because the discussions were private, said the executives decided to announce the initiative while still a concept in part so they can begin hiring staff for the new company.Three people familiar with the partnership said it took shape as Mr. Bezos, Mr. Buffett, and Mr. Dimon, who are friends, discussed the challenges of providing insurance to their employees. They decided their combined access to data about how consumers make choices, along with an understanding of the intricacies of health insurance, would inevitably lead to some kind of new efficiency — whatever it might turn out to be.“The ballooning costs of health care act as a hungry tapeworm on the American economy,” Mr. Buffett said in the statement. “Our group does not come to this problem with answers. But we also do not accept it as inevitable.”Over the past several months, the three had met formally — along with Todd Combs, an investment officer at Berkshire Hathaway who is also on JPMorgan’s board — to discuss the idea, according to a person familiar with Mr. Buffett’s thinking.The three chief executives saw one another at the Alfalfa Club dinner in Washington on Saturday, but by then each had already had dozens of conversations with the small in-house teams they had assembled. The plan was set.Mr. Buffett’s motivation stems in part from conversations he has had with two people close to him who have been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, according to the person. Mr. Buffett, the person said, believes the condition of the country’s health care system is a root cause of economic inequality, with wealthier people enjoying better, longer lives because they can afford good coverage As Mr. Buffett himself has aged — he is 87 — the contrast between his moneyed friends and others has grown starker, the person said.The companies said they would initially focus on using technology to simplify care, but did not elaborate on how they intended to do that or bring down costs. One of the people briefed on the alliance said the new company wouldn’t replace existing health insurers or hospitals.Planning for the new company is being led by Marvelle Sullivan Berchtold, a JPMorgan managing director who was previously head of the Swiss drugmaker Novartis’s mergers and acquisitions strategy; Mr. Combs; and Beth Galetti, a senior vice president at Amazon.One potential avenue for the partnership might be an online health care dashboard that connects employees with the closest and best doctor specializing in whatever ailment they select from a drop-down menu. Perhaps the companies would strike deals to offer employee discounts with service providers like medical testing facilities.“Each of those companies has extensive experience using transformative technology in their own businesses,” said John Sculley, the former chief executive of Apple who is now chairman of a health care start-up, RxAdvance. “I think it’s a great counterweight to what government leadership hasn’t done, which is to focus on how do we make this health care system sustainable.”The e-commerce giant’s actions – some big, like buying Whole Foods Markets; some smaller, like Amazon meal kits – have led to stock sell-offs for a wide range of businesses.Erik Gordon, a professor at the University of Michigan’s Ross School of Business, predicted that the companies would attempt to modernize the cumbersome process of doctor appointments by making it more like booking a restaurant reservation on OpenTable, while eliminating the need to regularly fill out paper forms on clipboards.“I think they will bring the customer-facing, patient-facing thing into your smartphone,” he said.Amazon has long been mentioned by health care analysts and industry executives as a potential new player in the sector. While the company has remained quiet about its plans, some analysts noted that companies often use their own employees as a testing ground for future initiatives.The entry of Amazon and its partners adds to the upheaval in an industry where much is changing, from government programs after the overhaul of the tax law to the uncertain future of the Affordable Care Act. All the while, medical costs have persistently been on the rise.Nationwide, average premiums for family coverage for employees rose to $18,764 last year, an increase of 19 percent since 2012, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. Workers are increasingly paying a greater share of those costs — they now pay 30 percent of the premium, in addition to high deductibles and growing co-payments.“Our members’ balance sheets speak for themselves — health care is a growing cost at a time when other costs are either not rising or falling,” said Robert Andrews, chief executive of the Healthcare Transformation Alliance, a group of 46 companies, including Coca-Cola and American Express, that have banded together to lower health care costs.Other major employers have also sought more direct control over their employees’ health care. Walmart contracted with groups like the Cleveland Clinic, Mayo and Geisinger, among others, to take care of employees who need organ transplants and heart and spine care. Caterpillar, the construction equipment manufacturer, sets its own rules for drug coverage, which it has said saves it millions of dollars per year, even though it still uses a pharmacy benefit manager to process its claims.Suzanne Delbanco, the executive director for the Catalyst for Payment Reform, a nonprofit group that mainly represents employers, said controlling rising prices is especially hard in markets where a local hospital or medical group dominates. While some have tried to tackle the issue in different ways, like sending employees with heart conditions to a specific group, “it’s piecemeal,” she said.She added, “There are so many opportunities to do this better.”The issue is not solely a 21st-century concern: In 1915, Henry Ford became increasingly worried about the quality of health care available to his growing work force in Detroit, so he opened the  Henry Ford Hospital. It is still in existence today.Follow Nick Wingfield, Katie Thomas and Reed Abelson on Twitter: @nickwingfield and @katie_thomas and @reedabelson.Nick Wingfield reported from Seattle, Katie Thomas from Chicago and Reed Abelson from San Francisco. Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting from London, and Emily Flitter from New York.Advertisement

      By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE, 
    
GABRIEL J.X. DANCE and 
    
RICH HARRIS

JAN. 31, 2018

Federal and state authorities are investigating the sellers of artificial followers and other fraudulent social media engagement.
Federal and state authorities are investigating the sellers of artificial followers and other fraudulent social media engagement.By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE, GABRIEL J.X. DANCE and RICH HARRIS JAN. 31, 2018More than a million followers have disappeared from the accounts of dozens of prominent Twitter users in recent days as the company faces growing criticism over the proliferation of fake accounts and scrutiny from federal and state inquiries into the shadowy firms that sell fake followers.The people losing followers include an array of entertainers, entrepreneurs, athletes and media figures, many of whom bought Twitter followers or artificial engagement from a company called Devumi. Its business practices were detailed in a New York Times article on Saturday describing  a vast trade in fake followers and fraudulent engagement on Twitter and other social media sites, often using personal information taken from real users. Twitter said on Saturday that it would take action against Devumi’s practices. A Twitter spokeswoman on Tuesday declined to comment about whether the company was purging fake accounts.The singer Clay Aiken, the actor John Leguizamo and the reality TV star Lisa Rinna have each lost a substantial number of followers, according to a review of their accounts. So has Martha Lane Fox, a British businesswoman and Twitter board member. Other well-known users have taken to Twitter in recent days to complain of lost followers, suggesting that a broad swath of people may be affected, not just Devumi customers.The company’s heightened campaign against bots comes as federal lawmakers and law enforcement officials in two states are scrutinizing Devumi and its competitors online, where numerous websites sell fake followers or engagement on Twitter, LinkedIn, YouTube, Instagram and other social media platforms.On Tuesday, Senators Jerry Moran of Kansas and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut — the chairman and the ranking member, respectively, of the Senate subcommittee on consumer protection and data security — asked the Federal Trade Commission to begin an investigation into the “deceptive and unfair marketing practices” of Devumi and similar companies. While Devumi promises customers “100 Percent Active, English Followers,” virtually all of the followers and retweets the company provides are fake, The Times found. Twitter prohibits buying followers of any kind.The Florida attorney general, Pam Bondi, a Republican, has also begun an investigation into Devumi, joining Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general and a Democrat, who announced on Saturday that he would begin reviewing whether the company had violated state laws against impersonation and commercial deception.The Times found evidence that the information of Twitter users in every state — including thousands of people in Florida and New York — had been copied onto bots sold by Devumi or rival companies.At least 55,000 fake accounts use the names, profile pictures, hometowns and other personal details of real Twitter users, including minors, according to a Times data analysis. The original accounts list locations in all 50 U.S. states.By The New York TimesDevumi was based in Florida until recently but lists a New York City address on its website. The company’s owner, German Calas, also lives in Florida.“Based on the New York Times article, we have opened an investigation into these very serious allegations,” Ms. Bondi said in an interview Tuesday. “We would encourage any citizens who believe they have been a victim of this scam to please contact the Florida attorney general’s office immediately.”Mr. Calas did not respond to an email seeking comment. But on Monday, Devumi’s parent company, Bytion, filed paperwork in Florida indicating that it had moved its principal place of business to Colorado. Jared Stark, a lawyer for Mr. Calas’s business, said in an email that both companies had relocated to Denver earlier in January, a move he described as “in the works for some time.” He declined to comment on the investigations into Devumi.A reporter visiting Bytion’s Denver office on Tuesday found it largely empty, save for a few boxes against one wall and patio furniture on a balcony. Gerald Sexton, Bytion’s director of people and culture, declined to comment and said that Mr. Calas was not available.A few minutes later, a process server arrived at the office to deliver a subpoena from Mr. Schneiderman’s office. A spokeswoman for Mr. Schneiderman declined to comment.The disclosure of dozens of Devumi’s customers in entertainment, politics and business has sparked a renewed debate — often carried out on Twitter itself — about the prevalence of fraud and fakery on social media, where tens of millions of fake users still roam.The Chicago Sun-Times announced on Monday that it would suspend publishing reviews by the newspaper’s film critic, Richard Roeper, while conducting a review of his social media following. Mr. Roeper bought at least 25,000 followers from Devumi, according to records reviewed by The Times, and an analysis of his account indicates that many of his nearly quarter-million Twitter followers are fake accounts.Both Twitter and Facebook verify the identity of some celebrities, politicians and other high-profile users and include blue check marks on their account pages, in part to prevent scam artists from impersonating them. But a vast majority of accounts are not vetted in the same way.Moreover, Twitter does not require that accounts be associated with a real person. Mark Cuban, a prominent technology investor, tweeted on Monday that it was time for Twitter to change that policy, and for Facebook to tighten its requirements. Mr. Cuban elaborated over email, saying that automated accounts, or bots, and impersonation on Twitter had made him less enthusiastic about using the platform.“I don’t think your user handle or profile has to reflect your actual name or picture,” Mr. Cuban said. “I do think Twitter would benefit from requiring every account(s) being tied back to an individual. If someone wants to run a bot account, great, but identify a person behind it.”Some federal and state lawmakers have called for more stringent laws regulating social media companies, in part to combat the epidemic of fake accounts. Many fake accounts are deployed by Russia and other countries seeking to influence American politics, but others are used by marketing companies to influence consumers and even policymakers.Marc Levine, a California state assemblyman from outside San Francisco, introduced legislation on Monday that would require social media companies doing business in California to link every account to a human being. The legislation would also require that social media companies allow only human account holders to place advertisements on their platforms.“There are any number of interest groups looking to shape public opinion,” Mr. Levine said in an interview. “We’ve seen all of this exploited and millions of people manipulated.”Kassondra Cloos contributed reporting.Jan. 27, 2018Jan. 27, 2018Sept. 27, 2017AdvertisementBy CECILIA KANGJAN. 30, 2018
WASHINGTON — The Hawaii emergency management services worker who sent a false alert warning of an incoming ballistic missile this month had a long history of poor performance and sent the warning because he thought the state faced an actual threat, officials said on Tuesday.The mistake, which touched off panic and confusion across Hawaii on Jan. 13, occurred when the worker misinterpreted testing instructions from a supervisor, according to the Federal Communications Commission and state officials in Hawaii.Believing the instructions were for a real emergency, the worker, who has not been identified, sent the live alert to the cellphones of all Hawaii residents and visitors to the state.State officials had previously described the episode as an accident. Shortly after it happened, Gov. David Ige blamed the false warning on a state employee who had “pressed the wrong button.”AdvertisementThe Federal Communications Commission and Hawaiian officials have both been investigating the event. The commission investigation, which is continuing, revealed a series of missteps that led to the false alert, including major gaps in Hawaii’s protocol for handling public safety alerts.AdvertisementThe state report was more critical of the employee, who it said had been fired. The investigation found that he had been a “source of concern” for 10 years and had twice before confused drills with real-world events.In a related development, Vern T. Miyagi, the administrator of the Hawaii Emergency Management Agency, resigned on Tuesday.Beginning at 8:05 a.m. on Jan 13, the reports say, a midnight supervisor at the agency began an unplanned drill during a shift change. The supervisor pretended to be from the United States Pacific Command in a phone call placed to day-shift workers.In the call, the supervisor said, “Exercise, exercise, exercise,” as required when tests are conducted. According to the Federal Communications Commission, the supervisor also erroneously said, “This is not a drill.”According to Bruce Oliveira, the retired Army general who led the state investigation, the message spoken by the shift leader did not adhere to the script outlined in the protocol. “What was actually said in the script was taken from an actual notification,” he said.But the general emphasized that the shift leader had some “flexibility” and did say “exercise, exercise, exercise” before and after his message. That “tells everybody that this is a practice drill,” General Oliveira said.Although other emergency management officials in Hawaii understood that the state was conducting a drill at the time, the employee who sent the alert said in a written statement that he had believed there was a real emergency.AdvertisementThe employee then chose from options in a drop-down menu that included test and real alerts. When prompted with the question “Are you sure you want to send this alert?” the employee clicked “yes,” according to the commission.Panic set in across Hawaii almost immediately, with people furiously contacting members of their family and seeking shelter. The escalating tensions between the United States and North Korea added to the level of concern.When the employee was directed to cancel the alert to prevent it from going to any phones that had not yet received it, he “just sat there and didn’t respond,” the state report said.It took about 38 minutes to send a second alert that said the original one was an error. In its report, the Federal Communications Commission faulted Hawaii’s emergency agency for lacking measures to prevent the mistake and to quickly notify the public to disregard it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hawaii “didn’t have reasonable safeguards in place,” Ajit Pai, the commission chairman, said.Michael O’Rielly, a Republican commissioner, said: “It is astounding that no one was hurt.”The mistake in Hawaii has stoked calls by lawmakers and regulators to improve wireless emergency alerts, which are slowly being updated and will include longer messages and Spanish-language versions starting next year.The false alarm also exposed some vulnerabilities in the military’s Pacific Command headquarters in Hawaii. On the morning of the alert, the command’s operations center did not have immediate access to the state’s unclassified alert system. Mobile devices are not allowed in the command headquarters for security reasons.The center did not realize what was happening until military staff frantically called in from outside. Cmdr. Dave Benham, a spokesman for the Pacific Command, said that process had taken only seconds. The command sent out its own message correcting the false alarm.Commander Benham declined to say what corrective measures the command had taken. Without going into detail, he said the Pacific Command was “using lessons from this event as an opportunity to improve our internal processes as well as coordination with state authorities.”AdvertisementStarted in 2012, the Wireless Emergency Alert system grew from the decades-old Emergency Broadcast System used for television and radio alerts. The federal government viewed mobile phone technology as a more efficient and reliable way of warning individuals about weather and law enforcement threats and sharing missing-person alerts.The program is voluntary, and every major wireless carrier and hundreds of cities, counties, states and law enforcement offices participate. Consumers do not pay to get alerts and can opt out of receiving the textlike warnings, except for those sent by the president.The episode in Hawaii also revealed major differences in how alerts are sent. In places like Houston, Chicago and New York City, tests and real alerts are not kept in the same drop-down menu, and at least one other person’s approval is required to send an alert, according to public safety experts.The report recommends, among many suggestions, that Hawaii put into effect a two-person confirmation process, in which all directives and actions are read aloud and verified by two employees. It also recommends adding an additional level of approval before a real alert is issued, such as, “Are you sure you want to send a ‘Real World Ballistic Missile Alert’?”A computer process to rapidly issue alert cancellations has already been installed.Some lawmakers have proposed that only members of the Department of Defense or Department of Homeland Security should be able to send a warning about missile threats.On Tuesday, the Federal Communications Commission voted to improve one aspect of the emergency alert system, allowing public safety officials to send more geographically precise alerts to avoid spreading panic across broad swaths of the public.Under the new rules, alerts can be directed to areas within a tenth of a mile of the target audience. Under the existing system, alerts often go to an entire county, spanning hundreds of square miles.The new technical requirement, which is to take effect in November 2019, is seen as a major upgrade by public safety officials. They say they have been put in the difficult position of deciding to send alerts for fires, hurricanes and other emergencies, while balancing concerns of raising fears among people who are not immediately in harm’s way.“When disaster strikes, it’s essential that Americans in harm’s way get reliable information so that they can stay safe and protect their loved ones,” Mr. Pai said. “People shouldn’t miss out on potentially lifesaving information just because the alert system’s current brush stroke is too broad.”An earlier version misstated, in one instance, the circumstances under which a state worker in Hawaii sent a false emergency alert about an incoming ballistic missile. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, the worker sent the alert intentionally, not inadvertently, after misunderstanding a supervisor’s directions.An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of a Republican member of the Federal Communications Commission. He is Michael O’Rielly, not O’Reilly.Maya Salam contributed reporting from New York, and Eric Schmitt and Gardiner Harris from Washington.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2018, on Page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: Worker Who Sent Missile Alert Had Confused Drills for the Real Thing Before.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By SHEERA FRENKELJAN. 28, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Over the past two months, Google has started letting people around the world choose what data they want to share with its various products, including Gmail and Google Docs.Amazon recently began improving the data encryption on its cloud storage service and simplified an agreement with customers over how it processes their information.And on Sunday, Facebook rolled out a new global data privacy center — a single page that allows users to organize who sees their posts and what types of ads they are served.While these changes are rippling out worldwide, a major reason for these shifts comes from Europe: The tech giants are preparing for a stringent new set of data privacy rules in the region, called the General Data Protection Regulation.AdvertisementSet to take effect on May 25, the regulations restrict what types of personal data the tech companies can collect, store and use across the 28-member European Union. Among their provisions, the rules enshrine the so-called right to be forgotten into European law so people can ask companies to remove certain online data about them. The rules also require anyone under 16 to obtain parental consent before using popular digital services. If companies do not comply, they could face fines totaling 4 percent of their annual revenue.AdvertisementWith the deadline for the new rules now just a few months away, Silicon Valley’s tech behemoths have been scrambling to get ready. Facebook and Google have deployed hundreds of people to make sense of the regulations. Many of the companies have overhauled how they give users access to their own privacy settings. Some have redesigned certain products that suck up too much user data. And in some cases, companies have removed products entirely from the European market because they would violate the new privacy rules.“Every person who works for us has, in some way, been involved in preparing the company for G.D.P.R.,” said Doug Kramer, general counsel of CloudFlare, an internet performance and security company based in San Francisco that has tightened its data storage and processing practices. “G.D.P.R. is going to introduce very fundamental changes to the way the internet works for everyone.”The rush of activity is a reminder of how Europe has set the regulatory standard in reining in the immense power of tech giants, while other places — including the United States — have largely taken a noninterventionist stance. The G.D.P.R. rules were approved in late 2015 after tech companies like Facebook ran into problems over data protection with national privacy watchdogs in various European countries.European officials said the coming rules are forcing American tech giants to take a step back.“There has not been any pushback from American companies,” said Věra Jourová, the European Commissioner for Justice, Consumers and Gender Equality. “If anything, they seem very eager to understand how exactly they can comply with the regulation.”Officials from Facebook, Google and other companies said in interviews that they had been working to give people more control over what data they share anyway. In the past, many of the companies fought back in European courts over privacy rules and declined to offer certain products in the region rather than redesign them to meet privacy standards.The coming of the new rules has nonetheless pushed a huge scale of internal change, Gilad Golan, Google’s director for security and data protection, said at a San Francisco event last month to introduce new security features. “When G.D.P.R. goes into effect in 2018, we will be ready,” he said.The biggest challenge, he said, has been preparing for the regulation’s mandate that people in Europe must have control over how their digital data is organized. Google, he said, has had to go through each of its services — from Gmail to its Cloud storage services — to comply. Since the new rules require individuals to give their consent before a company accesses data, for example, Google has had to redesign many consent agreements, as well as change underlying technology to make it easier to remove someone’s data.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“For a company with infrastructure of our size, it takes a lot of work,” Mr. Golan said.Facebook has also taken multiple steps to deal with the coming rules. On Sunday, the company began offering a new privacy center that puts user security settings on one page instead of dispersing them across different sections of the social network. While the company said the changes was separate from its preparations for the new European regulations, Facebook’s chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, connected the two in a speech in Brussels last week.AdvertisementThe new privacy center would give Facebook a “very good foundation to meet all the requirements of the G.D.P.R. and to spur us on to continue investing in products and in educational tools to protect privacy,” Ms. Sandberg said.Rob Sherman, Facebook’s deputy chief privacy officer, said the social network has also held a series of “Design Jams” where it invites designers and engineers to reimagine how products look so that people can more easily see and control their online data.With the new rules coming, Facebook also decided not to roll out some products in Europe that would violate the privacy laws.Last November, for instance, the company unveiled a program that uses artificial intelligence to monitor Facebook users for signs of self-harm. But it did not open the program to users in Europe, where the company would have had to ask people for permission to access sensitive health data, including about their mental state. The social network has also kept out of Europe facial recognition software that tracks when photos of users are posted across the platform.Amazon, too, has made changes. Last April, the company wrote a blog post  outlining its efforts to comply with the new European regulations. The internet retailer said it would strengthen the encryption around the data it stores on its cloud storage services, and reaffirmed the rights of customers to choose which region — Europe or otherwise — where they want their data stored. Amazon declined to discuss the work.Some American tech companies said they welcomed the new data protection rules.“We embrace G.D.P.R. because it sets a strong standard for privacy and data protection rights, which is at the core of our business,” Julie Brill, a corporate vice president and deputy general counsel at Microsoft, said in an interview. “We began work on G.D.P.R. as soon as it was adopted by the European Union. Our preparations for G.D.P.R. touch every part of our company.”How the biggest tech companies handle the regulations will most likely influence their smaller counterparts. Angelo Spenillo, general counsel for Siteimprove, which helps companies manage their presence online, said many little tech companies have been looking toward Google and Facebook for how user privacy and data will be managed online.“Where the bigger companies go, the smaller companies will follow suit,” he said. “We’re going to see real changes across the board.”Ms. Jourová said as the new rules take effect, countries outside Europe could begin demanding similar data protection measures for their citizens.Advertisement“There will be a moment, especially as more and more people in the U.S. find themselves uncomfortable with the channels monitoring their private lives,” she said.Follow Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @sheerafA version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tech Giants Await Change On Privacy In Europe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NICK WINGFIELDJAN. 28, 2018
SEATTLE — The other week, 218 cities and states lost in the sweepstakes to be the home of Amazon’s second headquarters, failing to make the list of 20 finalists.But Amazon thanks them for playing.That is because the hundreds of applications gave Amazon a hidden benefit: free research that the company can mine when picking spots for future warehouses and satellite offices.Amazon asked every city and state applying for its second headquarters for details about local resources, like available talent and transit options. Local officials were also prodded for tips on local education programs and tax incentives.The answers — most of which have not been released publicly — essentially do Amazon’s homework for it, providing valuable information that the company otherwise would have needed to dig up on its own or obtain through one-on-one negotiations.AdvertisementThe application from the Kansas City, Mo., region detailed a program for teaching technical skills to preschoolers through 12th graders, according to a person briefed on the submissions, who would speak only anonymously because the discussions were private. A local coalition that helps military veterans make the transition to civilian jobs, which could help Amazon’s efforts to recruit veterans, also caught the company’s eye.AdvertisementThe company did not realize until it saw the application from Louisville, Ky., the person said, that there is a large pool of technical talent within 200 miles of the city and a local public-private partnership that helps train students to become entry-level software developers.The Montreal submission stood out, the person said, with its thinking about attracting foreign talent to the region.Amazon alluded to the upside of the information last week when Holly Sullivan, its head of economic development, said the rejected locations could receive a consolation prize of sorts.“Through this process we learned about many new communities across North America that we will consider as locations for future infrastructure investment and job creation,” she said in a statement.Amazon’s plans are another illustration of how its search contest is about more than a second headquarters, or HQ2, as the company calls it. The winning location, Amazon says, will get up to 50,000 high-paying jobs and billions of dollars in construction. Those promises have generated extraordinary genuflection from politicians across North America, and a lot of glowing news coverage, at a moment of heightened scrutiny about Amazon’s market power.By getting 238 communities to give their best pitch, Amazon has also gotten insight into the kinds of accommodations that places are willing to make to bring it to town.“This is not just about HQ2,” said Richard Florida, an authority on urban development and a professor at the University of Toronto. “It’s about a broader locational strategy. HQ2 is the carrot. That’s the only thing that makes sense.”AdvertisementThe proposal from Detroit, which did not make the final 20, offers another peek into the sort of incentives that Amazon has received from the HQ2 bids, and how the inducements could factor into Amazon’s planning for other projects.The city offered to let Amazon operate for 30 years without paying real estate and personal property taxes and a variety of other local taxes, according to a report in Crain’s Detroit Business. Ari B. Adler, a spokesman for Gov. Rick Snyder of Michigan, confirmed the report’s accuracy.Mr. Adler said Amazon’s bidding process would make Detroit a stronger contender for any company looking for a new or expanded location. Amazon already has other facilities in the state, and Michigan welcomes more of them, he said.“We heard from Amazon that some of the key things in our favor during the review process were our commitment to partnerships, the creativity of our proposal and the investments being made in the region’s growth,” Mr. Adler said.Only about 40,000 of Amazon’s 540,000 global employees work in Seattle, its home base. Its work force is largely spread across warehouses and other parts of the logistics network that deliver the billions of items Amazon ships every year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are more than 300 warehouses and other shipping centers in the United States alone, according to estimates by MWPVL International, a supply chain and logistics consulting firm. The company is adding new ones at a fast clip.Amazon warehouses are often close to metropolitan areas so orders can be delivered to population centers as quickly as possible. A company site selection team scouts potential locations.The company also has more than a dozen satellite offices focused on research and development — Amazon calls them “tech hubs.” It has a large robotics unit near Boston, a machine translation team in Pittsburgh and a video game development group in San Diego.State and local officials have been enthusiastic about the jobs at the warehouses, offering tax breaks and raving about Amazon’s arrival in news releases. Since 2000, Amazon has received over $1.1 billion in public subsidies for its facilities and other operations, according to estimates by Good Jobs First, a nonpartisan research group that tracks economic development.Mark Williams, president of the Strategic Development Group, a site selection consulting firm, said available tax breaks, like those offered by Detroit, could be one of the most important pieces of information for Amazon.Advertisement“There are discretionary incentives that aren’t on the books that come in the heat of a deal,” Mr. Williams said. “In most cases, those are the most valuable incentives.”But he said the bids could also show a community’s willingness to offer other benefits.“There are special grant funds, special bond funds, naming of roads,” he said. “It’s not like you can acquire these through a data search.”Mr. Florida, the urban studies professor, advised Kansas City (an also-ran) and Toronto (a finalist) on their bids. He believes Amazon also “has something in mind” for the 20 places still in the game — including Indianapolis, Miami and Columbus, Ohio. The company is talking to all 20 and getting even more information from them.“What is a better distribution hub than Columbus or Indianapolis?” Mr. Florida said. “What is a better Latin America headquarters than Miami?”One of the finalists, Denver, whose bid has been made  public, provided Amazon with elaborate breakdowns of the number of students who graduated from Colorado from 2014 to 2016 with degrees in computer engineering, computer graphics, information technology, tax law and human resources management.The city boasted about the large number of faculty at the University of Colorado, in nearby Boulder, focused on computer science. Denver also suggested a handful of possible development sites for Amazon, though those locations were redacted from the public material.“There is no better place for Amazon’s second home than Colorado,” John W. Hickenlooper, the state’s governor, said in a cover letter with its application addressed to Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Local Expertise, in 238 Places.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO
 
JAN. 26, 2018
Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo, technology columnist at The New York Times, reviews the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Good morning! Let’s talk tech.People on Wall Street thought they knew how fast Netflix was growing. Very fast, they thought. It turns out they were wrong: It’s even faster.The company reported this week that it had added 8.3 million subscribers in the last quarter, about two million more than analysts were expecting. But it’s still spending tons of money on content — about $8 billion this year, and perhaps more in future years. Many in the industry continue to wonder whether the company’s business will ever work.The problem: To start making money, Netflix might eventually have to raise prices a lot. What will happen then?AdvertisementWell, we learned something interesting in Netflix’s earnings report. Netflix raised the prices of some its plans over the last quarter, and people still signed up.AdvertisementI suspect that accounts for how the service is changing. Now that there’s just so much stuff on Netflix — so many comedies, so many dramas, so many dumb movies, so many smart movies — it has become not just another premium cable channel but something like a replacement for TV itself. In other words, it’s indispensable. You can expect to keep paying for it forever.Remember HomePod? Probably not. Last summer, Apple unveiled a smart speaker inspired by Amazon’s Echo and Google’s Home, because it is apparently the rule in the tech industry that if one big company does something, every other company has to do it, too. Think Same.Then, nothing.A new Apple device is usually a Big Deal event, one of those campaigns that Apple rolls out with the precision of a military conquest. But nobody heard anything more about the HomePod until late November, when Apple announced that the timing had slipped and that HomePod wouldn’t come until after the holidays.It was a crucial miss — the Echo seems to have had a gangbusters holiday, with Amazon expanding its head start in the category by probably tens of millions of devices. In a widely passed-around post, the venture capitalist M. G. Siegler wondered whether Amazon was so far ahead that HomePod was essentially dead on arrival.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Well, we’ll see. Apple announced this week that HomePod was back in action — available to order on Friday, and in stores starting Feb. 9.It’s still an odd announcement; Apple provided only a short demo of the device in June, so people brave enough to order will be going in blind. But you count Apple out in the hardware business at your peril. It will be fun to see what happens here.My colleagues Cecilia Kang and Daisuke Wakabayashi had an interesting article this week about the growing tensions between the tech industry and the Democratic Party. Democrats and techies have long been reliable allies — techies donate tons of money, and Democratic candidates get to show off their association with widely admired visionaries of the future.That’s past. Now that the tech industry has become more a cause of national angst and confusion rather than of wondrous gadgets and money, Democrats are being called on to police the business more stringently. Lefty activists want antitrust investigations of big tech companies and regulations on political advertising — a generally more combative relationship between the government and the pursuits of business.AdvertisementThere’s another side to this story, too: While tech C.E.O.s have very publicly sparred with President Trump on a variety of issues, they’re all enjoying a once-in-a-lifetime windfall of profits from the Republican tax plan. As rich people running wealthy companies, the tech industry’s leaders have short-term corporate interests that are obviously very well served by the low-tax, low-regulation Republican Party.It’s an election year. It will be interesting to see whether Democrats run against tech, whether tech sticks with Dems and, always, what Trump does with all this.Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Netflix Is a Monster; Apple’s HomePod.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byThe technology inside Amazon’s new convenience store, opening Monday in downtown Seattle, enables a shopping experience like no other — including no checkout lines. By Nick WingfieldSEATTLE — The first clue that there’s something unusual about Amazon’s store of the future hits you right at the front door. It feels as if you are entering a subway station. A row of gates guard the entrance to the store, known as Amazon Go, allowing in only people with the store’s smartphone app.Inside is an 1,800-square foot mini-market packed with shelves of food that you can find in a lot of other convenience stores — soda, potato chips, ketchup. It also has some food usually found at Whole Foods, the supermarket chain that Amazon owns.But the technology that is also inside, mostly tucked away out of sight, enables a shopping experience like no other. There are no cashiers or registers anywhere. Shoppers leave the store through those same gates, without pausing to pull out a credit card. Their Amazon account automatically gets charged for what they take out the door.On Monday, the store will open to the public for the first time. Gianna Puerini, the executive in charge of Amazon Go, recently gave tours of the store, in downtown Seattle. This is a look at what shoppers will encounter. There are no shopping carts or baskets inside Amazon Go. Since the checkout process is automated, what would be the point of them anyway? Instead, customers put items directly into the shopping bag they’ll walk out with. Every time customers grab an item off a shelf, Amazon says the product is automatically put into the shopping cart of their online account. If customers put the item back on the shelf, Amazon removes it from their virtual basket. The only sign of the technology that makes this possible floats above the store shelves — arrays of small cameras, hundreds of them throughout the store. Amazon won’t say much about how the system works, other than to say it involves sophisticated computer vision and machine learning software. Translation: Amazon’s technology can see and identify every item in the store, without attaching a special chip to every can of soup and bag of trail mix. There were a little over 3.5 million cashiers in the United States in 2016 — and some of their jobs may be in jeopardy if the technology behind Amazon Go eventually spreads. For now, Amazon says its technology simply changes the role of employees — the same way it describes the impact of automation on its warehouse workers. “We’ve just put associates on different kinds of tasks where we think it adds to the customer experience,” Ms. Puerini said.Those tasks include restocking shelves and helping customers troubleshoot any technical problems. Store employees mill about ready to help customers find items, and there is a kitchen next door with chefs preparing meals for sale in the store. Because there are no cashiers, an employee sits in the wine and beer section of the store, checking I.D.s before customers can take alcohol off the shelves.Most people who spend any time in a supermarket understand how vexing the checkout process can be, with clogged lines for cashiers and customers who fumble with self-checkout kiosks.At Amazon Go, checking out feels like — there’s no other way to put it — shoplifting. It is only a few minutes after walking out of the store, when Amazon sends an electronic receipt for purchases, that the feeling goes away. Actual shoplifting is not easy at Amazon Go. With permission from Amazon, I tried to trick the store’s camera system by wrapping a shopping bag around a $4.35 four-pack of vanilla soda while it was still on a shelf, tucking it under my arm and walking out of the store. Amazon charged me for it.A big unanswered question is where Amazon plans to take the technology. It won’t say whether it plans to open more Amazon Go stores, or leave this as a one-of-a-kind novelty. A more intriguing possibility is that it could use the technology inside Whole Foods stores, though Ms. Puerini said Amazon has “no plans” to do so. There’s even speculation that Amazon could sell the system to other retailers, much as it sells its cloud computing services to other companies. For now, visitors to Amazon Go may want to watch their purchases: Without a register staring them in the face at checkout, it’s easy to overspend. Nick Wingfield is a technology correspondent based in Seattle. He covers Amazon, Microsoft and emerging technologies and has written on technology's impact on economies in the Pacific Northwest. He was previously a reporter at The Wall Street Journal.@nickwingfieldAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Cecilia Kang and Daisuke WakabayashiWASHINGTON — In November 2016, Dipayan Ghosh was still reeling from Hillary Clinton’s defeat as he left what was supposed to be a celebration party at the Javits Convention Center in New York to attend morning meetings for his job at the Washington offices of Facebook.As Mr. Ghosh, a former White House technology adviser to President Barack Obama, made the four-hour drive, troubling questions started nagging him. What if fake news on Facebook and other sites had an impact on voters? How did the campaigns and any outsiders use ads on the site to influence the election?A few months later, Mr. Ghosh quit his job at Facebook, where he worked on privacy and public policy issues. On Tuesday, a Washington think tank, New America, and Harvard’s Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy published a report he co-wrote, asserting that technology behind digital advertising — the financial lifeblood of Facebook, Google and Twitter — has made disinformation campaigns more effective.“The problems were much broader than we imagined, and it was not just about one tool or platform,” said Mr. Ghosh, who with his co-author, Ben Scott, worked on devising Mrs. Clinton’s tech policy platform. “It’s the profit model underlying the whole digital advertising system.”Mr. Ghosh and Mr. Scott are the latest members of the political party that more eagerly embraced Silicon Valley to sharply criticize the tech industry. Tech policy officials from the Obama administration and from Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, as well as prominent Democrats in Congress, are demanding changes from companies they had long viewed as too important and nimble for regulations.Senators Mark Warner of Virginia and Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota are demanding greater disclosures from companies like Facebook, Google and Twitter for political advertising on their sites. Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, who has big political backers from Silicon Valley, fears the biggest companies have edged out competition.Senator Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut has called for the Federal Trade Commission to restart an antitrust investigation into Google. And Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota has introduced a bill that would update antitrust policies to take more direct aim at the tech sector.“Democrats and progressives still strongly feel that there are shared values with Silicon Valley, but there is also a real concern over the industry’s increasingly concentrated wealth and power,” said Daniel Sepulveda, an ambassador and deputy assistant secretary at the State Department for the Obama administration.Karen Kornbluh, who served as Mr. Obama’s ambassador to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, said that before the election, there was a view of “internet utopianism” in government. Officials looked to the internet to solve problems in education, income inequality and global democracy. They called on tech executives to help with those initiatives and hired from Google and other tech outfits to bring their expertise into the White House.“So if you were championing the best things about the internet, it was easy to be disappointed that it was hijacked to subvert the very things it could foster,” Ms. Kornbluh said. But she said few people in government were looking with a full view of how social media and other internet services posed national security, economic and other risks.Mr. Ghosh and Mr. Scott played a leading role in helping to create the tech-friendly policies that helped companies like Facebook and Google flourish during the Obama administration. But as more information trickled out about the role played by technology firms in Russia’s attempts to influence the presidential election, they, like many Democrats, became disillusioned.“We were always careful to condition our optimism and our advocacy that this technology was potentially a double-edged sword,” said Mr. Scott, who is a senior adviser to the Open Technology Institute at New America. “But I guess we didn’t expect them to hit home quite as hard as it did.”Titled “#DigitalDeceit: Exposing the Internet Technologies of Precision Propaganda,” their report argues that the interests of internet giants in helping advertisers run persuasive campaigns are aligned with those of someone looking to spread misinformation.The authors suggest a few ways to regulate the advertising technology industry, including requiring more transparency for political advertising, restricting data collection or ad targeting on political issues, and strengthening consumer protection and competition policies.Republicans have also expressed concerns about internet giants. Many on President Trump’s campaign suspected that Google rigged search results in favor of Mrs. Clinton, questioning the influence of high-profile supporters of hers like Eric Schmidt, who is the former executive chairman of Google’s parent company, Alphabet. They were outraged by claims that Facebook manipulated its trending topics feature to push down results related to Republicans.But increasingly, the most vocal criticism is coming from Democrats. Tom Wheeler, Mr. Obama’s head of the Federal Communications Commission, recently called for social media firms to make it easier to figure out how certain information goes viral, who is sending those posts and what impact that activity may have.“The internet was once heralded as the great democratizing tool,” Mr. Wheeler said. “That vision was smashed by the algorithms of the social media platforms.”Last year, Google, Facebook and Twitter admitted that groups with ties to the Kremlin had used their online services to push false news stories or controversial headlines on divisive topics. In some cases, those groups amplified their reach by buying ads.On Friday, Twitter said it had found more than 50,000 Russian-linked accounts tweeting election-related content in the 10 weeks preceding the vote. Twitter said it would email notifications to 677,775 people in the United States who followed, retweeted or liked tweets from accounts linked to propaganda efforts by the Internet Research Agency, a shadowy Russian company linked to the Kremlin.But Mr. Ghosh and Mr. Scott said it would be a mistake to focus solely on the Russians. They argued that the tools used by the Russians could easily be applied to other misinformation campaigns. In the same way digital advertising campaigns spend relatively small sums of money to reach millions of people, any party with an interest in swaying sentiment can gain access to reams of behavioral data on the internet to target specific audiences.Improvements in artificial intelligence for digital advertising could allow for more precise audience targeting and make the problem even worse, they said.Fundamentally, the problem is that “disinformation campaigns and legitimate advertising campaigns are effectively indistinguishable on leading internet platforms, ” Mr. Ghosh and Mr. Scott wrote.This month, Mr. Ghosh’s former employer, Facebook, announced changes to what its more than two billion members would see most often. The company said it would give what users’ friends and family shared priority over content from publishers and brands, with the goal of delivering a more positive experience on Facebook.The changes were viewed as a response to the wave of criticism accusing the company of allowing its algorithms to promote misleading news and misinformation. On Friday, Facebook also said it would give priority to news sources that its users ranked as the most credible.Mr. Ghosh said that these changes were significant and might throw off propagators of disinformation in the short term, but that they — like advertisers — would adjust. Ultimately, the underlying business model of digital advertising hasn’t changed, and it’s not clear how Facebook will handle content that advertisers pay to promote.“I felt like Facebook was an amazing company, and in many ways I still think it is,” Mr. Ghosh said. “But something changed in me at the Javits Center.”Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, and Daisuke Wakabayashi from San Francisco.AdvertisementBy NATASHA SINGERJAN. 24, 2018
In the latest indication of Apple’s growing ambitions in the digital health market, the tech giant on Wednesday unveiled a new feature that would allow users to automatically download and see parts of their medical records on their iPhones.The feature is to become part of Apple’s popular Health app. It will enable users to transfer clinical data — like cholesterol levels and lists of medications prescribed by their doctors — directly from their medical providers to their iPhones, potentially streamlining how Americans gain access to some health information.A dozen medical institutions across the United States — including Johns Hopkins Medicine in Baltimore and Cedars-Sinai in Los Angeles — have agreed to participate in the beta version of the new feature. Apple plans to open the beta test to consumers on Thursday.Apple said it will not see consumers’ medical data, which is encrypted and stored locally on the iPhone, unless the user chooses to share it with the company.“It’s really strange to me that you can easily pull up all of your spending record on your credit card going back a long way in every detail, yet your health is way more important and you don’t have easy access to your health information,” said Jeff Williams, Apple’s chief operating officer. “We want to make sure that consumers are empowered with information about their health.”AdvertisementTech giants including Apple, Microsoft and Alphabet, Google’s parent company, are going head-to-head to obtain a larger slice of American health care spending, which amounts to more than $3 trillion annually.AdvertisementApple, more than the others, has been reticent to publicize its long-term vision for health technology. But recent product introductions, like the new health records feature, highlight how focused Apple is on using its iPhone, Apple Watch and apps to give people more control over their health care.In addition to the iPhone Health app, Apple has developed ResearchKit, software to help researchers develop iPhone apps to conduct health studies, and HealthKit, a platform that allows consumers to share health data on their iPhone or Apple Watch with health and fitness apps. Apple is also sponsoring clinical research, called the Apple Heart Study, at Stanford University to determine whether an app for the Apple Watch can detect irregular heart rhythms.A review of Apple’s current job openings also gives clues about the company’s wider ambitions in the health care sector.According to the company’s site, Apple is seeking a hardware engineer to develop “next-generation” health sensors for products like the iPhone and iPad; software engineers for the company’s “health special projects team” to join “an exciting new project at an early stage”; an engineering manager for the company’s motion technologies team “to help shape the next set of groundbreaking features” in fitness and health; and a biomedical scientist to help design studies for health, wellness and physiological measurement apps.“We will empower you to engage with a variety of internal teams and external partners to continually question the limitations of technology implemented in health products,” says an Apple job description for a health tech hardware development engineer.Apple’s personal medical record feature is hardly a new idea. With much fanfare about a decade ago, both Google and Microsoft introduced free services — called Google Health and Microsoft HealthVault — that helped consumers centralize their personal health data.But the concept of the personal medical record did not generate widespread adoption in that era, which predated the popularization of the iPhone and mobile apps. Google shut down Google Health in 2011. Microsoft still offers its HealthVault service.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: New on iPhone Health App: Your Test Results.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech We’re Using By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

JAN. 24, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Nicholas Casey, Andes bureau chief for The Times, based in Medellín, Colombia, discussed the tech he’s using.What are some of the most important tech tools you have relied on as our reporter covering parts of South America? Lately we’ve been having a lot of fun experimenting with drones here, and not just for filming.This summer, I traveled with Ben Solomon into the Peruvian Amazon on a 10-hour journey on a boat to a village along an extremely winding river. Several hours in, we launched the drone. The footage uploads in real time to a display that connects to an iPhone — you can essentially fly up there and have a look around at where you are, see how far you’ve come. Turns out we hadn’t gone all that far: The river is filled with switchbacks over a marshy swamp, so hours on the water doesn’t translate to the longest distance as the crow flies.It was no surprise to us, either, that drone technology was something that had never made it to the village we were working in. So the “flying camera” was quite an attraction when we arrived at our destination.AdvertisementWhat about the tools that you use could be better?Google Maps, for one. I mainly work in the Andes, and most anyone who lives in mountains can tell you that the shortest distance between two points isn’t necessarily the route that you want to take. However, Google doesn’t use local knowledge to calculate directions.Recently at a dinner party in La Paz, Bolivia, a friend told me about heading out of the canyon where the capital dwellers live and up to a concert on the plateau that sits above the city. The route his phone had calculated was on a dirt road that went straight up on a 45-degree angle that people generally walked or went up by mule.AdvertisementIt reminded me of the stories that every correspondent had about using Google or Waze when I used to cover Israel and the Palestinian territories. Your phone would regularly take you in and out of each as if there weren’t a conflict going on, through military checkpoints and down roads that often ended in a wall put up 10 years before. Even if impassable, it was always the shortest route, Google assured.You were barred from Venezuela last year after reporting on the financial crisis there in 2016. You witnessed shortages of food, medical supplies and electricity. What were some of the technology challenges you faced under such tough circumstances?Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A correspondent there warned me before I arrived to bring a Kindle — books were sometimes easier to download than to buy in Caracas, especially best-sellers or anything in English. You also lived in fear of losing things as basic and easy to get as a power cord. Venezuela is a country where people are having trouble finding tires when they get holes in them on the road, let alone Apple products. It is very unfortunate.It’s not uncommon for Venezuelans to come back with a duffel bag filled with just the basics that aren’t for sale in stores anymore: toilet paper, dish detergent, shampoo, sponges. It would get to the point where you were also adding phone chargers, batteries, USB cables, internet routers and anything else you could imagine that plugged into the wall.How has internet connectivity been in the Andes countries, and how do locals use apps or websites like Facebook or Twitter? You’d be surprised how fast the leap to connectivity can be in rural Latin America. It’s a lot faster to get a cellphone tower into a village than the years spent waiting for the state utility to install landlines. Social media has replaced the rumor mill in a lot of villages. Facebook is offering free internet to parts of Latin America — which increases connectivity but also, to Facebook’s aim, trains people to see Facebook as the extent of the internet.AdvertisementHow do governments use tech for surveillance in those places?That’s a question everyone would like to know. Venezuelan spying can be surprisingly low-tech at times — opposition politicians regularly turn on the television to hear embarrassing conversations of their telephone calls being aired to the public. It seems a bit of a throwback to the Soviet Union in some ways, rather than Pegasus and the other recent spyware that governments usually reach for.It’s effective, though. Many conversations just don’t happen over the phone, and we find another place to communicate where there’s encryption, like Telegram.Beyond your job, what tech product are you currently obsessed with using in your daily life?Netflix. There seem to be 10 times more offerings in Latin America than the United States, including many movies that are blocked back home and that I can only rent on iTunes. I would urge anyone who wants to spend days watching good films not available in America to set his or her VPN to Colombia and have a look.Follow Nicholas Casey on Twitter: @caseysjournal.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Explore With Drones, but Ignore Google Maps.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NATASHA SINGER and DANIELLE IVORYJAN. 23, 2018
The former superintendent of Baltimore County Public Schools, the 25th largest district in the United States, was charged with four counts of perjury by the Maryland state prosecutor on Tuesday.The state said the former superintendent, Shaun Dallas Dance, made false statements on his financial disclosure forms “to conceal the nature and extent of his outside business interests and conflicts of interest.”Mr. Dance has been at the center of questions about the close relationships between Baltimore County school officials and education technology companies, which have been trying to win the district’s business. An article in The New York Times in November profiled the district as a case study in how tech companies court and cultivate relationships with school officials.Mr. Dance was no longer employed by the district and already under investigation by the state when The Times article was published. His actions have been also been the focus of reporting by The Baltimore Sun.AdvertisementBaltimore County’s schools had embarked on an ambitious technology makeover, committing more than $200 million to providing laptops for students and millions more on no-bid contracts for learning apps. The Times found that tech industry-funded groups or vendors paid for flights to conferences, as well as hotels and dinners, for school officials.AdvertisementMr. Dance actively negotiated the terms of a $875,000 no-bid contract between his school district and Supes Academy, a school leadership training service, while he worked for Supes and a related company called Synesi, according to the indictment. Mr. Dance also made false statements on financial disclosure documents, the indictment said, to conceal about $90,000 in earnings from those companies.The prosecutor also said that Mr. Dance concealed about $12,000 in payments he received through his consulting work in 2015, including $4,600 from an organization called the Education Research and Development Institute — ERDI for short — that pays superintendents to attend meetings with educational tech companies.As part of its services, ERDI has in the past charged companies $13,000 to facilitate a meeting with five superintendents or other school leaders to discuss products, according to documents obtained by The Times. After Mr. Dance participated in confidential meetings with two of his district’s tech vendors at an ERDI conference last year, the district extended both companies’ contracts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Officials in Maryland and Ohio have begun looking superintendents’ relationships with ERDI.Andrew Jay Graham, a lawyer representing Mr. Dance, declined to comment on the case. Mr. Dance faces a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison for each of the four counts against him, according to the indictment.“We are surprised and saddened to hear about the charges against former superintendent Dallas Dance,” said Verletta White, the interim superintendent in Baltimore County.Ms. White has admitted to also receiving and failing to report consulting payments from ERDI, saying it had been a mistake. “It is important to note,” she said on Tuesday, “there are no accusations of wrongdoing by the current administration or me.”In early January, Gov. Larry Hogan said his administration planned to introduce legislation to establish an investigator general within the state’s Department of Education to examine complaints of unethical, unprofessional or illegal conduct related to school district procurement and other matters. In doing so, Mr. Hogan specifically cited “allegations of improprieties and conflicts of interest by both the former and current Baltimore County school superintendent.”David Sundstrom, ERDI’s president, said the company had not been contacted by the state prosecutor’s office.“We — along with so many who work to serve students and teachers — are profoundly disheartened and disappointed if these allegations are true,” Mr. Sundstrom wrote in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Perjury Case In Contract With Schools In Maryland.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrFor five and a half years, nearly the entire tenure of its chief executive, Virginia M. Rometty, IBM has reported a steady erosion of revenue.Selling off its chip manufacturing and smaller data-center computer businesses contributed to the decline. So, too, did the fact that new businesses like cloud computing, data analytics and artificial intelligence had not yet grown big enough to make up for the downturn in IBM’s traditional hardware and software products.But IBM’s half-decade losing streak will most likely end on Thursday, analysts predict, when the company reports its quarterly performance.The crossover to growth would be a long-awaited bright spot for Ms. Rometty and IBM, a challenged giant that has been overshadowed in recent years by the younger technology giants on the West Coast.Even if IBM delivers a revenue gain, however, the bigger question facing the company remains: Has Ms. Rometty turned it around?Skeptics abound. IBM is expected to have gotten an extra lift in the most recent quarter from currency gains and strong sales of a new line of mainframe computers. Without that help, the company’s revenue would decline by 2 percent or so, according to an estimate from A. M. Sacconaghi, a financial analyst for Sanford C. Bernstein.“Is a turnaround afoot? I don’t see it yet,” Mr. Sacconaghi said.There is no doubt, though, that there are signs of progress at IBM, which would not comment on its financial picture before the release of the earning report. So much attention is focused on the company’s top line because revenue is the broadest measure of the headway IBM is making in a difficult transformation toward cloud computing, data handling and A.I. offerings for corporate customers.The new businesses — “strategic imperatives,” IBM calls them — now account for 45 percent of the company’s revenue. And though it still has a ways to go, IBM has steadily built up those operations — and gained converts.The number of software developers using its cloud technology has doubled in the last year, IBM says, though it would not provide numbers. On Wednesday, Barclays upgraded IBM’s stock to a buy and noted its long-term opportunity in the cloud market. IBM’s stock price, a notable laggard as markets have surged in recent years, has climbed nearly 10 percent so far this year.IBM was slow to recognize the significance of cloud computing and software tools delivered as Internet-style services. In artificial intelligence, the company scored a research and public relations triumph in 2011, when its Watson system defeated human champions in the question-and-answer game, “Jeopardy!” But IBM first applied the Watson technology to the daunting realm of cancer research, a lengthy struggle with little short-term financial reward.Today, IBM trails well behind Amazon Web Services and Microsoft in the cloud market, according to analysts. Yet IBM has invested heavily in more than 60 cloud data centers in 19 countries in the past three years. And the most recent analysis by IDC, a technology research firm, and a report last month by Jefferies, a Wall Street firm, ranked IBM third in the category, ahead of Google.The Watson technology has been retooled as dozens of different services including text understanding, language translation, image recognition and sentiment analysis — all delivered via the cloud and available à la carte.IBM’s strategy is to offer businesses cloud computing, A.I. technology and industry expertise tailored for each customer. Big companies, said David Kenny, senior vice president for IBM’s Watson and cloud businesses, are adapting cloud and A.I. technology to make their businesses faster and smarter.“We start from our strength in knowing how enterprises operate,” Mr. Kenny said. “We’re a trusted partner for companies in this data and A.I. wave.”Companies want to move quickly, Mr. Kenny said, but they often want to exploit the speed and flexibility of cloud technology from within their own computer centers, where they figure their vital business data is more secure.AT&T began a project with IBM last fall to accelerate the use of cloud technology in developing and updating the telecommunications giant’s 2,200 in-house software applications. IBM — a longtime technology supplier to AT&T — was chosen both for its cloud expertise and its industry knowledge, said Sorabh Saxena, AT&T’s president of business operations.The AT&T-IBM collaboration involves breaking down programs into cloud-based building blocks of code called microservices, each of which handles a certain task. So a new feature for mobile payments, for example, can be adopted quickly by updating a few lines of code rather than having to rewrite an entire program.Most of this business software uses cloud technology that runs inside AT&T data centers — in a so-called private cloud, in contrast to a public cloud in which computing services are delivered from remote data centers owned by another company. Many corporations opt for private clouds to house their most sensitive customer and business data.“For certain parts of our business, IBM was the ideal partner,” Mr. Saxena said.IBM emphasizes its hybrid stance in the cloud market, offering both private and public cloud technology to its corporate clients. In its financial reporting, IBM also includes all the hardware, software and services it sells to companies to build private clouds in its total cloud revenue, which would put it on a par with Amazon.Most industry analysts focus on the public cloud market, assuming it will grow faster as companies build fewer data centers themselves. In the public cloud market, IBM has revenue of about $2 billion a year, growing at 30 percent, according to the most recent estimate by IDC. By contrast, Amazon generates more than $12 billion a year and Microsoft about $6.5 billion.Yet for IBM, its underlying cloud software is crucial to building a big A.I. business with Watson. “IBM has a strong set of assets in A.I.,” said Ed Anderson, an analyst at Gartner. “And cloud is the answer to getting Watson in the hands of developers.”That was the appeal for Opentopic, a start-up that uses A.I. technology to mine online and corporate data for marketing insights. Opentopic switched from Amazon Web Services to the IBM cloud in 2015, largely to tap Watson’s code modules for text, image and sentiment analysis, so the Opentopic developers had to write less code themselves.“It allows us to prototype rapidly,” said Andre Konig, a co-founder of Opentopic. “And Watson is the artificial intelligence layer that makes that possible.”The start-up’s clients include Unilever, Abbott Laboratories and The Economist. Today, Opentopic does all its software development on the IBM cloud, but that will most likely change soon.It is working with a new company that runs its business on the Amazon cloud. “We need to be where our customers are,” Mr. Konig said. “The future is going to be multi-cloud,” meaning businesses will use various services.His comment points to a brewing issue for IBM — and perhaps one that will help determine the resilience of Ms. Rometty’s turnaround campaign.IBM is putting all its advanced technology on the cloud — not just artificial intelligence, but also blockchain and quantum computing. If others are leaders in the underlying cloud layers, why not focus higher up and distribute its leading-edge technology on other clouds as well?IBM says its Watson software, for example, is fine-tuned down to the chip level for the IBM cloud. But some analysts suggest that IBM may eventually take another path, working with Amazon, Microsoft and Google.“If IBM does that,” said Frank Gens, IDC’s chief analyst, “its chance of being a cloud leader goes way up.”Follow Steve Lohr @SteveLohrOpinionThomas L. FriedmanAdvertisement

      By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE, 
    
GABRIEL J.X. DANCE, 
    
RICH HARRIS and 
    
MARK HANSEN

JAN. 27, 2018

Everyone wants to be popular online. Some even pay for it. Inside social media’s black market.


              Everyone wants to be popular online.Some even pay for it.Inside social media’s black market.
            


                By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE, GABRIEL J.X. DANCE, RICHARD HARRIS and MARK HANSEN



  
    Photo illustration by Adam Ferriss
  


      By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE, GABRIEL J.X. DANCE, RICHARD HARRIS and MARK HANSEN


The real Jessica Rychly is a Minnesota teenager with a broad smile and wavy hair. She likes reading and the rapper Post Malone. When she goes on Facebook or Twitter, she sometimes muses about being bored or trades jokes with friends. Occasionally, like many teenagers, she posts a duck-face selfie.But on Twitter, there is a version of Jessica that none of her friends or family would recognize. While the two Jessicas share a name, photograph and whimsical bio — “I have issues” — the other Jessica promoted accounts hawking Canadian real estate investments, cryptocurrency and a radio station in Ghana. The fake Jessica followed or retweeted accounts using Arabic and Indonesian, languages the real Jessica does not speak. While she was a 17-year-old high school senior, her fake counterpart frequently promoted graphic pornography, retweeting accounts called Squirtamania and Porno Dan.All these accounts belong to customers of an obscure American company named Devumi that has collected millions of dollars in a shadowy global marketplace for social media fraud. Devumi sells Twitter followers and retweets to celebrities, businesses and anyone who wants to appear more popular or exert influence online. Drawing on an estimated stock of at least 3.5 million automated accounts, each sold many times over, the company has provided customers with more than 200 million Twitter followers, a New York Times investigation found.The accounts that most resemble real people, like Ms. Rychly, reveal a kind of large-scale social identity theft. At least 55,000 of the accounts use the names, profile pictures, hometowns and other personal details of real Twitter users, including minors, according to a Times data analysis.“I don’t want my picture connected to the account, nor my name,” Ms. Rychly, now 19, said. “I can’t believe that someone would even pay for it. It is just horrible.”These accounts are counterfeit coins in the booming economy of online influence, reaching into virtually any industry where a mass audience — or the illusion of it — can be monetized. Fake accounts, deployed by governments, criminals and entrepreneurs, now infest social media networks. By some calculations, as many as 48 million of Twitter’s reported active users — nearly 15 percent — are automated accounts designed to simulate real people, though the company claims that number is far lower.In November, Facebook disclosed to investors that it had at least twice as many fake users as it previously estimated, indicating that up to 60 million automated accounts may roam the world’s largest social media platform. These fake accounts, known as bots, can help sway advertising audiences and reshape political debates. They can defraud businesses and ruin reputations. Yet their creation and sale fall into a legal gray zone.“The continued viability of fraudulent accounts and interactions on social media platforms — and the professionalization of these fraudulent services — is an indication that there’s still much work to do,” said Senator Mark Warner, the Virginia Democrat and ranking member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, which has been investigating the spread of fake accounts on Facebook, Twitter and other platforms.Despite rising criticism of social media companies and growing scrutiny by elected officials, the trade in fake followers has remained largely opaque. While Twitter and other platforms prohibit buying followers, Devumi and dozens of other sites openly sell them. And social media companies, whose market value is closely tied to the number of people using their services, make their own rules about detecting and eliminating fake accounts.Devumi’s founder, German Calas, denied that his company sold fake followers and said he knew nothing about social identities stolen from real users. “The allegations are false, and we do not have knowledge of any such activity,” Mr. Calas said in an email exchange in November.The Times reviewed business and court records showing that Devumi has more than 200,000 customers, including reality television stars, professional athletes, comedians, TED speakers, pastors and models. In most cases, the records show, they purchased their own followers. In others, their employees, agents, public relations companies, family members or friends did the buying. For just pennies each — sometimes even less — Devumi offers Twitter followers, views on YouTube, plays on SoundCloud, the music-hosting site, and endorsements on LinkedIn, the professional-networking site.The actor John Leguizamo has Devumi followers. So do Michael Dell, the computer billionaire, and Ray Lewis, the football commentator and former Ravens linebacker. Kathy Ireland, the onetime swimsuit model who today presides over a half-billion-dollar licensing empire, has hundreds of thousands of fake Devumi followers, as does Akbar Gbajabiamila, the host of the show “American Ninja Warrior.” Even a Twitter board member, Martha Lane Fox, has some.At a time when Facebook, Twitter and Google are grappling with an epidemic of political manipulation and fake news, Devumi’s fake followers also serve as phantom foot soldiers in political battles online. Devumi’s customers include both avid supporters and fervent critics of President Trump, and both liberal cable pundits and a reporter at the alt-right bastion Breitbart. Randy Bryce, an ironworker seeking to unseat Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, purchased Devumi followers in 2015, when he was a blogger and labor activist. Louise Linton, the wife of the Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, bought followers when she was trying to gain traction as an actress.Devumi’s products serve politicians and governments overseas, too. An editor at China’s state-run news agency, Xinhua, paid Devumi for hundreds of thousands of followers and retweets on Twitter, which the country’s government has banned but sees as a forum for issuing propaganda abroad. An adviser to Ecuador’s president, Lenín Moreno, bought tens of thousands of followers and retweets for Mr. Moreno’s campaign accounts during last year’s elections.Kristin Binns, a Twitter spokeswoman, said the company did not typically suspend users suspected of buying bots, in part because it is difficult for the business to know who is responsible for any given purchase. Twitter would not say whether a sample of fake accounts provided by The Times — each based on a real user — violated the company’s policies against impersonation.“We continue to fight hard to tackle any malicious automation on our platform as well as false or spam accounts,” Ms. Binns said.Unlike some social media companies, Twitter does not require accounts to be associated with a real person. It also permits more automated access to its platform than other companies, making it easier to set up and control large numbers of accounts.Tweets from a Twitter bot look just like those of a normal user, but a bot’s tweets are generated by a computer program, rather than a person. Below are three examples of common bot types you might encounter on Twitter and an approximation of the code controls them.By Richard Harris and Danny DeBelius“Social media is a virtual world that is filled with half bots, half real people,” said Rami Essaid, the founder of Distil Networks, a cybersecurity company that specializes in eradicating bot networks. “You can’t take any tweet at face value. And not everything is what it seems.”Including, it turns out, Devumi itself.Last year, three billion people logged on to social media networks like Facebook, WhatsApp and China’s Sina Weibo. The world’s collective yearning for connection has not only reshaped the Fortune 500 and upended the advertising industry but also created a new status marker: the number of people who follow, like or “friend” you. For some entertainers and entrepreneurs, this virtual status is a real-world currency. Follower counts on social networks help determine who will hire them, how much they are paid for bookings or endorsements, even how potential customers evaluate their businesses or products.High follower counts are also critical for so-called influencers, a budding market of amateur tastemakers and YouTube stars where advertisers now lavish billions of dollars a year on sponsorship deals. The more people influencers reach, the more money they make. According to data collected by Captiv8, a company that connects influencers to brands, an influencer with 100,000 followers might earn an average of $2,000 for a promotional tweet, while an influencer with a million followers might earn $20,000.Genuine fame often translates into genuine social media influence, as fans follow and like their favorite movie stars, celebrity chefs and models. But shortcuts are also available: On sites like Social Envy and DIYLikes.com, it takes little more than a credit-card number to buy a huge following on almost any social media platform. Most of these sites offer what they describe as “active” or “organic” followers, never quite stating whether real people are behind them. Once purchased, the followers can be a powerful tool.“You see a higher follower count, or a higher retweet count, and you assume this person is important, or this tweet was well received,” said Rand Fishkin, the founder of Moz, a company that makes search engine optimization software. “As a result, you might be more likely to amplify it, to share it or to follow that person.”Twitter and Facebook can be similarly influenced. “Social platforms are trying to recommend stuff — and they say, ‘Is the stuff we are recommending popular?’” said Julian Tempelsman, the co-founder of Smyte, a security firm that helps companies combat online abuse, bots and fraud. “Follower counts are one of the factors social media platforms use.”Search on Google for how to buy more followers, and Devumi often turns up among the first results. Visitors are greeted by a polished website listing a Manhattan address, displaying testimonials from customers and a money-back guarantee. Best of all, Devumi claims, the company’s products are blessed by the platform for which they are selling followers. “We only use promotion techniques that are Twitter approved so your account is never at risk of getting suspended or penalized,” Devumi’s website promises.To better understand Devumi’s business, we became a customer. In April, The Times set up a test account on Twitter and paid Devumi $225 for 25,000 followers, or about a penny each. As advertised, the first 10,000 or so looked like real people. They had pictures and full names, hometowns and often authentic-seeming biographies. One account looked like that of Ms. Rychly, the young Minnesota woman.But on closer inspection, some of the details seemed off. The account names had extra letters or underscores, or easy-to-miss substitutions, like a lowercase “L” in place of an uppercase “I.”Devumi claims to use its own “private network of hand-picked real and active Twitter users and influencers”. In reality, it sells bots with stolen profiles. Here are the details that give them away.By Richard Harris and Danny DeBeliusThe next 15,000 followers from Devumi were more obviously suspect: no profile pictures, and jumbles of letters, numbers and word fragments instead of names.In August, a Times reporter emailed Mr. Calas, asking if he would answer questions about Devumi. Mr. Calas did not respond. Twitter  forbids selling or buying followers or retweets, and Devumi promises customers absolute discretion. “Your info is always kept confidential,” the company’s website reads. “Our followers look like any other followers and are always delivered naturally. The only way anyone will know is if you tell them.”But company records reviewed by The Times revealed much of what Devumi and its customers prefer to conceal.Most of Devumi’s best-known buyers are selling products, services or themselves on social media. In interviews, their explanations varied. They bought followers because they were curious about how it worked, or felt pressure to generate high follower counts for themselves or their customers. “Everyone does it,” said the actress Deirdre Lovejoy, a Devumi customer.While some said they believed Devumi was supplying real potential fans or customers, others acknowledged that they knew or suspected they were getting fake accounts. Several said they regretted their purchases.“It’s fraud,” said James Cracknell, a British rower and Olympic gold medalist who bought 50,000 followers from Devumi. “People who judge by how many likes or how many followers, it’s not a healthy thing.”Ms. Ireland has over a million followers on Twitter, which she often uses to promote companies with whom she has endorsement deals. The Wisconsin-based American Family Insurance, for example, said that the former model was one of its most influential Twitter “brand ambassadors,” celebrities who are paid to help promote products.But in January last year, Ms. Ireland had only about 160,000 followers. The next month, an employee at the branding agency she owns, Sterling/Winters, spent about $2,000 for 300,000 more followers, according to Devumi records. The employee later made more purchases, he acknowledged in an interview. Much of Ms. Ireland’s Twitter following appears to consist of bots, a Times analysis found.A spokeswoman said that the employee had acted without Ms. Ireland’s authorization and had been suspended after The Times asked about the purchases. “I’m sure he thought he was fulfilling his duties, but it’s not something he should have done,” said the spokeswoman, Rona Menashe.Similarly, Ms. Lane Fox, a British e-commerce pioneer, member of Parliament and Twitter board member, blamed a “rogue employee” for a series of follower purchases spanning more than a year. She declined to name the person.Several Devumi customers or their representatives contacted by The Times declined to comment, among them Mr. Leguizamo, whose followers were bought by an associate. Many more did not respond to repeated efforts to contact them.A few denied making Devumi purchases. They include Ashley Knight, Mr. Lewis’s personal assistant, whose email address was listed on an order for 250,000 followers, and Eric Kaplan, a friend to Mr. Trump and motivational speaker whose personal email address was associated with eight orders. A Twitter account belonging to Paul Hollywood, the celebrity baker, was deleted after The Times emailed him with questions. Mr. Hollywood then sent a reply: “Account does not exist.”Many of these celebrities, business leaders, sports stars and other Twitter users bought their own followers, records show. In other cases, the purchases were made by their employees, agents, family members or other associates.By Richard Harris and Danny DeBeliusOver two years, the Democratic public relations consultant and CNN contributor Hilary Rosen bought more than a half-million fake followers from Devumi. Ms. Rosen previously spent more than a decade as head of the Recording Industry Association of America. In an interview, she described the purchases as “an experiment I did several years ago to see how it worked.” She made more than a dozen purchases of followers from 2015 to 2017, according to company records.Other buyers said they had faced pressure from employers to generate social media followers. Marcus Holmlund, a young freelance writer, was at first thrilled when Wilhelmina, the international modeling agency, hired him to manage its social media efforts. But when Wilhelmina’s Twitter following didn’t grow fast enough, Mr. Holmlund said, a supervisor told him to buy followers or find another job. In 2015, despite misgivings, he began making monthly Devumi purchases out of his own pocket.“I felt stuck with the threat of being fired, or worse, never working in fashion again,” said Mr. Holmlund, who left in late 2015. “Since then, I tell anyone and everyone who ever asks that it’s a total scam — it won’t boost their engagement.” (A Wilhelmina spokeswoman declined to comment.)Several Devumi customers acknowledged that they bought bots because their careers had come to depend, in part, on the appearance of social media influence. “No one will take you seriously if you don’t have a noteworthy presence,” said Jason Schenker, an economist who specializes in economic forecasting and has purchased at least 260,000 followers.Not surprisingly, Devumi has sold millions of followers and retweets to entertainers on the lower and middle rungs of Hollywood, such as the actor Ryan Hurst, a star of the television series “Sons of Anarchy.” In 2016 and 2017, he bought a total of 750,000 followers, about three-quarters of his current count. It cost less than $4,000, according to company records. Mr. Hurst did not respond to multiple requests for comment.Devumi also sells bots to reality television stars, who can parlay fame into endorsement and appearance fees. Sonja Morgan, a cast member on the Bravo show “The Real Housewives of New York City,” uses her Devumi-boosted Twitter feed to promote her fashion line, a shopping app and a website that sells personalized “video shout-outs.” One former “American Idol” contestant, Clay Aiken, even paid Devumi to spread a grievance: his customer service complaint against Volvo. Devumi bots retweeted his complaint 5,000 times.Mr. Aiken and Ms. Morgan did not respond to requests for comment.More than a hundred self-described influencers — whose market value is even more directly linked to their follower counts on social media — have purchased Twitter followers from Devumi. Justin Blau, a popular Las Vegas-based D.J. who performs as 3LAU, acquired 50,000 followers and thousands of retweets. In an email, Mr. Blau said a former member of his management team bought them without his approval.At least five Devumi influencer customers are also contractors for HelloSociety, an influencer agency owned by The New York Times Company. (A Times spokeswoman said the company sought to verify that the audience of each contractor was legitimate and would not do business with anyone who violated that standard.) Lucas Peterson, a freelance journalist who writes a travel column for The Times, also bought followers from Devumi.Influencers need not be well known to rake in endorsement money. According to a recent profile in the British tabloid The Sun, two young siblings, Arabella and Jaadin Daho, earn a combined $100,000 a year as influencers, working with brands such as Amazon, Disney, Louis Vuitton and Nintendo. Arabella, who is 14, tweets under the name Amazing Arabella.But her Twitter account — and her brother’s — are boosted by thousands of retweets purchased by their mother and manager, Shadia Daho, according to Devumi records. Ms. Daho did not respond to repeated attempts to reach her by email and through a public relations firm.While Devumi sells millions of followers directly to celebrities and influencers, its customers also include marketing and public relations agencies, which buy followers for their own customers. Phil Pallen, a brand strategist based in Los Angeles, offers customers “growth & ad campaigns” on social media. At least a dozen times, company records show, Mr. Pallen has paid Devumi to deliver those results. Beginning in 2014, for example, he purchased tens of thousands of followers for Lori Greiner, the inventor and “Shark Tank” co-host.Mr. Pallen at first denied buying those followers. After The Times contacted Ms. Greiner, Mr. Pallen said he had “experimented” with the company but “stopped using it long ago.” A lawyer for Ms. Greiner said she had asked him to stop after learning of the first purchases.Still, records show, Mr. Pallen bought Ms. Greiner more Devumi followers in 2016.Marketing consultants sometimes buy followers for themselves, too, in effect purchasing the evidence of their supposed expertise. In 2015, Jeetendr Sehdev, a former adjunct professor at the University of Southern California who calls himself “the world’s leading celebrity branding authority,” began buying hundreds of thousands of fake followers from Devumi.He did not respond to requests for comment. But in his recent best-selling book, “The Kim Kardashian Principle: Why Shameless Sells,” he had a different explanation for his rising follower count. “My social media following exploded,” Mr. Sehdev claimed, because he had discovered the true secret to celebrity influence: “Authenticity is the key.”Among the followers delivered to Mr. Sehdev was Ms. Rychly — or at least, a copy of her. The fake Rychly account, created in 2014, was included in the purchase orders of hundreds of Devumi customers. It was retweeted by Mr. Schenker, the economist, and Arabella Daho, the teenage influencer. Clive Standen, star of the show “Taken,” ended up with Ms. Rychly’s stolen social identity. So did the television baker Mr. Hollywood, the French entertainer DJ Snake and Ms. Ireland. (DJ Snake’s followers were purchased by a former manager, and Mr. Standen did not respond to requests for comment.)The fake Ms. Rychly also retweeted at least five accounts linked to a prolific American pornographer named Dan Leal, who is based in Hungary and tweets as @PornoDan. Mr. Leal, who has bought at least 150,000 followers from Devumi in recent years, is one of at least dozens of customers who work in the adult film industry or as escorts, according to a review of Devumi records.In an email, Mr. Leal said that buying followers for his business generated more than enough new revenue to pay for the expense. He was not worried about being penalized by Twitter, Mr. Leal said. “Countless public figures, companies, music acts, etc. purchase followers,” he wrote. “If Twitter was to purge everyone who did so there would be hardly any of them on it.”Devumi has sold at least tens of thousands of similar high-quality bots, a Times analysis found. In some cases, a single real Twitter user was transformed into hundreds of different bots, each a minute variation on the original.Individually, fake accounts are hard to detect. Study their group behaviour, and incriminating patterns begin to emerge.By Richard Harris and Mark HansenThese fake accounts borrowed social identities from Twitter users in every American state and dozens of countries, from adults and minors alike, from highly active users and those who hadn’t logged in to their accounts for months or years.Sam Dodd, a college student and aspiring filmmaker, set up his Twitter account as a high school sophomore in Maryland. Before he even graduated, his Twitter details were copied onto a bot account.The fake account remained dormant until last year, when it suddenly began retweeting Devumi customers continuously. This summer, the fake Mr. Dodd promoted various pornographic accounts, including Mr. Leal’s Immoral Productions, as well as a link to a gambling website.“I don’t know why they’d take my identity — I’m a 20-year-old college student,” Mr. Dodd said. “I’m not well known.” But even unknown, Mr. Dodd’s social identity has value in the influence economy. At prices posted in December, Devumi was selling high-quality followers for under two cents each. Sold to about 2,000 customers — the rough number that many Devumi bot accounts follow — his social identity could bring Devumi around $30.The stolen social identities of Twitter users like Mr. Dodd are critical to Devumi’s brand. The high-quality bots are usually delivered to customers first, followed by millions of cheaper, low-quality bots, like sawdust mixed in with grated Parmesan.Some of Devumi’s high-quality bots, in effect, replace an idle Twitter account — belonging to someone who stopped using the service — with a fake one. Whitney Wolfe, an executive assistant who lives in Florida, opened a Twitter account in 2008, when she was a wedding planner. By the time she stopped using it regularly in 2014, a fake account copying her personal information had been created. In recent months, it has retweeted adult film actresses, several influencers and an escort turned memoirist.“The content — pictures of women in thongs, pictures of women’s chests — it’s not anything I want to be represented with my faith, my name, where I live,” said Ms. Wolfe, who is active in her local Southern Baptist congregation.Other victims were still active on Twitter when Devumi-sold bots began impersonating them. Salle Ingle, a 40-year-old engineer who lives in Colorado, said she worried that a potential employer would come across the fake version of her while vetting her social media accounts.“I’ve been applying for new jobs, and I’m really grateful that no one saw this account and thought it was me,” Ms. Ingle said. Once contacted by The Times, Ms. Ingle reported the account to Twitter, which deactivated it.After emailing Mr. Calas last year, a Times reporter visited Devumi’s Manhattan address, listed on its website. The building has dozens of tenants, including a medical clinic and a labor union. But Devumi and its parent company, Bytion, do not appear to be among them. A spokesman for the building’s owner said neither Devumi nor Bytion had ever rented space there.Like the followers Devumi sold, the office was an illusion.In real life, Devumi is based in a small office suite above a Mexican restaurant in West Palm Beach, Fla., overlooking an alley crowded with Dumpsters and parked cars. Mr. Calas lives a short commute away, in a penthouse apartment.On his LinkedIn profile, Mr. Calas is described as a “serial entrepreneur,” with a long record in the tech business and an advanced degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. But Mr. Calas’s persona, too, is a mixture of fact and fantasy.Mr. Calas, who is 27, grew up in South Florida, where as a teenager he learned web design and built sites for local businesses, according to earlier versions of his personal web page available on the Internet Archive.Eventually he taught himself techniques for search engine optimization — the art of pushing a web page higher in search results. While in high school, he began taking classes at Palm Beach State College, where he earned an associate degree in 2012, according to a school spokeswoman. Within a few years, Mr. Calas was claiming to have built dozens of online businesses serving 10 million customers, now under the Bytion umbrella.“I started this company with a thousand dollars in the bank, without investors, and only the burning passion for success,” Mr. Calas wrote last year on the job-listing site Glassdoor.As Mr. Calas’s ambitions grew, so did his embroidery. A copy of his résumé posted online in 2014 claimed that he earned a physics degree from Princeton University in 2000, when he would have been about 10 years old, and a Ph.D. in computer science from M.I.T. Representatives for both schools said they had no record of Mr. Calas’s attending their institution. His current LinkedIn page says that he has a master’s degree in “international business” from M.I.T., a degree it does not offer.According to former employees interviewed by The Times, turnover was high at Devumi, and Mr. Calas kept his operation tightly compartmentalized. Employees sometimes had little idea what their colleagues were doing, even if they were working on the same project.The ex-employees asked for anonymity for fear of lawsuits or because they were subject to nondisclosure agreements with Mr. Calas’s companies. But their comments are echoed in reviews on Glassdoor, where some former employees said that Mr. Calas was uncommunicative and demanded that they install monitoring software on their personal devices.Dozens of Devumi’s customer service and order fulfillment personnel are based in the Philippines, according to company records. Employing overseas contractors may have helped Mr. Calas hold down costs. But it also appears to have left him vulnerable to a kind of social identity theft himself.Last August, Mr. Calas sued Ronwaldo Boado, a Filipino contractor who previously worked for Devumi as an assistant customer support manager. After being fired for squabbling with other members of his team, Mr. Boado took control of a Devumi email account listing more than 170,000 customer orders, Mr. Calas alleged in court papers. Then Mr. Boado created a fake Devumi. (Some details of the lawsuit and of Devumi were previously reported by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism.)His copycat company used a similar name — DevumiBoost — and copied the design of Devumi’s website, Mr. Calas alleged. The fake Devumi even listed the same phantom Manhattan address. Over a stretch of days last July, Mr. Boado, posing as a Devumi employee, emailed hundreds of Devumi customers to inform them that their orders needed to be reprocessed on DevumiBoost. Then he impersonated the customers, too, emailing Devumi under different aliases to ask that Devumi cancel the original orders. Mr. Boado, according to Mr. Calas, was trying to steal his customers. (Mr. Boado did not respond to emails seeking a response to Mr. Calas’s claims.)Mr. Calas’s lawsuit also revealed something else: Devumi doesn’t appear to make its own bots. Instead, the company buys them wholesale — from a thriving global market of fake social media accounts.Scattered around the web is an array of obscure websites where anonymous bot makers around the world connect with retailers like Devumi. While individual customers can buy from some of these bare-boned sites — Peakerr, CheapPanel and YTbot, among others — they are less user-friendly. Some, for example, do not accept credit cards, only cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin.But each site sells followers, likes and shares in bulk, for a variety of social media platforms and in different languages. The accounts they sell may change hands repeatedly. The same account may even be available from more than one seller.Devumi, according to one former employee, sourced bots from different bot makers depending on price, quality and reliability. On Peakerr, for example, 1,000 high-quality, English-language bots with photos costs a little more than a dollar. Devumi charges $17 for the same quantity.The price difference has allowed Mr. Calas to build a small fortune, according to company records. In just a few years, Devumi sold about 200 million Twitter followers to at least 39,000 customers, accounting for a third of more than $6 million in sales during that period.Last month, Mr. Calas asked for examples of bots The Times found that copied real users. After receiving the names of 10 accounts, Mr. Calas, who had agreed to an interview, asked for more time to analyze them. Then he stopped responding to emails.Ms. Binns, the Twitter spokeswoman, said the company did not proactively review accounts to see if they were impersonating other users. Instead, the company’s efforts are focused on identifying and suspending accounts that violate Twitter’s spam policies. In December, for example, the company identified an average of 6.4 million suspicious accounts each week, she said.All of the sample accounts provided by The Times violated Twitter’s anti-spam policies and were shut down, Ms. Binns said. “We take the action of suspending an account from the platform very seriously,” she said. “At the same time, we want to aggressively fight spam on the platform.”The company also suspended Devumi’s account on Saturday after the Times article was published online.Yet Twitter has not imposed seemingly simple safeguards that would help throttle bot manufacturers, such as requiring anyone signing up for a new account to pass an anti-spam test, as many commercial sites do. As a result, Twitter now hosts vast swaths of unused accounts, including what are probably dormant accounts controlled by bot makers.Former employees said the company’s security team for many years was more focused on abuse by real users, including racist and sexist content and orchestrated harassment campaigns. Only recently, they said, after revelations that Russia-aligned hackers had deployed networks of Twitter bots to spread divisive content and junk news, has Twitter turned more attention to weeding out fake accounts.Leslie Miley, an engineer who worked on security and user safety at Twitter before leaving in late 2015, said, “Twitter as a social network was designed with almost no accountability.”Some critics believe Twitter has a business incentive against weeding out bots too aggressively. Over the past two years, the company has struggled to generate the user growth seen by rivals like Facebook and Snapchat. And outside researchers have disputed the company’s estimates for how many of its active users are actually bots.Small design changes over a number of years has placed an increasingly greater focus on user engagement with replies, retweets and likes in Twitter’s timeline.By Richard Harris and Danny DeBelius“We’re working with completely unregulated, closed ecosystems that aren’t reporting on these things. They have a perverse incentive to let it happen,” said Mr. Essaid, the cybersecurity expert. “They want to police it to the extent it doesn’t seem obvious, but they make money off it.”In January, after almost two years of promoting hundreds of Devumi customers, the fake Jessica Rychly account was finally flagged by Twitter’s security algorithms. It was recently suspended.But the real Ms. Rychly may soon leave Twitter for good.“I am probably just going to delete my Twitter account,” she said.Reporting was contributed by Manuela Andreoni, Jeremy Ashkenas, Laurent Bastien Corbeil, Nic Dias, Elise Hansen, Michael Keller, Manuel Villa and Felipe Villamor. Research was contributed by Susan C. Beachy, Doris Burke and Alain Delaquérière.Design and development by Danny DeBelius and Richard Harris. Art direction by Antonio De Luca and Jason Fujikuni. Illustration photo credits: Ireland, Rodin Eckenroth/Getty Images; Lewis, D Dipasupil/FilmMagic; Leguizamo, Amanda Edwards/WireImage, via Getty Images; Ingle, Morgan Rachel Levy for The New York Times.Jan. 31, 2018Jan. 27, 2018Sept. 27, 2017Sept. 7, 2017Design and development by Danny DeBelius and Richard Harris. Art direction by Antonio De Luca and Jason Fujikuni. Illustration photo credits: Ireland, Rodin Eckenroth/Getty Images; Lewis, D Dipasupil/FilmMagic; Leguizamo, Amanda Edwards/WireImage, via Getty Images; Ingle, Morgan Rachel Levy for The New York Times.AdvertisementBy NATHANIEL POPPERJAN. 21, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Creating a new Bitcoin requires electricity. A lot of it.In the virtual currency world this creation process is called “mining.” There is no physical digging, since Bitcoins are purely digital. But the computer power needed to create each digital token consumes at least as much electricity as the average American household burns through in two years, according to figures from Morgan Stanley and Alex de Vries, an economist who tracks energy use in the industry.The total network of computers plugged into the Bitcoin network consumes as much energy each day as some medium-size countries — which country depends on whose estimates you believe. And the network supporting Ethereum, the second-most valuable virtual currency, gobbles up another country’s worth of electricity each day.The energy consumption of these systems has risen as the prices of virtual currencies have skyrocketed, leading to a vigorous debate among Bitcoin and Ethereum enthusiasts about burning so much electricity.The creator of Ethereum, Vitalik Buterin, is leading an experiment with a more energy-efficient way to create tokens, in part because of his concern about the impact that the network’s electricity use could have on global warming.Advertisement“I would personally feel very unhappy if my main contribution to the world was adding Cyprus’s worth of electricity consumption to global warming,” Mr. Buterin said in an interview.AdvertisementBut many virtual currency aficionados argue that the energy consumption is worth it for the grander cause of securing the Bitcoin and Ethereum networks and making a new kind of financial infrastructure, free from the meddling of banks or governments.“The electricity usage is really essential,” said Peter Van Valkenburgh, the director of research at Coin Center, a group that advocates for virtual currency technology. “Because of the costs, we know the only people participating are serious, that they are economically invested. That creates the incentives for cooperation.”This dispute has its foundations in the complex systems that produce tokens like Bitcoin; Ether, the currency on the Ethereum network; and many other new virtual currencies.All of the computers trying to mine tokens are in a computational race, trying to find a particular, somewhat random answer to a math algorithm. The algorithm is so complicated that the only way to find the desired answer is to make lots of different guesses. The more guesses a computer makes, the better its chances of winning. But each time the computers try new guesses, they use computational power and electricity.The lure of new Bitcoins encourages people to use lots of fast computers, and lots of electricity, to find the right answer and unlock the new Bitcoins that are distributed every 10 minutes or so.This process was defined by the original Bitcoin software, released in 2009. The goal was to distribute new coins to people on the Bitcoin network without a central institution handing out the money.Early on, it was possible to win the contest with just a laptop computer. But the rules of the network dictate that as more computers join in the race, the algorithm automatically adjusts to get harder, requiring anyone who wants to compete to use more computers and more electricity.AdvertisementThese days, the 12.5 Bitcoins that are handed out every 10 minutes or so are worth about $145,000, so people have been willing to invest astronomical sums to participate in this race, which has in turn made the race harder. This explains why there are now enormous server farms around the world dedicated to mining Bitcoin.This process is central to Bitcoin’s existence because in the process of mining, all the computers are also serving as accountants for the Bitcoin network. The algorithm the computers solve requires them to also keep track of all the new transactions coming onto the network.The mining race is meant to be hard so that no one can dominate the accounting and fudge the records. In the 2008 paper that first described Bitcoin, the mysterious creator of the virtual currency, Satoshi Nakamoto, wrote that the system was designed to thwart a “greedy attacker” who might want to alter the records and “defraud people by stealing back his payments.” Because of the mining and accounting rules, the attacker “ought to find it more profitable to play by the rules.”The rules have kept attackers at bay in the nine years since the network got going. Without this process, most computer scientists agree, Bitcoin would not work.But there is disagreement over the real value of Bitcoin and the network that supports it.For people who consider Bitcoin nothing more than a speculative bubble — or a speculative bubble that has enabled online drug sales and ransom payments — any new contribution toward global warming is probably not worth it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Bitcoin aficionados counter that it has allowed for the creation of the first financial network with no government or company in charge. In countries like Zimbabwe and Argentina, Bitcoin has sometimes provided a more stable place to park money than the local currency. And in countries with more stable economies, Bitcoin has led to a flurry of new investments, jobs and start-up companies.“Labeling Bitcoin mining as a ‘waste’ is a failure to look at the big picture,” Marc Bevand, a miner and analyst, wrote on his blog. The jobs alone, he added, “are a direct, measurable and positive impact that Bitcoin already made on the economy.”But even some people who are interested in all that innovation have worried about the enormous electrical use.Mr. de Vries, who keeps track of the use on the site Digiconomist, estimated that each Bitcoin transaction currently required 80,000 times more electricity to process than each Visa credit card transaction, for example.Advertisement“Visa is more centralized,” Mr. de Vries said. “If you really distrust the financial system, maybe that is unattractive. But is that difference really worth the additional energy cost? I think for most people that is probably not worth the case.”The figures published by Mr. de Vries have been criticized by Mr. Bevand and other Bitcoin fans, who say they overstate the energy costs by a factor of about three. Many critics add that producing and securing physical money and gold also require lots of energy, in some cases as much as or more than Bitcoin uses.Mr. Van Valkenburgh, of the Coin Center, has argued that Bitcoin miners, who can do the work anywhere, have an incentive to situate themselves near cheap, often green energy sources, especially now that coal-guzzling China appears to be exiting the mining business. Several mining companies have opened server farms near geothermal energy in Iceland and hydroelectric power in Washington State.But the concerns about electricity use have still hit home with many in the industry. The virtual currencies known as Ripple and Stellar, which were created after Bitcoin, were designed not to require electrically demanding mining.Perhaps the biggest change could come from the new mining process proposed by Mr. Buterin for Ethereum, a process that some smaller currencies are already using. Known as “proof of stake,” it distributes new coins to people who are able to prove their ownership of existing coins — their stake in the system. The current method, which relies so heavily on computational power, is called “proof of work.” Under that method, the accounts and people who get new coins don’t need existing tokens. They just need lots of computers to take part in the computational race.Energy concerns are not the only factor encouraging the move. Mr. Buterin also believes that the new method, which is likely to be rolled out over the next year, will allow for a less centralized network of computers overseeing the system.But it is far from clear that the method will be as secure as the one used by Bitcoin. Mr. Buterin has been fiercely attacked by Bitcoin advocates, who say his proposal will lose the qualities that make virtual currencies valuable.Mr. Van Valkenburgh said that for now, throwing lots of computing power into the mix — and the electricity that it burns — was the only proven solution to the problems Bitcoin solves.“At the moment, if you want robust security, you need proof of work,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Powering Bitcoin.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATHANIEL POPPER and NELLIE BOWLESJAN. 17, 2018
JAN. 17, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The air has been swiftly leaking out of the virtual currency bubble.A decline in virtual currency prices that began before Christmas has picked up pace in recent days as concern has grown that governments could crack down on the new industry.For a time on Wednesday, the price of Bitcoin dipped below $10,000 — taking it down to about half what it was at its peak last month.Currently, the average price of one Bitcoin is about $, according to Blockchain.info, a news and data site.
    Other virtual currencies have been falling even faster. Ripple, which was briefly second in value after Bitcoin, has lost more than two-thirds of its value from the high it hit early this month.The falling prices have been serious enough to prompt online posts with suicide hotlines for virtual currency investors in despair.AdvertisementThe declines are likely to be particularly painful for people who took out debt to buy virtual currencies at high prices. Even the lows hit on Wednesday are still well up — some 1,000 percent — from where Bitcoin began 2017. But that is little comfort for the people who purchased late last year.AdvertisementOne person on Reddit wrote about persuading family members to buy digital tokens late in 2017 and regretting it.“Fast forward to today,” the user, going by the screen name PM_ME_UR_ROOM_VIEW, wrote. “I opened my phone and I find a barrage of messages from them accusing me of scamming them and tricking them into crypto because they lost money, I tried to explain to them that this is normal and it will bounce back soon and it’s just a correction and don’t sell but they aren’t listening.”For skeptics of virtual currencies, the falling prices have provided some vindication.“Most people are buying Bitcoin, not because of a belief in its future as a global currency, but because they expect it to rise in value,” a note from economists at Capital Economics said on Wednesday. “Accordingly, it has all the hallmarks of a classic speculative bubble, which we expect to burst.”The pessimism in recent days has been fed by several reports that governments around the world were planning to tighten the reins on virtual currency trading.South Korean officials have said they were contemplating shutting down the virtual currency exchanges that have popped up over the past year. South Korea has seen the most frenzied surge of ordinary investors throwing their savings into Bitcoin and other digital tokens.The Chinese government has already shut down exchanges in China, but it was recently reported to be taking even further measures against new forms of online trading as well as Bitcoin mining operations in the country.Regulators in the United States have continued to crack down on smaller virtual currencies like Bitconnect, which has been described as a Ponzi scheme by many in the industry.AdvertisementBitcoin, which began in 2009, has been through these sorts of wild swings before. The price spiked in late 2013 to above $1,000, before moves by the Chinese government sent the price sliding. It was only last year that the price again recovered to the same levels.Since that recovery, an array of virtual currencies have been on a nearly uninterrupted tear. With Bitcoin, investors have been betting that it could be a new kind of asset, outside the control of any government, something like digital gold.Investors have also been putting money into newer virtual currencies like Ethereum and Ripple, which were designed to do more sophisticated types of transactions than Bitcoin.The excitement has been amplified by hedge funds that were created in the last year to invest in virtual currencies and by Wall Street institutions that have expressed an interest.But investments in these new tokens have far outstripped their real-world use in the types of transactions for which they are intended. Ripple, for example, is supposed to help financial institutions transfer money across international borders. But only a few institutions have said they are using the currency, known as XRP, for that purpose.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some longtime virtual currency investors have said that a major price pullback was necessary after the hype had gotten so far ahead of the reality.“This is the ecosystem purging the ‘easy money’ crowd that arrived in past couple months,” Spencer Bogart, a partner with the hedge fund Blockchain Capital, wrote on Twitter.Prominent individual investors echoed that sentiment. “I usually recommend people to buy during dips like these if they were hesitant to enter the market before because you can get in on a discount,” said James Spediacci, who with his brother Julian runs an investment club for virtual currency investors.Monica Quaintance, lead engineer at a company working on technology related to digital currencies and an organizer of events for women interested in them, said investors should expect price volatility until there is strong government regulation. “People want to know that if they make a lot of money from Bitcoin they’re going to be able to keep the money,” Ms. Quaintance said.But for those less enamored of the technology, the declines are viewed as the beginning of an even steeper fall.Advertisement“The latest price falls suggest that the bubble is bursting — although with prices still ten times higher than a year ago, they have a lot further to fall yet,” Capital Economics wrote.Follow Nathaniel Popper and Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @nathanielpopper and @NellieBowlesA version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bitcoin Price Declines as Virtual Currency Bubble Deflates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
JAN. 17, 2018
It’s not Apple’s fault that you feel enslaved by your phone. But the company that gave the world the modern smartphone has a perfect opportunity this year to create a brave and groundbreaking new take on that device: a phone that encourages you to use it more thoughtfully, more deliberately — and a lot less.Tech “addiction” is a topic of rising national concern. I put the A-word in quotes because the precise pull that our phones exert over us isn’t the same as that of drugs or alcohol. The issue isn’t really new, either; researchers who study how we use digital technology have for years been warning of its potential negative effects on our cognition, psyche and well-being.What is new is who has joined the ranks of the worried. Recently, a parade of tech luminaries, including several former Facebook employees, have argued that we’re no match for the sophisticated machinery of engagement and persuasion being built into smartphone apps. Their fears are manifold: They’re worried about distraction, productivity, how social networks alter our emotional lives and relationships, and what they’re doing to children.It’s hard to know what to make of these confessions of regret. Come on, guys — you gave us these wondrous machines, you made billions of dollars from their ubiquity, and now you tell us they’re bad?AdvertisementAlso, what do we do about it?Like air pollution or intrusive online advertising, tech addiction is a collective-action problem caused by misaligned incentives. Companies that make money from your attention — that is, ad-supported apps like Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and YouTube — now employ armies of people who work with supercomputers to hook you ever more deeply into their services. Sure, we should call on them to act more ethically — and Facebook, for its part, has said it’s willing to lose money to improve its users’ well-being — but I’m skeptical they’ll be able to suppress their economic interests.AdvertisementGovernment regulation and more restraint from users might also help, but the former is unlikely and the latter is insufficient. So who’s left?The same company that always seems to turn up when it’s time to cross into a new era of technology: Apple.I got to thinking about Apple’s responsibility last week when two large investors wrote an open letter asking the company to do more about its products’ effects on children. I was initially inclined to dismiss the letter as a publicity stunt; if you’re worried about children and tech, why not go after Facebook?But when I called several experts, I found they agreed with the investors. Sure, they said, Apple isn’t responsible for the excesses of the digital ad business, but it does have a moral responsibility to — and a business interest in — the well-being of its customers.And there’s another, more important reason for Apple to take on tech addiction: because it would probably do an elegant job of addressing the problem.“I do think this is their time to step up,” said Tristan Harris, a former design ethicist at Google who now runs Time Well Spent, an organization working to improve technology’s impact on society.“In fact,” Mr. Harris added, “they may be our only hope.”For one thing, Apple’s business model does not depend on tech addiction. The company makes most of its money by selling premium devices at high profit margins. Yes, it needs to make sure you find your phone useful enough to buy the next one, but after you purchase your phone and sign up for some of its premium services, Apple doesn’t really need you to overdo it. Indeed, because it can’t make infinite battery life, Apple would probably be O.K. if you cooled it with your phone a little.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet even though Apple is not part of the ad business, it exerts lots of control over it. Every tech company needs a presence on the iPhone or iPad; this means that Apple can set the rules for everyone. With a single update to its operating system and its app store, Apple could curb some of the worst excesses in how apps monitor and notify you to keep you hooked (as it has done, for instance, by allowing ad blockers in its mobile devices). And because other smartphone makers tend to copy Apple’s best inventions, whatever it did to curb our dependence on our phones would be widely emulated.AdvertisementMr. Harris suggested several ideas for Apple to make a less-addictive smartphone. For starters, Apple could give people a lot more feedback about how they’re using their devices.Imagine if, once a week, your phone gave you a report on how you spent your time, similar to how your activity tracker tells you how sedentary you were last week. It could also needle you: “Farhad, you spent half your week scrolling through Twitter. Do you really feel proud of that?” It could offer to help: “If I notice you spending too much time on Snapchat next week, would you like me to remind you?”Another idea is to let you impose more fine-grained controls over notifications. Today, when you let an app send you mobile alerts, it’s usually an all-or-nothing proposition — you say yes to letting it buzz you, and suddenly it’s buzzing you all the time.Mr. Harris suggested that Apple could require apps to assign a kind of priority level to their notifications. “Let’s say you had three notification levels — heavy users, regular users and lite, or Zen,” Mr. Harris said.Apple could set rules for what kind of notifications were allowed in each bucket — for instance, the medium bucket might allow notifications generated by other people (like a direct message in Instagram) but not those from the app itself (Instagram just sending you an alert to remind you that your high school friend’s mom’s brother posted a new picture recently).“And then Apple could say, by default, everyone is in the middle level — and instantly it could save a ton of users a ton of energy in dealing with this,” Mr. Harris said.There’s a danger that some of these anti-addiction efforts could get too intrusive. But that’s also why Apple would shine here; building a less-addictive phone is chiefly a problem of interface design, which is basically Apple’s entire corporate raison d’être.AdvertisementAnother thing that Apple is good at is marketing, and I suspect it could make a lot of gauzy ads showing people getting more out of iPhones and iPads by unplugging from them for a little while. Note that it already sells a device, the Apple Watch, whose marketing extols the magic of leaving your phone behind.Done right, a full-fledged campaign pushing the benefits of a more deliberative approach to tech wouldn’t come off as self-interest, but in keeping with Apple’s best vision of itself — as a company that looks out for the interests of humanity in an otherwise cold and sometimes inhumane industry.“How we live with technology is the cultural issue of the next half-century,” said James Steyer, the founder and chief executive of Common Sense Media, a nonprofit group that studies how children are affected by media.He suggested that the feeling was ripe for Apple to tap into. “It’s something that everyone cares about — whether you’re a Republican or a Democrat, liberal or conservative, whether you live in San Francisco or Biloxi, Miss., you know that you and your kids are part of the arms race for attention,” he said.Apple released a statement last week saying it cared deeply “about how our products are used and the impact they have on users and the people around them,” adding that it had a few features on addiction in the works.Apple hardly ever talks about future products, so it declined to elaborate on any of its ideas when I called. Let’s hope it’s working on something grand.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjooA version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: It’s Time for a Lot Less iPhone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NICOLE PERLROTHJAN. 18, 2018
Lebanon’s internal intelligence agency appears to have been caught spying on thousands of people — including journalists and military personnel — in more than 20 countries, according to researchers at the Electronic Frontier Foundation and Lookout, a mobile security company.The spy operation, revealed on Thursday, is among dozens around the world uncovered by human rights groups and technical organizations in recent years as governments and intelligence agencies have started relying more on mobile and desktop spyware than on traditional forms of cloak-and-dagger espionage.The researchers found what they said was evidence that Lebanon’s intelligence agency — called General Directorate of General Security, or GDGS — spied on their targets’ Android mobile devices and desktop computers using various methods for more than six years. Their primary attack method, researchers said, was through a series of decoy Android apps designed to look like widely used private, secure messaging services such as WhatsApp and Signal.Once downloaded, the apps allowed spies to steal nearly everything off their victims’ phones, including text messages with one-time passcodes for accessing email and other services, as well as contact lists, call logs, browsing history, audio recordings and photos. The apps also let the spies take photos using the phone’s front or back camera, and turned the device into a silent microphone to capture audio. The apps were not designed to target Apple iPhone users.Advertisement“One of the main takeaways from this investigation is that actors, like Dark Caracal, are shifting away from a pure desktop capability for espionage to now relying heavily on mobile tools to gather their intelligence,” said Michael Flossman, a security analyst at Lookout, referring to the name that he and other researchers coined for the Lebanese spies they said were most likely responsible for the espionage.AdvertisementGDGS is Lebanon’s main internal intelligence agency, and its director, Maj. Gen. Abbas Ibrahim, a career army general, has a rising profile and a broadening portfolio. The agency oversees residency permits for foreigners, from diplomats and tens of thousands of Southeast Asian domestic workers to more than a million Syrian refugees. The agency’s expertise and clout has traditionally been seen as stemming from its human intelligence, not from high-tech espionage techniques.Speaking ahead of the report’s publication, General Ibrahim told Reuters: “General Security does not have these type of capabilities. We wish we had these capabilities.” GDGS did not return a call for comment on Thursday.Researchers at the Electronic Frontier Foundation and Lookout began collaborating to uncover what they believed was a likely nation state spy campaign in 2016. That year, the Electronic Frontier Foundation released a report documenting a spy campaign against journalists and activists who had been critical of the authorities in Kazakhstan. The campaign included technology used to spy on Android users. Lookout, which focuses on mobile device security, offered to help.Together, researchers tracked the spying to command and control servers operated by the attackers. The researchers looked at who had registered the servers and when, as well as the dates of some of the stolen content. They deduced that the campaign had been going on for as long as six years.The attackers were targeting journalists and activists, as well as government officials, military personnel, financial institutions, defense contractors and others in 21 countries. Those countries included the United States, China, Germany, India, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Korea and inside Lebanon.The researchers traced the attacks to a building in Beirut that houses Lebanon’s GDGS, using Wi-Fi networks and so-called internet protocol addresses assigned to attackers’ machines. While researchers said they could not be sure whether the attacks were the work of the GDGS or rogue employees, many of the attacks appeared tied to an email address — op13@mail.com — that had been linked to various online personas, including “Nancy Razzouk” and “Rami Jabbour.” All of the physical addresses listed with registrations made by that email account were clustered around the GDGS building in Beirut, according to the user’s wireless activity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Emails sent to that email address were not returned.As part of their work, researchers found evidence that Lebanese spies were directing victims to install the spy apps through WhatsApp messages that began innocuously with a “How are you?” Those then linked to the spy apps with additional messages like “You can download from here to communicate further.”In other cases, the spies found their targets on Facebook, inviting them to Facebook groups, where they posted links to their decoy apps, which they often referred to by names like “WhatsApp plus.” The spies also directed victims to fake login sites for social media services like Twitter and Facebook to steal their credentials, hijack their accounts and push out trick messages to more people.AdvertisementResearchers also found evidence that Lebanese officials had previously used FinFisher, a product manufactured by the British company Gamma International, which sells surveillance tools that let customers turn computers and phones into listening devices to monitor a target’s messages, calls and whereabouts. Increasingly, researchers discovered that the spies had built their own custom mobile spy tools that were less sophisticated than FinFisher but as effective in getting the intelligence they were after.Martin J. Muench, the managing director of Gamma International, has told The New York Times that his company only sells surveillance tools to governments for criminal and terrorism investigations. The Times has covered several instances in which Mr. Muench’s tools have popped up on devices used by journalists and activists. Gamma Group did not respond to a request for comment on Thursday.Researchers also uncovered evidence that Lebanese officials deployed several variants of malware to victims’ desktop machines; the malware was designed to work across several operating systems, including Microsoft Windows, Apple’s Mac and Linux. That malware could steal screenshots of victims’ computer screens, use the victim’s webcam to spy on their physical whereabouts, record sound, grab photos and any Skype activity, file listings and files, and even iPhone backups.In the hours after researchers published their report on Thursday, the servers conducting the spying went dark.Anne Barnard contributed reporting.Follow Nicole Perlroth on Twitter: @nicoleperlrothA version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2018, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Lebanese Agency Turned Android Phones Into Spy Devices, Researchers Say.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and NICK WINGFIELDJAN. 15, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — These days, you can find virtual assistants like Amazon’s Alexa or Google’s Assistant in all sorts of things, from smart speakers and smartphones to washing machines and bathroom mirrors.The challenge isn’t finding these digitized helpers, it is finding people who use them to do much more than they could with the old clock/radio in the bedroom.A management consulting firm recently looked at heavy users of virtual assistants, defined as people who use one more than three times a day. The firm, called Activate, found that the majority of these users turned to virtual assistants to play music, get the weather, set a timer or ask questions.Activate also found that the majority of Alexa users had never used more than the basic apps that come with the device, although Amazon said its data suggested that four out of five registered Alexa customers have used at least one of the more than 30,000 “skills” — third-party apps that tap into Alexa’s voice controls to accomplish tasks — it makes available.AdvertisementBut while some hard-core fans are indeed tapping into advanced features of virtual assistants, like controlling the lights in their homes, for the most part, “people are still using these speakers for very routine tasks,” said Michael J. Wolf, the founder of Activate. “It’s not clear that there is something that’s going to drive people to use these.”AdvertisementApple popularized the virtual assistant concept in 2011 when it introduced technology called Siri in its iPhones. About three years later, Amazon debuted the Echo, a speaker packed with microphones to capture and decipher what we’re saying to Alexa. Soon, various technology companies were betting that speaking to machines through virtual assistants would be an essential way for consumers to interact with devices and services in the future.There is a reason tech companies think virtual assistants are so important: They want to control an indispensable “platform” — a crucial piece of technology other services or devices must rely upon.Some believe virtual assistant technology can be that sort of platform, and the company with the most useful assistant will gain an advantage for their other services — like internet search or online shopping. Lose that competition, however, and a company could be at the mercy of its rivals.With those stakes in mind, tech giants have been scrambling to make their assistants omnipresent. Since smart speakers are the main way for people to deal with virtual assistants, Amazon and Google stoked holiday sales with heavy discounts, dropping the price of their entry-level models to $30, from $50. At the same time, tech companies have been putting their assistants inside products of all shapes and sizes.Before last week’s International CES tech conference in Las Vegas, Amazon announced a string of new Alexa partnerships. Hisense will put the assistant into its television sets, while Kohler said a new bathroom mirror will have built-in microphones so people can use Alexa to dim the lights and fill a bathtub using voice commands. PC makers like HP, Asus and Acer said they were integrating Alexa into their computers, while Panasonic, Garmin and other electronics makers will do the same for devices that go into cars.Amazon also announced an agreement with Toyota to integrate Alexa into some Toyota and Lexus vehicles. Ditto for a new smoke alarm from First Alert. Google said LG Televisions, headphones from Sony and smart displays from Lenovo will tap into its Assistant.For now, consumers’ satisfaction with their smart speakers — and by extension, the onboard assistants — is helped in part by the fact they didn’t pay a lot to get them into their homes.AdvertisementJustin Hosseininejad, an engineering consultant from Medina, Ohio, said he bought his first Amazon Echo Dot for $50 last year and got a second one free a few months ago with another internet-connected device, the Nest thermostat. He uses them to listen to news in the morning and play music throughout the day. He recognizes that he’s not asking Alexa to do a lot, but considering how little he paid, he is fine with that.“There’s only certain things I use it for, but I’m happy with it,” he said. “I’m not doing my taxes with it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Paul Erickson, a senior analyst at the research firm IHS Markit, said the next step for these devices will be to become the hub of a connected home, controlling internet-connected lights, thermostats and other basic home appliances.“The more interesting functionality is yet to come,” Mr. Erickson said. “Part of that will come as more integration happens this year and next year. This is the first year we’re going to see real advances with the assistants because of competition in the marketplace.”Competitors of Google and Amazon are also spreading their assistants far and wide. Apple now has Siri running across its universe of devices, along with an upcoming smart speaker called HomePod. Samsung has its own assistant, Bixby, available in its phones and televisions, and Microsoft has Cortana as a feature built into its Windows software.Amazon has turned its Echo family of products and the Alexa assistant that powers them into the unlikeliest of success stories — although it is hard to say exactly how successful because it shrouds its disclosures about devices sales in fuzzy language.Amazon would say only that it sold “tens of millions” of Alexa devices during the recent holiday season, millions more than the same period last year. Analysts estimate that Echo accounts for over 70 percent of sales in the smart speaker category, with Google a distant second.Google was also coy about revealing exact sales of Google Home. In a statement on Jan. 5, Google announced it has sold one Google Home smart speaker every second since it started shipping a smaller version of voice-controlled device on October 19 — or about 79 days. That works out to roughly seven million units.In the 20 months since it first started making the Google Assistant available as part of its Allo messaging app, Google said its Assistant is now accessible on more than 400 million devices including washing machines, dryers, air-conditioners, refrigerators and dishwashers from LG, headphones from Bose and a range of speakers from 15 different companies.AdvertisementGoogle said the Assistant can now accomplish more than one million tasks, or “actions,” such as asking for photos from Halloween or adding events to a calendar. It created a directory — searchable, of course — to highlight these capabilities, hoping to remind users that the Assistant can do more than set a timer.There are signs that some consumers are starting to recognize the value of virtual assistants even if they aren’t interested in smart speakers. Mr. Hosseininejad’s friend Stephen Melik, also an engineer from Ohio, said he uses Siri on his Apple Watch and iPhone to control his lights and power switches. But the notion of a stand-alone smart speaker that remains in one place doesn’t make sense to him.“I’ve always viewed these smart speakers as a solution searching for a problem,” he said. “But the voice assistants, potentially there are a lot of benefits to it.”A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Sure, They Help You. Is Your Relationship Destined for More?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CECILIA KANGJAN. 16, 2018
WASHINGTON — The legal fight against the Federal Communications Commission’s recent repeal of so-called net neutrality regulations began on Tuesday, with a flurry of lawsuits filed to block the agency’s action.One suit, filed by 21 state attorneys general, said the agency’s actions broke federal law. The commission’s rollback of net neutrality rules were “arbitrary and capricious,” the attorneys general said, and a reversal of the agency’s longstanding policy to prevent internet service providers from blocking or charging websites for faster delivery of content to consumers.Mozilla, the nonprofit organization behind the Firefox web browser, said the new F.C.C. rules would harm internet entrepreneurs who could be forced to pay fees for faster delivery of their content and services to consumers. A similar argument was made by another group that filed a suit, the Open Technology Institute, a part of a liberal think tank, the New America Foundation.Suits were also filed on Tuesday by Free Press and Public Knowledge, two public interest groups. Four of the suits were filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. The Free Press suit was filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.Advertisement“The repeal of net neutrality would turn internet service providers into gatekeepers — allowing them to put profits over consumers while controlling what we see, what we do, and what we say online,” said Eric T. Schneiderman, the attorney general of New York, who led the suit by the state officials.AdvertisementThe lawsuits have long been expected. The filings on Tuesday, petitions to begin the suits, kick off what is expected to be an extended legal and political debate about the future of internet policy.Democrats have rallied to fight the F.C.C.’s repeal of net neutrality, which was passed in a 3-to-2 party line vote in December. The agency is led by Ajit Pai, a Republican nominated by President Trump. All of the attorneys general involved in the suit filed on Tuesday are Democrats.The lawsuits have the support of the Internet Association, a trade group representing big tech firms including Google and Netflix, giving the various legal challenges financial support and the clout of companies. The companies say internet service providers have the incentive to block and throttle their sites in order to garner extra fees.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The F.C.C. declined to comment on the suits. But it did point to a part of its order that prohibits legal challenges until the new rules are submitted into the federal registry. The F.C.C. is expected to enter the new rules into the federal registry in the coming days or weeks.The states said they could file a petition to the United States Court of Appeals, starting the process to determine which court would hear the case. That is the action the attorneys general, as well as Mozilla and the Open Technology Institute, took on Tuesday.The states that signed onto the lawsuit include California, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts and Oregon, as well as the District of Columbia. Xavier Becerra, the California attorney general, said the decision to roll back the agency’s declaration of broadband as a utility-like service will harm consumers.“Internet access is a utility — just like water and electricity,” Mr. Becerra said in a statement. “And every consumer has a right to access online content without interference or manipulation by their internet service provider.”AdvertisementIn a release, Mr. Schneiderman said the agency’s roll back disregarded a record of evidence that internet service providers’ could harm consumers without rules. A similar argument was made by Mozilla.“Ending net neutrality could end the internet as we know it,” said Denelle Dixon, Mozilla’s chief business and legal officer in a blog post. “That’s why we are committed to fighting the order. In particular, we filed our petition today because we believe the recent F.C.C. decision violates both federal law as well as harms internet users and innovators.”The issue of net neutrality has been fought in court challenges twice before in the past decade. The rules adopted in 2015, which set rules that sites could not be blocked or throttled, were upheld by the United States Court of Appeals in 2016 after legal challenges by telecom companies. The F.C.C. vote in December was to roll back those 2015 rules.The new lawsuits are among several efforts to restore net neutrality rules. On Tuesday, Senate Democrats announced they were one supporter away from winning a vote to restore net neutrality rules. All 49 members of their caucus, as well as one Republican, have signed on to a resolution to overturn the rules. A similar effort initiated in the House has the support of 80 members.Success by members of Congress is unlikely, particularly in the House, where Speaker Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, would have to agree to bring the resolution to a vote. The president will also have to agree to the resolutions, if they were passed, but the White House has expressed its support of the rollback of net neutrality rules.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Flurry of Lawsuits Filed in Net Neutrality Fight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.The e-commerce giant announced a short list of places that could become home to its second headquarters. The process has garnered the kind of enthusiasm normally reserved for bids to host the Olympics.Outside an Amazon building in Seattle.CreditElaine Thompson/Associated PressSupported byAmazon’s hunt for a second headquarters, after several months of publicity stunts and dangled perks from cities and regions vying to lure the e-commerce giant, has been narrowed to 20 options from 238 bids. The company, which is based in Seattle, plans to invest $5 billion in development and create up to 50,000 jobs wherever it builds its newest hub. Among its criteria: more than one million residents, proximity to an airport, manageable commutes, diverse demographics, connectivity and local schools churning out potential employees.With the kind of enthusiasm normally reserved for bids to host the Olympics, governors, mayors, business leaders and others have pulled together proposals promoting the potential of their cities and regions, sometimes going to outlandish lengths. These are the places that caught Amazon’s attention. By Mitch SmithPopulation: 472,000 in the city and 5.7 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: Georgia Tech, Emory University, Georgia State University, and Morehouse and Spelman Colleges are in the city. The University of Georgia is about 70 miles away.Transit: The airport is, by some metrics, the largest in the world. There are rail and streetcar systems, but most residents depend on the sprawling network of interstates. Atlanta’s traffic jams are notorious.Perks: Gov. Nathan Deal said he would call a special legislative session to work out an incentives deal if a location in Georgia was among the final three contenders.By Mitch SmithPopulation: 947,000 in the city and two million in the metropolitan area.Schools: The University of Texas’ flagship campus, which enrolls more than 51,000 students, is in the city. St. Edward’s University, a Roman Catholic institution, is also in Austin.Transit: Austin’s airport has flights to most major American cities and to Europe. The city also has a commuter rail line, but most people use cars to get around. Perks: “I still not have heard any conversations about offering incentives,” Mayor Steve Adler said at a Thursday news conference. He said there needed to be “a very open and transparent community conversation about Amazon and all these related issues.”By Tiffany HsuPopulation: 673,000 in the city and 4.8 million in the metropolitan area, according to census data from 2016.Schools: The caliber of local schools is impressive, including Harvard University, Boston University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Tufts University.Transit: Logan International Airport is 15 minutes from Boston’s financial district. Amtrak trains make dozens of trips between Boston, New York and Washington each weekday. And a third of Boston residents take public transportation to work, according to the city’s bid. Perks: The proposal does not promise any specific financial incentives to help reel in Amazon. But Worcester, which is roughly an hour away from Boston, has pledged $500 million in property tax breaks spread over 20 years, according to The Boston Globe.Other: Boston’s bid pointed to the more than 150 robotics companies in the area, the 3,200 people working in robotics jobs and the $200 million in private investments garnered by the field in the last year. By Tiffany HsuPopulation: 2.7 million people in the city and 9.5 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: The Chicago area is home to Northwestern, the University of Chicago and the Illinois Institute of Technology.Transit: Chicago has some of the nation’s worst traffic. But officials boast that its extensive subway and commuter rail system runs far more efficiently than networks in many major cities. O’Hare International Airport is one of the busiest airports in the world; Midway International Airport is another sizable hub.Perks: Chicago promised roughly $2 billion in tax incentives and infrastructure spending, and $250 million for work force training, according to The Chicago Tribune. Officials identified 10 potential downtown, urban and suburban sites for Amazon’s facilities. Other: The city’s association with violence — it led the nation in murders with 765 in 2016 — coexists alongside a cultural scene that features some of the most celebrated food and art in the country.By Kirk JohnsonPopulation: Two million in the metropolitan area.Schools: Ohio State University is the big wheel in town, with more than 66,000 students, but smaller schools abound.Transit: The city beat out 77 competitors to win federal funding in 2016 to plan and build what the Department of Transportation’s Smart Cities Challenge project.Perks: The city’s bid was created by Columbus 2020, the regional economic-development arm for an 11-county region, which has released few specifics.By Mitch SmithPopulation: 1.3 million in the city and 7.2 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: Southern Methodist University, home to George W. Bush’s presidential library, is in Dallas, and Texas Christian University is in nearby Fort Worth. The University of Texas has campuses in the suburbs of Richardson and Arlington.Transit: The airport is one of the country’s busiest, but public transit fares poorly when compared with systems in other large cities. A high-speed rail line to Houston is in the works.Perks: The city has not released details, but Mayor Mike Rawlings said in an interview Thursday that he believed local and state “incentives are going to be an important part of this.” He said the city was waiting to hear more from Amazon about the next steps.By Tiffany HsuPopulation: 693,000 in the city and 2.9 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: Amazon could draw from Regis University, the University of Denver, the University of Colorado and other schools. The Colorado School of Mines in nearby Golden is known for its engineering and applied sciences work.Transit: Denver International Airport has the third-largest domestic air service network in the country, according to a copy of the city’s bid obtained by The Denver Post. The region has added some 122 miles of commuter lines, light rail and bus services in the last 15 years. Perks: If Amazon chooses a city or county in Colorado, it could potentially have access to more than $100 million in incentives, pulled from a state fund set up to recruit large employers and from a tax credit to encourage job growth, according to The Denver Post.Other: Denver, with its reputation for progressive politics and outdoor activities, is popular with millennials. Google, Twitter, Oracle and IBM all have offices in Denver or in nearby Boulder. By Kirk JohnsonPopulation: 855,164 in the city and two million in the metropolitan area.Schools: The city can claim the University of Indianapolis, Butler University and Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis.Transit: Getting around has meant mostly driving. But in 2016, voters approved a local income tax increase to fund transit improvements including a big expansion of bus service.Perks: The city’s bid was put together by the Indy Chamber, an economic development group, in conjunction Indianapolis and Fishers, a nearby city, but few details have emerged.By Kirk JohnsonPopulation: Four million in the city and 13.1 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: The University of California, Los Angeles, proclaims the city’s name in its brand, but higher education also abounds at California State University Los Angeles and private schools like Loyola Marymount University and International American University.Transit: Los Angeles defined the modern idea of long-distance commuting through a haze of car-exhaust smog, but is now building one of the most ambitious and expensive transit systems in the nation, funded by a 0.5 percent local sales tax approved by voters in 2016.Perks: The city’s bid was formulated in conjunction with Los Angeles County, and has largely been kept secret for what a spokesman for Mayor Eric M. Garcetti said were competitive reasons. Gov. Jerry Brown also offered Amazon an incentive package on behalf of the state, including tax credits and a pledge to support the streamlining of permits, approvals and regulations.By Patricia MazzeiPopulation: Six million in Miami-Dade, Broward and Palm Beach Counties, which submitted a joint application to Amazon.Schools: The University of Miami is the best-known school in the region, which is also home to Florida International University in western Miami-Dade, Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton and several other institutions.Transit: Miami International, one of three airports in the South Florida region, leads the nation in international cargo service. But Miami also suffers from dreadful traffic. A new express train connecting Miami to Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach might offer some congestion relief.Perks: The region has kept its application secret, but it proposed eight sites to Amazon: five in Miami-Dade, two in Broward and one in Palm Beach.Other: Some local officials have been openly skeptical of Miami’s chances, citing the limited public transportation system.By Patricia MazzeiPopulation: One million.Schools: The University of Maryland’s main campus is just over the county line in Prince George’s County. Johns Hopkins University is an hour drive away in Baltimore, and several other schools are even closer.Transit: Montgomery County, home to the northern Washington suburbs of Bethesda and Silver Spring, is near three major airports and on the Metro system, where a new purple line extending service is under construction.Perks: Montgomery County has not made its bid public, but it promoted a 60-acre site near a Metro stop.By Mitch SmithPopulation: 684,000 in the city and 1.8 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: Nashville is home to several private universities, including Vanderbilt, Lipscomb and Belmont. Tennessee State University, a historically black institution, is also in Nashville. Transit: City leaders have urged a swift expansion of the public transportation system, which is less expansive than those in many other finalist cities.Perks: City officials declined to comment on incentives.By Patricia MazzeiPopulation: 282,000.Schools: Rutgers University’s main campus is a 40-minute drive away, and Newark has a satellite campus. Princeton University is about an hour away. And New York — 30 minutes away on the PATH train — is home to numerous universities.Transit: New Jersey Transit serves the city. The PATH train links Newark to New York’s subway system. And the Northeast Corridor is connected on Amtrak. The proposed Amazon site is near Newark Liberty International Airport, which is also a FedEx hub.Perks: New Jersey offered Amazon about $5 billion in tax breaks over a decade if it creates 30,000 jobs and makes $3 billion in capital investments, under legislation signed by Gov. Chris Christie before he left office. Newark, New Jersey’s largest city, put up additional property-tax abatements and a payroll-tax break, together worth up to $2 billion. By Patricia MazzeiPopulation: 8.5 million.Schools: The city says it’s home to 105 “institutions of higher learning,” including major universities like Columbia University, New York University, the City University of New York and the State University of New York.Transit: Few people want to drive, but the subway system — for all of its problems — is extensive, as are the bus and commuter rail options. Public transit is available into the three major international airports, Kennedy, LaGuardia and Newark Liberty.Perks: New York did not offer special subsidies or tax breaks beyond the ones available to any company. It listed four possible neighborhoods for the headquarters: the West Side of Manhattan, Lower Manhattan, Long Island City in Queens and the Brooklyn Tech Triangle, which includes Downtown, Dumbo and Brooklyn Navy Yard. Other: The city tops a study of cities best able to meet Amazon’s requirements, compiled by Anderson Economic Group, with Chicago secondBy Patricia MazzeiPopulation: 1.8 million in Arlington, Fairfax and Loudoun Counties.Schools: George Mason University is in Fairfax, with a number of other universities nearby. The University of Virginia, Richmond University and Virginia Commonwealth University are two-hour drives away.Transit: Northern Virginia boasts two major airports, Ronald Reagan Washington National and Washington Dulles. Driving on and around the Beltway can be horrendous, but commuters can also take the Metro subway system and the Virginia Railway Express, a suburban commuter rail system.Perks: Northern Virginia’s proposal included four potential sites, one each in Alexandria, Arlington County, Fairfax County and Loudoun County.By Tiffany HsuPopulation: 1.6 million in the city and 6.1 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: The employee pipeline to Amazon could come from the University of Pennsylvania, Temple University, Drexel University and other local campuses.Transit: Philadelphia has hundreds of miles of bike lanes with an extensive bike-sharing network. The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority is the fifth-largest transit system in the country. Perks: Settling down in Philadelphia (or Pittsburgh) could net Amazon more than $1 billion in tax incentives.Other: On its bid website, Philadelphia pitched itself as an affordable option for Amazon employees. The cost of living in the city is 18 percent lower than it is in Seattle, where median home prices are nearly twice as high.By Tiffany HsuPopulation: 304,000 in the city and 2.3 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: Potential breeding grounds for future employees include Carnegie Mellon University, the University of Pittsburgh and Duquesne University.Transit: The Pittsburgh International Airport lost thousands of jobs and hundreds of flights when a US Airways hub shut down in 2004, but nonstop destinations have nearly doubled in the last two years, with a $1 billion modernization plan set to kick off in 2019. Perks: More than $1 billion in public aid from the state, according to The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.Other: Known for its arts scene and food boom, Pittsburgh is also developing a reputation as a tech hub. Uber has tested autonomous vehicles on the city’s streets, though the experiments have caused some conflict. Duolingo, a popular language app, is based there. Apple, Google and Facebook also have offices in the area.By Mitch SmithPopulation: 458,000 in the city and 1.3 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: Raleigh is home to North Carolina State University and is within a half-hour drive of Durham’s Duke University and Chapel Hill’s flagship campus of the University of North Carolina.Transit: The airport serves a handful of international destinations, and voters recently approved a transportation tax to improve roads. There is bus service but no commuter rail.Perks: City officials declined to discuss incentives.By Tiffany HsuPopulation: 2.7 million in the city and 6.2 million in the metropolitan area, according to Canadian census data from 2016.Schools: The University of Toronto and the University of Waterloo are considered two of the best engineering schools in Canada; York University is also a highly regarded institution.Transit: It is possible to fly from Toronto’s Pearson or Billy Bishop airport to Boston, Chicago, New York and Washington within 90 minutes. Perks: No billion-dollar subsidies here, only reasonable incentives, according to a report from CBC.Other: Google last year opened an artificial intelligence lab in the city, which is considered one of the places on the cutting edge of A.I. research. (One of Google’s corporate siblings has bigger ambitions there.) Toronto’s official proposal stresses its embrace of immigrants, noting that 51 percent of the city’s residents come from outside Canada.By Patricia MazzeiPopulation: 681,170 in the city and 6.1 million in the metropolitan area.Schools: Georgetown University, George Washington University, Howard University and American University are among the schools in the district.Transit: Navigating Beltway traffic is challenging, but the Metro system, despite declines in service and ridership, makes it possible to get around the city and to Ronald Reagan Washington National and Washington Dulles Airports. Perks: Washington offered Amazon a zero-percent corporate tax rate for five years, and an exemption from state sales taxes on hardware and software, according to records obtained by WAMU, a public radio station. The city proposed four neighborhoods as Amazon locations: the Anacostia River around Nationals Park and the new D.C. United soccer stadium; behind Union Station; south of R.F.K. Stadium; and around the U Street and Shaw neighborhoods.Other: Amazon’s founder, Jeff Bezos, who owns The Washington Post, bought the city’s biggest mansion in 2016, for $23 million in cash.Zach Wichter contributed reporting.AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and NELLIE BOWLESJAN. 8, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — James Damore was  fired from his engineering job at Google last year after he wrote a memo that criticized the company’s diversity efforts and argued that the low number of women in engineering positions was a result of biological differences.Now he is suing his former employer for workplace discrimination, claiming that Google is biased against white men with conservative views.The lawsuit, filed Monday by Mr. Damore and another former Google employee with California Superior Court of Santa Clara County, also claims that the company uses illegal quotas in order to hire women and minorities.The two men “were ostracized, belittled and punished for their heterodox political views, and for the added sin of their birth circumstances of being Caucasians and/or males,” Harmeet K. Dhillon from the Dhillon Law Group, the lead attorney for the plaintiffs, said in the lawsuit. “Google’s open hostility for conservative thought is paired with invidious discrimination on the basis of race and gender.”Silicon Valley, often considered a bastion for liberal thinking, has been wrestling with how to deal with the culture wars that have reverberated throughout the country. At the same time, technology firms are trying to address the shortage of women and minorities in their ranks.Those issues are coming to a head at Google, one of the richest and largest technology companies in the world. Google is also fighting a pay discrimination lawsuit brought by four women who worked at the company. The women claim that Google systematically pays women less than men to do the same jobs.Mr. Damore’s memo last year argued that biological differences — citing greater levels of anxiety among women, and a lower tolerance for stress — helped explain why there were fewer women in key engineering positions and leadership roles at Google. His writing sparked outrage at the company and across Silicon Valley for rationalizing the pay and opportunity gap at technology companies.Join a deep and provocative exploration of race with a diverse group of New York Times journalists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Damore’s dismissal became a rallying point for conservatives who saw technology companies as workplaces dominated by groupthink. Ms. Dhillon, the lawyer who brought the suit, is a committeewoman for California in the Republican National Committee.Google did not provide immediate comment about the lawsuit. Sundar Pichai, the company’s chief executive, said in the past that Mr. Damore’s memo had violated the company’s code of conduct because it advanced “harmful gender stereotypes in our workplace.”A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Author of Memo on Gender Sues Google, Claiming Bias.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Disruptions By                     
 NELLIE BOWLES
 
JAN. 12, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — I’ve gone gray, and it’s great.In an effort to break my smartphone addiction, I’ve joined a small group of people turning their phone screens to grayscale — cutting out the colors and going with a range of shades from white to black. First popularized by the tech ethicist Tristan Harris, the goal of sticking to shades of gray is to make the glittering screen a little less stimulating.I’ve been gray for a couple days, and it’s remarkable how well it has eased my twitchy phone checking, suggesting that one way to break phone attachment may be to, essentially, make my phone a little worse. We’re simple animals, excited by bright colors, it turns out.Silicon Valley companies like Facebook and Google know this, and they have increasingly been turning to the field of applied neuroscience to see how exactly brains respond to color in the apps, what brings pleasure and what keeps the eye. New research shows how important color is to our understanding of priorities and emotion.But not everyone wants to be so enamored with their screen. This week, two major investors asked Apple to figure out how to help parents limit their children’s use of iPhones and iPads, citing concerns over  “long-term health.” There’s also a growing movement among some early tech employees warning against the products they’ve built. And many consumers are starting to wonder what this is all doing to our minds.AdvertisementMack McKelvey, the chief executive of the marketing firm SalientMG in Washington, D.C., said she’s aware of the tricks phones use to keep you on them longer — and coming back sooner.“You don’t buy black-and-white cereal boxes, you buy the really stimulating colored one, and these apps have developed really cool tiles, cool shapes, cool colors, all designed to stimulate you,” Ms. McKelvey said. “But there’s a vibrant world out there, and my phone shouldn’t be it.”She decided to make the switch to gray as well. But it was trickier than she expected.“It took like 40 minutes to figure it out. They buried the setting,” she said. “You have to really want to do it.” (If you want to try, here are some tips.)AdvertisementOne person Facebook and others turn to is Thomas Z. Ramsoy, the chief executive of Neurons, a four-year-old company based in Copenhagen. His business uses brain scans and eye tracking technology to study apps, updates and future technology. The company often measures the electrical activity of the brain while a consumer is interacting with a phone, such as texting and scrolling Facebook.The goal, Mr. Ramsoy said, is usually for a product to inspire happy emotions and draw attention without freaking a consumer out. For the past year, he said, Facebook has been its largest client, publicizing some of the research. “There is so much business now, we pinch ourselves,” he said.“Color and shape, these are the icebreakers when it comes to grabbing people’s attention, and attention is the new currency,” he said. “Having an interface that grabs people’s attention without disturbing them in the wrong way, without consciously intruding in their space, that’s the fine line.”What going grayscale does, Mr. Ramsoy said, is reintroduce choice.Companies use colors to encourage subconscious decisions, Mr. Ramsoy said. (So that, for example, I may want to open email, but I’ll end up on Instagram, having seen its colorful button.) Making the phone gray eliminates that manipulation. Mr. Ramsoy said it reintroduces “controlled attention.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s a very good idea,” he said. “You have to take away the sound as well.”One way Silicon Valley could help ease phone addiction is by using a more thoughtful color palette, said Bevil Conway, an investigator at the National Eye Institute, who researches color and emotion.“Color’s not a signal for detecting objects, it’s actually something much more fundamental: It’s for telling us what’s likely to be important,” Mr. Conway said. “If you have lots of color and contrast then you’re under a constant state of attentional recruitment. Your attentional system is constantly going, ‘Look look look over here.’ ”The same way people think about a color scheme when they’re planning the living room décor, Mr. Conway said, they should think about color when it comes to their phone’s home screen too.“If you had a color palette, you would end up with a phone that looked pleasant and was not addictively rewarding, that had some intentionality, but of course nobody wants you to do that,” he said. “Because what they want is for you to look.”Silicon Valley is in a battle for our attention, and often I feel like the last person in charge of my own eyes. After going to grayscale, I’m not a different person all of a sudden, but I feel more in control of my phone, which now looks like a tool rather than a toy. If I unlock it to write an email, I’m a little less likely to forget the goal and tap on Instagram. If I’m waiting in line for coffee, this gray slab is not as delightful a distraction as it once was.AdvertisementThe switch made me realize, in a tangible way, that I still have a little choice here.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2018, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Going Gray to Help Kick the Smartphone Habit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Farhad ManjooEach week, Farhad Manjoo, technology columnist at The New York Times, reviews the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Hello, readers! Usually in this space, my colleague Mike Isaac and I chat about the week’s tech news. But Mike is now fixing to become a big-time author. For the next few months, he’ll be out on book leave, which leaves me free to run this show on my own!Strap in. Let’s talk about some of the big stories in tech this week.It’s that time of the year — CES! The world’s largest technology convention is again taking place in Las Vegas, bringing thousands of nerds to see some really cool stuff that will probably never be released.I kid, but that’s generally how this goes. CES used to be cool for all the new stuff companies unveiled there, but then it got so crowded that it didn’t make sense to put out your product in the torrent of announcements. Now the biggest companies skip the event, so we’re left with a lot of strange news from unheard-of companies.I didn’t attend this year, but from what I gathered from the coverage (including this fun report by my colleague Brian X. Chen), CES is full of robotic pets, luggage that drives itself, and lots and lots and lots of voice assistants for everything you can imagine. If you’d love to see a cavernous room full of talking refrigerators, this is the show for you. Also, there was a huge power failure on Wednesday. Fun!We should probably get used to such slim pickings at CES. As I’ve been saying for a while now, traditional “gadgets” seem to be dying. We saw more evidence of that trend this week when GoPro, the extreme-camera company, lowered its revenue forecast, shut down its effort to build a drone, laid off 20 percent of its staff and said it would be open to a sale.More and more gadgets, now, are really run off services or content in the cloud — Amazon’s Alexa, for instance, or the fitness videos created by Peloton, the fitness start-up I wrote about this week.On the other hand: When the self-driving suitcase is perfected, I’m buying one.When President Trump tweeted a threat of nuclear war against North Korea this month, it at the very least seemed to constitute a threat of violence that might violate Twitter’s terms of service. The company has lately been trying to crack down on abusive accounts. So some people on Twitter started to wonder, would the company possibly decide that Mr. Trump had crossed the line?Oh, no, not at all. On Monday, Twitter said the tweets of world leaders got special deference from the company; world leaders can now essentially say anything on Twitter. “Blocking a world leader from Twitter or removing their controversial tweets would hide important information people should be able to see and debate,” it said.I don’t think anyone is surprised by this. And I saw some good arguments for allowing the president to stay on Twitter. As Will Oremus at Slate argued, barring Mr. Trump from the site is a “misguided fantasy” that wouldn’t really stop the underlying problem of his saying things that many people consider outrageous.Still, I do think there’s something to the argument that Twitter — by its very nature a platform meant for people to yell things at the news, usually without nuance — encourages the sort of reflexive communication that we probably don’t want in our world leaders.Sure, if Twitter barred him, he could always just go on TV and say what he had planned to tweet. But that would be slower and less automatic, and perhaps — I’m going out on a limb here — he might not blurt out threats of nuclear war.We’re still seeing fallout from Meltdown and Spectre, the two big computer chip flaws that were announced last week. Intel said this week that its fixes for the two flaws would slow computers down by single-digit percentages; the exact performance hit depends on what you’re doing on your machine.This is a small slowdown, but it’s not insignificant. After all, people buy new computers for speed, so being hit with a slowdown after you’ve already purchased the thing is going to make lots of customers seethe.There’s a bigger story here: When technology is found to be insecure, many companies evade any great degree of responsibility for the problems. As Nathaniel Fick, chief executive of the security company Endgame, wrote in The Times, “Cybersecurity today is being treated like accounting was before the fallout from the Enron scandal.” There are few lasting repercussions for flaws, and after a time everything goes back to normal. Equifax, for example, has already partly recovered after its massive breach.Unless the government steps in with stricter penalties, this system seems headed for catastrophe. Everything is interconnected now; it’s only a matter of time until there’s a hack big enough to cause widespread social and economic disruption. We should probably do something about that, maybe?Finally, in a late-breaking update, Facebook said on Thursday that it would be making huge changes to make you feel less terrible about using the service. It’s an unusual goal for a tech company — Facebook plans to alter its News Feed to increase your interactions with friends and family and reduce how many posts you see from brands and publishers, all in an attempt to make the service more “meaningful” for users.The move could have wide repercussions for media outlets — which depend on Facebook for traffic — and potentially for Facebook’s own bottom line. But as with all Facebook product changes, it will probably be months before we know how the move plays out. One thing is for sure: Initially, you’re bound to hate it, because that’s just how it goes with anything new online.O.K., that’s it for now. Tune in next week for another Mike-free newsletter. Bye!Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. You can follow him on Twitter here: @fmanjoo.AdvertisementBy NICK WINGFIELDJAN. 12, 2018
SEATTLE — Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, on Friday injected himself into one of the most contentious political debates in the United States, announcing that he and his wife had donated $33 million to a college scholarship program geared toward young immigrants brought to the country illegally as children.Mr. Bezos and his wife, MacKenzie, gave the money to the nonprofit Dream.US. The group said the donation, the largest in its history, would finance scholarships for 1,000 high school graduates who have been allowed to stay in the United States under  the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, known as DACA.The roughly 800,000 so-called Dreamers affected by the program face an uncertain future after President Trump said last year that he planned to end the protections.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Uncertainty continued to swirl around the program this week, with a federal judge ruling that the Trump administration must maintain it as a legal fight over the president’s decision proceeds and Mr. Trump sending mixed signals about his willingness to strike a deal with Congress that would offer Dreamers a path to citizenship.AdvertisementMr. Trump has regularly criticized Mr. Bezos, both for his role at Amazon and for his ownership of The Washington Post, which he bought in 2013. Mr. Trump has accused Amazon of sidestepping taxes and The Post of covering him unfairly.AdvertisementDon Graham, the publisher of The Post when Mr. Bezos bought the paper, is a founder of Dream.US.Mr. Bezos said in a statement that the donation was inspired by the example of his father, Miguel, who came to the United States from Cuba in the early 1960s as part of a wave of thousands of unaccompanied minors.“My dad came to the U.S. when he was 16 as part of Operation Pedro Pan,” Mr. Bezos said in the statement. “He landed in this country alone and unable to speak English. With a lot of grit and determination, and the help of some remarkable organizations in Delaware, my dad became an outstanding citizen, and he continues to give back to the country that he feels blessed him in so many ways. MacKenzie and I are honored to be able to help today’s Dreamers by funding these scholarships.”Mr. Bezos is not the first wealthy technology executive to donate to Dream.US. Two years ago, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, and his wife, Priscilla Chan, gave the group $5 million.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: With Gift, Bezos Enters ‘Dreamer’ Fight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Cade MetzSAN FRANCISCO — For years, tech industry financiers showed little interest in start-up companies that made computer chips.How on earth could a start-up compete with a goliath like Intel, which made the chips that ran more than 80 percent of the world’s personal computers? Even in the areas where Intel didn’t dominate, like smartphones and gaming devices, there were companies like Qualcomm and Nvidia that could squash an upstart.But then came the tech industry’s latest big thing — artificial intelligence. A.I., it turned out, works better with new kinds of computer chips. Suddenly, venture capitalists forgot all those forbidding roadblocks to success for a young chip company.Today, at least 45 start-ups are working on chips that can power tasks like speech and self-driving cars, and at least five of them have raised more than $100 million from investors. Venture capitalists invested more than $1.5 billion in chip start-ups last year, nearly doubling the investments made two years ago, according to the research firm CB Insights.The explosion is akin to the sudden proliferation of PC and hard-drive makers in the 1980s. While these are small companies, and not all will survive, they have the power to fuel a period of rapid technological change.It is doubtful that any of the companies fantasize about challenging Intel head-on with their own chip factories, which can take billions of dollars to build. (The start-ups contract with other companies to make their chips.) But in designing chips that can provide the particular kind of computing power needed by machines learning how to do more and more things, these start-ups are racing toward one of two goals: Find a profitable niche or get acquired. Fast.“Machine learning and A.I. has reopened questions around how to build computers,” said Bill Coughran, who helped oversee the global infrastructure at Google for several years and is now a partner at Sequoia, the Silicon Valley venture capital firm. Sequoia has invested in Graphcore, a British start-up that recently joined the $100 million club.By the summer of 2016, the change was apparent. Google, Microsoft and other internet giants were building apps that could instantly identify faces in photos and recognize commands spoken into smartphones by using algorithms, known as neural networks, that can learn tasks by identifying patterns in large amounts of data.Nvidia was best known for making graphics processing units, or G.P.U.s, which were designed to help render complex images for games and other software — and it turned out they worked really well for neural networks, too. Nvidia sold $143 million in chips for the massive computer data centers run by companies like Google in the year leading up to that summer — double the year before.Intel scrambled to catch up. It acquired Nervana, a 50-employee Silicon Valley start-up that had started building an A.I. chip from scratch, for $400 million, according to a report from the tech news site Recode.After that, a second Silicon Valley start-up, Cerebras, grabbed five Nervana engineers as it, too, designed a chip just for A.I.By early 2018, according to a report by Forbes, Cerebras had raised more than $100 million in funding. So had four other firms: Graphcore; another Silicon Valley outfit, Wave Computing; and two Beijing companies, Horizon Robotics and Cambricon, which is backed by the Chinese government.Raising money in 2015 and early 2016 was a nightmare, said Mike Henry, chief executive at the A.I. chip start-up Mythic. But “with the big, aquisition-hungry tech companies all barreling toward semiconductors,” that has changed, he said.China has shown a particular interest in developing new A.I. chips. A third Beijing chip start-up, DeePhi, has raised $40 million, and the country’s Ministry of Science and Technology has explicitly called for the production of Chinese chips that challenge Nvidia’s.Because it’s a new market — and because there is such hunger for this new kind of processing power — many believe this is one of those rare opportunities when start-ups have a chance against entrenched giants.The first big change will most likely come in the data center, where companies like Graphcore and Cerebras, which has been quiet about its plans, hope to accelerate the creation of new forms of A.I. Among the goals are bots that can carry on conversations and systems that can automatically generate video and virtual reality.Researchers at places like Microsoft and Google, which has built its own chip just for A.I., “train” neural networks by extreme trial and error, testing the algorithms across vast numbers of chips for hours and even days on end. They often sit at their laptops, staring at graphs that show the progress of these algorithms as they learn from data. Chip designers want to streamline this process, packing all that trial and error into a few minutes.Today, Nvidia’s G.P.U.s can efficiently execute all the tiny calculations that go into training neural networks, but shuttling data between these chips is still inefficient, said Scott Gray, who was an engineer at Nervana before joining OpenAI, an artificial intelligence lab whose founder include Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk.So in addition to building chips specifically for neural networks, start-ups are rethinking the hardware that surrounds them.Graphcore, for example, is building chips that include more built-in memory so that they don’t need to send as much data back and forth. Others are looking at ways of widening the pipes between chips so that data exchange happens faster.“This is not just about building chips but looking at how these chips are connected together and how they talk to the rest of the system,” Mr. Coughran, of Sequoia, said.But this is only part of the change. Once neural networks are trained for a task, additional gear has to execute that task. At Toyota, autonomous car prototypes are using neural networks as a way of identifying pedestrians, signs and other objects on the road. After training a neural network in the data center, the company runs this algorithm on chips installed on the car.A number of chip makers — including start-ups like Mythic, DeePhi and Horizon Robotics — are tackling this problem as well, pushing A.I. chips into devices ranging from phones to cars.It is still unclear how well any of these new chips will work. Designing and building a chip takes about 24 months, which means even the first viable hardware relying on them won’t arrive until this year. And the chip start-ups will face competition from Nvidia, Intel, Google and other industry giants.But everyone is starting from about the same place: the beginning of a new market.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.AdvertisementBy DAVID GELLESJAN. 8, 2018
A creator of the iPhone called the device “addictive.”A Twitter founder said the “internet is broken.”An early Facebook investor raised questions about the social network’s impact on children’s brains.Now, two of the biggest investors on Wall Street have asked Apple to study the health effects of its products and to make it easier for parents to limit their children’s use of iPhones and iPads.Once uncritically hailed for their innovation and economic success, Silicon Valley companies are under fire from all sides, facing calls to take more responsibility for their role in everything from election meddling and hate speech to physical health and internet addiction.Advertisement“Companies have a role to play in helping to address these issues,” said Barry Rosenstein, managing partner of Jana Partners, an investment firm that wrote an open letter to Apple this weekend pushing it to look at its products’ health effects, especially on children. “As more and more founders of the biggest tech companies are acknowledging today, the days of just throwing technology out there and washing your hands of the potential impact are over.”AdvertisementThe backlash against big tech has been growing for months. Facebook and Twitter are under scrutiny for their roles in enabling Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election and for facilitating abusive behavior. Google was hit with a record antitrust fine in Europe for improperly exploiting its market power.But until now, Apple had escaped largely unscathed, and concerns about the deleterious effects of excessive technology use have not been among the most pressing matters for Silicon Valley executives.Jana, an activist hedge fund, wrote its letter with Calstrs, the California State Teachers’ Retirement System, which manages the pensions of California’s public-school teachers. When such investors pressure companies to change their behavior, it is typically with the goal of lifting a sagging stock price. In this case, Jana and Calstrs said they were trying to raise awareness about an issue they cared deeply about, adding that if Apple was proactive about making changes, it could help the business.“We believe the long-term health of its youngest customers and the health of society, our economy and the company itself are inextricably linked,” the investors said in the letter. Jana, which is often vilified for its aggressive focus on short-term profits, also said it would be raising a fund this year that would engage in more such campaigns, an effort that could help soften its image.Whatever the motivations, the two large investors are tapping into the growing anxiety among parents about their children’s preoccupation with devices, at the expense of activities like reading and sports.“Over the past 10 years, there’s been a bottom-up backlash,” said Sherry Turkle, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the author of “Alone Together: Why We Expect More From Technology and Less From Each Other.” “You see it in things like people not sending their kids to schools that use iPads, and kids telling their parents to put their phones down.”For years, researchers have been sounding the alarm over the ubiquity of mobile phones and social media. A 2015 study by Common Sense Media, a research group that studies technology use, found that more than half of teenagers spent upward of four hours a day looking at screens, and that for a quarter of teenagers, the figure was more than eight hours. In another survey, in 2016, half the teenagers said they felt addicted to their mobile devices.Advertisement“These things can be incredibly addictive,” said Tony Fadell, a former Apple executive who helped create the iPod and iPhone. “It’s amazing, but there are a lot of unintended consequences.”A growing roster of prominent technology executives have grown worried about the creations that brought them fame and fortune.Sean Parker, an early investor in Facebook, reflected on the sprawling influence of the social network. “It literally changes your relationship with society, with each other,” he said in an interview with Axios in November. “It probably interferes with productivity in weird ways. God only knows what it’s doing to our children’s brains.”Evan Williams, one of the founders of Twitter, last year lamented the degree to which the messaging service had become a bastion for hateful speech. “The internet is broken,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chamath Palihapitiya, an early Facebook executive and the chief executive of Social Capital, a venture capital firm, said in November that he felt “tremendous guilt” about his role in building the social network.“The short term, dopamine-driven feedback loops that we have created are destroying how society works,” he said. “No civil discourse, no cooperation, misinformation, mistruth. And it’s not an American problem. This is not about Russian ads. This is a global problem.”By going after Apple, Jana and Calstrs, which together own about $2 billion worth of the company’s stock, have selected the tech giant that is perhaps least dependent on its users’ time. Because Apple makes most of its money selling hardware, rather than through digital advertising, it theoretically could afford to encourage its users to spend less time with its products.“Apple’s business model is not predicated on excessive use of your products,” Jana and Calstrs said in their letter to the company.For this reason, said Ms. Turkle, the M.I.T. professor, “it turns out that Apple is the company best positioned to act.”AdvertisementIn a statement, Apple said that the parental controls already on its devices “lead the industry” and that “we think deeply about how our products are used and the impact they have on users and the people around them.”“We take this responsibility very seriously,” the statement continued, “and we are committed to meeting and exceeding our customers’ expectations, especially when it comes to protecting kids.”Fears about technology addiction are not new. The BlackBerry, an early smartphone, was nicknamed “CrackBerry.” Adam Alter, a social psychologist and the author of “Irresistible: The Rise of Addictive Technology and the Business of Keeping Us Hooked,” documents instances of internet addiction spanning the globe.But some tech executives now acknowledge that far from being an accident, their products were designed to be addictive.Mr. Parker said that when Facebook was getting started, the thought process was about “how do we consume as much of your time and conscious attention as possible?”Mr. Palihapitiya said as Facebook was rapidly growing, “in the back, deep, deep recesses of our minds, we kind of knew something bad could happen.”Mr. Fadell said that at the time Apple was designing the iPhone, “we had no idea this was going to happen.” But, he added, people today are simply spending too much time looking at their phones.“Now it needs to be addressed,” he said. “It’s been 10 years in the making.”Even Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook and usually a staunch defender of his company’s influence, has appeared more reflective in recent days.“The world feels anxious and divided, and Facebook has a lot of work to do — whether it’s protecting our community from abuse and hate, defending against interference by nation states, or making sure that time spent on Facebook is time well spent,” he said in a Facebook post last week. “My personal challenge for 2018 is to focus on fixing these important issues.”Follow David Gelles on Twitter: @dgelles.A version of this article appears in print on January 9, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Prodding Apple on Addiction.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 11, 2018
Q. What kind of software should I use to protect my computer from ransomware? A. An up-to-date anti-malware program running on your computer is one way to help block ransomware — that malicious software that wants to invade your system and encrypt your files with demands for payment to release them. Several companies make programs that guard against ransomware and other threats, like Bitdefender Antivirus Plus and Webroot Secure Anywhere Antivirus (both less than $40). PCMag.com is one site that regularly reviews and rates new security software, and you can find reviews from other technology sites around the web.If you want a specific program to protect your files from online hijacking, you have options there, too. ZoneAlarm Anti-Ransomware is available to download with a free 30-day trial, Trend Micro’s  page has free or trial ransomware protection programs, and Bitdefender has a free Anti-Ransomware Tool of its own.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Most ransomware programs are aimed at Windows computers, and Microsoft has its own  online guide to protecting your PC from ransomware. The company also includes its Windows Defender Security Center utility for protecting Windows 10 if you do not want to install a third-party program.Macs are a smaller target for most virus writers, but Mac-specific ransomware is out there. If Apple’s built-in protections for its operating system do not put the mind at ease, commercial Mac security software is readily available; Bitdefender and Webroot make Mac versions of their programs, too.In addition to security software, assuming a stance of “defensive computing” can help shield you from internet scammers. Steer clear of links and file attachments in messages from people you do not know (or from friends who do not seem to be themselves, possibly because of hacking). Keep your system files backed up regularly so you have copies in case something does happen to your system. The Federal Trade Commission’s OnGuard Online site has tips and videos on protecting yourself from ransomware and other internet threats.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2018, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Here to Help; How to Protect Yourself From Ransomware.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech We’re UsingBy The New York TimesHow do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Mike Isaac, a technology reporter for The Times based in San Francisco, discussed the tech he’s using.You write a lot about Uber. How many Ubers or Lyfts do you take a week?It varies, to be honest. For a while back in 2013 to 2014, I was a frequent user of both services in San Francisco and New York. Plus, since I’m reporting on the companies, I need a good grasp of what Uber and Lyft are up to in designing their products.But I stopped using them both altogether for a while, because I was uncomfortable with either company knowing my location (even when I wasn’t using the app, in Uber’s case) and where I was going to meet people while doing my job. Paranoia? Maybe. But I’d prefer to keep my whereabouts to myself.Now, I’m an infrequent user. Mostly airport trips at 5 a.m., or if I’m stuck in no man’s land where San Francisco’s public transit rarely runs. Call me old-fashioned, but I like using the city metro services. They’re cheap!Do you use any other transportation apps? Yeah, a few. I don’t own a car anymore, so getting around the Bay Area can be a pain if you need to get out of the city. Especially if you have a 90-pound dog in tow.If I need to drive down to Silicon Valley for interviews, I usually rent a car through Getaround, which is essentially an Airbnb for people’s cars. It’s pretty convenient, and I’ve even struck up a budding friendship with a guy on my street whose car I frequently rent!I used Car2Go a lot in Brooklyn when I lived there. It’s basically a bunch of SmartCars scattered around the city. You find one using the app, drive it where you want to and leave it parked wherever there’s street parking that isn’t metered. It’s pretty rad.Mostly right now I’m using an app called Transit, which gives you the best route to where you want to go, which could include combinations of public transit, biking, car-sharing and just plain old walking.What is the most bizarre conversation you’ve ever had with an Uber or Lyft driver?Once I had a really scary one where a guy hadn’t slept in 36 hours and was straight up going off on all this unintelligible crazy conspiracy theory talk. I definitely couldn’t wait to get out of that car. (I also reported him to Lyft.)Other than that, I think I’ve been offered drugs once or twice. Mostly they complain about how Uber treats them poorly, even if they don’t know I’m a journalist. Probably not a good look for these companies.You spend a lot of time on social media. You use Twitter in a way that is somewhat unconventional to many Times standards. Does this help with work?You mean other Times employees don’t use Twitter the same way I do? I am shocked!I kid, of course. I am all over the place on Twitter, and use it as a kind of narrative of both my life and the things that interest me. It’s fun, stressful, anxiety-inducing and occasionally cathartic.But despite appearances, it’s actually been a very effective tool in doing my job. I talk to a lot of people through Twitter — either in public or in private — and feel that it’s facilitated many, many connections that I would have not otherwise made were I not constantly rambling online. For source development, it’s been fantastic.Outside your job, what tech product are you and your family currently obsessed with?Hmm, probably HQ Trivia, that app that’s literally a game show on your phone. My parents are even on it.Oh, also, I’m very late to this, but I am super into my pedometer on my iPhone. Who knew counting my steps would motivate me to walk more? (Editor’s note: Many people knew this.)What’s so great about them, and what could be better?HQ is cool because it’s interactive, it’s live, and you can talk to people on Twitter about it while you’re playing. It’s sort of the ideal experience of real-time communicating on the internet in a legitimately fun way. The problem is, TV shows are a hits business, where one is never enough, so the creators will have to evolve their success into other shows over time.The iPhone Health app pedometer is perfect in every way. I am such a dad.So why don’t you just buy a car? Are you waiting for the self-driving car of your dreams?Between parking tickets, insurance, renting a garage in the city, a monthly payment and gas, it’s way cheaper for me to be car-free and rent only when I need one.Maybe in 10 years it’ll be a moot point, and the streets will be filled with robot cars! I kind of hope so.Follow Mike Isaac on Twitter: @MikeIsaac.AdvertisementMr. Bezos is the world’s richest person and can afford virtually any luxury. But obscurity is no longer among them.By NICK WINGFIELD and NELLIE BOWLESJAN. 12, 2018
SEATTLE — Jeff Bezos rubbed elbows last weekend with Halle Berry, Chris Hemsworth and other Hollywood celebrities at an after-party for the Golden Globes. In December, he walked the red carpet, along with Meryl Streep and Tom Hanks, at a screening of “The Post” in Washington.On Friday, Mr. Bezos and his wife, MacKenzie, made public their $33 million donation to a nonprofit that provides college scholarships to so-called Dreamers, young immigrants brought to the United States illegally as children. In October, he received an award for a donation to a marriage equality campaign.Jennifer Cast, an Amazon executive who solicited the donation from him, said at the event that they could have donated anonymously to the campaign. “But just as critical as the money was Jeff’s offer to let us publicly acknowledge their gifts,” she said.“By allowing us to take their donation public,” she added, “the world quickly knew that Jeff Bezos supported marriage equality.”AdvertisementThe appearances and actions are a new look for Mr. Bezos.As he was shaping Amazon into one of the world’s most valuable companies, Mr. Bezos developed a reputation as a brilliant but mysterious and coldblooded corporate titan. He preferred to hunker down in Amazon’s hometown, Seattle, at least partly because he thought it was better for Amazon’s growing business, largely avoiding public causes and the black-tie circuit.But while Mr. Bezos — who at 54 is the world’s richest person, with a net worth of more than $100 billion — can afford virtually any luxury, obscurity is no longer among them.Amazon, now a behemoth valued at more than $600 billion, has become one of the faces of “big tech,” along with Apple, Alphabet’s Google and Facebook. These companies are facing a backlash. Amazon is under the microscope for what critics say is its corrosive effect on jobs and competition, and Mr. Bezos has become a bête noire for President Trump, who repeatedly singles out him and Amazon for scorn on Twitter.“People are starting to get scared of Amazon,” said Steve Case, a co-founder of America Online, who recently started an investment fund focused on start-ups in underserved areas, with Mr. Bezos among its contributors. “If Jeff continues to hang out in Seattle, he’s going to get a lot more incoming. Even for just defense reasons, he has to now play offense.”Mr. Bezos’ portfolio of other ventures has thrust him farther into the spotlight. In October 2013, he bought The Washington Post for $250 million, jump-starting a renaissance of the paper. In 2016, Mr. Bezos bought a $23 million home in Washington, one of the city’s most expensive, which is undergoing extensive renovations to make it a suitable party spot for the city’s political class. Nearby neighbors include former President Barack Obama and his family, and Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka Trump and her husband, Jared Kushner.AdvertisementMr. Bezos’ space start-up, Blue Origin, is also making its efforts more public, giving him another stage. The company is trying to rescue Earth by helping to move pollution-belching heavy industries off the planet.“He’s getting thanked at the Golden Globes and targeted by presidential tweet tantrums — not even Steve Jobs had that kind of pop-culture currency,” said Margaret O’Mara, a professor of history at the University of Washington, who curated a museum exhibit in Seattle endowed by Mr. Bezos.In a statement, Drew Herdener, an Amazon spokesman, said, “Jeff loves what he is doing, at Amazon, Blue Origin and The Washington Post, and he enjoys sharing his enthusiasm in public as he works with the teams to build and invent.”But interviews with more than 30 people who know Mr. Bezos, most of whom declined to be identified to protect their relationships with him, revealed his awareness of the growing opposition to Amazon and his growing comfort with being in the public eye.Mr. Bezos, they said, accepts the probability of greater government scrutiny of Amazon. The chief executive has advised Amazon executives to conduct themselves so that they can pass any legal or regulatory test.The investor Warren E. Buffett, who has known Mr. Bezos since the 1990s, said the cautionary tale of Microsoft, which faced a landmark antitrust case by the government that decade, must loom in Mr. Bezos’ mind. Microsoft, by far the most dominant technology company at the time, lost its footing after the case, opening an unexpected opportunity for competitors.“You’re going to get a lot of scrutiny if you’re disrupting other people’s livelihoods,” Mr. Buffett said.Some of the people who know Mr. Bezos said his new public face was for business expediency. Others believe it is a result of personal growth.AdvertisementBut they all said it was clear that Mr. Bezos and Amazon were trying to go beyond his tech persona to show the world his other sides.Mr. Bezos has always been happy to play the role of Amazon’s chief pitchman, especially when he perceives some benefit to Amazon customers from doing so, people who have worked with him said. He submits to interviews and speaks at events when, for instance, a new company product like the Kindle electronic reader or Echo speaker needs to be explained to the world.But for nearly two decades, he was adamant that the company should largely stay out of the political limelight and not make a stir in local communities. It also had a bare-bones lobbying operation.Even as he was named Time magazine’s person of the year in 1999, he tried to avoid politics. He was even reluctant to do photo opportunities with politicians, standard fare for executives, one longtime former employee said.There were business benefits to staying out of the glare.A hedge fund executive in New York who caught the internet bug early, Mr. Bezos piled into a vehicle with his wife in 1994 with the intention of finding a place to start a business selling books on the internet. He founded Amazon later that year in Seattle, in part because of the growing pool of technical talent Microsoft had brought to the area.But putting his start-up in Washington also meant Amazon would not have to collect sales tax in the country’s most populous states, like California, Texas and New York. Retailers typically have an obligation to collect sales tax in states where they have a physical presence.For a time, for the same reason, the company would not publicly discuss where most of its warehouses were. And Amazon employees in Seattle who planned to travel out of state for work had to submit itineraries for review to avoid triggering unwanted sales tax liabilities.Those efforts would, in turn, give his fledgling company a further price advantage against established physical retailers like Barnes & Noble.AdvertisementIt also meant that, despite its growing legions of customers, Amazon remained almost invisible in politics.By the end of 2012, the company had swelled to more than 88,000 employees and over $61 billion in annual sales, creating huge businesses like its Prime membership service and Amazon Web Services along the way. Yet that year the company was criticized by leaders in Seattle and the news media for being disengaged from civic life compared with stalwarts like Boeing and Starbucks.“I’m not aware of what Amazon does in the community,” Sally Jewell, the chief executive of the retailer R.E.I. at the time, said in The Seattle Times in 2012. “It’s not a name that comes up often in the nonprofit organizations I’m involved with.”With investors, Mr. Bezos gave just enough of a peek at Amazon’s business to win their confidence while saying as little as possible to keep competitors guessing. To this day, Amazon will not disclose exactly how many Kindles, Echoes and other devices it has sold, and for years it refused to reveal financial details about Amazon Web Services, its highly profitable cloud computing business.Despite the paucity of details, investors have sent its stock up more than 1,100 percent over the last decade, dazzled by its growth.A turning point came for Mr. Bezos around 2011 when Amazon faced a public showdown with state governments.At the time, legislators began hounding internet retailers like Amazon to collect sales tax. In California, Amazon initially campaigned to overturn a new law imposing an internet sales tax. But Mr. Bezos backed off after it became clear that Amazon’s image could be tarnished, a former employee involved in the matter said.Instead, Amazon began to make peace. In 2011, it signed an agreement with California to collect sales tax in the state, reaching numerous similar agreements around the same time.As part of those state deals, Amazon began building warehouses across the country, which allowed Amazon to deliver orders more quickly and let local politicians trumpet the arrival of thousands of jobs.AdvertisementSuddenly, a company that once refused to confirm how many employees it had at its Seattle headquarters could not stop talking about how many jobs it was creating. It now has 542,000 employees.As Mr. Bezos and the company talked about creating jobs, though, he and Amazon faced a counternarrative from critics that the company was really a job-killing bully.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Waves of store closings by bricks-and-mortar retailers like Barnes & Noble and Macy’s increased the volume. ”Amazon Must Be Stopped,” read a 2014 New Republic article about the company’s growing market power.That year, a nasty fight over e-book prices with Hachette, the book publisher, solidified Amazon’s reputation for using brass-knuckle tactics. At one point, Amazon slowed delivery times for the publisher’s titles and took other steps to make them less attractive to order.After the matter was resolved, Mr. Bezos told an interviewer that Amazon was simply negotiating hard on behalf of its customers.“It’s very difficult for incumbents who have a sweet thing to accept change,” he said, referring to book publishers.Another blow to the company’s public standing landed in 2015 when The New York Times published a lengthy examination of Amazon’s corporate work culture, which was depicted as an unforgiving environment. “The article doesn’t describe the Amazon I know or the caring Amazonians I work with every day,” Mr. Bezos said in an email to the company’s employees after the article came out.According to two people who work closely with Mr. Bezos, the chief executive became more focused on corporate reputation issues after The Times article and the Hachette uproar.AdvertisementBy late 2015, a few months after Mr. Trump announced his campaign for president, he started his Twitter broadsides against Mr. Bezos, which often coincided with critical coverage of the candidate in The Washington Post.“The @washingtonpost loses money (a deduction) and gives owner @JeffBezos power to screw public on low taxation of @Amazon!” he tweeted in December that year. “Big tax shelter.”Mr. Bezos responded by offering to launch the future president of the United States into space on a Blue Origin rocket.
            The @washingtonpost loses money (a deduction) and gives owner @JeffBezos power to screw public on low taxation of @Amazon! Big tax shelter        
            Finally trashed by @realDonaldTrump. Will still reserve him a seat on the Blue Origin rocket. #sendDonaldtospace https://t.co/9OypFoxZk3 A White House spokesman did not respond to requests for comment.The attention in Washington edged up in June when Amazon announced it was buying Whole Foods Markets. Though Amazon remains a niche player in the grocery business, the deal drove home the power of the company and led some lawmakers to question its power.“The purchase of Whole Foods was a moment when people looked up and recognized this company as a force in the economy,” said Stacy Mitchell, a co-director of the Institute for Local Self-Reliance, a nonprofit advocacy group for local businesses, which has published a critical report on Amazon’s impact on jobs and communities.People who have known Mr. Bezos for a long time say they see a concerted effort by him and Amazon to show more of his personality.He became an active user of Twitter in late 2015, posting a photo of himself wearing his lucky cowboy boots and a video clip of him standing atop a wind turbine in Texas. At an event with his brother in Los Angeles in November, as part of a long lineup of presentations by an array of business, wellness and entertainment leaders, he said his ideal job would be bartender, partly because he enjoys talking to people.“I pride myself on my craft cocktails,” he said.If there’s an image that captures Mr. Bezos at the moment, it’s a picture of him with his biceps bulging out of a polo shirt at a business conference in Idaho from July. “Swole Jeff Bezos” instantly became an internet meme, with one tweet juxtaposing shots of a doughy Mr. Bezos from the late 1990s (caption: “I sell books”) and the brawny 2017 version (“I sell whatever I want”).AdvertisementThe details people are willing to talk about include scraps about his daily routine. On most days, he leaves his lakefront estate in the affluent town of Medina, Wash., for a sparkling new 37-story office tower in Seattle, where he runs Amazon.On Wednesdays, he heads south to an industrial office park in the suburb of Kent, where rockets are assembled for Blue Origin.Every other week, he huddles on conference calls with The Post’s leadership, and twice a year they visit him at his home. He communicates with the newspaper’s top brass with an email list called the Pancakes Group. The Amazon chief once made members of the group flapjacks from a favorite recipe in “Joy of Cooking” on their first visit to his house.“It wasn’t like we went to some billionaire’s house and the help outnumbered the guests,” said Shailesh Prakash, the newspaper’s chief information officer. “He was trying to get the dog off the couch.”Mr. Bezos’ more public-facing work was abetted by a management change nearly two years ago at Amazon, when he put Jeff Wilke in charge of its consumer business and Andy Jassy in charge of cloud computing. That freed him up to devote more time to The Post and Blue Origin, though he remains deeply engaged at Amazon, dedicating most of his time to initiatives that are two to four years away from hitting the market.Mr. Bezos has also pushed using publicity to the company’s advantage. In September, he masterminded the company’s splashy search for a place to locate a second headquarters. In the hoopla, Amazon highlighted the jobs it planned to create with the move — up to 50,000 total — and spurred a horde of towns, from Dallas to Boston, to apply.In the future, that means Mr. Bezos will most likely be a more familiar presence in Washington. Mr. Bezos now visits Washington about 10 times a year, dropping in at The Post for forums, discussions with engineers and meals with journalists. In the capital’s stately Kalorama neighborhood, just off Massachusetts Avenue’s row of embassies, renovations are proceeding on his home — two combined properties that used to be the city’s Textile Museum.Mr. Bezos plans to host salon-style dinners at the house, drawing inspiration from the celebrated dinner parties thrown by Katharine Graham, the former publisher of The Post, for the city’s movers and shakers from both parties. Mr. Bezos is known for asking his dinner guests to stick to a single conversation topic at a time to keep people from splintering off into private side discussions.Advertisement“It’s a very big house,” said Martin Baron, the executive editor of The Post. “I hope he has a party for us in the house.”Sally Quinn, a longtime Post writer and an arbiter of the city’s social mores, said she had no firsthand knowledge of Mr. Bezos’ plans for his home. But she praised the idea of attempting to bring together guests from across the political spectrum.“There’s really no one who is doing that kind of thing in Washington right now,” said Ms. Quinn, who bumped into Mr. Bezos recently at the screening of “The Post.” “It would be like a throwback to the old days.”“I think Jeff,” she said, “is the only person who could do that.”Nick Wingfield reported from Seattle, and Nellie Bowles from San Francisco. Brooks Barnes contributed reporting from Los Angeles, and Cecilia Kang from Washington. Doris Burke contributed research.Follow Nick Wingfield and Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @nickwingfield and @NellieBowlesA version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2018, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Hello, My Name Is Jeff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CECILIA KANGJAN. 11, 2018
WASHINGTON — A new front is opening in the battle to restore so-called net neutrality rules: state legislatures.Lawmakers in at least six states, including California and New York, have introduced bills in recent weeks that would forbid internet providers to block or slow down sites or online services. Legislators in several other states, including North Carolina and Illinois, are weighing similar action.They are responding to the Federal Communications Commission’s vote last month to end regulations that barred internet service providers from creating slow and fast lanes for different sites and services. The new policy will go into effect in the coming weeks.By passing their own law, the state lawmakers say, they would ensure that consumers would find the content of the choice, maintain a diversity of voices online and protect businesses from having to pay fees to reach users. And they might even have an effect beyond their states. California’s strict auto emissions standards, for example, have been followed by a dozen other states, giving California major sway over the auto industry.Advertisement“There tends to be a follow-on effect, particularly when something happens in a big state like California,” said Harold Feld, a senior vice president at nonprofit consumer group, Public Knowledge, which supports net neutrality efforts by the states.Bills have also been introduced in Massachusetts, Nebraska, Rhode Island and Washington. The issue has also attracted some support in governor mansions. In Washington, for example, Gov. Jay Inslee reiterated his support for a state law in a speech this week.Advertisement“When Washington, D.C., takes away that protection, we must protect net neutrality for our people, for our businesses and for the virtues of free speech,” Mr. Inslee, a Democrat, said.But the bills are still in the early stages and could face roadblocks. Many similar efforts by states to restore broadband privacy rules that Congress repealed last year, have stalled or been scrapped.And any such state law could be challenged in courts. The Federal Communications Commission’s new order, which rolled back rules passed in 2015, blocks state and city governments from creating their own net neutrality laws. The commission said different state laws were too difficult for an internet service provider, like Verizon or Charter, to follow because the internet does not recognize state borders and transfers traffic between states.“The internet is the ultimate form of interstate commerce, which is clearly only within the authority of the F.C.C.,” said Bret Swanson, a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute who specializes in telecommunications policy.But the state lawmakers argue that they have an obligation to protect consumers with net neutrality rules and that local governments can approve or deny requests by telecommunications providers to operate in their states. They also argue that it is unclear if the Federal Communications Commission can declare a blanket pre-emption of states, something they say Congress would have to do. In 2016, a federal court ruled against the commission’s effort to pre-empt state laws related to municipal broadband networks.“People should not be intimidated by the F.C.C. simply saying it has pre-emptive authority, and we need to dig into the sources of that claim, which are a lot weaker than the F.C.C. makes it out to be,” said State Representative Drew Hansen, a Democrat who has introduced one of two net neutrality bills in Washington in recent weeks.AdvertisementThe Federal Communications Commission declined to comment but pointed to the section of its order that pre-empts states from creating their own net neutrality rules.Supporters of net neutrality are attacking the agency’s repeal of the 2015 rules in other ways as well. On Tuesday, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, announced that he had enough support to force a vote on a congressional resolution to bring back the rules. He gained an important Republican supporter, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, who said she would vote in favor of it. Such a measure is a long shot in the House, however, and would also need President Trump’s signature.“Net neutrality will be a major issue in the 2018 campaigns, and we are going to let everyone know where we stand and where they stand,” Mr. Schumer said at a news conference, warning Republicans to vote in favor of the Democratic-led resolution.In addition, lawsuits against the commission are expected shortly after the policy becomes official. Last week, a lobbying group for big technology companies including Facebook, Google and Netflix announced that it planned to join the lawsuits, giving the opposition substantial new resources. More than a dozen state attorneys general have also announced plans to sue the commission.But state lawmakers say they cannot wait around to see what happens with those efforts.State Representative Norma Smith, a Republican who introduced the other bill in Washington, said net neutrality was an important safeguard for small businesses that might not be able to pay internet service companies for fast speeds. Even though Republicans in Washington, D.C., supported the repeal, she said many Republicans in her state supported her bill.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is not a partisan issue here,” Ms. Smith said. “Everyone is concerned about equal access to the internet and being able to participate in the 21st-century economy.”Kevin de León, a leader in the California Senate, said net neutrality would be a major issue in his campaign against Senator Dianne Feinstein in the Democratic primary this year. He said a net neutrality bill he had introduced, one of two in California, had the backing of tech companies and many consumers in his state. Ms. Feinstein has criticized the Federal Communications Commission’s vote.“If the Trump administration won’t protect consumers, the State of California will,” Mr. de León said.AdvertisementIn New York, Assemblywoman Patricia Fahy, a Democrat, said a few internet service providers already had too much power over the marketplace and should not be given the ability to charge websites more for faster delivery to users.This month, she introduced a bill that would hold back state telecom projects from broadband providers that blocked, throttled or gave priority to sites that paid for faster access. Legislators in Rhode Island and North Carolina have introduced or are considering similar bills that are more focused on government contracts than telecom law, they say.“We are threading a needle here,” Ms. Fahy said, “but this is the best way to get at consumer protection, because state projects are huge and this will really affect the internet service providers.”A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: States Look for Ways To Keep Net Neutrality.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 23, 2018, 8:37 A.M. E.D.T.
(Reuters) - Netflix Inc said on Monday it planned to raise $1.5 billion in debt, the second time the company is tapping the debt market in less than a year to fuel a rapid expansion in original content.The video streaming pioneer, which raised $1.6 billion in debt last October, has been spending aggressively on original content to drive subscriber growth around the world.Netflix crushed Wall Street's estimates for subscriber additions earlier this month, driven by hit original shows "Altered Carbon" and "Jessica Jones", and said it looks to spend nearly $8 billion on content in 2018.The company also reported long-term debt of $6.5 billion at the end of first quarter and said it expects free cash flow to be negative in the second half of 2018.Netflix had around $2.6 billion in cash, according to the company's latest quarterly report.The company said on Monday it intends to use the net proceeds from the offering for general corporate purposes, which may include content acquisitions, production.Netflix shares were up 1 percent in premarket trading.(Reporting by Laharee Chatterjee in Bengaluru; Editing by Saumyadeb Chakrabarty)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSAN FRANCISCO — Chinese ride-hailing firm Didi Chuxing on Monday began offering its service in the Mexican city of Toluca, the company said, setting up a potentially costly battle with rival Uber Technologies Inc [UBER.UL] in a key Latin American market.The Mexican launch marks the first time Didi has brought its own app-based ride service outside of Asia, a critical global expansion that comes as the company faces increased competition at home from internet giant Meituan-Dianping, which recently launched its own ride-hailing service.Didi Express has launched in the capital city of the State of Mexico, an urban hub about 40 miles (60 km) west of Mexico City, adding a number of new safety features for drivers and riders.Reuters was first to report Didi's plans for Toluca earlier this month.In Mexico, Didi will go up against Uber, its chief international rival, for the first time since Uber's launch in China that ended with a merger of the two companies' operations in 2016. Uber is the ride-hailing leader in Mexico, where it has 7 million users in more than three dozen cities.Didi, which has an operations hub in the Juarez neighborhood in Mexico City, said it hopes to bring its ride-hailing service to other major Mexican cities later this year.Didi said teams in Mexico, Beijing and California studied the Mexican market to adapt Didi's algorithms and other ride-service technologies for the local market, addressing issues such as crime.Didi is bringing to Mexico a number of new safety features, including an emergency alert button in the app that will connect drivers and passengers with police and other emergency contacts if they find themselves in danger, a safety monitoring system and a way for passengers to share their ride itinerary.The company started recruiting drivers early this month, promising not to take any piece of their fares until June 17. After mid-June, Didi plans to take a 20 percent cut, below Uber's 25 percent commission, Reuters previously reported.Didi late last year bought Brazilian ride-hailing firm 99, giving the company its first toehold in Latin America. (Reporting by Heather Somerville in San Francisco. Additional reporting by Julia Love in Mexico City; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama and Jeffrey Benkoe)AdvertisementBy THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 23, 2018, 4:02 P.M. E.D.T.
SAN FRANCISCO —  The academic at the center of the Facebook data-misuse scandal is apologizing for his actions, but also says he thought he did nothing wrong at the time.Cambridge University researcher Aleksandr Kogan made his comments to CBS's "60 Minutes" on Sunday.Facebook has been embroiled in scandal since revelations that data analytics firm Cambridge Analytica misused personal information from as many as 87 million Facebook accounts. Cambridge Analytica received the data from a Facebook personality quiz Kogan created. That app collected data on both users and their Facebook friends.Kogan is due to testify before a U.K. parliamentary committee on Tuesday. The committee is investigating Cambridge Analytica's role in elections globally as well as the U.K.'s Brexit vote in 2016.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersHANOVER, Germany — Deutsche Telekom unit T-Systems should return to profitability in 2020 as the company undergoes a digital makeover, new Chief Executive Adel Al-Saleh said on Monday at the Hannover Trade Fair.American Al-Saleh, who took over the loss-making IT services company in January, also said at a presentation that SAP had certified the Open Telekom Cloud for its suite of business software, offering an alternative to hyperscale services such as AWS, Microsoft Azure or Google. (Reporting by Nadine Schimroszik; Writing by Douglas Busvine; Editing by Arno Schuetze)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 23, 2018, 6:19 A.M. E.D.T.
BEIJING —  China will strive hard to achieve this year's economic targets, the politburo, a top decision-making body of the ruling Communist Party said on Monday, according to state media.China still faces many difficulties in fighting what the government has described as the "three tough battles" - the prevention of risks, poverty alleviation and pollution control - against an increasingly complex global economic and political backdrop, the Xinhua news agency said.Citing a document released after a politburo meeting chaired by President Xi Jinping, Xinhua said China will maintain a proactive fiscal policy, and keep monetary policy prudent and neutral, all reiterations of past comments.The 25-member politburo added that China will boost domestic demand to ensure the stability of the economy.AdvertisementThe politburo also said China will deepen supply-side structural reforms and overcapacity cuts in a lawful and market-based way, Xinhua said.AdvertisementOfficial data last week showed China's economy grew a faster-than-expected 6.8 percent in the first quarter, well above Beijing's target of around 6.5 percent this year.The would be good news for policymakers seeking room to crack down on financial risks and reduce corporate debt levels.But soon after the data release, the central bank unexpectedly said it was cutting the amount of cash that banks must keep in reserves, raising concerns among investors about the risks to China's economic growth outlook and whether Beijing is backsliding on its promise to reduce debts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.China has been fine-tuning its monetary policy, Wen Xinxiang, secretary-general of the monetary policy committee at the central bank, wrote in an official magazine on Monday.Wen likened the approach to a process of irrigation where liquidity is managed "drip by drip" in a precise way as funds are being directed to weaker and ailing sectors in the economy."To serve the real economy is the vocation of the finance sector," Wen wrote in China Finance, a magazine managed by the People's Bank of China.LOWER CORPORATE FINANCING COSTSChina will also step up efforts to make breakthroughs in key technologies to support emerging industries, and further lower corporate financing costs and reduce the tax burdens and fees for companies, according to Xinhua.The state planner said last week it aims to cut commercial and industrial electricity prices by an average of 10 percent, a move that aligns with a years-long effort to reduce corporate costs.China will also follow up on its pledge of opening up the economy, and deepen reforms for state-owned firms and assets, the agency said, while pushing for the healthy development of its foreign exchange, stock, debt, credit and property markets and lower corporate financing costs.Advertisement(Reporting by Stella Qiu and Ryan Woo; Editing by Clarence Fernandez and Kim Coghill)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

      By BRIAN X. CHEN

JAN. 8, 2018

At the International Consumer Electronics Show this week in Las Vegas, thousands of tech companies showcased some of the hottest new innovations: artificial intelligence, self-driving car tech, the smart home, voice-controlled accessories, fifth-generation cellular connectivity and more.Curious about the new products and how they will affect your personal technology? Readers asked Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology writer who is attending the trade show, their questions about wireless, TV and the Internet of Things.
Why does Apple, the most valuable company in the world, boycott CES?Apple doesn’t exhibit at trade shows in general. In 2008, Steve Jobs announced that Apple was pulling out of Macworld Expo, the Apple-centric trade show, where he had previously announced a number of important Apple products, including the original iPhone in 2007. Apple’s reasoning was that the company had retail stores all over the world that could showcase Apple products. In addition, the company had the clout and budget to host keynotes, or marketing events to unveil products, independent of a giant trade show, where companies are competing for attention from the press. Many companies, like Amazon, Samsung Electronics and Google, have followed suit and introduced products at their own events.Here’s what’s interesting: Over my last decade attending CES, Apple cast a long shadow over the conference despite not having an official presence. Many companies were making things that worked with the iPhone or iPad, like cases, speakers or apps. But this year, Apple doesn’t seem very relevant here. The show now revolves around Amazon and Google and their battle for domination with voice assistants. There are a good number of companies here showing smart home products that work with Amazon’s Alexa and Google’s Assistant and choosing to skip out on Apple’s HomeKit because of the stricter privacy requirements and extra fees associated with making products that are certified to work with HomeKit. So the show seems to have moved on from one giant to two others.I've been attending CES for 5 years and feel really underwhelmed by the products showcased at the event this year. I feel like we need to figure out how to "make gadgets great again." Analysts, entrepreneurs, and journalists I've talked to in Vegas this week shared similar impressions. Has CES gotten too big? Does it need to be more selective? What's going on?PG, that is definitely the sentiment among journalists and exhibitors I’ve chatted with this week. I think this year is an incremental phase in consumer technology. A couple of years ago, virtual reality was the hot new tech at CES, with brand-new products like the Oculus Rift and HTC Vive headsets that worked very well. And Alexa was just starting to become popular, along with smart home accessories. This year, we’re seeing those technologies mature with improved features that make them more capable. That isn’t very exciting, but at the end of the day consumers will be getting better products in the coming year.What does it say about the state of tech companies and organizations that there are no female keynote speakers at CES, yet there are female robot strippers being showcased at the event? (CES added two female keynote panelists after backlash, but the point remains).Yes, the pole-dancing strippers were a real thing at a strip club this week. While they weren’t officially affiliated with CES, they were an effective gimmick to lure CES attendees into the strip club. Still, your point is valid: CES has a diversity problem. The vast majority of featured keynote speakers are men.In some ways, that mirrors the tech industry. The overwhelming majority of tech executives in Silicon Valley are white men. Tech companies have acknowledged their diversity issues, but over the years there has been little progress.How has the Spectre/Meltdown vulnerabilities been addressed at CES, if they have been?Brian Krzanich, Intel’s chief executive, gave a keynote speech at CES. Unsurprisingly, he downplayed the repercussions of Spectre and Meltdown, two security flaws that affect nearly all microprocessors in computers and smartphones, by saying the company has not heard any reports about people whose data was stolen as a result of Spectre or Meltdown. (How would anyone even know if they were victims in the first place?) His statement was disappointing because downplaying the problem could make consumers complacent. Meltdown can be fixed with software updates for your operating system, browser and other important apps. But Spectre is an issue that can’t be completely fixed with a software patch; tech companies can only mitigate the vulnerability with software updates. The bottom line is you have to be diligent about keeping your software up-to-date. And you should also run an ad blocker to prevent malicious code from infecting you through ad networks when you’re browsing the web.What "left-field" finds did you stumble upon?I saw some pretty goofy gadgets, like a piece of rolling luggage with an electric scooter built into it. Can you imagine riding your luggage through the crowd at the airport? I also saw a robot sherpa — it was basically a big trunk for carrying heavy objects — that follows you around as you walk. It had sensors to avoid colliding with you.Brian, hi. I'm hoping that CES will bring announcements for in-wall light switch dimmers that don't require me to buy a separate hub. I don't need Alexa in my light switch, though I do want it to talk with her. Ideally, the same company would also have in-wall on/off switches and outlet controllers, so I don't need to have different apps to manage different switches. Thanks!Adam, I understand — a separate bridge or hub, which establishes a connection between your Wi-Fi router and a smart home device, is ugly and a waste of space. The good news for you is I did see some bridge-free light switch dimmers at CES. One example is Belkin’s Wemo dimmer switch, which only requires a Wi-Fi connection to work with Amazon’s Alexa and Google’s Assistant. I think you will continue to see companies shift away from hubs toward Wi-Fi connections built into their appliances. The downside of this, in my experience, is that Wi-Fi-equipped smart home devices occasionally lose their connection with your Wi-Fi router, and you sometimes have to power cycle them (turn the power off and back on) to regain a connection. With a light dimmer, that might require flipping your circuit breaker, but hopefully not.What do you see as some of the big trends in the “smart kitchen” space? And who do you think is leading the charge as an appliance manufacturer?The smart kitchen, which is a segment of the smart home where devices are internet-connected, is very interesting to me because each big manufacturer is approaching it in a different way. Samsung is selling a very expensive smart fridge that is equipped with a 21.5-inch touchscreen and voice controls; the company is focused on making the kitchen the center of the home, where families convene and spend quality time together. (I don’t know about your family, but that’s never been my experience.) Whirlpool’s smart kitchen vision is to try to make it easier for you to figure out what to cook with the ingredients you have. The company is offering an app that lets you use your smartphone camera to scan the ingredients in your pantry or fridge so that the software can give you some ideas of what to cook. It’s tough to say who is leading the charge because these are fairly new ideas, so we will have to see what resonates with consumers.Just curious to know about any new technology in locks. I run an Airbnb and I’m interested in battery technologies as most locks suck battery juice, especially the Wi-Fi models.Nick, I’m not a fan of smart locks. Every type has flaws.There are complete lock systems that include the dead bolt, door handle, keypad and electric locking system that talks to a smartphone. These are the most robust solutions, but they don’t fit on all doors. One lock I tried from Schlage didn’t work on two different doors; I probably would’ve had to cut new holes into the doors, which is a pain.Another approach to take instead is to try the robotic arm that attaches to your dead bolt and turns it. These are marketed as the simplest to install. The August lock is an example. But the reality is that when you install these devices, you need to make sure you have a modern high-quality deadbolt that can withstand being locked and unlocked repeatedly by a robot arm. In addition, you will need to change the batteries frequently, probably every other month.A third approach is a deadbolt with a wireless connection built into it that talks to your smartphone. The Kwikset Kevo, which is Wirecutter’s top pick for a smart lock, is an example. While this lock appears to be easy to install and well designed, there are hundreds of one-star Amazon reviews from customers who say the lock is unreliable, leaving them hanging outside the door.As a former Airbnb superhost, I recommend using an old-school lock box to provide keys to guests. A lock box requires no batteries, and it’s secure, easy to install, cheap and reliable.How are technology developers working to increase security with internet-connected devices?The tech giants that offer virtual assistants for controlling smart home devices — Apple, Google and Amazon — continually issue software updates with security updates. It’s those smaller brands making the smart home accessories that you need to be wary of. While many smart home products work great, their security teams probably are not as thorough or experienced as the people that work for large tech companies. In the end, the onus is likely on you to protect yourself. I wrote a guide on how to fend off cyberattacks on your home devices. I also recommend reading privacy policies of smart home accessory makers to understand what data they are collecting about you and potentially sharing with third parties like marketers.How will new large smart appliances like refrigerators and washing machines begin to pop up in the average American home or apartment? I find there is still a large amount of 10-plus years old appliances (that function fine of course) that still occupy many living spaces. But with a revolution in technology that senses how much water to use when cleaning your clothes or when you should buy a new container of milk, how long would you predict it would take for the technology of today to become the standard?It will likely be a very long time. Many of these smart appliances have premium price tags. A smart refrigerator with Alexa controls, for example, costs upward of $4,000. It’s unclear why you would pay that much for a refrigerator when you can just put a cheap Echo Dot ($50) on your counter. It’s also important to note that smart appliances have been around for many years. There are high-end ranges priced upward of $5,000 that include buttons you can press to tell the oven what you are cooking so it can set the temperature and time accordingly. At the end of the day, these features are a novelty: If you’re going to spend that much on a range, you’re probably a pretty good cook and know what temperature and timing to use to cook a roast or casserole. Smart home appliances need to be cheaper and have more useful applications before they reach the mainstream. Until then, they are an impractical luxury.I just purchased a 4K, OLED HDR TV. Anything at CES suggest it will be obsolete anytime soon?Nope, you’re in good shape. At CES, LG demonstrated a so-called 8K TV, which has quadruple the resolution of 4K TV. But rest assured that your 4K OLED HDR TV, which is the best type of television you can buy right now, won’t be obsolete for years. That’s because content makers are taking their sweet time to transition from 1080P resolution to 4K, meaning there isn’t much 4K video to watch right now, but there will be more coming over time. In addition, streaming devices like the Apple TV just recently added support for 4K. In other words, we’re only at the beginning of the adoption curve with these TVs, so sit back and enjoy your fancy television set.Given the push now to sell OLED TVs, what could they possibly do to improve picture quality, especially since content quality is not keeping up?I’m going to defer to Chris Heinonen, the TV expert at Wirecutter, a New York Times company that recommends products, for this one. He says the following: “OLEDs can still improve quite a bit. For professional users, Sony makes a reference OLED that is an RGB OLED while consumer models are white OLEDs right now with color filters. The RGB version is over 50 percent brighter, and has more saturated, true colors for bright areas (fires, skies, leaves, and so on). Sony also just demoed a 10,000 nit LCD (a higher peak brightness than current OLED TVs) which is a long way off, but the extra brightness made everything look more like real life. 4K Blu-ray content, and streaming content, already has picture information that an OLED cannot correctly display. While they do look great, and are what I use as a reference, they still have a lot of room to improve, even with our current content.”Samsung has announced a 146-inch 8k TV called The Wall. Is there a market for this type of “consumer” product, how successful do you think this will be? And will other companies do the same?I wouldn’t expect this to be a consumer product. When picking screen size, you should consider the distance between where you are sitting and where the television is placed. In order to properly consume a 146-inch television, you would have to live in an enormous house with a huge amount of space in the living room. Many products shown at CES are merely demonstrations of what tech companies are capable of doing today; very few actually materialize into products you will buy on Amazon or at Best Buy.Are mobile phones trending towards more user friendly or less user friendly this year?Less friendly. If you look at the sheer number of features that Apple and Google keep adding to iOS and Android year after year, mobile operating systems are becoming increasingly complex. (As an iOS user, I find the Mail app’s user interface to be confusing, and I find it perplexing that Apple hid the useful Airdrop feature in a menu that is difficult to find.) In addition, now that Apple has nixed the physical home button on the iPhone X, the way we use phones is poised to change significantly in the coming year. In both Android and iOS, we are increasingly relying on touch gestures that are not as intuitive to discover as pressing a physical button.Should I replace my recent vintage Apple Time Capsule router with an Eero or similar mesh network device?I think so. Internet service providers keep increasing their bandwidth speeds, and a dated router might not be able to deliver the higher speeds you could be getting. I like mesh networking, which is basically a system of Wi-Fi stations that work together to blanket every corner of your home with a strong wireless data connection. That is mainly beneficial for larger homes with multiple stories, but even if you have a modestly sized home you could benefit from having two mesh stations creating a continuous wireless link throughout your home. The other benefit of modern mesh networking systems is that they automatically apply software updates with the latest security enhancements. Many older routers require the consumer to manually download the updates, and I don’t know anyone who would even remember to do that. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersDUBAI — Careem, Uber's main ride-hailing app rival in the Middle East, was hit by a cyber attack that compromised the data of 14 million users, it said on Monday.The company learned of the breach, in which access was gained to a computer system that stored customer and driver account information, on January 14, it said in statement.Names, email addresses, phone numbers and trip data were stolen, though there was no evidence that passwords or credit card information - held on external third-party servers - were compromised, it said.At the time of the attack, Careem had 14 million customers and 558,000 drivers on its platform operating in 78 cities across the region, a company spokesman told Reuters. Users who have signed up since the attack were not affected.The company, one of the region's most prominent start-ups, apologized to its users, saying it "has learned from this experience and will come out of it a stronger and more resilient organization".News of the attack comes at a sensitive time for Careem, as it tests investor appetite for a bid to raise as much as $500 million to fund new business lines. It completed a funding round of the same amount last year.Careem, founded in 2012, already counts Saudi Arabia's Kingdom Holding, German carmaker Daimler and Chinese ride-hailer DiDi Chuxing among its investors.The company has previously said it is targeting profitability in the second half of 2018. It has also said that an initial public offering is an option under consideration. (Reporting by Katie Paul; Editing by Ghaida Ghantous and David Goodman)AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSAN FRANCISCO — Facebook Inc said on Monday that it removed or put a warning label on 1.9 million pieces of extremist content related to ISIS or al-Qaeda in the first three months of the year, or about double the amount from the previous quarter. Facebook, the world's largest social media network, also published its internal definition of "terrorism" for the first time, as part of an effort to be more open about internal company operations. The European Union has been putting pressure on Facebook and its tech industry competitors to remove extremist content more rapidly or face legislation forcing them to do so, and the sector has increased efforts to demonstrate progress.Of the 1.9 million pieces of extremist content, the "vast majority" was removed and a small portion received a warning label because it was shared for informational or counter-extremist purposes, Facebook said in a post on a corporate blog https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2018/04/keeping-terrorists-off-facebook. Facebook uses automated software such as image matching to detect some extremist material. The median time required for takedowns was less than one minute in the first quarter of the year, the company said. Facebook, which bans terrorists from its network, has not previously said what its definition encompasses. The company said it defines terrorism as: "Any non-governmental organization that engages in premeditated acts of violence against persons or property to intimidate a civilian population, government, or international organization in order to achieve a political, religious, or ideological aim." The definition is "agnostic to ideology," the company said, including such varied groups as religious extremists, white supremacists and militant environmentalists.  (Reporting by David Ingram; Editing by Leslie Adler)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 23, 2018, 2:16 P.M. E.D.T.
MUMBAI —  Infosys Ltd, India's second-biggest IT firm, plans to renew its focus on digital services as it looks to boost growth amid shrinking profit margins in its legacy business and rising competition from local and international rivals.Digital services - such as cloud, big data and analytics which accounted for more than a quarter of Infosys' revenue in year to March 2018 - are a massive opportunity, Chief Executive Salil Parekh said on Monday at the company's first analyst meeting in nearly two years."The idea is - this is a huge market, how can we be more relevant for our clients' future through this market," Parekh said.India's $154 billion software services industry, led by Tata Consultancy Services and No. 2 Infosys, is facing a margin squeeze in its legacy business such as routine infrastructure maintenance as clients increasingly demand more work for less money.AdvertisementDigital services are the new, big long-term opportunity for most Indian IT firms as they help Western clients transform traditional businesses and prevent them from getting disrupted by tech-savvy and agile start-ups.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Infosys, earlier this month, reported a rise in profit and forecast healthy revenue growth for the year, but its outlook on profit margins failed to cheer investors.AdvertisementOn Monday, Parekh said Infosys had set a three-year roadmap. "The first year in fiscal 2019 to stabilize where we are, the second year to start to build momentum and (the) third year to start to accelerate where we can have more and more share of our clients' relevance and that will obviously translate, overall, to a better Infosys," he said.Bigger rival TCS on Monday became the first Indian company to hit the $100 billion market capitalization mark, riding on the back of a record quarterly profit and a weaker rupee.(Reporting by Sankalp Phartiyal; Editing by Euan Rocha and Susan Fenton)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 22, 2018, 8:16 P.M. E.D.T.
SYDNEY —  The head of Australia's competition regulator said on Monday it will scrutinize contracts between Uber Technologies Inc [UBER.UL] and restaurants that use its food delivery app Uber Eats.The Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported on Sunday  several restaurateurs were disgruntled with contract terms they said left them, and not Uber, responsible for late deliveries despite being charged by Uber for the service."Certainly, we'll have a look at it," Rod Sims, head of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, told ABC radio on Monday when asked about the report."We have three bits of the law we can deal with here. One is business to business - are they misleading the people they're dealing with? Two is: Are they engaged in unconscionable conduct, putting all the conduct together? And thirdly are the terms with which they work unfair? So, there's a lot to look at there," he said.AdvertisementUber, which is backed by Japan's SoftBank Group, said Uber Eats is merely a "marketplace that connects restaurants with delivery partners" and that its terms and conditions are "consistent with Australian law".Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."Restaurants aren't locked in, just like delivery partners and eaters. Uber Eats is just one option. If a restaurant does not wish to use the app, they do not have to," an Uber East spokeswoman said in a statement.Uber, which is preparing for a potential initial public offering in 2019, lost $4.5 billion last year and is facing fierce competition at home in the United States as well as a  regulatory crackdown in Europe where governments have been leery of the company's impact on the traditional taxi industry.Advertisement(Reporting by Tom Westbrook; Editing by Daniel Wallis and Stephen Coates)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Raymond ZhongHONG KONG — United States officials have torpedoed a Chinese state-backed group’s plan to buy an American electronics company, signaling the Trump administration’s continuing skepticism toward Chinese investment deals, particularly those that involve transferring technological know-how.Xcerra, a Massachusetts-based provider of equipment for testing computer chips and circuit boards, said this week that it was withdrawing from its $580 million sale to an investment group backed by a Chinese government-controlled fund.The reason, according to Dave Tacelli, Xcerra’s president and chief executive, was that the deal was not likely to be approved by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, a multiagency Washington panel that operates largely out of the public eye. The committee, known as Cfius, plays an advisory role to the president, but it can effectively block foreign acquisitions of American companies over national security concerns.“Despite our best efforts to secure approval, it has become evident that Cfius will not clear this transaction,” Mr. Tacelli said. The deal would ultimately have been financed by the China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund, a $21 billion fund that counts several Chinese state-run companies as investors.It was the latest in a string of Chinese acquisitions scotched by Washington officials. Under President Barack Obama, regulators showed increased skepticism about Chinese deals involving technology companies. That trend has continued under President Trump, who has taken a tough line on China’s trade and investment practices.Chinese deal makers may soon find it even harder to get investments and acquisitions through. Lawmakers in Washington introduced a bill late last year that would widen Cfius’s remit, giving it oversight over more types of deals and, in particular, those that move advanced technologies into foreign hands.The intensified scrutiny comes as China’s government is ramping up a plan, called “Made in China 2025,” to use state support and overseas acquisitions to dominate high-tech fields like big data, advanced robotics and electric cars.The two countries have clashed over computer chips before. In September, the Trump administration blocked the $1.3 billion purchase of Lattice Semiconductor, an American chip manufacturer, by a Chinese-funded private equity firm.Tensions have also flared over technology deals that involve sensitive personal data. In January, regulatory worries caused the collapse of a plan by Ant Financial, a sister company of the Alibaba Group, the Chinese e-retailing giant, to buy MoneyGram, the money-transfer provider. That deal would have been worth $1.2 billion.In scuttling the purchase of Xcerra, American officials have struck at a major priority area for China’s innovation policies.China is the world’s biggest exporter of electronic devices. But to churn out all those smartphones, computers and other equipment, it must still import most of the electronic brains inside them. That has led the government in Beijing to try to supercharge its domestic chip industry.Progress so far has been mixed. Despite government subsidies, the technologies at China’s leading chip makers remain generations behind those at Intel, Samsung and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company.In the business of semiconductor assembling, packaging and testing, however, China has surged to become a world leader. Xcerra designs and makes equipment to test chips, but it doesn’t manufacture chips themselves.Follow Raymond Zhong on Twitter: @zhonggg.Advertisement
Tech We’re Using By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

FEB. 14, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? For Valentine’s Day, Daniel Jones, who edits the Modern Love column for The Times, discussed the tech he’s using.As the editor of Modern Love, you are constantly reading stories about people’s relationships, including submissions that never make it to publication. With that bird’s-eye view, how do you think tech has transformed relationships?In looking for love, tech gives us access, protection and the power of curation. Meaning we can shop for love from the safety of our homes while presenting only the best parts of ourselves to potential mates. So much control! How could anything go wrong?But actually, as with so much of tech, it’s mostly the illusion of control. Because we can’t really choose anyone even if it seems that we can. We can’t protect our hearts with the glass of our phones. And we can’t keep a potential mate from discovering who we truly are; we just increase the odds of their ultimately being disappointed by keeping them hooked to our “best” self.AdvertisementHow has tech changed dating? Is online dating making romance better or worse?I think we view technology in all areas as being a shortcut. We can solve problems faster, maximize time, use less energy while doing more. We can work smarter. And we can love smarter, too, right? With online dating, we can find the perfect person more efficiently, make contact more easily, rule that person in or out faster.AdvertisementBut that whole approach is fueled by an expectation that our search for love is like finding a needle in a haystack. And from what I’ve seen, love doesn’t often work that way. Having too many choices is in itself inefficient and fantasy inducing.In my view, love is best found not in a haystack but in a pea pod. Here are your five peas. Or maybe nine peas. The anthropologist Helen Fisher claims that a human brain can reasonably consider only nine or 10 choices; beyond that, they turn to noise. So if you were to limit yourself to nine people and get to know them, give each a chance, you’d probably fall in love with one.Even so, I’m not one of those people who moan about how dating apps make things worse. It’s just different, much the way online shopping differs from brick-and-mortar.When shopping online, you buy more stuff because it’s so easy. Then you probably fantasize a little more about your new shoes or flying drone as you await their arrival, which means you’re going to be disappointed more often because the shoes don’t fit or the drone is poorly made. So you return them and start over — same as with the average online date. In the store, meanwhile, all of that trying on and rejecting would have happened in real time, much like getting to know and rejecting people at the bar or a party happens in real time, leaving you little time to fantasize.What’s particularly misleading about online dating is how everyone on the site is trying to seduce you. They’re trying to seduce everyone. They’re all saying, “Date me!”When you walk into a bar, does everyone rush up to you with a big smile and a glowing résumé? No. Everyone ignores you. But online, a little piece of you believes. Because you’re being pitched, you allow yourself to believe in these people’s vulnerability and desire. Which is why meeting people online tends to heighten our fantasies and deepen our disappointment.Our smartphones now include photos, chat transcripts, contacts and more. Is it good for relationships to have so much of our lives public? AdvertisementWhat I’ve noticed about young people who’ve grown up with social media is the degree to which they bring a sense of audience to nearly everything they do. They see their own life as a performance, one that is constantly “reviewed” by friends, family, aunts, cousins, strangers.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But what’s refreshing to me is how goofy a lot of it is. It’s curated but not always to show perfection; in fact, imperfection seems to be the goal, something to laugh at, an ugly or embarrassing moment or expression or bad experience. They splash it all out there as a way of saying, “This is me.” I think a lot of us who didn’t grow up with that are horrified about having unflattering pictures of ourselves out there or embarrassing stories. We see that kind of online vulnerability as risky, and they often don’t — they celebrate it.How has tech affected your job editing Modern Love?Tech — which for me mostly consists of my laptop and phone — has made me both happier and more stressed out, more engaged with the world and more isolated from my immediate surroundings, more in touch with my friends and family while I see them less and less. In my job, tech allows me incredible freedom — to do my work at The Times or from the beach, and whether I’m feeling good or am sick in bed. I’m writing this now on a train from New York City to Massachusetts on a brisk, beautiful Saturday in February. It’s glorious, and at the same time my work and personal life have almost no boundary.What tech are you obsessed with in your personal life? I could not navigate the world without Google Maps, and I could not fully appreciate the world without Google Earth. I still don’t get how either works. They are miraculous.Recently there has been a lot of talk about smartphone addiction. What’s your advice for couples who struggle to put down their phones and want to remain present with each other?I’m a bad person to ask about that because I’m on my phone all the time, too. I’m just glad these things didn’t exist when I had small children, because I know I’d be like those parents you see at the playground, staring at their phones as their children try to get their attention.My immediate family is scattered — kids in college, my wife and I frequently in different cities — and these days that texting connection outweighs the negative of being on our phones when we’re together. But just barely. With phone addiction, it’s all about willpower. These days I’m without my phone only in the shower.So I guess my parting advice to couples who want to remain present with each other: Spend more time together in the shower.Follow Daniel Jones on Twitter: @danjonesnytA version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Modern Relationships Transformed by Technology.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By REUTERSAPRIL 23, 2018, 6:43 A.M. E.D.T.
BAGHDAD —  A new electronic system will deliver the results of Iraq's upcoming national election within hours of polls closing, the country's chief electoral officer said, a marked improvement from previous years when it took weeks to announce the outcome.Iraqis head to the polls on May 12 and will be using an electronic voting system for the first time."The results will be announced in hours, not days," Riyadh al-Badran, the Chief Electoral Officer of the Independent High Electoral Commission, said in a Reuters interview at the commission's headquarters in Baghdad."We will have results that accurately reflect the will of the voters," Badran said, adding that the new system significantly limits the possibilities of voter fraud.The upcoming election will be the fourth held since the fall of Saddam Hussein after the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003. More than 24 million of Iraq's 37 million people are eligible to vote next month.AdvertisementIraqi authorities hope to avoid the political tension caused by delays in reporting the results in previous elections.AdvertisementUnder the new system, which replaces the ink-stained fingers indicating who voted that became a symbol of post-Saddam democracy, Iraqi voters will insert ID cards into a machine which will link them to individual ballots using machine-readable codes. After voters mark the ballots, they put them into a scanner that will tally and record results.The commission has been educating voters and training poll workers to familiarize them with it, said Badran, who gave Reuters correspondents a demonstration of the process.Baghdad awarded Korean company Miru Systems a $135 million contract for the system, which includes around 70,000 devices to be used across the country, Badran said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Aid groups have expressed concern that a system that relies on identity cards could make it difficult to vote for people displaced by the war to recapture territory from the Islamic State group.Islamic State, which captured nearly a third of Iraq's territory in 2014, was largely defeated in Iraq last year. But more than 2.3 million Iraqis - mostly Sunni Muslim Arabs, a minority in Iraq - are still internally displaced. Many lost or abandoned their identity documents during their flight.Badran said displaced Iraqis with voting cards from previous elections can use them to vote. Those who are living in camps and have no cards will also be given other ways to prove their identities and get permission to vote."The commission has a special concern for this issue," said Badran, who said fair representation was important so that parliament reflects Iraq society.There are nearly 7,000 candidates running for 329 seats in 18 provinces using Iraq's proportional representation system.Iraqis abroad will be able to vote in 19 countries, including the United States, Britain and Canada.(Reporting by Raya Jalabi and Ahmed Aboulenein; Editing by Peter Graff)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersDUBAI — Iran's central bank has banned the country's banks from dealing in cryptocurrencies, including Bitcoin, over money-laundering concerns, the state news agency IRNA reported on Sunday as the country tries to halt a currency crisis."Banks and credit institutions and currency exchanges should avoid any sale or purchase of these currencies or taking any action to promote them," IRNA said, quoting a central bank circular based on a ban on cryptocurrencies passed by Iran's anti-money laundering body in December. Iran moved this month to formally unify its official and open market exchange rates and banned money changing outside of banks, after its currency, the rial, plunged to an all-time low on concerns about a possible return of crippling sanctions. U.S. President Donald Trump will decide by May 12 whether to restore U.S. economic sanctions on Tehran, which would be a severe blow to the 2015 pact between Iran and six major powers. He has pressured European allies to work with Washington to fix the deal.  (Reporting by Dubai newsroom, Editing by William Maclean)AdvertisementBy VINDU GOEL and SUHASINI RAJJAN. 7, 2018
ALIGARH, India — Signs and banners for Paytm, India’s biggest digital payments service, festoon Pooran Singh’s cellphone shop, where people drop in all day to add data or talk time to their prepaid phones.Yet few of these people actually use Paytm at the store, which straddles two dusty streets in this sleepy north Indian city in which tractors jostle with cows for space on the narrow roads.“People recharge in cash,” Mr. Singh said, after a young man handed him 20 rupees, about 32 cents, to top up his mother’s phone.The scene in Mr. Singh’s shop underscores a persistent reality of India’s economy: People prefer cash for most routine transactions, despite intensive efforts by the government and global technology companies to lure them onto digital platforms.AdvertisementIndia’s reluctance to give up paper money poses challenges for the firms that are vying to offer electronic payments, including local players like Paytm, which has received financing from the Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba, and American tech companies, like Facebook, Google and PayPal.Advertisement“Cash is convenient,” said Caesar Sengupta, who oversees Google’s products for emerging markets. “It’s anonymous. You can use it everywhere.”Even so, tech companies see India’s low rate of digital payments as an opportunity. They all cite China, where in just a few years, mobile payments became so popular that it is now difficult to get through the day with cash alone.“In India, we’re going to see a similar rise,” Mr. Sengupta said in November, shortly after Google introduced Tez, a payments app for India.One reason for tech companies’ optimism is that digital payments in India have increased over the past year. The value of transactions using digital wallets, the business on which Paytm was built, rose 64 percent from December 2016 to December 2017. Transactions made with the Unified Payments Interface, a government-backed technology used by Tez and many other mobile apps, went from virtually nothing a year ago to $2.1 billion last month.Leading India’s budding payments shift are Paytm and its chief executive, Vijay Shekhar Sharma.Mr. Sharma founded the company seven years ago as a way for cellphone users to pay their bills online. It is now India’s largest consumer-payments app, with 302 million account holders and 90 million active users.Customers can use it to buy goods at physical stores, book movie or airline tickets, send money to each other or order items from Paytm’s online mall. A transaction requires a quick scan of a merchant’s bar code or a few taps on a smartphone, rivaling Apple Pay or Venmo in simplicity.Mr. Sharma aspires to put his company at the center of Indians’ financial lives, and he has pledged to spend $1.9 billion over the next two years toward that goal.Advertisement“Our truest ambition is for Paytm to be known as the bank for this new-age, digital, mobile world,” he said in an interview at the company’s headquarters in Noida, just outside Delhi.Merchants like Mr. Singh are crucial to Paytm’s plans.The company pays Mr. Singh a bounty of 20 rupees for each of the eight or so customers he signs up each month, with additional payments if a newcomer continues to use the service. He earns an additional 18 rupees each time he verifies the identity of an existing Paytm user with his fingerprint scanner, a new requirement imposed by the government on all digital wallet companies.Mr. Singh’s phone shop has also become a virtual A.T.M. for Paytm’s nascent banking division, which plans to turn 100,000 shops across India into mini-branches where customers can deposit and withdraw cash, get a loan and buy insurance policies.“We really want to reach the underserved, underbanked customer,” said Renu Satti, who leads the Paytm bank.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Paytm’s strategy dovetails with the goals of India’s central government. Narendra Modi, who became prime minister in 2014, has sought to recast his country as “digital India,” and his government has heavily promoted cashless transactions.In November 2016, Mr. Modi suddenly banned most of India’s currency. The edict forced people to exchange their rupees for new notes at banks, setting off a short-term cash crunch and prompting many Indians to consider digital options.Still, the country’s cash economy has endured.Only one-third of India’s 1.3 billion residents have access to the internet. Of those who are able to go online, just 14 percent make mobile payments at least once a week, according to Kantar TNS, a research firm based in London.Consumer trust is a big issue. Ghani Khan, who was finishing a snack with his wife at Aligarh’s lone McDonald’s, said that someone had once stolen 3,300 rupees, what would be about $52 now, from his Paytm account.Advertisement“People feel scared to use these apps,” Mr. Khan said. Although he got his money back, he now avoids payment apps, preferring to use cash or his debit card. (Paytm says that most such problems are related to thieves who call users and persuade them to turn over sensitive account data.)Merchants also worry that officials are promoting digital transactions as a way to better track commerce — and collect more taxes.Anusheel Shrivastava, a top Kantar executive in India, said his firm found that 6 percent of mobile phone users made at least one digital transaction a day in 2017, up from 2 percent in 2016.That number is likely to increase further when WhatsApp, the messaging service owned by Facebook, adds payments to its service in the next few months.Paytm stands out in part because of the 10,000 employees that it has in the field to help new businesses use the service, educate existing ones about new features and troubleshoot problems. There are about six million merchants in its network, from giant multinationals like Uber to tiny neighborhood sweet shops.“We have to train them, we have to retrain them, we have to visit them,” said Yashwin Gupta, who oversees a team of 65 Paytm representatives in the region that includes Aligarh. “That’s our daily job.”The job is getting easier now that Paytm is better known.Last month, Mukesh Gupta sought Paytm’s help in setting up the service for his toy shop here after 10 to 20 percent of his customers asked to pay with Paytm. “People like to spend money on more than just needs,” he said.Aligarh, with 1.2 million residents, is a barometer for Paytm’s progress because it’s a midsize city, and because Mr. Sharma, the company’s chief executive, grew up nearby.AdvertisementOn one visit home, he said, he met a Hindi-speaking merchant who did not know how to get money out of Paytm and into his bank.The problem? Paytm’s app for merchants was in English, and the icons were not clear enough for those who did not speak the language. Paytm soon developed a Hindi version.In recent months, skeptics have questioned whether Paytm can maintain its growth. The new regulations requiring customer verification could turn off some customers. The company is also spending heavily on incentives, such as giving cash back on certain purchases and free credit-card processing for merchants.Mr. Sharma said such expenses were necessary investments.“The only way to grow digital transactions is to make them free,” he said. “This is a culturally different country being built.”Ayesha Venkataraman contributed research from Mumbai.Follow Vindu Goel and Suhasini Raj on Twitter: @vindugoel and @suhasiniraj.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Digital Money Pushes Into India.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DON CLARKJAN. 7, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — In 1994, Intel faced a public relations crisis over an elusive mathematics glitch that affected the accuracy of calculations made by its popular Pentium computer chips. After insisting that the problem would not affect many people, the company succumbed to public pressure and recalled the chips, costing it $475 million.Now Intel faces an even bigger test: two serious security issues with its chips that could have implications for nearly everyone touched by computing. And so far — in something of a repeat of the 1994 incident — Intel has failed to quiet critics, putting it in an awkward position this week as its chief executive prepares to take the stage at one of the world’s biggest tech trade shows.The cause of the new public relations crisis is the disclosure last week of two new ways to filch data from the microprocessors inside nearly all of the world’s computers. Called Meltdown and Spectre, they could allow hackers to steal the entire memory contents of computers and spur the discovery of new attacks.“It is a very big deal, because it’s an area people haven’t looked at before,” said Bruce Schneier, a computer security expert and lecturer at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. “Everybody is going to start now.”AdvertisementIntel was privately informed of the issues by security researchers in June. The company, which has rejected doing a chip recall or other costly remedies, said it has quietly marshaled a coalition of software, hardware and cloud services to develop and deploy programming tweaks that are designed to close most of the security gaps. Intel and its partners said the fixes should be largely in place this week.Advertisement“We’ve gotten much more mature in our ability to respond,” said Steven L. Smith, an Intel vice president who was closely involved in the Pentium crisis and is now overseeing its handling of the new security issues.But just how well the proposed fixes work remains a matter of debate, putting Brian Krzanich, Intel’s chief executive, in the hot seat. Mr. Krzanich is scheduled to help kick off the International CES trade show, one of the biggest tech conventions of the year, at a Las Vegas hotel on Monday night. Now he may need to address the chip security problems in addition to topics like artificial intelligence, virtual reality and self-driving cars.Adding to Intel’s image challenges is that Mr. Krzanich sold about $39 million in Intel shares in late November, after the company learned of the chip security problems. A company spokesman said the sale had been unrelated to the security issues and followed a prearranged annual trading plan. Mr. Krzanich, who reduced his holdings by about 50 percent, “continues to hold shares in line with corporate guidelines,” Intel said.Meltdown and Spectre were identified by a team at Google, with their work augmented by researchers from other organizations. Meltdown affects only Intel chips. Spectre also affects chip designs from companies such Advanced Micro Devices and ARM Holdings, whose technology is used in most smartphones.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Intel, largely by virtue of its success, has the most at stake. While the Pentium chip underpinned most PCs running Microsoft operating systems in 1994, Intel processors are now also used in all Apple Macintosh systems and more than 95 percent of the chips used by cloud services and data centers run by corporations. Its technological reach means that both Meltdown and Spectre could affect just about anyone who uses the internet.“We created a microprocessor monoculture,” said Bryan Cantrill, chief technology officer at Joyent, a cloud service owned by Samsung. “There are dangers associated with that.”Intel’s situation is complicated by history and semantics. The Pentium problem was caused by a design error. But Meltdown and Spectre attacks exploit a common speed-boosting technique in chips called speculative execution that Intel’s Mr. Smith insisted is working as it should. That approach to chip design emerged before researchers developed new ways to spy on such internal operations, using what they call “side-channel” analysis, Mr. Smith said.AdvertisementAs a result, the security issues that were discovered were not flaws or bugs, he said. The features that hackers could exploit are a bit like a door or window in a house, which burglars can exploit but that builders would not consider leaving out.That hasn’t stopped an uproar from security researchers and tech industry executives. One widely distributed barb came from Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux operating system, who posted a testy message last week advising Intel to “take a long hard look” at its chips “and actually admit that they have issues instead of writing P.R. blurbs that say that everything works as designed.”Major users of Intel chips — including Apple and the cloud computing arms of Google and Amazon — have said they deployed security fixes recommended by Intel and so far they have not reported the sharp performance slowdowns of the sort some experts projected.But the solutions are far from perfect. While Meltdown’s effects can be mitigated with updated operating systems, countering Spectre requires more complex steps like updating computer code stored in the chips themselves — or in some applications like web browsers, Intel recommends inserting special instructions in places that security professionals said may be hard to identify.Mr. Smith said Intel and its partners had originally planned to disclose the security problems and their proposed solutions on Jan. 9, before the news was broken last week in The Register, a tech publication. Mr. Smith said the company did not disclose the issues when they were informed of them in June because Intel needed time to analyze the issues and then develop and test remedies.Many security professionals said they accepted the argument. “This is not a simple ‘we found a bug, here’s a patch and we are done,’” Mr. Schneier said.Whether Intel’s actions to address Meltdown and Spectre will be enough for the company to sidestep a sizable financial hit is unclear. At least one lawsuit seeking class action status has been filed against Intel, and some industry executives expect more litigation to come. At a minimum, Intel engineers working on future microprocessors now face the additional labor of trying to make them less susceptible to the new kinds of attacks.Using the software fixes, “we already have the security improvement that we are seeking to get,” Mr. Smith said. But making internal changes to the chips could handle those changes more efficiently, he said.Follow Don Clark on Twitter: @donal888A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Intel Chip Security Is Scrutinized After Disclosure of Hacking Openings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
JAN. 3, 2018
Imagine this: When you leave the house, your air conditioner and lights turn off automatically. Then when a motion sensor detects a person in the house, like your house cleaner, it sends an alert to your phone. When you arrive home, a camera recognizes who you are and the door automatically unlocks.Automated technologies like these will be at the forefront of CES, one of the world’s largest tech conventions, next week in Las Vegas. They underline one major trend: Increasingly, the innovations that are making their way into your personal technology aren’t physical electronics or gadgets at all.The real star is artificial intelligence, the culmination of software, algorithms and sensors working together to make your everyday appliances smarter and more automated. It is A.I. that is telling the door to unlock when the camera recognizes you, or sending an alert to your phone when sensors detect a person.“It’s less about the hardware, and more about what’s inside,” Carolina Milanesi, a technology analyst for Creative Strategies, said about the prominence of artificial intelligence and software innovations at CES. For consumers who are dazzled by flashy new devices, A.I. is never as exciting, she said — but it’s the magic that is making hardware evolve.AdvertisementThat artificial intelligence will take center stage at CES also speaks to how the event has changed in the last few years. It has become less of a venue for tech companies to unveil splashy new products like smartphones or computers, and instead has turned into a showcase for nascent technologies.AdvertisementHere are some highlights you can expect from next week’s show.Alexa, Amazon’s intelligent assistant that listens to your voice commands to play music, order diapers and place a phone call, will be everywhere at CES.Smaller tech companies have teamed up with Amazon to bring voice-controlled smarts to their products. Devices like light bulbs, car stereo accessories, robovacuums, home security systems and even coffee makers will work with Alexa. In addition, thousands of companies have developed “Skills,” or third-party apps, that work with Alexa voice commands. Sonos, a premium audio brand, recently released a speaker with Alexa functionality built in.What’s fueling interest in Alexa? Amazon’s success with Echo, the smart speakers enabled with the personal assistant. Amazon said last month that it sold tens of millions of Echo devices over the holiday season. Strategy Analytics, a research firm, estimates that 68 percent of voice-controlled speakers sold last year worked with Alexa.Other tech giants want a piece of the pie, too. In 2016, Google introduced Home, an artificially intelligent speaker to rival the Echo. The search giant will have a large presence at CES, where the company is also expected to highlight accessories that work with its Home speaker and Google Assistant.Apple this year will release HomePod, a speaker that relies on Siri, the Apple assistant, to control some smart home accessories. And Samsung Electronics, the South Korean manufacturer, is expected to unveil a major upgrade for Bixby, its virtual assistant, later this year.“If I had to make a bet, it’s the year of A.I. and conversational interfaces,” said J. P. Gownder, an analyst for Forrester Research.Nowadays, it’s easy to shop for high-quality internet-connected home accessories, like light bulbs, thermostats and security cameras. At CES, Samsung is even planning to introduce a smart refrigerator at the electronics show that can listen to voice commands to control other home accessories.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now tech companies are looking to push internet connectivity beyond products in your home.Consider parking spaces that can sense whether cars are occupying them, and can then alert people when spots free up. Or a garbage can that can notify a waste collection facility when the container is full, or street lamps planted throughout a city that could monitor air quality.Advertisement“You’ve seen the smart home,” Mr. Gownder said. “The smart city is elevating that to the next level.”Deloitte, the consulting firm, has been making a big push for smart cities. It envisions a future where a multitude of sensors work together to create a healthier, safer and more energy efficient town. Sensors in a river could detect pollution like leaks from chemical plants, and sensors that detect the sound of a gunshot could be used to alert the police, for example.Next week, companies will demonstrate prototypes of devices embedded with some of these sensors with the hope that cities will soon begin adopting these technologies within their infrastructure.Self-driving-car enthusiasts like Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla, dream of a future where driverless cars eliminate traffic accidents while letting people do work on their commutes.They can keep dreaming: Autonomous vehicles still have a long way to go before they become safe and properly regulated.“Your car doesn’t drive itself, at least not reliably for a long period of time,” said Ms. Milanesi of Creative Strategies.Still, at CES, carmakers like Ford, Hyundai, BMW and Audi are expected to show off the latest improvements to self-driving tech, like smarter parking assistance and less error-prone collision avoidance. These are baby steps toward truly driverless vehicles, but some features may appear in cars in the coming years.AdvertisementLikely coming sooner is the so-called connected car. Tech and car companies will demonstrate new features for internet-equipped cars, like the ability to pay for parking and gas through a dashboard or cameras that enhance a driver’s side and rear vision. At the trade show, Gentex Corporation, a company that develops car technology, will demonstrate in-vehicle biometrics that scan a driver’s iris to verify his or her identity before turning on the car.As a growing number of devices rely on artificial intelligence, they will require faster bandwidth speeds. At CES, wireless companies like AT&T and Verizon are expected to give progress reports on so-called 5G, the fifth-generation network technology.With 5G, wireless carriers envision an era of incredibly fast speeds that let smartphone users download a movie in less than five seconds — roughly 100 times faster than the current network technology, 4G. Even more important, 5G is expected to greatly reduce latency to let devices communicate with each other with extremely fast response times.(One caveat: the wireless industry is not expected to roll out 5G until 2020. Telecom equipment makers and tech companies are still fighting over which of their technologies should be standardized globally.)So why should you care? All of the above — the smart city, the driverless car and smarter artificial intelligence — will need extremely fast response times for devices to work reliably. The chief example is driverless cars, which will have to communicate with each other practically in real-time to avoid collisions.“It could be foundational to the next generation of advancements,” said Greg Roberts, an executive at Accenture, a tech consulting firm. “You’re going to see more talk around the potential of 5G to remove the barriers around bandwidth.”Email: brian.chen@nytimes.com; Twitter: @bxchen.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: A.I. Will Take Center Stage at Major Tech Convention.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Nellie BowlesIt was another terrible day for Facebook and the company had dispatched Campbell Brown, its head of news partnerships, to do some damage control.In mid-March, Ms. Brown took the stage at a conference in New York about the future of the media industry. In front of a room full of editors and advertising executives, she immediately faced a question about Facebook’s latest scandal: The company had sent a letter to The Guardian threatening a lawsuit if the newspaper published a massive report on the political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica’s improper harvesting of the data of millions of the social network’s users.“If it were me, I would have probably not threatened to sue The Guardian,” Ms. Brown said, with a Southern lilt in her voice and the easy charm of a onetime broadcast anchor. “Probably not our wisest move.”Some in the audience shot surprised glances at one another. That Ms. Brown was so willing to buck Facebook’s tightly controlled messaging — and do it in the middle of a news cycle that kept getting worse — made some wonder if she had gone rogue.“Is she on her way out?” Emily Bell, a professor at Columbia Journalism School who had been on stage with Ms. Brown, wondered later. “She is one of the few people from Facebook who will voice what sounds like disappointment.”Ms. Brown, 49, wasn’t out at Facebook. Yet she has long had to grapple with questions about whether she really has influence at the social network.Since joining the Silicon Valley company in 2017 to repair its frayed relationship with the news media, many have considered the former CNN and NBC anchor as little more than window dressing. Others see her as a more insidious figure — a telegenic personality with close ties to conservative figures who can offer Facebook’s outreach the veneer of journalistic credibility. To them, she is an ambassador from a dictatorship, willing to deliver bad news with a smile and some canapés. No matter their view of her, almost all question what influence she has at a company where the chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has viewed news — both making it and displaying it — as a headache.But a year and a half into her tenure, Ms. Brown, who became a school-choice activist with close ties to conservative politics after her TV career, is emerging as a fiery negotiator for her vision of Facebook as a publishing platform, according to interviews with more than 30 people who work or who regularly interact with her. This month, Hollywood Reporter named Ms. Brown one of this year’s 35 most powerful New York media figures.Facebook — with its reach of more than 2.2 billion users — already holds enormous power over the news that people consume. But now it is making its first venture into licensed news content. Facebook has set aside a $90 million budget to have partners develop original news programming, and Ms. Brown is pitching publishers on making Facebook-specific news shows featuring mainstream anchors, according to two people involved in or briefed on the matter, who asked not to be identified because the details were confidential.Once those shows get started, Ms. Brown wants to use Facebook’s existing Watch product — a service introduced in 2017 as a premium product with more curation that has nonetheless been flooded with far-right conspiracy programming — to be a breaking news destination. The result would be something akin to an online competitor to cable news.Ms. Brown is also pushing paywalls for publishers on the social network, another first for a company that has long avoided circulating any content that users would have to pay for.“This is us changing our relationship with publishers and emphasizing something that Facebook has never done before; it’s having a point of view,” Ms. Brown said in February at a tech and media conference where she discussed how Facebook planned to de-emphasize low-quality news and could even begin paying some publishers.Whether all these changes last — or even get implemented — are open questions. Facebook has started down the road of editorial control before, only to change course. The company laid off a group of editors in 2016 after a controversy over its Trending Topics items and replaced them with an algorithm that automatically surfaces the top news of the day.And with recent changes that have lowered the visibility of hard news in Facebook’s News Feed, frustration within the media industry is mounting. Rupert Murdoch, News Corp.’s executive chairman, has called for publishers to band together to force Facebook to pay for news content.Ms. Brown declined to speak on the record but some Facebook colleagues spoke about how she has navigated the relationships with the news media and inside the company, even as the social network’s own rapport with journalism remains uneasy.“Campbell leads a critical piece of our business,” said Dan Rose, Facebook’s vice president for partnerships. “She’s been incredibly effective, and she’s just getting started.”Ms. Brown was born into a tight-knit Catholic family in 1968 in Ferriday, La., population about 5,000. Her father, a local politician and state insurance commissioner, once served a prison stint for lying to the F.B.I. during an investigation related to an insurance company.In her youth, Ms. Brown was kicked out of an all-girls boarding school for sneaking off campus to a party. She spent two years at Louisiana State University before attending Regis University, a small Jesuit school in Denver. Afterward, she moved to then-Czechoslovakia for two years to teach English before returning to the United States and beginning a television news career, going from a local station in Topeka, Kan., to Richmond, Va., then Baltimore.Her approach on camera was confrontational, yet likable. In 1996, she got a call from NBC News.“There was something about her on screen that indicated she was a person who could make you feel comfortable — the nice girl next door you could talk to,” Neal Shapiro, then president of NBC, said in 2003.At NBC, she became a political campaign reporter, covering George W. Bush’s run for the presidency in 2000. She smoked cigarettes and threw parties. With her best friend and fellow reporter Anne Kornblut, she started “Chick Chat,” a social group for female White House correspondents that drew political guests as well as charges of elitism from those it excluded.While in Iraq in 2004 for a story on the Abu Ghraib prison complex, she met Dan Senor, chief spokesman for the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq. Ms. Brown asked him out and they married in 2006 and now have two sons, ages 8 and 10. Ms. Brown converted to Judaism, her husband’s religion, before their marriage, and friends said the couple is known for hosting raucous seders with skits and singing.Mr. Senor now works for the conservative billionaire Paul Elliott Singer’s hedge fund, Elliott Management, and is a power broker in the Republican fund-raising world, as well as a frequent guest on morning news shows.In 2007, Ms. Brown joined CNN as a prime-time anchor but struggled for good ratings. She quit three years later with a statement that threw shade at her fellow CNN anchors, saying that she could not compromise her desire for honest, unbiased reporting.“Shedding my own journalistic skin to try to inhabit the kind of persona that might coexist in that line up is simply impossible for me,” she wrote.Some said her behavior now, seemingly throwing Facebook’s strategy of silence under the bus, mirrors that letter.But after leaving CNN, Ms. Brown did shed her journalistic skin, and turned herself into a political animal.Ms. Brown became an activist focused on education. She fought teachers’ unions, a tactic some friends think was meant to position her for a run for office. A New York Magazine profile once posed the question, “How did an ex-news anchor become the most controversial woman in school reform?”“She was a celebrity in ed reform,” said Eva Moskowitz, the founder and chief executive of the Success Academy Charter Schools, where Ms. Brown is a board member. “We just didn’t have people of her prominence before.”Ms. Brown also started an education news site called The 74 Million, which often reports on issues around teachers’ unions, and an advocacy group called The Partnership for Educational Justice, which funded a lawsuit against teacher tenure. She served on the board of Betsy DeVos’s American Federation for Children. (Ms. Devos has funded The 74 Million.) When President Trump nominated Ms. DeVos to be Secretary of Education last year, Ms. Brown wrote an op-ed in her defense, calling Ms. DeVos a “friend.”By then, Facebook was in crisis mode over how it handled news.In mid-2016, the social network was grappling with criticism that its Trending Topics team of editors was choosing to feature left-leaning content and leaving out right-leaning posts. A few months later, the term “fake news” would crash into the lexicon after the presidential election.Ms. Kornblut, who had left the Washington Post to go work at Facebook with Sheryl Sandberg, the company’s chief operating officer, called Ms. Brown in to help rebuild news relationships and ease tensions with an agitated media world. Ms. Brown’s hiring was announced in January 2017.Many in the news business were immediately skeptical about what Ms. Brown might do.“If you wanted to deeply understand American journalists, having a TV personality is not really the first place you would go,” said Tom Rosenstiel, executive director of the American Press Institute, a nonprofit that supports news media with research and training.At Facebook, Ms. Brown became part of an informal cadre on the company’s business side known as the FOSSes, or “Friends of Sheryl Sandberg.” But close association with a powerful figure within the company does not assure her of success.When it comes to decisions related to publishers, the power at Facebook has traditionally been more with the product staff, who tend to be aligned more with Mr. Zuckerberg and cloistered from meetings with partners, according to several media executives. Google, in contrast, has a similar power dynamic but, publishers said, a more robust partnership structure and easier contact with product teams.“She’s smart, but we’re different beasts,” Richard Gingras, the vice president for news at Google, said of Ms. Brown. “I’m in a fortunate position where I’m involved with the product. I can make change. I feel for her, I really do.”While Ms. Brown has helped Facebook mount its charm offensives at industry events, her efforts to remake Facebook’s relationships with publishers has meant cutting back her visibility to the broader public.“There was a time you couldn’t turn on a T.V. and not see Campbell Brown,” said Ben Winkler, chief investment officer for OMD, a global media agency. “Since she went to Facebook, Campbell Brown is where?”The answer, it turns out, was close to home. Editors talk about Facebook as an authoritarian regime or perhaps an ideological cult, and they call Ms. Brown its emissary to the city.She takes those ambassadorial duties seriously. She’s a regular figure in the New York media scrum, such as a recent Pulitzer reception at the media hot spot Michael’s. She also hosts frequent media and Facebook mixers at her modern, airy TriBeCa apartment.At these events, attendees are met with wine and hors d’oeuvres (seared tuna, and a cheese and cracker buffet). Guests describe Ms. Brown as “a hoot” with a sharp humor. When she calls the party to order, the group sits around her living room on leather cowhide seats and polished wooden stumps.Ms. Brown typically has a guest of honor from Facebook, such as the chief product officer Chris Cox, and allows questions. If she deems a question too challenging for the guest, she pushes back against the inquisitor — her go-to is some form of the retort, “Really?”The gatherings are frequently a who’s who of the news media, mixing long-established outlets with digitally focused newcomers. The guest lists have included Ben Smith, the BuzzFeed editor in chief; David Remnick, the editor of The New Yorker; Nick Thompson, the editor of Wired; and the Vox publisher Melissa Bell. One editor, who asked not to be identified because these gatherings are off the record, said he felt “humiliated” afterward, having been reminded that the power of traditional publishers is waning.The gatherings are the first outreach Facebook has made to the New York media world — a world that is increasingly beholden to the company’s power.“I know a lot of publishers there, they have to manage good relationships in order to survive, let alone thrive,” said Jason Kint, chief executive of Digital Content Next, a trade association serving digital content companies. “It’s not getting better.”Some said Ms. Brown has had more influence on Facebook than they expected, citing the introduction of paywalls and the prospect of the company paying for content.“I think she’s been a stronger figure in that role than any platform has ever had,” Mr. Smith said.As much as those soirees may include needling from her, Ms. Brown’s daytime summits with publishers tend to be more overtly contentious. At one recent meeting, two publishers complained about having lost a lot of online traffic after changes to Facebook’s News Feed. According to one publisher who was present, Ms. Brown told them the company would give them more traffic if they stopped doing clickbait.Still, the media industry has been so beaten down by Facebook that some said they were happy to just have someone in the company who talks to them.“We see some small movement in the right direction in terms of at least improving transparency,” said Jim Bankoff, chief executive of Vox Media. There had not been “real movement in terms of providing better business opportunity,” he added. “But at least we’re being listened to.”Ms. Brown recently helped arrange a meeting between Mr. Zuckerberg and several members of The Washington Post management team: Martin Baron, the editor; Fred Ryan, the chief executive; and Shailesh Prakash, the chief product officer. The group discussed whether a Facebook user should hit a paywall on Post content after clicking on three, five or 10 articles. Mr. Zuckerberg said 10, but The Post executives wanted a paywall to start after 3 articles, according to a person who was in the meeting.Ms. Brown went for the middle ground, pushing Mr. Zuckerberg to give The Post a test run of paywalls that kick in after three and five Post articles are read. She won. Since March 1, The Post has been doing just that, according to Mr. Prakash.“She’s helped us,” Mr. Prakash said.But Ms. Brown’s biggest project is developing a news apparatus within Facebook’s premium video section, called Watch.She is negotiating with BuzzFeed, Vox, CNN, Fox News and others to partner on creating about a half-dozen Facebook-exclusive shows, which will launch in May and June.Building off these shows, Ms. Brown is pushing to create a curated breaking news destination and envisions a cohesive daily Facebook newscast using partner content highlights — paid for by Facebook, made by media partners, and edited by a growing editorial team, according to a person familiar with her thinking.Discussing Facebook’s reticence to put paywalls in and engage with publishers transparently, Ms. Brown said at the February media and tech conference that it had taken too long for the social network to come around to a workable news strategy.“I’m having a hard time with patience right now,” she said. “And I know publishers are too.”Follow Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @NellieBowlesAdvertisementBy NATHANIEL POPPER, OLEG MATSNEV and ANA VANESSA HERREROJAN. 3, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Russian and Venezuelan officials are hoping virtual currencies can help their countries make an end run around American sanctions.Both governments, with ambitions to create state-sponsored cryptocurrencies, are looking to take advantage of the promise that Bitcoin introduced to the world financial system: a new kind of money and financial infrastructure, outside the control of any central authority, particularly the United States.The Russian and Venezuelan plans may sound outlandish, even in the financial Wild West of Bitcoin and its online competitors. But they underscore how the rise of virtual currencies is pushing governments around the world to rethink the most basic elements of their own currencies and financial infrastructure.What has seemed like a fringe concept is starting to gain some level of acceptance in global finance. Several of the largest central banks in the world, including the Bank of England and the People’s Bank of China, have said they are looking at using the technology introduced by Bitcoin to track and issue their own digital currencies.AdvertisementIn Venezuela, the idea has come from the top. President Nicolás Maduro laid out a plan last month to create a homegrown digital currency known as the Petro, which would be similar to Bitcoin but backed by the government’s oil and natural resources.AdvertisementIn Russia, officials under President Vladimir V. Putin have floated the idea of a Bitcoin-like crypto ruble.“When it comes to state-sensitive types of activities, this instrument suits us very well,” one of Mr. Putin’s aides, Sergei Glazyev, said last month in a conversation about the crypto ruble, according to several Russian news outlets. “We can settle payments with our business partners all over the world regardless of sanctions.”Economists and virtual currency experts have given Venezuela’s Petro and the crypto ruble from Russia low probabilities of working in the way the governments seem to anticipate. That’s because Bitcoin and other virtual currencies are decentralized systems with no one in charge, while the Russian and Venezuelan plans would give the leaders of both countries a measure of control over the new currencies.That runs counter to some of the most basic concepts of virtual currency.All Bitcoin transactions are recorded on a ledger known as the blockchain, which is maintained by many independent computers. The system was designed that way explicitly to avoid central banks and large financial institutions. Just as email allowed messages to move around without going through a central postal service, the computer network maintaining Bitcoin records allows money to move around without going through any central authority.That would provide a good way to get around sanctions, which are usually enforced through regulatory and banking disclosure rules.But some central bankers have said that issuing their own currencies on some sort of blockchain could make it easier for citizens to use the money without going through intermediaries like banks and credit card companies. It could also make the records more resistant to tampering and hacking.In a speech last year, a member of the German central bank’s executive board, Carl-Ludwig Thiele, said the bank’s “conceptual study shows that blockchain technology can be adapted to meet the current needs and requirements of the financial system.”“The prototype works,” he added.These projects, though, have been slow to move from prototype to working systems, and many officials and programmers have pointed to many technical hurdles that still need to be overcome.AdvertisementNone of that has stopped Venezuela from moving forward quickly with its effort to create a digital asset that the government can control.Mr. Maduro introduced the idea on Dec. 3 in his regular Sunday television program. He said he had been monitoring so-called cryptocurrencies and had put in place plans to create the Petro, which would be backed by the country’s gold, oil, gas and diamond reserves.“To overcome the financial blockade, this will allow us to move toward new forms of international financing,” he said.Since then, the government has created an office of the cryptocurrency superintendent and appointed officials to run the operation.The Petros are set to live on a blockchain like the one Bitcoin uses, but will derive their value from the government’s natural resources.The link between Petros and natural resources could be similar to the backing that gold provided for most international currencies a century ago. The backing might counteract the sort of hyperinflation that the real Venezuelan currency, the bolívar, has experienced in recent years because of the government’s unbridled expansion of the money supply.The boldness of the Petro plan is in proportion to Venezuela’s desperate economic condition, which has officials looking for anything that could help.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The country is in a social crisis,” said José Ángel Álvarez, the head of a national association, Asonacrip, that has been working with the government on the Petro. “How do we manage to build trust? Open technology, clear rules that meet the attributes of the cryptocoin: decentralization, for example.”AdvertisementMr. Álvarez said he anticipated that the first oil will be sold for Petros in the first half of 2018.But the link between the currency and the government’s oil holdings is likely to make it unattractive to investors, given the lack of confidence that investors have shown in Mr. Maduros’s government.There is a measure of irony in the government’s interest in cryptocurrencies. Over the last few years, Venezuelans have shown a growing interest in virtual currencies as a means of escaping Mr. Maduro’s government.An online marketplace known as LocalBitcoins has connected Venezuelans looking to buy Bitcoin and get their money out of the bolívar, which has steadily lost value because of hyperinflation. This year, the number of transactions in Venezuela on LocalBitcoins has risen tenfold, according to Chainalysis, a data analysis firm.The Venezuelan government has not been nearly as welcoming of this type of virtual currency activity.Randy Brito, the founder of the Facebook group Bitcoin Venezuela, said that in December he identified between 10 and 20 cases where people in Venezuela appeared to have been arrested for their Bitcoin activities — more than double the cases he had seen in the year up until now.In most cases, buying any sort of foreign currency is illegal in Venezuela. That prevents residents from sending all of their money out of the country.Mr. Brito, who left Venezuela in 2004 and now lives in Spain, said everyone in his group was aware of how the government was punishing its citizens for doing the same thing that the government was trying to do within the broader financial system.Advertisement“The irony is in front of us,” he said. “They have been blockaded by the U.S., just like they blockade their own people from operating.”The Russian government has also not looked kindly upon its citizens’ use of Bitcoin and other virtual currencies. While the government’s policies have remained opaque, officials with the Russian Central Bank have talked about blocking the access of people inside the country to virtual currency websites, and Mr. Putin has pointed out the many potential illegal uses of the technology.“First and foremost, this is an opportunity for laundering illegal gains, tax evasion and even financing of terrorism, not to mention the proliferation of scams to which ordinary people can fall victim,” he said in October.But Mr. Putin has indicated that he is open to potential uses of the technology that would be under his control. In June, he had a much publicized conversation with Vitalik Buterin, the creator of one of the largest virtual currency networks, Ethereum. Mr. Buterin was raised in Canada and has dual Russian and Canadian citizenship.A number of officials with the central bank and the Ministry of Communication have dropped hints about the creation of some sort of crypto ruble.The efforts in Russia are much less urgent than those in Venezuela because the Russian economy is doing much better. But leaders there have been looking widely for any way to push back against American sanctions.The Russian minister of communications, Nikolai Nikiforov, said in October that a crypto ruble would be designed quite differently from Bitcoin, with no need for the mining process through which Bitcoins are released into the world.Such a currency would make it easier for the government to track and tax transactions, which is an advantage that other countries have spoken about as well.The authorities in the United States have long been aware that virtual currencies might be used to evade sanctions. David S. Cohen, a Treasury official focused on terrorism and financial intelligence, said in 2014 that the American authorities were not seeing any widespread efforts to get around sanctions with virtual currencies.AdvertisementBut, he said at the time, “these are adaptable actors who are drawn to ungoverned spaces and so may increasingly look to this technology as an attractive way to transfer value.”Nathaniel Popper reported from San Francisco, Oleg Matsnev from Moscow, and Ana Vanessa Herrero from Caracas, Venezuela.Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopper.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: To Evade Sting of U.S. Sanctions, Nations Ponder Digital Currency.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nellie Bowles and David StreitfeldVENICE, Calif. — Travis VanderZanden, the chief executive of electric scooter company Bird Rides, surveyed the new indoor park at his office one morning this week.While the space is still under construction, it will eventually have a winding path and a park scene, with benches and trees, he said. It will be made to take his little Bird scooters on scenic trips inside the confines of the 20,000-square-foot office situated near the Pacific Ocean and, more important to him, on Electric Avenue here in Venice, Calif.“When you ride a Bird, it reminds you of being free,” said the 39-year-old. “It gives you freedom. Like you have wings.”Mr. VanderZanden did not act like a man in the middle of a controversy. But he is here to disrupt — by any means necessary.Electric scooters have arrived en masse in cities like Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington, with companies competing to offer the dockless and rechargeable vehicles. Leading the pack is Mr. VanderZanden’s Bird, with rivals including Spin and LimeBike. The start-ups are buoyed with more than $250 million in venture capital and a firm belief that electric scooters are the future of transportation, at least for a few speedy blocks.The premise of the start-ups is simple: People can rent the electric scooters for about a $1, plus 10 cents to 15 cents a minute to use, for so-called last-mile transportation. To recharge the scooters, the companies have “chargers,” or people who roam the streets looking to plug in the scooters at night, for which they get paid $5 to $20 per scooter.The problem is that cities have been shocked to discover that thousands of electric scooters have been dropped onto their sidewalks seemingly overnight. Often, the companies ignored all the usual avenues of getting city approval to set up shop. And since the scooters are dockless, riders can just grab one, go a few blocks and leave it wherever they want, causing a commotion on sidewalks and scenes of scooters strewn across wheelchair ramps and in doorways.So officials in cities like San Francisco and Santa Monica, Calif., have been sending cease-and-desist notices and holding emergency meetings. Some even filed charges against the scooter companies.“They just appeared,” said Mohammed Nuru, director of the San Francisco Public Works, which has been confiscating the scooters. “I don’t know who comes up with these ideas or where these people come from.”Dennis Herrera, the San Francisco city attorney who sent cease-and-desist letters to Bird and others, described the chaos as “a free for all.”Mr. VanderZanden said given how enormous a social shift he believes his scooters are, he was not surprised it ruffled some feathers. But people would eventually adjust, he said.“Go back to the early 1900s, and people would have a similar reaction to cars because they were used to horses,” he said. “They had to figure out where to park all the dockless cars.”If there is something familiar about these scooter companies’ strategy of just showing up in cities without permission, that’s because that has now become a tried-and-true playbook for many start-ups. In its early days, Uber, the ride-hailing giant, also barreled into towns overnight to launch its service and only asked for forgiveness later.“Cities don’t know what it is,” Caen Contee, the head of marketing for LimeBike, said of the arrival of electric scooters. “They don’t know how to permit it until they’ve seen it.”That has led to scenes like a crowded and contentious transportation committee meeting at San Francisco City Hall on Monday, where so many people wanted to speak about the scooters that everyone was limited to one minute each.David Valladares, who works as a “charger” for Bird, said the work helped “supplement my income due to the large cost of living in the Bay Area.”He urged the city to concentrate on deadly cars instead, noting, “I’ve never seen a scooter-on-scooter accident kill somebody.”Advocates for the disabled said they would have trouble moving through the streets if the scooters were zooming around or left on sidewalks. Advocates for older people said rampaging scooters would also encourage them to seek the safety of their homes, becoming shut-ins.“Somebody whizzing along at 15 miles an hour, that’s a symbol of entitlement and arrogance,” said Fran Taylor, a retired medical reporter. She called the scooters “a plot of the young people to kill off all us old farts so they can have our rent-controlled apartments.”Back in Venice, Mr. VanderZanden seated himself upstairs in a barren conference room with a view of the parking lot. He leaned back and kept his eyes on his open computer screen as he talked. He wore his blond hair slicked back.He said efforts to regulate his Bird scooters differently than personally owned scooters was discrimination against the poor.“Not everyone can afford their own electric scooter,” he said. “We shouldn’t discriminate against people that are renting versus owning.”Before launching Bird, Mr. VanderZanden had worked at tech companies and founded an on-demand carwash service called Cherry. Cherry was acquired by Lyft in 2013 and Mr. VanderZanden became chief operating officer at the ride-hailing company.He left Lyft in 2014 and joined Uber as vice president of growth that same year. Lyft sued him for breaching a confidentiality agreement and fiduciary duty. The litigation was eventually settled.Of his time at Uber, which has since been exposed as having had a growth-at-all-costs environment, Mr. VanderZanden said: “I learned some good things, and I learned some bad things.”He left Uber in 2016 and moved to Southern California. Last year, he founded Bird to bring electric scooters, already popular in cities across China, to America. To date, Bird has raised $115 million from investors, including Craft Ventures and Index Ventures. Mr. VanderZanden now has a team of more than 100 people.He likes wordplay. The scooters are called Birds. He calls a group of people riding on the scooters a flock. The areas where scooters are supposed to be generally kept are called nests. His mom’s name is Robin.“We might have taken the birds too far,” Mr. VanderZanden said.Bird initially rolled out its scooter-rental service in Santa Monica and now operates in seven cities. The company will not disclose how many scooters are in operation but said it has sent out 22,500 helmets to riders, as part of a compliance effort for cities that require riders to use helmets. Bird has also hit one million rides.Mr. VanderZanden said greater Los Angeles, including Santa Monica, has been especially excited about Bird and that the area has become a transportation tech hub.“The city’s been very receptive,” he said.It actually has not.In Santa Monica, the city attorney’s office filed a nine-count misdemeanor criminal complaint against Bird and Mr. VanderZanden last year for operating a commercial scooter rental business without a mobile vending business license and for failing to comply with citations. The company pleaded no contest and paid a settlement of $300,000. Those who work for Santa Monica’s city government even went so far as to reach out to other towns to caution them about electric scooters.“My brother and sister legislators from Santa Monica warned me that that phenomenon has hit their cities,” said Aaron Peskin, who is on San Francisco’s board of supervisors, the city’s legislative branch. Referring to the scooter start-ups, he added, “These people are out of their minds.”Even other scooter companies don’t seem to like each other much. When Mr. VanderZanden recently announced a pledge for scooter start-ups to sign that promised responsible growth and revenue sharing with cities, he did not get much of a response. “We’re still waiting for others to sign the pledge,” he said.Mr. VanderZanden also feigns ignorance about all the controversy he has caused.“Anything any city’s asked us to do, aside from shut down, we do,” he said.And even though Bird is handing out helmets, he said the requirement that scooter riders wear them is absurd unless all pedestrians have to wear helmets because cars are the real danger.“We’re not going to be happy till there are more Birds than cars,” Mr. VanderZanden said.Nellie Bowles covers tech and internet culture. Follow her on Twitter:@nelliebowlesDavid Streitfeld has written about technology and its effects for twenty years. In 2013, he was part of a team that won a Pulitzer Prize for Explanatory Reporting.  Advertisement
Bits By                     
 FARHAD MANJOO and
 

 MIKE ISAAC
 
JAN. 5, 2018
Each Friday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Mike: Happy New Year, Farhad! How was your New Year’s Eve? I ate German food, went to a concert and then went home. It was weird.Farhad: Everyone in my house was sick except me. So, I took a bunch of selfies. Same as every year.Mike: An early contender for father of the year, I see! O.K., let’s talk tech.Mike: So we’re kicking off 2018 with a nightmare, and no, I’m not talking about your expense report. This week brought the emergence of Meltdown and Spectre, two of the worst computer security flaws we’ve ever seen. My understanding is that together, the two problems affect microprocessors in nearly every computer in the world, and they’re not easily fixable via the usual software update.AdvertisementIn a nutshell, this is incredibly bad. Also, I love how every computer security flaw seems to be named after an ‘80s era Jean-Claude Van Damme action flick. Remember Heartbleed?AdvertisementFarhad: Hey, “Spectre” was James Bond. And apparently there are a handful of movies called “Meltdown,” including a 2014 zombie comedy.But let’s get back to computer bugs. So as serious as these flaws are, they’re of biggest concern to cloud service providers — that is, companies like Amazon, Microsoft and Google, which let other companies host their data in enormous data centers. As The Verge explains, the bugs in theory allow data to leak from one hosted account to another — basically raising questions about the security of hosting your stuff in the cloud.Obviously these bugs aren’t going to kill the cloud, but it does point to the concern of centralization online. Now that we have these huge companies running the internet, they’re going to become the biggest targets for attackers.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mike: Yeah. I think the thing that worries me here is that a software patch to fix Meltdown could result in slowing your computer down by as much as 30 percent, which is nuts! Can you imagine how long it will take me to tweet insults at you after that?And as for Spectre, fixing the issue could actually require redesigning how computer chips are built. This whole thing has the big tech companies freaked out, from chip makers like AMD and Intel to software giants like Google and Microsoft. And honestly, they should be. People should probably be more worried about this than they appear to be, but it’s difficult to convey a sense of urgency about complicated technical issues when the president of the United States is tweeting about the possibility of nuclear war.Mike: And that might not even be the weirdest thing on the internet this week. Social media superstar Logan Paul stepped in it big time, posting a video of himself stumbling upon a person who had killed themselves in Japan’s “Suicide Forest.” His discovery was an accident, but the posting and presentation — he and his entourage treated the whole thing as a kind of a thrilling spectacle — were entirely Mr. Paul’s choices, and they were terrible. The internet rightly flew into an outrage almost immediately after he posted the video to YouTube, and eventually Mr. Paul pulled down the clip and apologized to his fans and the dead man’s family.Farhad: Oh, that’s interesting, Mike, but before you go any further let me just ask one small thing: Who? Logan Paul? I’ve never heard of him and I’m certainly not a subscriber to every one of his channels, definitely not.AdvertisementMike: Er, O.K. But seriously, the whole thing really sours me on the internet and vlogging culture writ large. To me, it’s a prime example of how social media stars and lifestyle bloggers seem to lose perspective on what’s appropriate to share. When your entire success is based on capturing every moment of your daily life, it might be more difficult to step back and say, “Hey, maybe sharing this would be completely insensitive?”What’s more worrisome is that this sharing culture seems to be fast becoming normalized and ubiquitous, advanced by the many tools we have at our disposal to put more of ourselves online. Even slayings and suicides have been live streamed. And the ability to attach these things to massive social networks means everyone has a built-in, captive audience.In short, Black Mirror isn’t so much a satire anymore — it’s basically a reality show.Farhad: I think this story presents a growing issue for YouTube. If 2017 was the year that everyone noticed the dangers of Facebook — prompting Mark Zuckerberg to announce that he’s spending this year trying to fix the platform — I suspect our attention will now increasingly shift to YouTube.It’s becoming the world’s biggest platform for information, its influence surpassing even Facebook’s. How YouTube polices itself — how it’s aiming to improve the place, and the backlash its efforts generate — is probably going to be one of the bigger stories of the year, I’d guess.But that’s too heavy for the new year. I’m going to go watch “Meltdown.”Mike: Don’t forget to take a selfie with the TV. Ta ta for now!Farhad Manjoo writes a weekly technology column called State of the Art. Mike Isaac covers Facebook, Uber and Twitter. You can follow them on Twitter here: @fmanjoo and @MikeIsaacA version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Security Flaws and Social Media Outrages.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressNEW YORK — An audit of Facebook's privacy practices for the Federal Trade Commission found no problems even though the company knew at the time that a data-mining firm improperly obtained private data from millions of users — raising questions about the usefulness of such audits.Facebook agreed to outside audits every two years as part of a 2011 settlement with the FTC over its privacy practices. It is not clear from the report whether the company informed PricewaterhouseCoopers, which performed the audit, of the Cambridge Analytica data grab that would put Facebook in the crosshairs of Congress.The heavily redacted audit by PricewaterhouseCoopers is available on the FTC's website. It covers February 12, 2015 to February 11, 2017.PwC declined to comment, but Facebook said Friday that keeping data secure is a priority."We remain strongly committed to protecting people's information, said Rob Sherman, Facebook's deputy chief privacy officer, in a statement. "We appreciate the opportunity to answer questions the FTC may have."The fact that PwC found no issues raised red flags for privacy advocates."The FTC failed to protect the public," said Jeffrey Chester, executive director of the nonprofit digital rights group Center for Digital Democracy. "Instead of conducting its own review to enforce one of its most important decisions— the consent decree —it looked the other way, which allowed Facebook to engage in serious misconduct."Chester said the audit shows that the "FTC cannot be relied on to really protect consumers."The 2011 consent decree bound Facebook to a 20-year privacy commitment. Any violations of that pact could cost the company a ton of money. In his congressional testimony last week, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg appeared uninformed about key details of the agreement, saying he did not remember if it carried a financial penalty.Any violations of the 2011 agreement could subject Facebook to fines of $41,484 per violation per user per day. To put that in context, Facebook could theoretically owe $8 billion for one single day violation affecting all of its American users, or about half of the profit that the company booked for all of last year.The agreement requires that Facebook users give "affirmative express consent" any time that data they haven't made public is shared with a third party. Cambridge Analytica accessed information from so many users (the firm puts the number at 30 million, although Facebook has said 87 million) because it was able to access the data of people's friends, and not just people who explicitly permitted access when they took a personality quiz. While Facebook did have controls in place that allowed people to restrict such access, they are found buried in the site's settings and are difficult to find.Sen. Catherine Cortez Masto, a Democrat from Nevada, said during last week's hearing that in her view, "these requirements were not met," because user consent shouldn't have been buried in privacy settings.PwC disagreed."In our opinion, Facebook's privacy controls were operating with sufficient effectiveness to provide reasonable assurance to protect the privacy of covered information and that the controls have so operated throughout the Reporting Period, in all material respects for the two years ended February 11, 2017," the report states.Facebook is also under a separate investigation by the FTC because of the Cambridge Analytica scandal. The agency is looking at whether Facebook has engaged in "unfair acts" that cause "substantial injury" to consumers.AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 8:07 P.M. E.D.T.
SAN FRANCISCO —  Companies that buy and sell consumer data are preparing for increased scrutiny from U.S. lawmakers after a scandal over how social network Facebook handles personal information, Acxiom Corp's chief executive said on Friday.Scott Howe told Reuters in a phone interview that Acxiom, among the largest U.S. data brokers, welcomed change and supported regulation of some kind, although he stopped short of endorsing a specific plan or greater powers for the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the primary U.S. regulator of data privacy.Facebook Inc, which uses personal data to sell targeted ads but does not sell data, caused an uproar last month when it said political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, whose clients have included President Donald Trump's 2016 campaign, had wrongly harvested the information of millions of users.Acxiom and competitors such as Experian PLC were indirectly affected by the Cambridge Analytica scandal when, shortly after it broke, Facebook said it would discontinue one of its advertising tools powered by third-party data in an effort to be more careful about privacy.AdvertisementAcxiom shares plunged as much as 34 percent the day after Facebook's announcement on March 28. They have since partially recovered.Advertisement"Facebook has done a credit to the entire industry because they brought this back out into the public spotlight," Howe said.He said he had traveled to Washington to meet regulators and would continue to do so, and that industry executives were speaking more frequently among themselves about regulations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."This isn't an area that perhaps most companies or most legislators have thought a tremendous amount about," Howe said.Data brokers faced the prospect of tougher U.S. oversight in 2014, after the FTC in a report called for legislation that would enable consumers to more easily learn how data brokers use their data, correct it or opt out of the process.No such legislation passed.On Thursday, Howe published a list of principles on a corporate blog that he thinks any new legislation should follow. He did not endorse a specific bill.Asked about the FTC, he said in the interview: "I think the FTC has an important role to play here, and how that evolves, I'm not sure."(Reporting by David Ingram; Editing by Tom Brown)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CADE METZ and NICOLE PERLROTHJAN. 3, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Computer security experts have discovered two major security flaws in the microprocessors inside nearly all of the world’s computers.The two problems, called Meltdown and Spectre, could allow hackers to steal the entire memory contents of computers, including mobile devices, personal computers and servers running in so-called cloud computer networks.There is no easy fix for Spectre, which could require redesigning the processors, according to researchers. As for Meltdown, the software patch needed to fix the issue could slow down computers by as much as 30 percent — an ugly situation for people used to fast downloads from their favorite online services.“What actually happens with these flaws is different and what you do about them is different,” said Paul Kocher, a researcher who was an integral member of a team of researchers at big tech companies like Google and Rambus and in academia that discovered the flaws.AdvertisementMeltdown is a particular problem for the cloud computing services run by the likes of Amazon, Google and Microsoft. By Wednesday evening, Google and Microsoft said they had updated their systems to deal with the flaw.AdvertisementAmazon told customers of its Amazon Web Services cloud service that the vulnerability “has existed for more than 20 years in modern processor architectures.” It said that it had already protected nearly all instances of A.W.S. and that customers must update their own software running atop the service as well.To take advantage of Meltdown, hackers could rent space on a cloud service, just like any other business customer. Once they were on the service, the flaw would allow them to grab information like passwords from other customers.That is a major threat to the way cloud-computing systems operate. Cloud services often share machines among many customers — and it is uncommon for, say, a single server to be dedicated to a single customer. Though security tools and protocols are intended to separate customers’ data, the recently discovered chip flaws would allow bad actors to circumvent these protections.The personal computers used by consumers are also vulnerable, but hackers would have to first find a way to run software on a personal computer before they could gain access to information elsewhere on the machine. There are various ways that could happen: Attackers could fool consumers into downloading software in an email, from an app store or visiting an infected website.According to the researchers, the Meltdown flaw affects virtually every microprocessor made by Intel, which makes chips used in more than 90 percent of the computer servers that underpin the internet and private business operations.Customers of Microsoft, the maker of the Windows operating system, will need to install an update from the company to fix the problem. The worldwide community of coders that oversees the open-source Linux operating system, which runs about 30 percent of computer servers worldwide, has already posted a patch for that operating system. Apple had a partial fix for the problem and is expected to have an additional update.The software patches could slow the performance of affected machines by 20 to 30 percent, said Andres Freund, an independent software developer who has tested the new Linux code. The researchers who discovered the flaws voiced similar concerns.AdvertisementThis could become a significant issue for any business running websites and other software through cloud systems.There is no evidence that hackers have taken advantage of the vulnerability — at least not yet. But once a security problem becomes public, computer users take a big risk if they do not install a patch to fix the issue. A so-called ransomware attack that hit computers around the world last year took advantage of machines that had not received a patch for a flaw in Windows software.The other flaw, Spectre, affects most processors now in use, though the researchers believe this flaw is more difficult to exploit. There is no known fix for it, and it is not clear what chip makers like Intel will do to address the problem.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is not certain what the disclosure of the chip issues will do to Intel’s business, and on Wednesday, the Silicon Valley giant played down the problem.“Intel and other technology companies have been made aware of new security research describing software analysis methods that, when used for malicious purposes, have the potential to improperly gather sensitive data from computing devices that are operating as designed,” the company said in a statement. “Intel believes these exploits do not have the potential to corrupt, modify or delete data.”The researchers who discovered the flaws notified various affected companies. And as is common practice when such problems are identified, they tried to keep the news from the public so hackers could not take advantage of the flaws before they were fixed.But on Tuesday, news of the Meltdown flaw began to leak through various news websites, including The Register, a science and technology site based in Britain. So the researchers released papers describing the flaws on Wednesday, much earlier than they had planned.For now, computer security experts are using a patch, called Kaiser, that was originally discovered by researchers at the Graz University of Technology in Austria to respond to a separate issue last year.Spectre will be much more difficult to deal with than issuing a software patch.The Meltdown flaw is specific to Intel, but Spectre is a flaw in design that has been used by many processor manufacturers for decades. It affects virtually all microprocessors on the market, including chips made by AMD that share Intel’s design and the many chips based on designs from ARM in Britain.AdvertisementSpectre is a problem in the fundamental way processors are designed, and the threat from Spectre is “going to live with us for decades,” said Mr. Kocher, the president and chief scientist at Cryptography Research, a division of Rambus.“Whereas Meltdown is an urgent crisis, Spectre affects virtually all fast microprocessors,” Mr. Kocher said. An emphasis on speed while designing new chips has left them vulnerable to security issues, he said.“We’ve really screwed up,” Mr. Kocher said. “There’s been this desire from the industry to be as fast as possible and secure at the same time. Spectre shows that you cannot have both.”The Meltdown flaw was discovered by Jann Horn, a security analyst at a Google-run security research group called Google Project Zero, last June. Mr. Horn was the first to alert Intel. The chip giant then heard from other researchers who had also discovered the flaw, including Werner Haas and Thomas Prescher, at Cyberus Technology; and Daniel Gruss, Moritz Lipp, Stefan Mangard and Michael Schwarz at the Graz University of Technology.The researchers had been working through the Christmas holiday on a patch, and coordinating with companies like Microsoft and Amazon to roll out the fix.The second flaw, Spectre, was also discovered by Mr. Horn at Google and separately by Mr. Kocher, in coordination with Mike Hamburg at Rambus, Mr. Lipp at Graz University and Yuval Yarom at the University of Adelaide in Australia.A fix may not be available for Spectre until a new generation of chips hit the market.“This will be a festering problem over hardware life cycles. It’s not going to change tomorrow or the day after,” Mr. Kocher said. “It’s going to take a while.”Follow Cade Metz and Nicole Perlroth on Twitter: @CadeMetz and @nicoleperlothA version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: 2 Big Flaws Discovered In Nearly All Computers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Reuters(Reuters) - Apple Inc on Friday said component failure in a limited number of MacBook Pros has caused built-in battery to expand, adding, it will offer worldwide free replacement for such batteries.Apple said the flaw, reported in some 13-inch Macbook Pros without touch bars, is not a safety issue.The affected units were manufactured between October 2016 and October 2017, Apple said on its support page, without giving the actual number of MacBooks affected.The iPhone maker previously came under scrutiny after it confirmed in December that software to deal with aging batteries in iPhone 6, iPhone 6s and iPhone SE models could slow down performance. The company later apologized and lowered the price of battery replacements for affected models to $29 from $79. (Reporting by Munsif Vengattil in Bengaluru; Editing by Sandra Maler)AdvertisementBy CECILIA KANGJAN. 5, 2018
WASHINGTON — An industry group that represents the country’s biggest technology companies said on Friday that it planned to join a looming legal fight against the Federal Communications Commission over its repeal of so-called net neutrality rules.In its announcement, the group, the Internet Association, made clear for the first time that Facebook, Google, Netflix and other large tech firms would put their reputations and financial clout behind the challenge.Lawsuits seeking to block the commission’s new policy, which was approved in December, are expected in the weeks ahead, once the rules take effect. The rules will let internet service providers block online content, or charge websites for faster delivery to consumers, by rolling back the protections against such actions that were adopted in 2015.Several public interest groups, including Free Press and Public Knowledge, and some start-ups had announced plans to challenge the commission’s move weeks ago, but the Internet Association had been undecided about how to respond. Before the commission voted on the repeal, some of America’s biggest tech companies, Facebook and Google in particular, took a back seat during public protests over the issue.AdvertisementOn Friday, a day after the commission released the 539-page final rules, the Internet Association said it would join the coming legal case against them.Advertisement“The rule defies the will of a bipartisan majority of Americans and fails to preserve a free and open internet,” Michael Beckerman, the association’s chief executive, said on Friday.Netflix, whose data-heavy video streams could face extra charges by internet service providers, also said it would support a legal challenge.“In 2018, the Internet is united in defense of #NetNeutrality. As for the FCC, we will see you in court,” the company said in a message posted on Twitter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The issue of regulating internet service providers to maintain an open internet has wound through the courts and the commission for more than a decade. The repeal in December, led by Ajit Pai, the commission chairman, attracted strong opposition.Mr. Pai has said the new rules would encourage more investment and innovation by internet service providers. He has also argued that the change would withstand any legal challenge, as it essentially restores the rules to what they were before 2015.The commission declined to comment on Friday.Democratic lawmakers in Washington hope to reverse the commission’s action by using the Congressional Review Act, and they have introduced numerous bills that could replace the agency’s rules, although the prospects for those efforts appear weak. States lawmakers in California, New York and Washington are also considering bills that would recreate the 2015 net- neutrality rules in those states.Public interest groups are trying to make net neutrality an issue in this year’s midterm elections. They have deployed text and email campaigns meant to pressure lawmakers to support a congressional reversal of the commission’s action.“We’ll be going to court soon to challenge the F.C.C. and ramping up pressure on Congress to throw the rules out altogether,” said Craig Aaron, president of Free Press. Mr. Pai, he said, had “awakened the public.”The strong response to the repeal has also led to some safety concerns. At the commission meeting where the new rules were approved, law enforcement officials briefly cleared the room to address an unspecified security issue.AdvertisementMr. Pai canceled a scheduled appearance at the tech industry’s CES trade show next week. The commission declined to say why he would not attend, but has previously confirmed that he and his family had recently received threats by phone and email over the net neutrality issue.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Tech to Fight Net Neutrality Repeal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 6:04 A.M. E.D.T.
BERLIN —  German Chancellor Angela Merkel is likely to discuss Russia when she meets U.S. President Donald Trump in Washington next week, a government spokesman said on Friday.The United States on April 6 imposed sanctions against Russian entities and individuals to punish Moscow for its alleged meddling in the 2016 U.S. election and what the U.S. Treasury Department dubbed other "malign activity."(Reporting by Michelle Martin and Thomas Escritt)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Sheera FrenkelSAN FRANCISCO — As protests in Iran stretched into their sixth day on Tuesday, the Iranian authorities continued to restrict access to social media tools that have become key sources of information to antigovernment demonstrators.Telegram, a messaging app that is widely used in Iran, has been blocked since Dec. 31, while internet access has been sporadically cut off to several cities where protests have taken place, according to cybersecurity researchers monitoring internet activity in the country. Access to other social media platforms like Instagram has also been intermittent.Social media and messaging apps have become crucial to antigovernment demonstrators around the world, as a means of both organizing and delivering messages to other citizens. Not surprisingly, restricting access to such technology has become as important to government crackdowns as the physical presence of the police.Many social media tools — as well as a number of products that encrypt internet conversations — have long been unavailable in Iran. Twitter and Facebook have been banned since 2009, although many Iranians still find ways to use them. Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, even opened a Facebook account. But messaging apps like Telegram, which claims some level of encryption, report wide usage in the country.When Iranians took to the streets in 2009 in protests known as the Green Revolution, roughly one million Iranians had smartphones. Today, that number is 48 million — more than half of the country’s population.“Having not just a smartphone, but the best and newest smartphone, is incredibly important to them,” said Holly Dagres, a Middle East analyst and curator of The Iranist newsletter. “They might not have money for food, but they will find money for a phone.”No app is more popular among Iranians than Telegram, Ms. Dagres said. There are 40 million to 46 million Telegram accounts in Iran.“The Iranian government is active on Telegram, as is the president, and members of Parliament,” she said. “Iranians use it to sell clothes or find doctors, she added. “In the last week it has become a key source of information about the protests.”In a Dec. 31 blog post, Pavel Durov, chief executive of Telegram, which is based in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, wrote that the company had previously complied with requests by the Iranian government to shut down access to “channels” that called for violence during the protests. But, he added, the company “refused to shut down channels of peaceful Iranian protesters.”It was not clear if the block on Telegram would be permanent or temporary, Mr. Durov wrote. In a statement, Iran’s interior minister said that social networks were “causing violence and fear.”In the past, some Iranians have found ways to get around government restrictions by using tools that evaded Iran’s censorship technology. But economic sanctions imposed on the country have made access to some of those tools more difficult, said Collin Anderson, a cybersecurity researcher who planned to publish a report this week about Iran’s capabilities.Take, for example, the Google App Engine, a service intended to be used as a platform for developing and hosting web applications. In countries where they are otherwise banned, messaging apps that encrypt conversations often use the Google App Engine to conceal their activity within Google’s traffic.But Google believes that it is not allowed to offer its Google App Engine in Iran because of the sanctions. That makes it tough to offer Iranians apps like Signal, which is commonly used in other countries to protect internet communications from surveillance.“Google has chosen to adhere to the strictest letter of the law regarding sanctions in Iran, and by doing so they are blocking Iranians from this service,” Mr. Anderson said. Google could be worried that technology would be used by nuclear scientists in a potential violation of sanctions. But “the reality is that the ban affects everyday Iranians’ ability to use a tool that could keep them safe,” he said.Mr. Anderson argued that Google could white list, or unblock, certain applications like Signal. In doing so, Google could allow the app to become widely available in Iran in a matter of hours.Google declined to comment on its policies regarding the use of its technology in Iran.Sanctions have also forced many Iranians to use smartphones and applications that have been jailbroken, a term used when a manufacturer’s restrictions are removed to allow a user to install unauthorized software. But jailbroken phones and apps cannot be updated, leaving their users open to hackers and government monitors that take advantage of bugs in outdated software.“Iranians are tech-savvy but by using jailbroken phones they leave themselves really vulnerable,” Ms. Dagres said.The communication crackdown prompted an online outcry that included President Trump, who posted on Twitter over the weekend that Iran had “closed down the internet so that peaceful demonstrators cannot communicate. Not good!”Ms. Dagres argued that tweets from officials in other countries do little, but allowing access to more communications tools would help protect protesters. As it is, she said, Iranians have proved to be resourceful in finding ways to communicate.“Where there is a will, there is a way,” Ms. Dagres said. “Iranians have been living under sanctions for years, and they have always found a way to get online.”Follow Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @sheeraf.AdvertisementBy STEVE LOHRAPRIL 20, 2018
General Electric reported a first-quarter loss on Friday, but there were also signs that the struggling industrial giant is beginning to stabilize its business.G.E.’s big power-generator division continues to drag down the company’s overall performance, and it is still burdened with financial liabilities that linger from the conglomerate’s pared-back finance arm, GE Capital.But G.E.’s other major industrial divisions, led by aviation and health care, delivered solid results in the quarter. That should provide some assurance to investors as the company charts a future dependent on its industrial lines.In a conference call, John L. Flannery, the company’s chief executive, called the quarterly results “a good start” to the year that showed “signs of progress” at G.E., with improving trends in industrial earnings, cash flow and profit margins.AdvertisementEspecially heartening for investors, General Electric reaffirmed its profit outlook for the year, predicting earnings per share of $1 to $1.07, though likely at the lower end of that range, G.E. said. Analysts had been skeptical that G.E. could do that well. The average analysts’ forecast for the year was 95 cents a share, as compiled by Thomson Reuters.AdvertisementG.E. also reaffirmed that its free cash flow — funds available for the day-to-day running of a business — would be $6 billion to $7 billion for the year.The positive outlook for earnings and cash, despite the troubled power division, points to “the underlying performance in the core businesses,” Jamie Miller, G.E.’s chief financial officer, said in an interview. “We’re really making progress.”The company’s shares were about 4 percent higher at the close of trading.G.E. reported a net loss of $1.18 billion for the quarter, but it was mainly related to a one-time charge of $1.5 billion for liabilities in a subprime lender, WMC Mortgage, which G.E. once owned and is part of a federal investigation.The company’s decision to set aside the $1.5 billion, analysts said, was an encouraging step to contain the financial fallout from the investigation. “Risk is receding, not rising,” said Nicholas Heymann, an analyst at William Blair.Without that charge, the company’s operating earnings per share rose 14 percent, to 16 cents a share, or 5 cents above analysts’ estimates.Total revenue in the quarter rose 7 percent to nearly $28.7 billion, ahead of analysts’ expectations, helped by the contribution from the merger of G.E.’s oil-field equipment business with Baker Hughes last July. G.E. owns a majority stake in the combined company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But G.E.’s revenue from industrial operations, excluding acquisitions and currency swings, fell 4 percent, to $23.8 billion. This so-called organic revenue does not include the merger-related lift from the Baker Hughes deal, and the falloff in G.E.’s power-generator business more than offset the gains from aviation and health care.In its jet engine business, revenue rose 7 percent and operating profit rose 26 percent. It is not yet clear whether the Southwest Airlines accident this week, which left one passenger dead, will have any effect on the company’s aviation business. Investigators said an engine, made by CFM International, a joint venture between General Electric and France’s Safran, suffered a catastrophic failure in midair when a fan blade broke, creating shrapnel that punctured a window in the plane.AdvertisementG.E.’s power turbine business remains weak, with revenue down 9 percent and orders 29 percent lower.Since he became chief executive last August, Mr. Flannery has been wrestling with a series of setbacks.Last fall, he surprised investors by telling them the power-generation unit — long a pillar of strength for the company — was reeling. The division had badly misjudged the market, producing too many power turbines as global demand for electricity generation softened.At the time, Mr. Flannery warned that it might take a few years to fix the power business, prompting G.E. to cut its dividend for only the second time since the Great Depression.Then, in January, G.E. delivered two more jolts. The company announced it would take a big charge and set aside $15 billion over seven years to pay for obligations held by GE Capital, mainly on long-term care insurance policies. G.E. had been shrinking its once-huge finance arm for years, and its liabilities were thought to be few, and known.The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating the company’s handling of its insurance obligations and how it accounted for multiyear industrial services contracts.Mr. Flannery’s blueprint for General Electric is not yet complete, but he did elaborate on his management philosophy on Friday. G.E., he said, must become a “simpler, leaner, high-performance company,” with a small headquarters staff and most decisions made by the individual businesses.G.E.’s lighting and rail locomotive divisions are already up for sale, and others may follow.Mr. Flannery is also cutting costs aggressively. G.E. said it would trim expenses by more than $2 billion this year. “Flannery is doing a good job on the things he can control and he’s addressing the worry points,” said Deane Dray, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Signs of a Turnaround  As G.E. Reports Earnings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 5:04 A.M. E.D.T.
TOKYO —  Japan's cryptocurrency exchanges should be regulated more like banks as they hold investors' assets while offering trading platforms, the chief executive of online brokerage Monex Group Inc said.Monex, Japan's No.3 online brokerage, on Monday completed the 3.6 billion yen ($33.6 million) acquisition of Coincheck Inc - the exchange hit by a $530 million digital money heist - in the most significant move yet by a major financial company into Japan's crypto sector.Coincheck, like many of Japan's other cryptocurrency exchanges, holds customers' assets as well as "matching" those who want to trade digital money."Japan's exchanges do both matching and custodial services - they're close to a bank," CEO Oki Matsumoto told Reuters in an interview. "To someone in the financial industry like myself, it's common sense that regulations will get stricter."AdvertisementThere are currently 32 cryptocurrency exchanges operating in Japan. While rules introduced last year require exchanges to keep customers' and company assets separate, the practice has not been clearly defined.AdvertisementAt online brokerages such as Monex, in contrast, the separation of assets is strictly enforced, with customers' cash and stocks kept at third-party custodians such as trust banks.  Monex's purchase of Coincheck allows it to enter the cryptocurrency industry, using Coincheck's well-developed trading platform and customer base as a launch pad into a sector whose fast growth has attracted the attention of other firms.Last week, Yahoo Japan said it would buy a stake in a Tokyo-based cryptocurrency exchange. Messaging app operator Line Corp is also looking to join the market, while Monex's larger rival competitor SBI Holdings Inc holds a license to run an exchange but has not yet begun operations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yen-based trades accounted for over half of worldwide bitcoin trades over the last 24 hours, according to data from cryptocompare.com.As of March, 3.5 million Japanese trade digital money, regulatory data show, with a majority in the 20-40 year old age bracket coveted by financial firms as the country's population shrinks and ages.The market has so far reacted positively to the gamble by Matsumoto, who held an account with Coincheck for three years before the exchange was hacked.Monex shares have soared 66 percent since the brokerage said it was looking at buying Coincheck, touching their highest in a decade.Still, Matsumoto, who mines cryptocurrencies, said few major companies would have had interest in the Coincheck deal."I don't think there would have been many firms ready to do so," he said. "It's an issue for management."Advertisement(Reporting by Taiga Uranaka and Thomas Wilson; Editing by Kim Coghill)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Cecilia KangWASHINGTON — AT&T’s chief executive, Randall Stephenson, on Thursday attacked the Justice Department’s lawsuit to block its merger with Time Warner, saying that a combined company would be no different from the Silicon Valley giants that make and distribute video content.As the last witness for the defense in the Justice Department’s legal battle against AT&T’s $85.4 billion deal to buy Time Warner, Mr. Stephenson portrayed the 140-year-old phone giant as being in an existential crisis and in need of the deal with Time Warner to compete against tech companies.He called the blockbuster merger a “vision deal” that would allow AT&T to better match up against Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix and Google, which he referred to as “F.A.A.N.G.”“The F.A.A.N.G. are all focused on premium video,” Mr. Stephenson said, comparing the proposed merger to the businesses of tech giants. “All of them are vertically integrated.”The Justice Department sued to block the union of AT&T and Time Warner last November, saying it would hurt consumers who would likely see their monthly cable bills increase. The trial is being closely watched as a barometer of how the Trump Administration may treat mega-mergers, and for the implications of the case on antitrust policy and the entertainment landscape.The trial is expected to wrap up in coming days after rebuttal arguments by the Justice Department and closing statements by both sides. Judge Richard J. Leon of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, who is presiding over the case, is expected to make a decision on the suit as early as the end of May.In cross-examination of Mr. Stephenson, the Justice Department’s lead litigator, Craig Conrath, picked apart the portrayal of AT&T as under siege by Silicon Valley. Mr. Conrath said the key difference between AT&T and tech companies is that AT&T is in a powerful position as the company that provides broadband access to the internet — a service that Netflix and Amazon don’t offer.Mr. Conrath also presented a friendly email from June 2017 between Mr. Stephenson and Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, in which Mr. Zuckerberg offered to help build AT&T’s ad platform. Mr. Conrath questioned the offer of “cooperation,” suggesting there was less of a rivalry between the companies than Mr. Stephenson had said.Mr. Stephenson dismissed the significance of the email with Mr. Zuckerberg. Mr. Zuckerberg was following up on a casual meeting the executives had during an annual media industry gathering of executives in Sun Valley, Idaho, he said.Mr. Stephenson’s testimony followed that of Jeffrey Bewkes, the chief executive of Time Warner, on Wednesday. On the stand, Mr. Bewkes voiced similar arguments about the threats that their legacy companies face from tech companies. The executives said their deal was struck in August 2016 over a long lunch in New York where they became convinced they needed to merge.The key disadvantage that AT&T and Time Warner face is their slow start in behavioral advertising and marketing, Mr. Stephenson said. Both companies do not collect or analyze the habits of television and web users in the same way that Comcast does with cable subscribers and that Google and Facebook do on their platforms.Mr. Stephenson said Netflix, Amazon, Google and Facebook are all investing in premium video content to collect increasing amounts of data on users who would spend longer times on their sites and visit more often.The AT&T chief spent much of his time talking about the history of the company. He spoke directly to Judge Leon to explain the company’s evolution from a phone company to one that seeks to make money from advertising and subscriptions for consumers who will watch much of their videos on mobile devices.Mr. Stephenson attacked the Justice Department’s underlying theory that the company would threaten to withhold Time Warner content to raise prices on other cable and satellite distributors. He said that argument “defies logic.”“The value of a content company is how many people watch the content. Period,” Mr. Stephenson said.Follow Cecilia Kang on Twitter: @ceciliakangAdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 2:43 A.M. E.D.T.
JAKARTA —  Indonesia has given Facebook a week to provide more information on how personal data of about one million of its citizens was misused and on the steps the company is taking to prevent such breaches, the country's communications ministry said.More than 115 million Indonesians use Facebook and authorities in the Southeast Asian country have been pressing the firm to explain how personal data was harvested by political consultancy Cambridge Analytica via a personality quiz.A Facebook official apologized to Indonesian members of parliament this week at a public hearing, where the company said that 1,096,666 people in the country may have had their data shared, or 1.26 percent of the global total.In a statement released on Thursday evening, the ministry said it had sent a letter to Facebook Ireland Ltd, the company's main international business unit, in response to an April 10 letter from the company's head of data protection.AdvertisementThe ministry had asked for more details and documents on any  misuse of data, including whether data had been shared with other third parties such as CubeYou and Aggregate IQ.AdvertisementFacebook has said it was suspending Canadian political consultancy AggregateIQ from its platform after reports the firm may have improperly had access to the personal data of Facebook users.According to CNBC, Facebook was also suspending data analytics firm CubeYou to investigate how it was collecting information through quizzes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Indonesian communications ministry was also seeking confirmation on technical measures to limit data access in Facebook and more information on an audit the social media company was doing on sharing.The statement said Facebook would have to meet the requests within seven days of the letter that was sent on Thursday.Facebook did not immediately provide comment on Friday.Earlier this week, Facebook said in a statement that it was  "committed to improving the way we protect people's information, and to providing a safe and secure experience for the more than 115 million Indonesians on Facebook".It said it was "working hard to tackle past abuse, prevent future abuse and give people more prominent privacy controls" and was "committed to providing regular updates to Indonesians, their representatives, the authorities and the media."The company is also facing investigations in other countries, such as the Philippines, the United States and Australia, in the wake of the Cambridge Analytica data breach scandal.(Writing by Ed Davies; Editing by Himani Sarkar)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Reuters(Reuters) - Twitter Inc said on Friday that it has banned ads from Moscow-based Kaspersky Lab, saying the cyber-security company's business model conflicts with advertising rules and citing U.S. government claims that Kaspersky has ties to Russian intelligence agencies. Twitter confirmed the ban in an email to Reuters after Kaspersky Lab co-founder Eugene Kaspersky disclosed the development in a blog post on Friday, saying that the company learned of the ban in early January.The ban follows charges by Washington that Kaspersky Lab has close ties to intelligence agencies in Moscow and its software could be used to enable Russian spying, which prompted the Trump administration to ban its products from U.S. government networks.Kaspersky Lab has repeatedly denied those allegations, saying it will open up its code for inspection so that experts can hunt for vulnerabilities in its products that could be exploited by intelligence agencies, and it has asked a U.S. federal court to overturn the American ban. Eugene Kaspersky said in his blog post that he was surprised by Twitter's ban and asked the company to reconsider."We haven’t violated any written – or unwritten – rules, and our business model is quite simply the same template business model that’s used throughout the whole cybersecurity industry: We provide users with products and services, and they pay us for them," he said.Department of Homeland Security cyber-security official Jeanette Manfra said her agency has not instructed U.S. companies to punish Kaspersky. "We laid out a very transparent process and how we came to our decision," to ban Kaspersky products from government networks, she said at a panel at the RSA security conference in San Francisco. "I would defer to the companies for how they made their decisions." Kaspersky said in an email that Twitter was the only social media company to ban its ads.But other social media companies have taken action regarding Kaspersky Lab. Facebook Inc in January said it had removed Kaspersky Lab from a list of anti-virus offerings to users.When asked to explain its ban, Twitter said in an email, "This decision is based on our determination that Kaspersky Lab operates using a business model that inherently conflicts with acceptable Twitter Ads business practices."Twitter also said it was responding to a Department of Homeland Security warning of a threat to national security posed by Russian government access to Kaspersky products.It is rare for Twitter to ban specific advertisers. In October it banned Russian media outlets Russia Today and Sputnik, accusing them of interfering in the 2016 U.S. elections. Last month, Twitter banned cryptocurrency ads.  (Reporting by Jim Finkle in Toronto and David Ingram in San Francisco; additional reporting by Dustin Volz in San Francisco; editing by David Gregorio and Jonathan Oatis)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 8:52 A.M. E.D.T.
BERLIN/FRANKFURT —  Facebook's attempt to limit fallout from a massive data breach hit trouble in Germany on Friday as a privacy watchdog opened a case against the social network and politicians accused its bosses of evasion.The social network has been at the center of controversy over suspected Russian manipulation of the 2016 U.S. presidential election via its platform, and the leak of personal data of 87 million users to a political consultancy that advised Donald Trump's team.A German data privacy regulator said it was opening a non-compliance procedure against Facebook in relation to the data leak to the consultancy, Cambridge Analytica, that was exposed a month ago.The city-state of Hamburg's Data Protection Commissioner, Johannes Caspar, notified Facebook in writing that he had opened a probe into suspected data abuse. The case could lead to a fine of up to 300,000 euros ($370,000).Advertisement"First we will seek a statement from Facebook and then hearings will begin," said Caspar's spokesman, Martin Schemm.AdvertisementSuch a fine, if imposed, would only be a pinprick for Facebook, which recorded revenues of more than $40 billion last year.But the case marks a warning shot ahead of the introduction of tougher privacy rules across the European Union on May 25 that foresee penalties of up to four percent of worldwide revenues for serious violations."We remain strongly committed to protecting people's information," a Facebook spokeswoman said in response to news of the probe. "We appreciate any opportunity to answer questions by data protection authorities."CHARM DEFENSIVEFacing a hostile audience, a Facebook executive earlier met German lawmakers and repeated apologies by CEO Mark Zuckerberg over the Cambridge Analytica leak."What happened with Cambridge Analytica represents a huge violation of trust, and we are deeply sorry," Joel Kaplan, vice president for global public policy, said according to the text of his prepared remarks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kaplan said Facebook would roll out a new 'view ads' feature, designed to make political advertising more transparent, in time for a regional election being held in the German state of Bavaria in October.Social media experts say Germany's parliamentary election last September was less affected by the spread of 'fake news' than the U.S. vote, where Trump pulled off a stunning come-from-behind victory.Yet the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) was able to capitalize on a wave of discontent with an active campaign on social media, winning seats in parliament for the first time as Chancellor Angela Merkel's Christian Democrats polled poorly.AdvertisementThe Bavarian party closely allied to Merkel's conservatives is seeking re-election in October. Its leading figure in the federal government, Interior Minister Horst Seehofer, is taking a hard line on immigration in a bid to squeeze the AfD vote.Lawmakers came away dissatisfied from the closed-door hearing, saying Facebook executives had failed to give clarity on how widespread the illicit harvesting of data using Facebook apps had been."We just experienced another slice of Facebook's salami tactics," said Thomas Jarzombek, the Christian Democrats' digital policy spokesman.Tabea Roessner of the opposition Greens said the hearing had shown Facebook was still in 'business as usual' mode. "That disrespects those affected," she told the Handelsblatt daily.(Writing by Douglas Busvine; Editing by Matthew Mpoke Bigg, William Maclean)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 12:25 A.M. E.D.T.
BEIJING —  China will retaliate if the United States insists on initiating a trade war, China's ambassador to the United States was quoted as saying by the state news agency Xinhua on Friday.Speaking at an event held by the Fairbank Center for Chinese Studies at Harvard University this week, Cui Tiankai said any dispute should be worked out through dialogue and a trade war would poison the atmosphere of overall China-U.S. relations.Cui also urged the United States to abandon a cold war and zero-sum mentality, Xinhua reported.(Reporting by Beijing Monitoring Desk; editing Darren Schuettler)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 19, 2018, 8:13 P.M. E.D.T.
(Reuters) - Japanese e-commerce company Rakuten Inc will issue as much as 200 billion yen ($1.86 billion) to prepare for its entry into the country's mobile phone service market, the Nikkei business daily reported on Thursday.Rakuten plans to launch the service in October 2019 and spend about 600 billion yen to build the required infrastructure, including a nationwide wireless network, the Nikkei reported.Rakuten said last week it won government approval to offer mobile services as it expands into a market dominated by three major carriers — NTT DoCoMo Inc, KDDI Corp and SoftBank Group Corp.Rakuten is aiming to sign up at least 15 million subscribers. By comparison, No. 3 carrier SoftBank has about 39 million subscribers.($1 = 107.3400 yen)(This version of the story was refiled to correct first paragraph to add dropped words "in bonds")(Reporting by Akankshita Mukhopadhyay in Bengaluru; Editing by Sai Sachin Ravikumar)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATHANIEL POPPERAPRIL 19, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Venture capitalists and entrepreneurs have been lobbying federal regulators to protect at least some virtual currencies from being categorized as securities, a designation that would carry significantly more oversight.The venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz helped assemble a group of investors and lawyers that met with the Securities and Exchange Commission in late March. They also proposed a “safe harbor” for some virtual currencies, according to a copy of the proposal reviewed by The New York Times and three people briefed on the effort who agreed to speak on the condition of anonymity because the proceedings were confidential.Regulators have indicated in private meetings that they are considering whether virtual currencies — including Ether, the second most widely used digital token — should be categorized as a security, according to three people who have been in the meetings. That designation could cause a significant drop in the value of Ether.“It’s a ‘come to the lord’ moment,” said Richard Levin, a lawyer at the firm Polsinelli who works with companies in the space. “We are seeing a watershed moment in which many firms in the digital asset community who may have been ignorant of the law — or poorly informed — are now coming to terms with the fact that they are subject to regulators.”AdvertisementThe group led by Andreessen Horowitz called themselves the “Venture Capital Working Group,” according to the proposal, dated March 26.AdvertisementThe group included the two largest venture capital firms in the virtual currency industry, Andreessen Horowitz and Union Square Ventures. It also included lawyers from Cooley, Perkins Coie, and McDermott Will & Emery, the people involved in the effort said.The group met with the S.E.C. in Washington on March 28 to present their idea for a safe harbor that would allow some tokens to be categorized as “utility tokens” rather than securities. An S.E.C. spokesman declined to comment on the meeting.Thousands of virtual currencies have been created through so-called initial coin offerings in which entrepreneurs sold digital tokens to raise money for their projects. The tokens are generally intended to serve as internal payment methods in software that the entrepreneurs are building.Over the past year, entrepreneurs have raised more than $6 billion through initial coin offerings. These coins mostly trade on unregulated virtual currency exchanges. Many entrepreneurs have said that because their tokens have a utility, as a payment method, they should not be considered investment contracts or securities.But Jay Clayton, the chairman of the S.E.C., has said in recent months that he believes almost every token issued through an initial coin offering should be registered as a security — almost none are today.The S.E.C. has sent subpoenas to dozens of people and companies in the virtual currency industry asking for information about how various digital tokens were issued and marketed to investors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When investments are securities, they generally need to have paperwork filed with regulators and can only be traded on regulated exchanges, like those where stocks and commodities are bought and sold. No regulated securities exchanges offer virtual currency trading.Most investors assume that Bitcoin is safe from being categorized as a security because it was not originally issued through an initial coin offering or central organization. New Bitcoins are distributed on a daily basis to computers helping to maintain the network. Some large virtual currencies, like Litecoin and Monero, have similar designs.AdvertisementBut Ethereum, the virtual currency network that houses the Ether virtual currency, did raise money by selling Ether tokens to investors through what was then called a pre-sale and is now often called an initial coin offering. The Ethereum Foundation took in Bitcoin that were worth around $18 million at the time. Ether are now distributed in a manner similar to that of Bitcoin.The group pulled together by Andreessen Horowitz said in its proposal that Ether “has become so decentralized it should not be deemed a security.”The proposal suggests that digital tokens should generally be exempt from securities laws if they achieve “full decentralization” or “full functionality.” It adds that full decentralization could occur under several conditions, including “when the token creator no longer has control of the network based on its ability to make unilateral changes to the functionality of the tokens.”The proposal says a token is fully functional when it can be used for its intended purpose on a computer network and is not just useful as a speculative investment, which is the case with many tokens today.The group notes that these definitions are only suggestions, but the “proposed safe harbor has been vetted by, and has the support of, many of the key players in the industry.”People briefed on the meeting said that regulators did not immediately embrace the safe harbor proposal.Many entrepreneurs and law firms have been creating new ways for virtual currency projects to issue their tokens as securities and some exchanges have talked about getting registered as official securities exchanges.It is still unclear what will happen to tokens that did not register as securities but are later categorized as securities.Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopperA version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeking ‘Safe Harbor’ For Virtual Currencies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersTAIPEI — Shares of Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co Ltd tumbled and other Apple supplier and chip stocks fell after it cut its full-year revenue target on softer demand for smartphones.Also citing uncertainty in the cryptocurrency mining market, the world's largest contract chipmaker said revenue for 2018 is likely to grow 10 percent rather than the earlier forecast of 10-15 percent.TSMC's shares slid as much as 6.8 percent in morning trade to its lowest level since Dec. 29.A raft of analysts read a prediction of softer-than-expected smartphone demand as driven chiefly be concern about demand for iPhones. Apple is believed to account for nearly 20 percent of the Taiwanese company's revenue.Barclays said on Thursday some Apple suppliers will likely see choppiness into June due to weakness in handset sales, while Mizuho Securities USA said it sees limited upside to 2018 iPhone unit shipment estimates. In the United States, shares of Apple and its suppliers including Qualcomm Inc, Intel Corp, Qorvo Inc, Skyworks Solutions Inc and Broadcom Inc fell by 2 percent to 5 percent.In Japan, shares of semiconductor equipment makers and electronic component makers, including Tokyo Electron and Advantest Corp also lost ground.  (Reporting by Clare Jim; Editing by Amrutha Gayathri and Edwina Gibbs)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 19, 2018, 1:28 P.M. E.D.T.
ABIDJAN —  Gabon will invest 150 billion CFA francs ($277 million) over three years to expand its fiber optic telecoms network to improve digital connections, the country minister of communication and digital economy said on Thursday.The first step of the project is already completed, linking the seaside capital Libreville to Franceville, said Alain-Claude Bilie-By-NZE on the sidelines of a telecoms forum in the commercial capital Abidjan.Korea telecom was chosen to do the second half of the project connecting up the north of the Central Africa country, after a tender process.Ninety-nine percent of people in Gabon have access to the internet on mobile phones, the minister said.(Reporting by Loucoumane Coulibaly; Editing by Edward McAllister and Mark Potter)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 19, 2018, 10:25 A.M. E.D.T.
LONDON —  A Cambridge University academic who harvested data on millions of Facebook users will appear before a British parliamentary committee investigating the scandal on April 24.The committee said it had called Aleksandr Kogan from the Department of Psychology at the University of Cambridge to discuss his relationship with Cambridge Analytica, a UK-based political firm also accused of improperly accessing data.(Reporting by Kate Holton; editing by Stephen Addison)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATHANIEL POPPERJAN. 4, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The virtual currency boom has gotten so heated that it is throwing the list of the world’s richest people into disarray.Consider what has happened to the founders of an upstart virtual currency known as Ripple, which has seen its value skyrocket in recent weeks.At one point on Thursday, Chris Larsen, a Ripple co-founder who is also the largest holder of Ripple tokens, was worth more than $59 billion, according to figures from Forbes. That would have briefly vaulted Mr. Larsen ahead of Facebook chief executive Mark Zuckerberg into fifth place on the Forbes list of the world’s richest people.Other top Ripple holders would have also zoomed up that list as the value of their tokens soared more than 100 percent during the last week — and more than 30,000 percent in the last year. The boom has turned Ripple into the second largest virtual currency, within striking distance of the original behemoth, Bitcoin.AdvertisementThe explosion in Ripple’s value over the past month is the starkest illustration yet of how the mania around Bitcoin  has spilled over into a broader universe of virtual currencies. These coins — with names like Cardano, Stellar, and Iota — are generally new twists on the Bitcoin technology, which uses a decentralized network of volunteer computers to keep a record, known as a blockchain, of all transactions.AdvertisementWhile most of these currencies were worth nearly nothing a year ago, many are now responsible for creating billionaires — albeit with rapidly fluctuating fortunes. If this is a tulip fever, the fever has spread to chrysanthemums and poppies.Mr. Larsen’s soaring wealth sparked a few congratulatory messages on Twitter on Thursday, even if the value of Ripple — and his Forbes ranking — dropped later in the day. But his net worth, and the ballooning value of Ripple tokens, mostly drew comments about the irrationality of the virtual currency markets, which appear to be largely driven these days by the fear of missing out, or FOMO.“This is beyond insane,” said Jeremy Gardner, an investor who previously worked at the virtual currency hedge fund Blockchain Capital, which invested in Ripple. “There’s absolutely nothing driving this rally except rampant FOMO, misinformation, and speculation.”Ripple, whose tokens are known as XRP, is far from the only virtual currency being fueled by the hysteria. In 2017, there were 29 tokens — including Einsteinium and Byteball — that rose more than Bitcoin’s remarkable 1,600 percent jump, according to OnChainFx, a data provider.Nearly 40 virtual currencies are worth more than $1 billion — when all the outstanding tokens are counted at their current value — despite many of them not having been used in any sort of transaction other than speculative trading.Against this backdrop, Ripple could be considered a staid institution, though one with a colorful history.Ripple was invented in 2012 by Jed McCaleb, a programmer who had created Mt. Gox, a Bitcoin exchange that later dissolved in disgrace. Mr. McCaleb designed Ripple as a faster and more efficient version of Bitcoin, without the mining process that Bitcoin uses to distribute new coins and secure the network.AdvertisementMr. Larsen joined Mr. McCaleb early on to create a company, also known as Ripple. The company helped develop an open source Ripple software that makes it possible to move money between digital wallets. The Ripple token is one of the currencies that can be transferred with the software.Mr. McCaleb later left Ripple in an acrimonious divorce, though he retained a sizable number of Ripple tokens. His holdings were worth around $20 billion at Thursday’s prices, putting him close to 40th on the Forbes list. (The actual list is only published once a year, and no big virtual currency holders have been officially added.)Mr. McCaleb has since created a competitor to Ripple, known as Stellar. Stellar has risen even faster than Ripple in recent weeks, with all outstanding Stellar tokens — known as Lumens — worth around $14 billion on Thursday, making it the seventh largest virtual currency.In contrast, all the outstanding Ripple tokens were worth $140 billion on Thursday, while all Bitcoin were worth $250 billion.Yet the fortunes of Mr. McCaleb and Mr. Larsen are not nearly as durable as those of other people on the Forbes list given that the value of virtual currencies fluctuates wildly. If Mr. Larsen wanted to access his wealth by selling Ripple tokens for dollars, it would likely drive down the value of Ripple tokens — and his riches.Mr. McCaleb and Mr. Larsen did not respond to questions about the recent price increases.Mr. Larsen was Ripple’s chief executive from 2012 until he stepped down last year to become the company’s executive chairman. During his tenure, Ripple focused on helping banks use its software to shift money between different foreign currencies, something that most banks currently do through a cumbersome process involving separate accounts in every country where they operate.Ripple has said it has signed up more than 100 banks to use the company’s technology, including American Express and Banco Santander.But banks do not need to use Ripple tokens for Ripple’s software to transfer dollars, euros and yen. That point appears to be lost on many small time investors who are buying Ripple tokens.AdvertisementMost of the buying and selling of Ripple tokens is happening in South Korea, according to data providers that track virtual currency exchanges, where ordinary investors have thrown money at a wide array of virtual currencies.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several virtual currency hedge fund investors said that they have talked to banks and heard about interest in Ripple’s software, but not its tokens.“I’m not aware of banks using or planning to use the XRP token at the scale of tens of billions of dollars necessary to support XRP’s valuation,” said Ari Paul, a co-founder of the hedge fund BlockTower Capital.Ripple has so far announced that one company, a Mexican money-transfer business, is planning to use the Ripple token.Brad Garlinghouse, who took over as Ripple’s chief executive last year, said in an interview this week that other institutions are also using — or looking at using — XRP, but the company could not name them because of confidentiality agreements.Mr. Garlinghouse said he thought the rising value of Ripple tokens was justified, given the company’s growth and the size of the foreign currency markets that Ripple wants to tackle.“It’s clear that people increasingly understand that we are solving a very large problem,” he said.Ripple has attracted the ire of Bitcoin fans because Ripple has a greater degree of centralized authority in Mr. Garlinghouse’s company, even though the Ripple software is open source. Bitcoin and other virtual currencies were designed to operate without companies or governments in charge.AdvertisementBut the company Ripple, if not the XRP token, has won a following among top figures in government and finance who are interested in bringing the ideas introduced by Bitcoin into the traditional financial system. The company’s board includes the former top financial regulator in New York state, Benjamin M. Lawsky, and Gene Sperling, who was the director of the National Economic Council under Presidents Barack Obama and Bill Clinton.Still, even virtual currency analysts who believe in Ripple’s software have said there is a big difference between Ripple the company being successful, and Ripple the token gaining enough traction to justify current prices.“An impossibly long list of things already needs to go right for XRP to become a reserve currency for banks,” Ryan Selkis, a virtual currency analyst, wrote in a post on Thursday.But, Mr. Selkis added, that doesn’t mean Ripple’s price won’t keep ascending. Why? “Because this is crypto, and everyone in the industry is now slinging crack crypto cocaine to retail addicts,” he wrote.Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopperA version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Bitcoin Rival Mints Wealth To Match Even Zuckerberg.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 19, 2018, 12:43 P.M. E.D.T.
BERLIN —  German lawmakers will question a senior Facebook Inc manager about data privacy in the wake of revelations that the personal information of millions of users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica.Lawmakers in the Bundestag lower house of parliament will grill Joel Kaplan, Facebook's vice president for global public policy, during a closed-door session on Friday morning.The meeting mirrors the appearance of Facebook's Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg before a U.S. Congressional joint hearing on April 10-11 over the scandal engulfing the world's largest social network.The 87 million Facebook users affected included nearly three million Europeans and Zuckerberg is also under pressure from EU lawmakers to come to Europe to shed light on the data breach.Advertisement"Facebook needs to show more openness and transparency when dealing with user data," said Nadine Schoen, deputy leader of Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservative bloc in the Bundestag.AdvertisementShe said Facebook needed to do more than just pay lip service and it remained to be seen how serious the company was about really improving user rights."It is not enough to exchange the gray T-shirt and jeans for suit and tie," she said in reference to Zuckerberg's appearance in the U.S. Congress.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The senior lawmaker said that Facebook so far was giving the impression that it only wanted to save its business model."For example, the company is already rowing back in the supposedly world-wide announced implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation," Schoen warned, referring to privacy rules that will enter force in the European Union next month."We no longer need excuses, but facts," she said.German Justice Minister Katarina Barley last month summoned executives of the firm, including European public affairs chief Richard Allan.Misuse of data by Facebook means it will in future be bound by stricter regulations and the threat of tougher penalties for further privacy violations, Barley said after the meeting.(Reporting by Michael Nienaber; Editing by Douglas Busvine)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSTRASBOURG — Investigations into how Google may be using its Android smartphone operating system and its AdSense advertising service to thwart rivals are advancing, Europe's antitrust chief said on Wednesday, amid concern about the lengthy proceedings.The European Commission opened its investigation into Android in 2015, following a complaint two years earlier from the lobbying group FairSearch. A 2016 document seen by Reuters said the EU competition enforcer planned to levy a large fine against the company and would order it to stop giving revenue-sharing payments to smartphone makers to pre-install only Google Search.It is also expected to tell the company, a unit of Alphabet, to stop requiring Google's Chrome browser and other apps to be installed alongside Google's Play store. In the AdSense case, Google was accused of blocking rivals in online search advertising in 2016.The Commission has yet to rule on either case, triggering worries among rivals and consumer groups."We are advancing on our two cases involving Google, both the Android case and the AdSense case," European Competition Commissioner Margrethe Vestager told EU lawmakers."Five years in the Google case seems an eternity," lawmaker Ramon Tremosa said. Echoing some of Google's rivals, he has urged Vestager to break up the company. Such a move is unlikely because of the high legal threshold.The former Danish economy minister, who has the power to sanction companies up to 10 percent of their global turnover, handed down a record 2.4 billion-euro ($2.97 billion) fine to Google last year for squeezing out rivals of its shopping service.But industry experts, analysts and even Google's competitors say regulators may struggle to break the company's stranglehold because of its entrenched dominance and the popularity of its products. (Reporting by Foo Yun Chee, editing by Larry King)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 19, 2018, 7:31 A.M. E.D.T.
BEIJING —  Chinese President Xi Jinping told British Prime Minister Theresa in a telephone call on Thursday that there needs to be a comprehensive, just and objective probe into a suspected chemical weapons attack in Syria, state television reported.(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; editing by Nick Macfie)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 18, 2018, 11:22 P.M. E.D.T.
MEXICO CITY —  America Movil's fixed-line unit Telmex said on Wednesday that the nation's supreme court has sided with it and ruled the firm should not be barred from charging rivals for calls to its network.The decision follows a similar ruling from the Supreme Court in August that opened the door for America Movil's mobile unit Telcel to begin charging its rivals for use of its network.The rulings weaken a key pillar of a 2014 telecommunications reform intended to loosen billionaire Carlos Slim's grip on a market he has dominated since taking control of former state phone monopoly Telmex in the 1990s.Mexico's Federal Institute of Telecommunications (IFT) will set the rates, which will become effective on Jan. 1, 2019, Telmex said.AdvertisementA spokeswoman for the IFT did not immediately respond to a request for comment.The IFT ruled in November that America Movil could resume charging local rivals for mobile calls to its network.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In March, the IFT approved a plan to separate part of America Movil's fixed-line units into new companies, after about a year of discussion. America Movil submitted a plan for the separation this month, which is intended to open up its infrastructure to competitors.Telmex held about 62 percent of Mexico's fixed-lines as of the third quarter 2017, according to IFT data.Advertisement(Reporting by Anthony Esposito and Julia Love; Editing by Himani Sarkar)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 18, 2018, 10:19 P.M. E.D.T.
MEXICO CITY —  Mexico's telecom regulator IFT said on Wednesday that it has fined billionaire Carlos Slim's flagship company America Movil and its mobile service unit Telcel 96.8 million pesos ($5.4 million) in an antitrust case.The IFT said it fined America Movil and Telcel for having "exclusivity agreements with Blue Label Mexico, which prevented the company from marketing or providing" services for Telcel's competitors in the mobile telephone service.Blue Label provides technical and banking support to retail businesses in Mexico, according to the company's LinkedIn page."We have already received the notification from the IFT. We are analyzing the document and in due time we will present the challenge in accordance with law," an America Movil spokesman said.Blue Label did not immediately respond to a request for comment.(Reporting by Julia Love and Anthony Esposito; Editing by Dave Graham and Himani Sarkar)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — A Florida man alleged to have made almost 100 million robocalls to trick consumers with “exclusive” vacation deals from well-known travel and hospitality companies on Wednesday denied wrongdoing before a U.S. Senate Committee.In June, the Federal Communications Commission said Adrian Abramovich allegedly made 96 million robocalls during a three-month period in 2016, and proposed a $120 million fine."I am not the kingpin of robocalling that is alleged," Abramovich said as he appeared under subpoena.He denied engaging in "fraudulent activities" and said "it was always my intent with the FCC to negotiate toward an appropriate fine within my ability to pay such an amount."Abramovich declined to answer some questions about his case, asserting he was invoking his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.Senator John Thune, who chairs the Senate Commerce Committee, said Abramovich had waived his right to avoid answering questions when he discussed his case at the hearing. Thune warned that Abramovich could be held in contempt of Congress if he did not answer questions.The calls, which the FCC said violated U.S. telecommunications laws, appeared to offer vacation deals from companies such as Marriott International Inc, Expedia Group Inc, Hilton Inc and TripAdvisor Inc. TripAdvisor complained to the FCC in 2016 after getting complaints from consumers claiming it was robocalling them.Consumers who answered the calls were transferred to foreign call centers that tried to sell vacation packages, often involving timeshares. These call centers were not related to the major companies, the FCC said.Abramovich told the Senate he had been engaged in legitimate telemarketing for more than 15 years and that the calls were offering real vacation packages.The FCC said in June “Abramovich is the perpetrator of one of the largest — and most dangerous — illegal robocalling campaigns that the Commission has ever investigated." Those robocalls impacted other people and services, the FCC said. Abramovich “engaged in regular mass-robocalling campaigns during 2015 and 2016" that "repeatedly disrupted a critical telecommunications service used by hospitals and emergency medical providers,” it said.U.S. consumers get nearly 2.5 billion monthly robocalls - automated, prerecorded calls that regulators have labeled a “scourge,” according to FCC estimates. FCC Chairman Ajit Pai said last year “Americans are mad as hell” at robocalls and the agency gets more than 200,000 complaints annually.In November, the FCC approved new rules to protect consumers from unwanted robocalls, allowing phone companies to proactively block calls likely to be fraudulent. Some senators want the FCC to take additional steps.The FCC authorized voice providers to block robocalls that appear to be from telephone numbers that do not or cannot make outgoing calls. The FCC wants a reliable verification system to prevent scam artists from spoofing the number of a bank, debt collector, government tax agency or other organizations to trick consumers into disclosing confidential financial information.AT&T Inc said in March it had blocked 3.5 billion illegal robocalls and was working with regulators to put an end to unwanted solicitations. (Reporting by David Shepardson; Editing by Bernadette Baum)Advertisement

      By CADE METZ and 
    
KEITH COLLINS

JAN. 2, 2018

The woman in the photo seems familiar.She looks like Jennifer Aniston, the “Friends” actress, or Selena Gomez, the child star turned pop singer. But not exactly.She appears to be a celebrity, one of the beautiful people photographed outside a movie premiere or an awards show. And yet, you cannot quite place her.That’s because she’s not real. She was created by a machine.The image is one of the faux celebrity photos generated by software under development at Nvidia, the big-name computer chip maker that is investing heavily in research involving artificial intelligence.At a lab in Finland, a small team of Nvidia researchers recently built a system that can analyze thousands of (real) celebrity snapshots, recognize common patterns, and create new images that look much the same — but are still a little different. The system can also generate realistic images of horses, buses, bicycles, plants and many other common objects.The project is part of a vast and varied effort to build technology that can automatically generate convincing images — or alter existing images in equally convincing ways. The hope is that this technology can significantly accelerate and improve the creation of computer interfaces, games, movies and other media, eventually allowing software to create realistic imagery in moments rather than the hours — if not days — it can now take human developers.In recent years, thanks to a breed of algorithm that can learn tasks by analyzing vast amounts of data, companies like Google and Facebook have built systems that can recognize faces and common objects with an accuracy that rivals the human eye. Now, these and other companies, alongside many of the world’s top academic A.I. labs, are using similar methods to both recognize and create.Nvidia's images can't match the resolution of images produced by a top-of-the-line camera, but when viewed on even the largest smartphones, they are sharp, detailed, and, in many cases, remarkably convincing.For example, look at the two photos below and see if you can figure out which person is real.

          This one is computer-generated


          This one is also computer-generated
● Sorry! This was a trick question. Both images were generated by computers.Like other prominent A.I. researchers, the Nvidia team believes the techniques that drive this project will continue to improve in the months and years to come, generating significantly larger and more complex images.“We think we can push this further, generating not just photos but 3-D images that can be used in computer games and films,” said Jaakko Lehtinen, one of the researchers behind the project.Today, many systems generate images and sounds using a complex algorithm called a neural network. This is a way of identifying patterns in large amounts of data. By identifying common patterns in thousands of car photos, for instance, a neural network can learn to identify a car. But it can also work in the other direction: It can use those patterns to generate its own car photos.As it built a system that generates new celebrity faces, the Nvidia team went a step further in an effort to make them far more believable. It set up two neural networks — one that generated the images and another that tried to determine whether those images were real or fake. These are called generative adversarial networks, or GANs. In essence, one system does its best to fool the other — and the other does its best not to be fooled.“The computer learns to generate these images by playing a cat-and-mouse game against itself,” said Mr. Lehtinen.10 MINUTES8 HOURS16 HOURS1 DAY2 DAYS3 DAYS4 DAYS5 DAYS6 DAYS7 DAYS8 DAYS9 DAYS10 DAYS14 DAYS16 DAYS18 DAYSThis series of images shows the output of Nvidia’s system over the course of 18 days of processing. With their method, called progressive GANs, the Nvidia researchers built a system that begins with low-resolution images and then gradually progresses to higher resolutions. This allows the training to happen more quickly, but it also in a more controlled and stable way. The result: 1024- by 1024-pixel images that are sharp, detailed, and, in many cases, very convincing. Source: NvidiaA second team of Nvidia researchers recently built a system that can automatically alter a street photo taken on a summer’s day so that it looks like a snowy winter scene. Researchers at the University of California, Berkeley, have designed another that learns to convert horses into zebras and Monets into Van Goghs. DeepMind, a London-based A.I. lab owned by Google, is exploring technology that can generate its own videos. And Adobe is fashioning similar machine learning techniques with an eye toward pushing them into products like Photoshop, its popular image design tool.Trained designers and engineers have long used technology like Photoshop and other programs to build realistic images from scratch. This is what movie effects houses do. But it is becoming easier for machines to learn how to generate these images on their own, said Durk Kingma, a researcher at OpenAI, the artificial intelligence lab founded by Tesla chief executive Elon Musk and others, who specializes in this kind of machine learning.“We now have a model that can generate faces that are more diverse and in some ways more realistic than what we could program by hand,” he said, referring to Nvidia’s work in Finland.But new concerns come with the power to create this kind of imagery.With so much attention on fake media these days, we could soon face an even wider range of fabricated images than we do today.“The concern is that these techniques will rise to the point where it becomes very difficult to discern truth from falsity,” said Tim Hwang, who previously oversaw A.I. policy at Google and is now director of the Ethics and Governance of Artificial Intelligence Fund, an effort to fund ethical A.I. research. “You might believe that accelerates problems we already have.”Each of these images took about 18 days for the computers to generate, before reaching a point that the system found them believable. Source: NvidiaThe idea of generative adversarial networks was originally developed in 2014 by a researcher named Ian Goodfellow, while he was a Ph.D. student at the University of Montreal. He dreamed up the idea after an argument at a local bar, and built the first prototype that same night. Now Mr. Goodfellow is a researcher at Google, and his idea is among the most important and widely explored concepts in the rapidly accelerating world of artificial intelligence.Though this kind of photo generation is currently limited to still images, many researchers believe it could expand to videos, games and virtual reality. But Mr. Kingma said this could take years, just because it will require much larger amounts of computing power. That is the primary problem that Nvidia is also working on, along with other chip makers.Researchers are also using a wide range of other machine learning techniques to edit video in more convincing — and sometimes provocative — ways.In August, a group at the University of Washington made headlines when they built a system that could put new words into the mouth of a Barack Obama video. Others, including Pinscreen, a California start-up, and iFlyTek of China, are developing similar techniques using images of President Donald Trump.The results are not completely convincing. But the rapid progress of GANs and other techniques point to a future where it becomes easier for anyone to generate faux images or doctor the real thing. That is cause for real concern among experts like Mr. Hwang.Eliot Higgins, the founder of Bellingcat, an organization that analyzes current events using publicly available images and video, pointed out that fake images are by no means a new problem. In the years since the rise of Photoshop, the onus has been on citizens to approach what they view online with skepticism.But many of us still put a certain amount of trust in photos and videos that we don’t necessarily put in text or word of mouth. Mr. Hwang believes the technology will evolve into a kind of A.I. arms race pitting those trying to deceive against those trying to identify the deception.Mr. Lehtinen downplays the effect his research will have on the spread of misinformation online. But he does say that, as a time goes on, we may have to rethink the very nature of imagery. “We are approaching some fundamental questions,” he said.AdvertisementBy VINOD SREEHARSHA and MIKE ISAACJAN. 3, 2018
RIO DE JANEIRO — Didi Chuxing, the Chinese ride-sharing company, agreed to acquire full control of 99 — the main Brazilian rival to Uber and a company in which Didi already holds a stake — for around $600 million, according to three people with knowledge of the transaction.The all-cash deal changes the global competitive landscape for ride-hailing companies, particularly Uber and Didi, the industry’s two biggest players. The companies have been locked in a struggle to be the dominant force in as many regions as possible, with fast-growing markets like South America, and Brazil specifically, seen as huge prizes.Didi on Thursday confirmed the deal without disclosing financial details.Uber and Didi have teamed up in some countries, including China, but Didi’s decision to buy a major Uber competitor in Brazil puts the companies at loggerheads in Latin America.The deal also reflects Didi’s effort to accelerate its global footprint outside China. In December, the company raised $4 billion in financing from investors that included the Japanese conglomerate SoftBank, partly to fuel that expansion.AdvertisementDidi previously owned around 30 percent of 99, according to two people familiar with the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly. Members of Didi’s technology and engineering team have been in Brazil working with employees at 99, which is based in São Paulo, for about a year, these people said.AdvertisementThe new deal calls for Didi to pay roughly $600 million for the shares of 99 that it does not already own, giving it complete control of the Brazilian company, the people said. Didi has also agreed to put additional cash into 99. The acquisition will help 99’s previous investors — a group that includes SoftBank, Riverwood Capital, Qualcomm Ventures and Monashees — cash out, representing a rare successful exit for investors in Brazilian internet start-ups.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Peter Fernandez, 99’s chief executive, is expected to stay on at the company, as are other top executives, the people familiar with the transaction said. Brazil is likely to remain the company’s focus, although it may also expand elsewhere in Latin America.“Globalization is a top strategic priority for Didi,” Cheng Wei, Didi’s founder and chief executive, said in a statement.Talks between the companies were previously reported by The Information, a technology news website.With a population of about 210 million and underdeveloped public transportation networks, Brazil is a lucrative market for ride-hailing companies. But the country has moved to create barriers for such services, including legislative efforts to require drivers to show licenses and proof of ownership of the cars they use, although those rules were eventually modified.99, originally named 99Taxis and founded in 2012, focused initially on working with licensed taxi drivers, taxi unions and government regulators. Uber entered Brazil two years later, and the companies have battled each other since. By the end of 2015, 99 had the most Brazilian users with the app on their mobile devices, according to data from research firm 7Park Data, with another ride-hailing company, Easy Taxi, in second place and Uber in third.In 2016, 99 had trouble securing additional financing amid an economic and political crisis in Brazil. That year, Paulo Veras, the company’s co-founder and then chief executive, brought on Mr. Fernandez to be chief product officer. Mr. Fernandez later succeeded Mr. Veras and was tasked with finding global strategic partners for 99.In an interview with The New York Times last May, Mr. Fernandez said: “When I joined the company, my top priority was to reach out to Didi. I was impressed with things Didi was doing in transportation.”In a statement on Wednesday, Mr. Fernandez said that 99 was “confident that being part of Didi Chuxing will vastly enhance our capability to expand our services throughout Brazil to bring critical value to users, drivers and cities.”AdvertisementDidi has said it was drawn to 99’s initial approach of working with regulators and taxi drivers instead of against them. In an interview with The Times last year, Stephen Zhu, a senior vice president at Didi, said: “99 shares a lot of similarities with Didi in terms of business model and its evolution. Their culture and philosophy is very similar to ours.”Vinod Sreeharsha reported from Rio de Janeiro, and Mike Isaac from San Francisco.Follow Vinod Sreeharsha and Mike Isaac on Twitter: @VinodSreeharsha and @MikeIsaac.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Company Agrees To Buy Uber Rival in Brazil.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 18, 2018, 9:52 P.M. E.D.T.
(Reuters) - Tesla Inc is being probed by a California agency for occupational safety after a report that the electric carmaker failed to disclose serious injuries at a Fremont factory.The state's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Cal-OSHA) disclosed the inspection on Wednesday, two days after news website Reveal said that Tesla's omissions in legally mandated reports made its safety record appear better than it was.The probe began on Tuesday, Erika Monterroza, spokesperson for Cal/OSHA, said. The agency typically reviews an employer's log of work-related injuries and illnesses to make sure that serious injuries are reported directly to the administration within eight hours, she added.A Tesla spokesman said Cal-OSHA is required to investigate any claims, whether they have merit or are baseless."We have never in the entire history of our company received a violation for inaccurate or incomplete injury record-keeping," he said in an emailed statement.The injury rate at the Fremont factory, which it had taken over from General Motors Co and Toyota Motor Corp, is half what it was in its final years under the previous owners, the spokesman added.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
JAN. 3, 2018
Happy new year to you and yours, of course, but I’m going to have to put a halt to the festivities and play Frowning Farhad for a minute: You’re fooling yourself if you think 2018 is going to be any different, sanity- or anxiety-wise, from the roller coaster of the year just concluded.Sure, as in any year, a lot of good things could happen in 2018, and perhaps lots of bad things will happen, too. (How’s that for a prediction?) But there is a deeper and more unsettling certainty about the ride upon which we’ve all just embarked: A lot of probably very crazy things will happen in 2018.Get ready for even more events that don’t follow the rational course, and narratives that appear unmoored from the laws of politics, business and science. The background sensation of uncertainty that has pervaded much of the last two years isn’t going to abate. Just the opposite — my columnist’s Spidey sense tells me it’s only going to get worse. Strap in.Just a few years ago, there was a dawning sense that technology would give us a peek around the corner. Thanks to reams of information — sensors and surveillance everywhere, and computing capacity to make sense of it all — it looked as if we were entering a “Minority Report”-type world, where much of the future could be foretold in our numbers. Google could predict flu trends, election-stats nerds could predict political outcomes, and predictive policing algorithms were going to give us a handle on crime.AdvertisementYet what has happened is rather quite different. Instead of revealing unseen order and predictability in the world, technology has unleashed a cascade of forces that have made the world more volatile — and thus made the future hazier and more open to out-of-the-blue results.AdvertisementSome of this isn’t news. In 2016 and 2017, the world began to appreciate how smartphones and social networks can upend what we once considered the natural order. Tech has helped undercut the power of incumbent institutions — governments, political parties, the media, the patriarchy — and it has created a new class of geopolitical actors whose presence and ricocheting power we’re all still getting used to: trolls, terrorists, conspiracy theorists, social-media activists, hackers and cyptocurrency bugs, among others.These dynamics aided many of the biggest and most surprising stories in the last couple of years — Brexit, the election of Donald Trump, the emergent resistance movement against him, the #MeToo avalanche, the decline of Uber, the rise of Bitcoin.Yet even as a barrage of surprising stories plays out, many of us have yet to come to grips with the permanence of this chaos. People seem to have a latent, hopeful sense that things are going to calm down, that we’re on the cusp of a more normal news cycle. I suspect that’s wrong. Chaos is the new normal; the apprehension you feel every time you get a notification on your phone — the fear that you don’t know what fresh horror it could bring — isn’t an overreaction but an adaptation. Thanks to phones and Facebook, anything really could happen tomorrow.“I will tell you that as someone who does this professionally, my job has become a lot harder in the last few years,” said Amy Webb, a futurist who runs the Future Today Institute, a firm that helps big companies think about the possibilities of tomorrow.“There are just a lot more variables in play,” Ms. Webb said. “Think about how a single tweet from Donald Trump can have all these strange reverberations across the world. You can almost apply chaos theory to Donald Trump’s Twitter account.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One of the touchstone ideas of chaos theory, which is the study of dynamic systems, is the “butterfly effect” — the idea that small changes in initial conditions can lead to huge differences in outcomes, like how a butterfly flapping its wings in Peru can cause a hurricane in Houston.Nowadays, because we’re hyperconnected, we see butterfly effects everywhere. A single confessional blog post by Susan Fowler, a former employee of the ride-hailing company Uber, led to a swirling online campaign that eventually brought down Travis Kalanick, Uber’s once indomitable chief executive — an outcome that, as far as I can tell, not a single observer of Uber predicted would happen long before it did.AdvertisementBut it’s not just that one-off stories cause huge cascades; it’s that in a connected world, there are now so many one-off stories capable of setting off cascades, and no one knows which ones will hit.Note how Mr. Trump was not brought down by the series of sexual harassment claims against him during the presidential campaign — and yet just a few months later, claims against a host of other powerful men spiraled into a culture-shaping movement that has upended many parts of the economy.To continue the butterfly-effect analogy: “It used to be that there were a trillion butterflies each in their own weather system, but we have now connected all those butterflies into one planetary weather system — and you never know which one is going to have some kind of autocatalytic effect, and which one isn’t,” said Alexander Rose, executive director of the Long Now Foundation, an organization that aims to promote a long-term outlook on the world.As if all that weren’t enough, there’s another complication to fold into the chaos: Technology isn’t stopping. The pace of technological change is in many cases too fast for anyone of us to comprehend or get used to; as a result, just as the world seems to get its head around one new force unleashed by tech, another comes along to discombobulate our efforts to respond to it.For example, in the last year and a half, social networks have tried several ways to tamp down the misinformation flowing online. Their efforts have been fitful at best, but already they risk being outdated. Soon artificial intelligence and augmented reality software will make it trivially easy to create not just text-based misinformation but entirely fake audio and video, too.Last year, researchers at the University of Washington used A.I. to scan through footage of Barack Obama speaking, giving them a way to put just about any words into the former president’s mouth. Someone else thought up a more vulgar way to show off similar tech — a fake pornographic video of the actress Gal Gadot.In the run-up to the 2018 election, Facebook, Twitter and other social networks have vowed to take on the kinds of misinformation and trolling that ran amok in 2016. But what if social media is hit with a wave of explosive, realistic-looking viral videos whose authenticity can’t be confirmed? It’s highly unlikely that the social networks, the news media or the political class will know how to respond to such a situation.Mr. Rose pointed out that in the long span of human history, periods of turbulence aren’t unusual; technological change often prompts social and political instability and unpredictability. What is unusual now is that many of us aren’t used to this sort of chaos.“I’m 39, about to turn 40, and people like me who came of age in America in the ’80s and ’90s, we got used to a fairly predictable world,” said Nate Silver, the founder of the data-news site FiveThirtyEight, whose uncannily accurate forecast of the 2012 presidential election while at The New York Times set off wide interest in data-based journalistic predictions.Advertisement“So I do think people are now realizing the world is less predictable than we thought it was,” Mr. Silver said. “But in some ways that’s a return to normal.”Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: In 2018, Expect Chaos To Be the New Normal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By REUTERSAPRIL 18, 2018, 8:34 A.M. E.D.T.
LONDON —  Iran banned government bodies on Wednesday from using the popular Telegram instant messaging app as Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei's office said his account would shut down to protect national security, Iranian media reported.ISNA news agency did not give a reason for the government ban on the service which lets people send encrypted messages and has an estimated 40 million users in the Islamic Republic.The order came days after Russia - Iran's ally in the Syrian war - started blocking the app in its territory following the company's repeated refusal to give Russian state security services access to users' secret messages.Iran's government banned "all state bodies from using the foreign messaging app," according to ISNA.Khamenei stopped using Telegram on Wednesday "in line with safeguarding national interests and removing the monopoly of the Telegram messaging app," state media reported.AdvertisementThe Supreme Leader has a strong presence on social media, even on Twitter and Facebook that are blocked in Iran. His office updates the accounts with photos and his latest speeches.AdvertisementTelegram, set up by a Russian entrepreneur and ranked the world's ninth most popular mobile messaging app, has been widely used by Iranian state media, politicians and companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A judicial official said this week that Telegram and other foreign messaging services could only operate in Iran if they got permission from the government and saved users' data inside the country.Iran temporarily blocked the service in January as security forces sought to contain anti-government protests in more than 80 cities.Many Iranians kept accessing Telegram then, using virtual private networks (VPNs) and other tools to bypass government filtering.The service is widely used in countries across the Middle East and the former Soviet Union.(Reporting by Bozorgmehr Sharafedin; Editing by Andrew Heavens)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 1:34 P.M. E.D.T.
(Reuters) - New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman on Tuesday sought information from 13 cryptocurrency trading platforms, including Coinbase Inc and Gemini Trust, about their operations such as fee structures and safety measures to protect customer accounts."With cryptocurrency on the rise, consumers in New York and across the country have a right to transparency and accountability when they invest their money," Schneiderman said in a press statement.Schneiderman's letter to the companies is part of a fact-finding inquiry called the 'Virtual Markets Integrity Initiative' that seeks to protect virtual currency investors by providing them information they need to understand the practices and risks of trading on these platforms.The letter includes a questionnaire about the trading platform's ownership, trading policies, internal controls and privacy and money laundering, among others.Trading platforms have to respond before May 1, the press statement said.(Reporting By Aparajita Saxena in Bengaluru; Editing by Arun Koyyur)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 18, 2018, 1:01 A.M. E.D.T.
SINGAPORE —  A Singaporean tutor has pleaded guilty to helping six Chinese students cheat in school exams in a "highly sophisticated" operation using video calling and skin-coloured earphones, court documents seen by Reuters on Wednesday showed.Private tuition is big business in Singapore with parents paying as much as S$700 (£373) for four-session courses and some tutors have become millionaires from the business. [https://reut.rs/2HwpC5n]Singapore's reputation for a good education system attracts students from across Asia and beyond.Tan Jia Yan, 32, worked for a tuition centre that offered money-back guarantees to Chinese students if they failed to pass exams and get a place in a Singapore polytechnic.Tan pleaded guilty on Monday to 27 charges of cheating.Together with her colleagues, Tan helped attach "wearable Bluetooth devices" and skin-coloured earphones to the students which were connected to discreetly placed mobile phones when they sat their exams in 2016.AdvertisementTan then sat the exams herself as a private candidate and used a camera phone attached to her chest to send video footage of the paper to her colleagues via Facebook's Facetime app [FB.O].AdvertisementHer colleagues would then call the students to tell them the answers.Court documents said the "highly sophisticated" operation ran between Oct. 19 and Oct. 24, 2016, before it was uncovered by an invigilator.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tan faces up to 3 years in prison or a fine, or both, per charge.Three of her colleagues, including principal of the Zeus Education Centre, had also been charged, but were contesting the charges, media reported.The principal allegedly worked with a Chinese associate, who would refer students to him, court documents said.For each student referred, the associate allegedly received S$8,000 in deposit fees and another S$1,000 in admission fees.The court documents said the six students were witnesses in the case.(Reporting by Fathin Ungku; Editing by John Geddie and Robert Birsel)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 5:34 P.M. E.D.T.
SAN FRANCISCO —  China's ZTE Corp may not be able to use Google's Android operating system in its mobile devices because of a U.S. Commerce Department export control order, a source familiar with the matter said on Tuesday, adding that ZTE and the Alphabet Inc  unit have been discussing the impact of the order.The two companies had not reached a decision about the use of Android by ZTE as of Tuesday morning, the person said. The U.S. order bars U.S. suppliers from selling components to ZTE.ZTE shipped 46.4 million smartphones last year, placing it seventh among Android-based manufacturers, according to research firm IHS Markit.(Reporting By Paresh Dave; editing by Peter Henderson and Jonathan Oatis)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 4:34 P.M. E.D.T.
SAN FRANCISCO —  U.S. Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen warned on Tuesday that a European data privacy law taking effect next month may have "unintended consequences" that harm the United States' ability to protect itself from cyber attacks.The European Union law, called the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), is the biggest overhaul of online privacy since the birth of the internet, giving Europeans the right to know what data is stored on them and the right to have it deleted.Online data privacy is important and contextual across borders and different cultures, Nielsen said during a keynote appearance at the RSA cyber security conference in San Francisco.But "what we don't want are the unintended consequences of preventing the research community to be able to give us a heads up on (cyber) threats that are coming our way," she said.Advertisement"In other words, through trying to protect a citizen's privacy we eliminate the ability of many of the vendors and researchers who otherwise have access to data to see the trends in attacks," Nielsen said.AdvertisementWhile some U.S. officials have in recent months raised concerns publicly about the European law, Nielsen is the most senior Trump administration official yet to do so.Her remarks suggest that any attempts by the U.S. Congress to legislate comprehensive privacy protections would face hurdles from the Trump administration.Calls for new digital privacy rights in American law have increased after disclosures that the political consultancy Cambridge Analytica obtained data on more than 87 million Facebook users from quizzes that were supposed to be for academic research.Among the Trump administration's concerns are limitations  the law seeks to impose on accessing data about website registrations that can often offer clues for investigators pursuing cyber criminals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The strong limits on what can be done with data on users are a source of concern for security professionals in government, internet companies and outside forensics and investigations providers.As things stand, many European uses and others who sign on to online services housed within the region would not be giving companies explicit permission to use their data in probes of fraud or other criminal activity, security experts told Reuters this week.Unless the GDPR is amended, companies and outside investigators will lose access to material that many users have not realized they were giving up.The experts said that they were working on ways to recover access to some of that material, which they declined to detail. The most straightforward would be an explicit declaration when users join what data could be used as evidence against people that harm them or against the users themselves.AdvertisementOn Monday, White House cyber coordinator Rob Joyce on Twitter said that GDPR would "undercut a key tool for identifying malicious domains on the internet."He added: "Cyber criminals are celebrating GDPR."Joyce said at a conference last month that U.S. officials were trying to persuade European regulators to allow a carve out in the law for security researchers to continue collecting data pertinent to data breaches or other cyber crime investigations.(Reporting by Dustin Volz and Joseph Menn in San Francisco; Editing by Alistair Bell)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 11:22 A.M. E.D.T.
ZURICH —  ABB said on Tuesday it received an order from Volkswagen unit Electrify America to provide high power electric vehicle chargers across the United States, the biggest U.S. project to date in that field.Electrify America plans to place hundreds of charging stations within and around 17 metropolitan areas and along multiple nationwide highway corridors, the power and automation company said in a statement.It did not give the value of the contract.ABB shares were up 1.9 percent at 1455 GMT, outperforming a 1 percent higher Swiss bluechip index.(Reporting by Silke Koltrowitz; editing by David Evans)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSTRASBOURG — Identity cards held by EU citizens will be required to include digital images of the holder's fingerprints as part of a crackdown on fraudulent documents used by criminals and extremists, the European Commission proposed on Tuesday.In a proposal likely to make waves in countries such as Germany, whose history has made data privacy a guarded asset, the Commission wants to do away with paper-based identity documents that are easy to falsify and can be used to enter the bloc from non-EU countries.The Commission said in its proposal on Tuesday that it would not oblige countries to introduce ID cards, but those countries that use them would be required to include two pieces of biometric data: an image of two fingerprints and a facial image.Non-compliant cards should be phased out within five years, and within two years for cards that cannot be read by a machine. New cards should be valid for no more than 10 years.The Commission also proposed other security measures on Tuesday, which include making it easier for authorities to access electronic and bank account information in other EU countries. [L8N1RU3FC]The list of chemicals banned for sale because they can be used to make explosives would be expanded and new controls added to limit trafficking of firearms. The proposals will need backing from EU countries and the European Parliament. "Today, we are stepping up our actions to deprive criminals and terrorists of the tools and resources they need to perpetrate their crimes," Commission First Vice-President Frans Timmermans said in a statement. The Commission estimates 80 million Europeans currently have ID cards that cannot be read by machines and do not contain biometric identifiers.All EU countries except Britain, Ireland and Denmark issue ID cards, although in some, such as Austria and Sweden, they are optional.Jan Philipp Albrecht, a German Green in the European Parliament and data protection specialist, said the proposed measure would not prevent attacks and violated civil rights."Even fingerprints can be forged and terrorist assassins and their henchmen regularly obtain weapons and financial means without presenting an identity card," he said. The European Union has required since 2009 that passports contain biometric data, although many countries have taken time to implement this rule.ID documents themselves vary across the bloc. Some countries such as Belgium have biometric ID cards but do not store fingerprint data. In Germany, nationals can choose whether or not to have fingerprint data included. In Spain, new ID cards issued do include fingerprints. (Reporting by Philip Blenkinsop and Samantha Koester; Editing by Peter Graff)AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersDAR ES SALAAM — Tanzania briefly detained two musicians, including one of the country's most popular singers, after they posted video clips deemed obscene by the authorities, in the latest crackdown on social media users.Tanzania has become more socially conservative since the election of President John Magufuli in late 2015. Last month, the government tightened regulations on online content, imposing licence fees for bloggers and threatening internet users with criminal charges for posting hate speech or indecent content. Award-winning 28-year old singer Nassib Abdul, whose stage name is Diamond Platnumz, was detained on Monday after sharing a video clip with his 4.5 million followers on Instagram that showed him kissing a girl.Another local musician, 26-year old Faustina Charles, popularly known as Nandy, was also detained on Monday for posting a video clip of herself and another musician via WhatsApp that the authorities considered "indecent".Police said both singers had been released on bail on Monday without charge after questioning. Two mobile phones were confiscated as part of an ongoing investigation, they added.Diamond deleted his video clip after posting it but it has continued to circulate on social media. The video clip with Nandy also went viral on WhatsApp but it was unclear who had originally posted it.Harrison Mwakyembe, the minister for information, sports and culture, earlier told parliament that the authorities planned to file criminal charges against the two musicians.If convicted, the singers could face a fine of at least 5 million shillings ($2,200) or a prison sentence of a minimum of 12 months or both.SAFEGUARDING CULTURE"I would like to urge the youth to stop using the internet to post obscene content. The government will continue to safeguard the country's culture for present and future generations," Mwakyembe said.Under Magufuli, a Christian in a country that also has a sizeable Muslim population, Tanzanian authorities have vowed to crack down on homosexuality, which is illegal, and indecent exposure.Though laws governing moral and sexual issues have mostly long been in place, their enforcement was fairly relaxed under the more liberal government of Magufuli's predecessor, Jakaya Kikwete, who retired as president in 2015 after a 10-year rule. Magufuli said last year it was immoral for young girls to be sexually active and rejected activists' calls for the government to allow pregnant students to attend state schools.Activists have accused his government of infringing free speech and democracy in its crackdown on internet users.The Paris-based Reporters Without Borders said last week the new online content rules "will kill off Tanzania's blogosphere". The number of internet users in Tanzania rose 16 percent in 2017 to 23 million, with the majority of those using their mobile phone handsets to go online in the nation of around 52 million people.Last week, neighbouring Uganda, another East African nation moving to regulate internet use, announced plans to slap a new tax on social media users to boost state revenues.($1 = 2,266.0000 Tanzanian shillings) (Editing by Duncan Miriri and Gareth Jones)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 11:46 A.M. E.D.T.
DETROIT —  Volkswagen AG unit Electrify America said on Tuesday it has selected several suppliers, including Switzerland's ABB LtdS> and South Korea's Signet EV Inc, to install more than 2,000 high-speed electric vehicle chargers in the United States by the end of 2019.The chargers will be installed at 484 charging stations across the country. Electrify America said the fast chargers will deliver 20 miles of range per minute of charge, seven times faster than chargers currently in operation.Other suppliers chosen include Portugal's Efacec Electric Mobility, S.A. and Santa Ana, California-based BTC Power Inc.VW has agreed to spend $800 million in California and a total of $2 billion nationwide on clean car infrastructure as part of its agreement with federal regulators after admitting to diesel emissions cheating.AdvertisementABB said it would supply its Terra HP charging stations, which can recharge "even the largest electric vehicle battery in under 15 minutes."A lack of public charging infrastructure for U.S. consumers to recharge their vehicles is seen is as a major barrier to the mass adoption of electric vehicles as consumers remain concerned over their limited range.Advertisement(Reporting by Nick Carey; Editing by Dan Grebler)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Reuters(Reuters) - Uber's robust growth in Brazil, its biggest market outside the United States, has given the ride-hailing app a far stronger position than it had in Asian markets that it recently exited, a senior executive said on a visit to South America.In a telephone interview with Reuters, Andrew Macdonald, who runs operations in Latin America, played down the prospects for a merger with Brazilian rival 99, a subsidiary of Didi Chuxing, which absorbed Uber's Chinese operations in late 2016.Macdonald also runs Uber's operations in the Asia Pacific region, where the company agreed to sell its Southeast Asian business to larger rival Grab last month. "I think the scale (of operations in Brazil) is at a level that is different from those other markets ... both on an absolute and relative basis," Macdonald said, when asked if there could be a merger or acquisition in Brazil next."We're really not focused on M&A," he said.His comments suggested Uber is ready to stand and fight in Brazil and elsewhere in Latin America, where it has a head start on rivals, rather than beating another strategic retreat. Chief Executive Dara Khosrowshahi, who joined Macdonald on a visit to Chile, told employees after the Grab deal that he had no plans for another transaction of its kind.Reuters reported at the time that SoftBank Group Corp, which invested in an array of ride-hailing competitors including Uber, Grab and Didi, urged Uber to focus less on Asia and more on profitable markets like Latin America."Competition is good for everyone," Macdonald said when asked about the dynamic with rival 99. "We think the scale advantage that we've established in Brazil means we can offer the lowest prices to riders and the best economics for drivers, but also do so in a way that is in Uber's economic interest."After a first round of expansion focused primarily in Brazil's biggest cities, Macdonald said growth in the country was now being driven by strength in secondary cities and the metropolitan areas around its core markets. Last year, demand in those markets grew more than twice as fast as in bigger cities.Brazil continues to be Uber's biggest market by rides after the United States, Macdonald said. Sao Paulo is Uber's No. 1 city globally, and Rio de Janeiro is also in the top five. (Reporting by Brad Haynes in Sao Paulo; Editing by Cynthia Osterman)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 7:40 P.M. E.D.T.
WASHINGTON —  The U.S. Internal Revenue Service said it would give taxpayers an additional day to file their 2017 returns after computer problems prevented some people from filing or paying their taxes ahead of Tuesday's midnight deadline."Taxpayers do not need to do anything to receive this extra time," the IRS said in a statement announcing the extension.The agency said its processing systems were now back online.Earlier, the agency said several systems were hit with the computer glitch, including one that handles some returns filed electronically and another that accepts online tax payments using a bank account.The IRS said it believed the problem was a hardware issue and "not other factors."It was not clear how many taxpayers might have been affected, but the agency said it received 5 million tax returns on the final day of filing season last year.Advertisement"This is the busiest tax day of the year, and the IRS apologizes for the inconvenience this system issue caused for taxpayers," acting IRS Commissioner David Kautter said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The agency said taxpayers should continue to file their taxes as normal on Tuesday evening - whether electronically or on paper.Taxpayers could also ask for six-month extensions, as President Donald Trump did. The White House said on Tuesday that Trump, because of the complexity of his tax returns, would file his by Oct. 15.Advertisement(Reporting by Eric Beech; Editing by Diane Craft and Chris Reese)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersMOSCOW — The Kremlin said on Tuesday it did not understand the basis for British and U.S. allegations that Russia was conducting a global cyber espionage campaign.The United States and Britain said on Monday that Russian government-backed hackers had infected computer routers around the world, targeting government agencies, businesses and critical infrastructure.Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters in a conference call that London and Washington had not presented any evidence.  (Reporting by Polina Devitt; Editing by Robin Pomeroy)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 12:13 A.M. E.D.T.
(Reuters) - U.S.-based cryptocurrency exchange Kraken will stop its trading services in Japan, citing rising costs of doing business there, Bloomberg reported on Tuesday.The exchange plans to exit Japan by the end of June but it may come back in the future, Bloomberg said, citing an emailed statement."Suspending services for Japan residents will allow us to better focus on our resources to improve in other geographical areas," Kraken was quoted as saying in the report https://bloom.bg/2H6cX5T.The move will impact only residents of Japan and not Japanese citizens or businesses based out of the country, Bloomberg reported.AdvertisementKraken did not immediately respond to Reuters' request for comment outside regular U.S. business hours.Kraken's exit comes amid regulatory pressure for tighter standards at Japan's cryptocurrency exchanges after the $530 million theft of digital money from Coincheck earlier this year when a hacker used malware to break into its network before stealing an encrypted key and withdrawing digital coins.Advertisement(Reporting by Kanishka Singh in Bengaluru; Editing by Gopakumar Warrier)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 1:22 P.M. E.D.T.
DUBLIN —  Ireland will become the second country to trial a new tool that Facebook hopes will ensure greater transparency in political advertising, when it holds a referendum on abortion next month, the company's vice president for global policy said on Tuesday.Facebook introduced the tool this month as part of steps to deter the kind of election meddling and online information warfare that U.S. authorities have accused Russia of pursuing, although Moscow has denied the allegations.The 'view ads' tool, which allows users to view all the ads a particular advertiser is running in that jurisdiction, has been successfully tested in Canada, Joel Kaplan said."As of April 25, we will add Ireland to our pilot programme to the first phase of our transparency efforts, the 'view ads'. Ireland will be the second and only other country that we roll out before the global deployment," Kaplan told an Irish parliamentary committee.Advertisement"We hope that this will bring greater transparency to ads running in the context of the forthcoming referendum on the eighth amendment" of the Irish constitution, he said.AdvertisementFacebook has been swamped by privacy concerns since it acknowledged last month that information about millions of users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, which counted U.S. President Donald Trump's 2016 electoral campaign among its clients.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kaplan said the tool would probably be rolled out globally  by mid-June.The Irish referendum on whether or not to liberalise its abortion laws will give voters the first opportunity in 35 years to overhaul one of the world's strictest regimes that has long divided the once deeply Catholic nation.The divisive nature of the issue has prompted concern that social media ads could be targeted to influence voter behaviour.The Transparent Referendum Initiative, a voluntary group set up to campaign for greater transparency over social media ads ahead of the vote, said the move was a positive first step and called on other advertisers such as Google and YouTube to follow suit.(Reporting by Padraic Halpin; Editing by Hugh Lawson)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSAN FRANCISCO — Digital maps startup Mapbox Inc told Reuters on Tuesday that it has hired a lead product manager from the local search unit of Alphabet Inc's Google to serve as head of product for maps and search.Andrew Chen is charged with helping engineers at Mapbox, which licenses maps to software developers, better understand consumer desires, Mapbox Chief Executive Officer Eric Gundersen said."Any engineering-heavy company is constantly wanting the perspective of the users, and we’re looking to people who can help illustrate how maps are being used," Gundersen said.Mapbox competes with Google, OpenStreetMap and other firms to license maps to software makers. The data have become a bedrock of thousands of mobile apps, with Mapbox customers including social media company Snap Inc, food delivery service DoorDash and credit card giant MasterCard Inc. Mapbox has less live traffic information and fewer details on "social" places such as bars than Google, Gundersen said. But Mapbox's system, an amalgamation of 130 data sources, is appealing to some developers because it allows greater customization, Chen said. Google's emphasis remains on its consumer Maps app, he said, while Mapbox exclusively focuses on developer tools. Google did not respond to a request for comment.Chen said he spent more than five years at Google overseeing development of Google Maps features including estimated wait times at restaurants and a question-and-answer system for users to learn more about businesses. SoftBank Vision Fund led a $164 million financing of Mapbox in October.  (Reporting by Paresh Dave; Editing by Leslie Adler)AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSAN FRANCISCO — A U.S. federal judge ruled on Monday that Facebook Inc must face a class action lawsuit alleging that the social network unlawfully used a facial recognition process on photos without user permission. The ruling adds to the privacy woes that have been mounting against Facebook for weeks, since it was disclosed that the personal information of millions of users was harvested by the political consultancy Cambridge Analytica. U.S. District Judge James Donato ruled in San Francisco federal court that a class action was the most efficient way to resolve the dispute over facial templates. Facebook said it was reviewing the ruling. "We continue to believe the case has no merit and will defend ourselves vigorously," the company said in a statement. Lawyers for the plaintiffs could not immediately be reached for comment. Facebook users sued in 2015, alleging violations of an Illinois state law about the privacy of biometric information. The class will consist of Facebook users in Illinois for whom Facebook created and stored facial recognition algorithms after June 7, 2011, Donato ruled. That is the date when Facebook launched "Tag Suggestions," a feature that suggests people to tag after a Facebook user uploads a photo. In the U.S. court system, certification of a class is typically a major hurdle that plaintiffs in proposed class actions need to overcome before reaching a possible settlement or trial.  (Reporting by David Ingram; Editing by Sandra Maler and Cynthia Osterman)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 9:55 A.M. E.D.T.
LONDON —  A prominent campaigner to leave the European Union, Arron Banks,  denied allegations on Tuesday by a former employee of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica that he had misused personal data for political purposes.Brittany Kaiser testified to a committee of British lawmakers that Leave.EU founder Banks might have broken data protection law by mixing customer data from his insurance firms with voter contact lists, and that he had refused to pay a bill for work done by Cambridge Analytica.Banks told Reuters the testimony was "sheer whoppers", a British colloquialism for lies.British consultancy firm Cambridge Analytica lies at the center of a storm for using data obtained from millions of Facebook users without their permission after it was hired by Donald Trump for his 2016 U.S. presidential election campaign.Kaiser said she was no expert in data but that she believed that the number of Facebook users compromised in similar ways was "much greater" than the current estimate of 87 million.AdvertisementThe analytics firm is also under scrutiny over alleged campaigning for the 2016 referendum when Britons voted to leave the European Union.AdvertisementKaiser said that on a visit to Banks' headquarters in Bristol, she had seen a call center where data for Eldon and GoSkippy, Banks' insurance firms, was being used by Leave.EU."In hindsight, I now think that there is reason to believe that misuse of data was rife amongst the businesses and campaigns of Arron Banks," she said in written testimony to the committee.Banks told Reuters it was well-known that Leave.EU had set up a call center in his offices, but there was a separate dataset for politics, and there was "no overlap at all."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."We absolutely refute that any insurance data was used in it," he added.Cambridge Analytica said it had "never received data from any Arron Banks company," in a tweet as Kaiser gave her testimony.Kaiser also said that Banks refused to pay a bill of 41,500 pounds ($59,500) for initial work undertaken by Cambridge Analytica.Cambridge Analytica and Banks, who was a major donor to eurosceptic party UKIP, have said that while the consultancy pitched for work with Leave.EU, it did not have any contracts and no money changed hands.The unpaid bill was an invoice for UKIP, Banks said, who decided not to proceed with the project and said that the work done was "so superficial that it didn't warrant what was being charged.""It had nothing to do with the referendum campaign" he said.Banks reiterated that Leave.EU decided not to use Cambridge Analytica after his campaign was not designated as the official campaign to leave the European Union.The chair of the committee of lawmakers, Damian Collins, has said that Leave.EU still benefited from work done before that decision was made.Advertisement(Additional reporting by Eric Auchard; editing by Stephen Addison)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 9:22 A.M. E.D.T.
MOSCOW —  Russia's state telecommunications regulator said on Tuesday it had sent requests to Google and Apple asking them to remove the Telegram messenger service from their application stores, the Interfax news agency reported.The watchdog, Roskomnadzor, said on Monday it had begun blocking access to Telegram, implementing a decision by a Russian court.(Reporting by Polina Devitt; editing by Jason Neely)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 8:25 P.M. E.D.T.
SAN FRANCISCO/WASHINGTON —  Chinese smartphone maker ZTE Corp's U.S. woes deepened on Tuesday, as regulators proposed new rules that could cut into its sales, while a supply ban means it may not be able to use Android software in its devices, according to a source.The U.S. Commerce Department banned American firms on Monday from selling parts and software to ZTE for seven years. The move was sparked by ZTE's violation of an agreement that was reached after it was caught illegally shipping U.S. goods to Iran.Then on Tuesday a U.S. telecoms regulator proposed new rules that would bar government programs from buying from companies that it says pose a security threat to U.S. telecoms networks, which will likely hurt both ZTE and rival Chinese smartphone maker Huawei Technologies [HWT.UL].The moves threaten to further complicate relations between the United States and China. The two countries have already proposed tens of billions of dollars in tariffs in recent weeks, fanning worries of a full-blown trade war that could hurt global supply chains as well as business investment plans.AdvertisementThe Commerce Department decision means ZTE Corp may not be able to use Google's Android operating system in its mobile devices, a source familiar with the matter said on Tuesday.AdvertisementZTE and the Alphabet Inc unit have been discussing the impact of the ban, the source added, but the two companies were still unclear about the use of Android by ZTE as of Tuesday morning.ZTE shipped 46.4 million smartphones last year, placing it seventh among Android-based manufacturers, according to research firm IHS Markit.Google declined to comment and ZTE has not responded to requests to comment.The proposed new rules from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), meanwhile, which are expected to be finalized this year, appear to be another prong in a U.S. effort to prevent ZTE and Huawei from gaining significant market share in the United States.They would prevent money from the $8.5 billion FCC Universal Service Fund, which includes subsidies for telephone service to poor and rural areas, from being spent on goods or services from companies or countries which pose a "national security threat to the integrity of communications networks or their supply chains," the FCC said."Hidden 'backdoors' to our networks in routers, switches, and other network equipment can allow hostile foreign powers to inject viruses and other malware, steal Americans' private data, spy on U.S. businesses, and more," said FCC Chairman Ajit Pai, who introduced the proposal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pai did not specify China or specific companies.But in a letter to Congress last month, Pai said he shared the concerns of U.S. lawmakers about espionage threats from Huawei, the world's third-largest smartphone maker.USTelecom, an industry trade group, praised the FCC's "proposal to confront nation-state actions that threaten the confidentiality, integrity and availability of our nation's network infrastructure."Republican U.S. senators have also introduced legislation that would block the U.S. government from buying or leasing telecoms equipment from Huawei or ZTE.AdvertisementHuawei's planned deal with U.S. carrier AT&T Inc to sell its smartphones in the United States collapsed in January after U.S. lawmakers sent a letter to Pai citing concerns about Huawei's plans to launch U.S. consumer products.Amid a steady drip of bad news, Huawei has laid off its vice president of external affairs, Bill Plummer, and four other employees at its Washington office, according to sources familiar with the matter.The company slashed lobbying expenditures to $60,000 in 2017 from $348,500 in 2016, according to Huawei filings.ZTE has similarly cut its lobbying expenditures, from $860,000 in 2016 to $510,000 last year, according to ZTE filings.(Reporting by Paresh Dave and David Shepardson; Additional writing by Diane Bartz and Chris Sanders; editing by Susan Thomas and Rosalba O'Brien)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 12:34 P.M. E.D.T.
WASHINGTON —  U.S. President Donald Trump accused Russia and China on Monday of devaluing their currencies while the United States raises interest rates."Russia and China are playing the Currency Devaluation game as the U.S. keeps raising interest rates. Not acceptable!" Trump said in a Twitter post.Trump's tweet referred to what he sees as unfair trading advantages: If a country's currency is artificially low, its exports are more competitive. Higher U.S. interest rates would generally increase the value of the dollar, making U.S. exports more expensive.Since Trump took office in January 2017, the dollar has weakened substantially against most currencies, including the Chinese yuan and, until the United States imposed sanctions on Russia in the last few weeks, the ruble.AdvertisementAgainst the yuan, the dollar has fallen by 8.6 percent since Jan. 20, 2017, while it has appreciated 4.5 percent against the ruble. Until the United States announced sanctions on Russian oligarchs earlier this month, however, the dollar had weakened by nearly 4 percent against the Russian currency. That gain was entirely erased by a two-day drop of 8.4 percent in the ruble on April 9 and 10.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More widely, the U.S. dollar index, which measures the greenback’s value against a basket of major trading partner currencies, has declined by 11.2 percent since Trump became president.    The U.S. Treasury, in a semiannual report on Friday, again refrained from naming any major trading partners as currency manipulators. The report came as the Trump administration pursues potential tariffs, negotiations and other restrictions to try to cut a massive trade deficit with China.AdvertisementThe report did not mention Trump’s recent threats to impose billions of dollars worth of tariffs on Chinese goods over Beijing’s intellectual property practices, or pending Treasury  restrictions on Chinese investment in the United States.White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders later told reporters aboard Air Force One on a trip by the president to Miami that China is on a U.S. Treasury Department watch list for being potentially labeled a currency manipulator.(Reporting by Doina Chiacu in Washington, Dan Burns in New York and James Oliphant aboard Air Force One; writing by Eric Walsh; editing by Chizu Nomiyama, Frances Kerry and Jonathan Oatis)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 8:16 A.M. E.D.T.
WASHINGTON/BEIJING —  U.S. President Donald Trump accused Russia and China on Monday of devaluing their currencies while the United States raises interest rates, prompting China to accuse the United States of sending confusing messages."Russia and China are playing the Currency Devaluation game as the U.S. keeps raising interest rates. Not acceptable!" Trump said in a Twitter post.Speaking in Beijing on Tuesday, Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying noted that what Trump said seemed to contradict the U.S. Treasury's report that refrained from naming any major trading partners as currency manipulators."So it seems like the information being released by the U.S. side is a bit chaotic," she told a daily news briefing.AdvertisementHua said it reminded her of a poem by the founder of modern China, Mao Zedong, about remaining calm in the midst of chaos.Advertisement"No matter what others say we will continue to steadily promote the reform of the renminbi exchange rate mechanism," she added, without elaborating, using the currency's formal name.Trump's tweet referred to what he sees as unfair trading advantages: If a country's currency is artificially low, its exports are more competitive. Higher U.S. interest rates would generally increase the value of the dollar, making U.S. exports more expensive.Since Trump took office in January 2017, the dollar has weakened substantially against most currencies, including the Chinese yuan and, until the United States imposed sanctions on Russia in the last few weeks, the ruble.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Against the yuan, the dollar has fallen by 8.6 percent since Jan. 20, 2017, while it has appreciated 4.5 percent against the ruble.Until the United States announced sanctions on Russian oligarchs this month, however, the dollar had weakened by nearly 4 percent against the Russian currency.That gain was entirely erased by a two-day drop of 8.4 percent in the ruble on April 9 and 10.More widely, the U.S. dollar index, which measures the greenback’s value against a basket of major trading partner currencies, has declined by 11.2 percent since Trump became president.The U.S. Treasury, in a semiannual report on Friday, again refrained from naming any major trading partners as currency manipulators. The report came as the Trump administration pursues potential tariffs, negotiations and other restrictions to try to cut a massive trade deficit with China.The report did not mention Trump’s recent threats to impose billions of dollars worth of tariffs on Chinese goods over Beijing’s intellectual property practices, or pending Treasury  restrictions on Chinese investment in the United States.White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders later told reporters aboard Air Force One on a trip by the president to Miami that China is on a U.S. Treasury Department watch list for being potentially labeled a currency manipulator.Advertisement(Reporting by Doina Chiacu in Washington, Dan Burns in New York and James Oliphant aboard Air Force One; Writing by Eric Walsh; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama, Frances Kerry and Jonathan Oatis)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 9:13 P.M. E.D.T.
SAN FRANCISCO —  White House cyber security coordinator Rob Joyce will leave his post and return to the National Security Agency, a White House official said on Monday."Joyce is three months past his detail of a year and is deciding to return to NSA," the official said.His departure follows that of his boss, Tom Bossert, who oversaw Joyce's work on cyber security and was pushed out of the administration last week.Another senior U.S. official said Joyce was leaving the White House of his own volition and not being forced out by President Donald Trump's new national security adviser, John Bolton, or other personnel. The White House has seen a raft of departures since Bolton began his new role earlier this month.AdvertisementJoyce is expected to continue in his role for about another 30 days, DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen told reporters during a media roundtable at the RSA cyber security conference in San Francisco.AdvertisementNielsen said Bolton will select Joyce's replacement, calling his departure a "natural inflection point when you have a new national security adviser."Joyce was well respected by cyber security experts and widely credited with steering the Trump administration toward trying to impose harsher penalties on foreign adversaries in response to cyber attacks.The announcement of his departure came just hours after he and briefed reporters on a global cyber attack targeting routers and other networking equipment. They blamed Russian government-backed hackers for the campaign against government agencies, businesses and critical infrastructure operators.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Joyce was scheduled to speak at the RSA conference this week but cancelled, prompting speculation that he would be the latest official to leave the White House."It's a huge loss for the country," said Curtis Dukes, former head of cyber defense at the NSA who worked with Joyce. "He was very effective in that role."Dukes, now vice president at the Center for Internet Security, said Joyce was an asset for all federal agencies and was instrumental in revamping the way the U.S. government decided whether to disclose or exploit cyber vulnerabilities discovered by spy agencies.Robert Lee, a former U.S. intelligence officer and president of the cyber firm Dragos, said Joyce was technically competent and that many of the previous White House cyber coordinators had backgrounds ill-suited for the job."He'll be missed in the position but hopefully set a standard that future appointments to the position will follow," Lee said.(Reporting by Dustin Volz; Writing by Doina Chiacu; Editing by Phil Berlowitz and Lisa Shumaker)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 11:37 A.M. E.D.T.
BRUSSELS —  The European Union's digital chief will meet with Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg in San Francisco as the world's largest social network faces increasing scrutiny over its use of personal data.Privacy concerns have swamped Facebook since it acknowledged last month that information about millions of users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, a firm that has counted U.S. President Donald Trump's 2016 electoral campaign among its clients.Andrus Ansip, European Commission Vice President in charge of digital issues will meet with Zuckerberg on Tuesday, as well as meeting with Sundar Pichai, Google's CEO, to discuss issues such as data protection, online privacy, illegal content and fake news.Facebook Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg spoke to Ansip's justice counterpart last week in what was described as an open and constructive discussion.AdvertisementA tough new EU data protection law entering into force on May 25 has acquired new prominence following the Cambridge Analytica scandal, with European policymakers saying it will set a standard worldwide.Zuckerberg has also been asked to speak before the European Parliament to explain how Europeans' Facebook data may have been misused.Advertisement(Reporting by Julia Fioretti, editing by David Evans)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersTEL AVIV — Oracle Corp co-CEO Safra Catz said on Monday she expects an acceleration in the company's cloud business after the software maker last month reported sales from its cloud business that fell short of Wall Street expectations.Catz told reporters in Tel Aviv that the company's cloud business was impacted by a new model made available to customers three quarters ago that resulted in much higher than projected license growth."That makes the appearance of a lower number (for the cloud business) even though money is actually coming in to another bucket," Catz said."As this evens out I think we are going to start seeing cloud acceleration again that is very significant but I don't want to time that right now."Oracle last month said its quarterly cloud business revenue rose 31.7 percent to $1.57 billion, but fell short of the average analysts’ estimate of $1.59 billion, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S. (Reporting by Tova Cohen; Editing by Steven Scheer)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 12:07 A.M. E.D.T.
CHICAGO —  Walmart Inc, the world's largest brick-and-mortar retailer, said on Tuesday it has made extensive changes to its website, betting that a cleaner, more modern walmart.com will help it win market share from Amazon.com Inc.Walmart, which announced in October that it was redesigning its website, has been investing heavily in its e-commerce business and using its more than 4,700 U.S. stores to make it easier to shop online.The Bentonville, Arkansas-based company has been letting shoppers pick up and return online orders in stores, and said in March that it planned to expand its grocery home delivery services to reach more than 40 percent of U.S. households.The changes, to take effect at the start of May, will include a wider range of colors, fonts and more informal photographs. The retailer declined to comment on the total cost of the redesign.AdvertisementThe last time Walmart updated its website was in 2014, but the changes were not as dramatic, Walmart spokeswoman Danit Marquardt said.AdvertisementWalmart's new homepage will be personalized to customers' locations, allowing them to buy products that are trending in their towns and see which of these online services their local stores provide, Marc Lore, the head of Walmart's e-commerce business, said in an interview on Monday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lore also said the website would soon have different layouts depending on product categories, allowing customers to shop for groceries differently from how they buy clothes and accessories, or home improvement products.Lore said these changes had been well-received by the website's brands, which will have more space and different ways to advertise. Retailers, including Amazon and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd, often give brands space on their websites to increase e-commerce traffic and boost online assortments."We can see from the research that it's going to appeal to customers," Lore said.Walmart said in February that online sales increased 23 percent in the most recent quarter, less than half the rate of growth in each of the previous three quarters. The company posted about $11.5 billion in U.S. e-commerce revenue for the full year. Total U.S. sales were $318.5 billion.The slowing online sales growth raised concerns among analysts that the retailer might be unable to keep pace with Amazon. Company officials said at the time that Walmart was still on track to increase its e-commerce sales by 40 percent this year.(Reporting by Richa Naidu; Editing by Matthew Lewis)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSINGAPORE — Singapore began seeking public feedback on proposals to allow short-term rentals of private homes such as those on Airbnb.The government is seeking feedback on issues such as what homes should qualify and the responsibilities of short-term accommodation platforms, the Urban Redevelopment Authority said on Monday. The proposed rules require that a significant majority of owners in a condominium agree to the presence of short-term rentals in their development. The agency also proposed an annual rental cap of 90 days that a property can be used for short-term rentals.Earlier this month, a Singapore court fined two Airbnb hosts a total of S$60,000 ($45,800) each for unauthorized short-term letting. (Reporting by Aradhana Aravindan; Editing by Stephen Coates)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 7:07 A.M. E.D.T.
MANILA —  The Philippines government criticized on Monday Facebook's choice of two independent online news platforms to help fight the spread of fake news, saying they are biased against President Rodrigo Duterte.Facebook said last week it would partner with VERA Files and Rappler IQ to launch a third-party, fact-checking program aimed at preventing the spread of false news on the social media platform in the Philippines.But Duterte has accused Rappler, which has a reputation for its investigative reporting and its tough questioning, of trying to undermine his government, perhaps with the help of U.S. spies, and the Securities and Exchange Commission has rescinded its operating license for violating foreign ownership rules.Rappler continues to operate pending an appeal."We would also like to register our protest at the choice of fact-checkers by Facebook and this will be on the agenda when we finally get to sit with them soon," Loraine Badoy, assistant secretary at the Presidential Communications Operations Office, said in a statement.AdvertisementResearch has shown Filipinos to be among the most active social media users in the world, spending on average more than four hours a day on platforms like Facebook.AdvertisementDuterte, a former mayor from outside of the sphere of national politics, tapped into social media to help him win a 2016 election by a huge margin.Last year, lawmakers began an inquiry into the proliferation of what they saw as fake news on the internet.Duterte spokesman Harry Roque welcomed Facebook's desire to counter fake news, but he noted some people had complained that "the chosen police of the truth are sometimes partisan themselves".Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Facebook spokeswoman did not comment on the government's protest and referred Reuters to a statement last week announcing the partnership with Rappler and VERA Files."Partnering with third-party fact-checking organizations, is one of the ways we hope to better identify and reduce the reach of false news that people share on our platform," Clair Deevy, Facebook's director for community affairs for Asia Pacific, said last week.There was no immediate comment from Rappler.Ellen Tordesillas, president of VERA Files, said "non-partisanship and fairness are among the requirements for an international fact-checking network accreditation".VERA Files and Rappler IQ are the only two Philippine-based members of an international fact-checking network at the Poynter Institute, a journalism school in the United States.Privacy concerns have swamped Facebook since it acknowledged last month that information about millions of users wrongly ended up in the hands of political consultancy Cambridge Analytica, a firm that has counted U.S. President Donald Trump's 2016 electoral campaign among its clients.(Reporting By Manuel Mogato; Editing by Darren Schuettler)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.Genetic disease risk screening is becoming a popular employee benefit. But the tests may not be all that beneficial for the general population, experts say.By NATASHA SINGERAPRIL 15, 2018
Levi Strauss & Company introduced a novel benefit for employees at its San Francisco headquarters last fall: free genetic screening to assess their hereditary risks for certain cancers and high cholesterol.Chip Bergh, Levi’s chief executive, said he had hoped that the tests would spur employees to take preventive health steps and in that way reduce the company’s health care costs. But even Mr. Bergh was surprised by the turnout. Of the 1,100 eligible Levi’s employees, more than half took the genetic tests. Now, he wants to extend the benefit to employees in other cities.“It really is a differentiator,” Mr. Bergh said.West Coast companies vying for talent offer an unusual array of benefits like college loan repayment, egg freezing, surrogacy assistance and, for new mothers away on business trips, overnight breast milk shipping. Some companies have added genetic screening as well, and employees are lining up for the tests.Instacart, Nvidia, OpenTable, Salesforce, SAP, Slack, Stripe and Snap have offered the screenings as an employee benefit. So have some companies based on the East Coast, like General Electric Appliances and Visa. All of them, including Levi’s, work with Color Genomics, a start-up that has quickly become a leader in employee genetic screening and counseling.AdvertisementBut the use of screenings as an employee benefit is becoming more commonplace just as federal health agencies, researchers, and physicians are wrangling over whether the tests, originally developed to establish patients’ inherited risks of developing certain diseases, are ready for widespread adoption.The tests screen for inherited gene mutations that can greatly increase a person’s risk of developing diseases like colon cancer or breast cancer. Doctors now regularly suggest them for high-risk patients, such as people who have close family members with certain cancers.But for people of average risk in the general public, a screening may not be all that useful — and could even cause harm, experts said. A person without a family history of cancer may have the same problematic mutations as high-risk patients, they said, but could have lower risk of developing cancer.A federal advisory panel on evidence-based preventive medicine currently recommends against routine screening for certain harmful breast cancer mutations for women who do not have cancer or a family history of cancer. The group concluded that the net benefit of routine genetic screening for these women could range from minimal to potentially harmful.“There is exactly no evidence that systematic screening of the general healthy population for rare genetic conditions will have a net benefit in terms of health outcomes,” said Dr. Jonathan Berg, an associate professor of genetics at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.AdvertisementIn fact, most cancers are not the result of the hereditary mutations in single genes that these tests detect. Some experts cautioned that extending use of the tests to the broader population may lead some people of average risk to forgo recommended screening tests like colonoscopies. And they warned that it could also lead people to undergo unnecessary medical procedures, including going to the extreme of having surgery to remove their breasts.“You could scare the living daylights out of people unnecessarily,” said Dr. Stephen J. Chanock, director of the division of cancer epidemiology and genetics at the National Cancer Institute.The Food and Drug Administration, however, recently took the opposite stance. It authorized 23andMe, a consumer genetics company that had already received agency clearance to market several hereditary disease risk tests, to offer a test directly to consumers for three breast cancer gene mutations common in people of Eastern European Jewish descent.While regulators called their decision a step forward in the availability of direct-to-consumer genetic screening, they explicitly warned that the test did not detect most mutations that increase breast cancer risk. They also warned consumers not to use the tests as a substitute for qualified medical care and genetic counseling.Color, the genomics company, takes something of a middle road. It markets comprehensive medical diagnostic tests that screen for all mutations of certain genes known to be linked to certain kinds of heredity cancers and heart risks. It has doctors available to order its tests online for users and provides genetic counseling to discuss users’ results.“By using genetics, you can help some people prevent or interrupt something at an earlier stage where the costs are much lower,” said Othman Laraki, chief executive of Color Genomics. The start-up advises users that they could develop major diseases even if their test results show no harmful mutations.Executives at SAP and Nvidia said they hoped genetic screening might ultimately help prevent at least a few late-stage cancers, the kinds of life-threatening illnesses that can debilitate employees and cost companies with self-funded health plans more than $1 million in medical fees.After Nvidia began offering free screening from Color last year, about 27 percent of its 6,000 eligible employees in the United States took the test. After SAP started subsidizing the genetic tests last year, about 17 percent of the company’s 30,000 eligible employees and family members participated.“In the long-term view of a program like this, it’s going to pay for itself,” said Jason J. Russell, who oversees employee compensation and benefits for SAP North America. And, he added, “You are creating good will with employees.”AdvertisementGiven the expense of screening more people of average risk — as well as follow-up costs from additional tests, medicines, surgery and potential complications from surgeries — experts said that overall medical expenditures were actually likely to increase. Even so, they said, spending on screening for conditions like hereditary high cholesterol, which increases risk for strokes and heart attacks before the age of 50, could ultimately prolong some lives.“You are getting good preventive care value for money, ” said David L. Veenstra, a professor at the University of Washington who studies health outcomes and economics.Color has raised $150 million from venture capital firms like General Catalyst as well as Bay Area tech luminaries including Max Levchin, a PayPal co-founder; Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive; and Laurene Powell Jobs, a philanthropist-investor who is the widow of the Apple co-founder Steve Jobs.The company has reduced genetic testing costs by using robotics and machine learning and eliminating tasks like in-person prescreening by doctors. It charges $249 for hereditary risk screening for eight of the most common cancers and began offering that price while more established medical diagnostics firms were charging $4,000 for similar tests.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The price point appealed to OpenTable. It started offering genetic screening benefits after an employee with a history of cancers told executives she was spending thousands of dollars out of her own pocket to pay for hereditary risk tests.“This was a really interesting opportunity to provide some choice to our employees that was accessible and affordable so they could better understand their own personal health,” said Christa Quarles, chief executive of OpenTable.As for privacy concerns, executives at several companies said that Color regularly sent them aggregated data on the number of employees with harmful disease mutations, but that the data is not tied to identifying details like employees’ names or birth dates.AdvertisementAs more large-scale research is conducted, medical recommendations may change. More than 150,000 patients, for instance, have enrolled in a DNA sequencing study at Geisinger Health, a medical center in Danville, Pa. And the federal advisory panel is updating its recommendation on genetic screening for certain breast cancer mutations.Executives at several companies that have signed up with Color said they were aware of the debate over genetic screening, but said they believed the start-up was simply ahead of the curve.“Over time, innovation becomes consensus science,” said Mr. Russell of SAP.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Latest Job Perk: Genetic Testing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 8:52 A.M. E.D.T.
MILAN —  Vivendi has been an "awful" investor in Telecom Italia (TIM), Italy's outgoing Industry Minister Carlo Calenda told daily la Repubblica on Monday, as the French media company fights to keep its grip on Italy's biggest phone group."I am in favour of foreign investments, but this does not mean standing aside when they destroy value rather than creating it, especially when there's a strategic interest at stake," Calenda said in the interview.Vivendi declined to comment on the issue.TIM has lost a quarter of its market value since Vivendi first took a stake in the middle of 2015. The French company is now TIM's biggest investor with just under 24 percent.Last year, Vivendi, using its position as TIM's largest shareholder and backed by investment funds, appointed two thirds of Telecom Italia's board and picked its CEO Arnaud de Puyfontaine as chairman. It also made Amos Genish, a favorite of Vivendi's Chairman Vincent Bollore, CEO of the Italian group.AdvertisementVivendi's management of the company has led to tensions with the Italian government and Rome eventually decided to use its so-called "golden powers" to ensure it had a say in some key decisions.AdvertisementThe French company is also facing a challenge from activist hedge fund Elliott, which has a built a 9 percent stake, and wants to make changes to TIM's board.To increase its influence, the government bought a 4.262 percent stake in TIM through its investment arm Cassa Depositi e Prestiti (CDP) at the beginning of April.The CDP investment follows a decision by TIM to put its telecoms network, which analysts have valued at up to 15 billion euros, into a legally separate company, called Netco and fully controlled by TIM.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Calenda also defended CDP's move and said that Italy should have a single telecoms network, speaking in the interview."CDP has intervened to support a project to turn Telecom Italia into a (genuine) public company and spin off the network," the minister said, adding that CDP did not want to take control of the company.Calenda, a member of the caretaker centre-left government headed by Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni, remains in his ministerial post pending efforts to end a political stalemate following a national election last month.Some politicians and Elliott have advocated the creation of a single national network via the merger of Telecom Italia's NetCo with rival Open Fiber, a broadband firm jointly owned by the CDP and state-controlled utility Enel.Calenda had previously said that Elliott's plan for soon-to-be network company Netco to be listed or partially sold was in line with government's strategy to protect public interests.(Additional reporting Mathieu Rosemain in Paris,; Editing by Robin Pomeroy/Keith Weir and Jane Merriman)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 4:49 A.M. E.D.T.
NEW DELHI —  Indian ride-hailing firm Ola, backed by Japan's SoftBank Group, said it will add 10,000 electric three-wheelers to its fleet over the next 12 months as part of a plan to promote the use of electric vehicles.Ola plans to have 1 million electric vehicles on offer by 2021, it said in a statement, adding that it will work with various state governments, vehicle manufacturers and battery companies to meet its target.Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government is determined to promote electric vehicle use, starting with public transport and taxis, to combat rising pollution and reduce the nation's dependence on imported oil. India has also set a target to make all new vehicles electric by 2030.Ola, which operates in 110 Indian cities and has over a million driver partners, said the electric three-wheelers will be introduced in three cities but did not name them.AdvertisementThree-wheelers are commonly used, especially in smaller cities, but electric variants were introduced only a couple of years ago.AdvertisementOla did not say which manufacturers would provide the three-wheelers or whether it would be the company making the purchases or whether the vehicles would be driver-owned. It also did not provide details of when it planned to introduce electric cars.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last May, Ola launched a pilot project to test a fleet of electric vehicles in the Western city of Nagpur. But its drivers, unhappy with long wait times at charging stations and high operating expenses, said they want to return the cars."The EV (electric vehicle) program in Nagpur has provided Ola with significant insights into effectively managing vehicles, batteries and operations," the company said in the statement on Monday. It added that it plans to continue exploring ways to optimize batteries and charging.Electric car sales in India, one of the world's fastest-growing auto markets, made up less than 0.1 percent of annual sales of more than 3 million passenger cars. They are expensive and the infrastructure to charge the vehicles is inadequate.(Reporting by Aditi Shah; Editing by Swati Bhat and Edwina Gibbs)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack NicasSAN FRANCISCO — Jason Pressman spent Thursday morning cheering from the balcony of the New York Stock Exchange as shares of the software firm Zuora, which he backed in 2008, began trading.By the market’s close, Zuora’s stock had soared 43 percent, making his venture capital firm’s $17 million investment in the company worth roughly $150 million.“Not bad at all,” Mr. Pressman said by phone on Thursday night, before heading to a celebratory dinner with about 60 people at a pricey Italian restaurant in Chelsea. Mr. Pressman, a venture capitalist at Shasta Ventures, said he had been up much of the night before but still expected to raise a few glasses. “I’m running a little bit on adrenaline.”Mr. Pressman and many other Silicon Valley venture capitalists expect the windfalls to continue. Many of these investors, who back tiny start-ups with the hope that they will someday go public or be sold for nine- or 10-figure sums, have enjoyed enormous paper gains in recent years. But few have cashed in, because their fast-rising companies, like Uber and Airbnb, have remained private.That finally may change. Investors, bankers and analysts said they expected a wave of initial public offerings to bring some of the most highly valued and recognizable start-ups to the public market over the next 18 to 24 months — and billions of dollars in returns to their executives and investors. The potential bonanza would follow years of waiting as a few dozen companies amassed valuations without precedent in the private market.Already, 2018 has gotten off to a fast start. Two of the biggest start-ups still sitting on the sidelines — Dropbox, an online file storage company, and Spotify, the streaming music service based in Sweden — successfully went public over the past month. Tech I.P.O.s have already raised more than $7 billion this year — more than all of 2015 and 2016, and more than half the $13 billion they raised last year, according to the market-data firm Dealogic.The bullishness is a far cry from 2017, when Snap, the maker of Snapchat, went public — and then promptly fizzled. Blue Apron, which delivers meal kits, also saw its share price collapse after its I.P.O. last year.The tide has turned, venture capitalists said. “I talk to bankers all the time and they’re like: ‘Dude, we have stuff coming down the pike. There’s a bunch of offerings teed up,’” said Rob Hayes, a general partner at First Round Capital, who led a $1.5 million funding round in Uber in 2010 that valued the company at $4 million. Uber is now worth $68 billion.Some of the biggest-name privately held tech companies have recently made moves that position them to go public in the next year or two. Dara Khosrowshahi, Uber’s chief executive, has said he plans to take the company public next year. Lyft has held talks with investment banks to explore going public. And Airbnb has begun bringing independent directors onto its board, a move that is typically part of the preparations for becoming a public company.A wave of tech I.P.O.s would have implications for Silicon Valley’s start-up ecosystem. Once start-ups go public and their employees pocket some of the wealth, executives and engineers may leave with more resources to begin their own start-ups. That gives venture capitalists a fresh set of companies to invest in, renewing the cycles of innovation and experimentation that sit at the heart of Silicon Valley.The I.P.O.s will also earn the venture capitalists big returns — and bragging rights. According to an annual ranking of venture capitalists by CB Insights, a research firm that follows start-ups and venture capital, many of the top-ranked investors backed companies with 2017 I.P.O.s, including the software maker MuleSoft; Stitch Fix, a mail-order clothing service; and Snap. (While Snap has struggled on the stock market, investors bought in at far lower valuations.)At the top of the CB Insights list for the second straight year was Bill Gurley, a general partner at Benchmark, which was a Stitch Fix backer and one of the biggest investors in Uber. (Mr. Gurley became embroiled in plenty of drama with Uber last year, including filing a fraud lawsuit against its former chief executive, Travis Kalanick. Benchmark recently sold some shares of Uber to SoftBank, the Japanese conglomerate.)Steve Anderson of Baseline Ventures, No. 2 on the list, also backed Stitch Fix. And Jeremy Liew of Lightspeed Ventures, who was No. 10, funded Snap, while his colleague Ravi Mhatre, No. 8, backed MuleSoft and Stitch Fix. (The list of top 20 venture capitalists is below.)“Even though most firms have had fairly record numbers over the past four or five years, they’ve been paper numbers,” Mr. Gurley said. “At the end of day, cash-on-cash returns is what matters.”While private capital has been so accessible that start-ups have been able to get ample funding without the headaches of an I.P.O., several factors are encouraging companies to go public now, investors and bankers said. Public investors are hungry to buy shares of fast-growing companies. Early employees are getting antsy to cash in their stakes. And some start-up executives are eager to prove themselves as public company chief executives after founders like Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg and Twitter’s Jack Dorsey have said going public improved their discipline and focus on profits.“At all levels, there are more and more companies who are thinking about should we go public this year or next?” said Noah Wintroub, JPMorgan Chase’s vice chairman of investment banking. “You’ve got an environment now that’s conducive to asking that question, and also a lot of companies that have scaled up to the point where they can go now.”Matthew Kennedy, an I.P.O. analyst at Renaissance Capital, said nearly all private companies valued at more than $1 billion were strong candidates to go public in the next two years. He said he expected more immediate activity among midsize start-ups, such as Slack, the maker of corporate messaging software, which is valued at $5.1 billion, and DocuSign, an e-signature company valued at $3 billion that filed I.P.O. paperwork last month.Large private Chinese firms may also be nearing I.P.O.s, Mr. Kennedy said, including Xiaomi, a smartphone maker valued at $46 billion, and Meituan Dianping, an e-commerce firm valued at $30 billion.Once this generation of start-ups goes public, investors said, it will ease the anxiety of the wealthy families, pension funds and university endowments that finance the venture capitalists’ investment funds. Those so-called limited partners have been itching for their returns, venture capitalists said.“They’re certainly eager for cash back,” said Mr. Pressman, the Zuora investor. An I.P.O. boon would be good for the venture capitalists, too.“For sure,” he said. “We’re in the business to make money for our investors, but we make money when our investors do.”CB Insights analyzed investors’ exits (I.P.O.s, stock sales and acquisitions) the value of their current holdings and other factors to rank the top 100 venture capitalists. The analysis spanned 2009 through March 2018. The New York Times presents the top 20 here:1. Bill Gurley — Benchmark2. Steve Anderson — Baseline Ventures3. Joshua Kopelman — First Round Capital4. Alfred Lin — Sequoia Capital5. Brian Singerman — Founders Fund6. Jeffrey Jordan — Andreessen Horowitz7. Rob Hayes — First Round Capital8. Ravi Mhatre — Lightspeed Venture Partners9. Mary Meeker — Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers10. Jeremy Liew — Lightspeed Venture Partners11. Neil Shen — Sequoia Capital China12. Mitch Lasky — Benchmark13. Asheem Chandna — Greylock Partners14. Kirsten Green — Forerunner Ventures15. Aydin Senkut — Felicis Ventures16. Peter Fenton — Benchmark17. Danny Rimer — Index Ventures18. Robert Nelsen — Arch Venture Partners19. Fred Wilson — Union Square Ventures20. Neeraj Agrawal — Battery VenturesFollow Jack Nicas on Twitter: @jacknicas.AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 3:01 A.M. E.D.T.
SINGAPORE —  Singapore proposed on Monday allowing private home owners to let out their property for short-term rentals but with an annual cap of 90 days a year - part of a consultation process welcomed by rental service Airbnb.Private homes in Singapore are currently subject to a minimum rental period of three consecutive months, and such strict rules make the city-state one of the tougher markets in which Airbnb operates.Two Airbnb hosts were fined S$60,000 ($45,800) each by a local court this month for unauthorized short-term letting.Singapore's proposal to limit rentals days is broadly in line with measures introduced by other cities such as Paris, London and Amsterdam. The city state has begun seeking public feedback on the proposal and other measures to regulate the sector.AdvertisementAirbnb, which previously called Singapore's regulatory framework "untenable" after news of the illegal rentals broke late last year, said on Monday it welcomed the consultation.Advertisement"We're committed to reasonable solutions that will allow responsible home sharing to thrive in Singapore and welcome the opportunity to provide feedback through the consultation process," said Mich Goh, head of public policy for Airbnb Singapore.While Singapore has been an early adopter of the sharing economy, it is also keen to minimize any potential negative impact of allowing short-term rentals, as most of the wealthy but land-scarce city-state's 5.6 million people live in public and private apartments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The proposed rules require that a significant majority of owners in a condominium complex agree to the presence of short-term rentals in their development.The government is also seeking feedback on issues such as what homes should qualify and the responsibilities of short-term accommodation companies, the Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA) said on Monday.The URA said it will also consider the licensing of operators that advertise or market short-term rental units.Responsibilities of such companies could include paying relevant taxes on revenue generated from business activities in Singapore and facilitating the collection of taxes from hosts.The agency said it would consider factors such as the type of residential development and the character of the area when assessing applications for short-term rentals.The public can provide feedback until May 31.(Reporting by Aradhana Aravindan; Editing by Miyoung Kim and Edwina Gibbs)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersBERLIN — The German government has to assume that a cyber attack on its Foreign Ministry stemmed from Russia, Foreign Minister Heiko Maas told the broadcaster ZDF on Sunday.Maas listed a series of what he called problematic actions by Moscow, including the lack of progress in implementing a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine, a poison gas attack in Britain, Moscow's support of the Syrian government, Russia's efforts to influence Western elections, and the cyber attack."We had an attack on the Foreign Ministry where we have to assume that it stemmed from Russia," he said. "We can't just wish all that away ... And I think it's not only reasonable but necessary to point out that we do not view those as constructive contributions." (Reporting by Andrea Shalal; Editing by Kevin Liffey)AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersBANGKOK — Thailand's iTruemart, a unit of mobile phone operator True Corp Plc, said on Saturday it has fixed a data leak that led to information on some of its customers, including their ID and passport data, becoming public.The files of customers buying "TrueMove H" mobile packages had been 'hacked', it said in a statement following reports of the leak.It was the first known instance of a major data leak from a mobile operator in Thailand. Niall Merrigan, a Norway-based security researcher, detailed on his personal blog on Friday that he was able to access 32 gigabytes of True's customer data, including identification cards and passports. Merrigan told Reuters the data was "public facing" and that he notified True of the leak in March. The company said it would alert the customers affected by the hacking on measures it is taking to protect their data. It did not say how many customers or data files had been affected.Thailand's National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC) asked the company to clarify the matter on Tuesday before taking any action, Secretary-General Takorn Tantasith said on Saturday.True Corp is Thailand's second biggest mobile operator and a flagship company of billionaire Dhanin Chearavanont's Charoen Pokphand Group. (Reporting by Chayut Setboonsarng; additional reporting by Papitcha Tanakasempipat; Editing by Clelia Oziel)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 11:10 P.M. E.D.T.
SHANGHAI —  China's Sina Weibo will remove gay and violent content, including pictures, cartoons and text posts, during a three-month clean-up campaign, the microblogging platform said.Friday's announcement comes amid a clampdown targeting content across social media platforms as China's leaders look to tighten their grip on a huge and diverse cultural scene popular with the young.Weibo announced the move on its official administrator's account, saying the action aimed to comply with China's new cyber security law that calls for strict data surveillance.The post drew more than 24,000 comments, was forwarded more than 110,000 times, and prompted users to protest against the decision, using the hashtag "I am gay".Advertisement"I am gay and I'm proud, even if I get taken down there are tens of millions like me!," said one poster, who used the handle "rou wan xiong xiong xiong xiong" and posted a photo of himself.AdvertisementSome posts were quickly blocked by the platform, with the message displayed that they contained "illegal content".Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This week, news and online content portal Toutiao, which is luring investors, was forced to pull a joke sharing app after a watchdog denounced its "vulgar and improper content".Award-winning gay romance "Call Me By Your Name" was also dropped from a Chinese film festival last month. Homosexuality is not illegal in China, but activists say the conservative attitudes of some parts of society have prompted occasional government clampdowns.Weibo has so far cleared 56,243 pieces of content, shut 108 user accounts and removed 62 topics considered to have violated its standards, it added.(Reporting by Brenda Goh; Editing by Clarence Fernandez)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 8:04 A.M. E.D.T.
MOSCOW —  The chief executive of the Telegram messenger service, Pavel Durov, said on Friday the application will use built-in systems to circumnavigate a ban in Russia imposed by a court earlier on Friday.He said on his page in the VK social network that he still cannot guarantee that Telegram users will retain access to the messenger without using virtual private networks (VPNs).(Reporting by Polina Ivanova; Writing by Maria Tsvetkova; Editing by Matthew Mpoke Bigg)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 13, 2018, 6:26 P.M. E.D.T.
NEW YORK —  If you want to tailor a Facebook ad to a single user out of its universe of 2.2 billion, you could.Trying to pitch your boutique bed and breakfast to a 44-year-old "trendy mom" who lives in Seattle, leans conservative and is currently traveling in the Toronto area but hasn't booked a hotel for the night yet? Go right ahead. Interested in mail-ordering pet treats to a 32-year-old cat owner in Madison, Wisconsin who enjoys Japanese food, doesn't like pizza and has an anniversary coming up in the next two months? Not a problem.Targeting ads, it turns out, is almost infinitely customizable — sometimes in surprising ways. The ads you might see can be tailored to you down to the most granular details — not just where you live and what websites you visited recently, but whether you've gotten engaged in the past six months, are interested in organic food or share characteristics with people who have recently bought a BMW, even if you've never expressed interest in doing so yourself.Facebook made $40 billion in advertising revenue last year, second only to Google when it comes to its share of the global digital advertising market. Even with a recent decision to stop working with outside data brokers to help advertisers target ads based on things like offline purchases or credit history, this number is expected to grow sharply this year.AdvertisementHere are some ways advertisers can target you through Facebook:— MONITORING YOUR FACEBOOK ACTIVITYBy now you've probably gathered that Facebook uses things like your interest, age and other demographic and geographic information to help advertisers reach you. Then there's the stuff your friends do and like — the idea being that it's a good indicator for what you might do and like. So, if you have a friend who has liked the New Yorker's Facebook page, you might see ads for the magazine on your Facebook feed.AdvertisementBut that's just the tip of the iceberg. Facebook and advertisers can also infer stuff about you based on things you share willingly. For example, Facebook categorizes users into an "ethnic affinity" based on what it thinks might be their ethnicity or ethnic influence. It might guess this through TV shows or music you've liked. Often, Facebook is wrong — and while it's possible to remove it, you can't change it. There is also no "ethnic affinity" option for whites.While there are plenty of good reasons advertisers may want to target people of a particular ethnicity, this became a problem for Facebook in 2016, when ProPublica found that it let advertisers exclude specific ethnic groups from seeing their ads. When it comes to housing and employment ads, this is illegal.In late 2017, Facebook said it was temporarily blocking advertisers' ability to target based on ethnic affinity, along with other things such as religious or LGBT affinity. Advertisers can still target those groups — just not exclude them. Facebook, which said it is conducting an audit of how the feature can be misused, did not say when it would lift the block.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While some advertisers want to reach large swaths of people, others like more specific targeting. As Facebook explains in a guide for advertisers, it's possible to refine an ad's audience on things like what people post on their timelines, apps they use, ads they click, demographics such as age, gender and location, and even the mobile device they use or their network connection. Based on this information, advertisers can either include or exclude categories such as homeowners, "trendy moms," people who moved recently, conservatives, or people interested in cooking, for example.That said, Facebook warns advertisers not to narrow their audience too much by being overly specific, which can make the ads less effective — since fewer people will see them.— FOLLOWING YOU OFF FACEBOOKAn ad offering called "custom audiences" lets advertisers target anyone who has already bought stuff from them or has visited their websites. They can also target anyone who has shared an email address or downloaded their app. So, if you use Netflix, you may see an ad on Facebook for a new TV show that might interest you. Or, if you gave your email address when you bought a pair of slippers from Land's End, you might get an ad for an upcoming slipper sale, since Facebook has your email address too.Then there are "lookalike audiences." These are people who are similar to a business's existing customer base, but are not customers themselves. This can help advertisers reach people in different countries, for example. Advertisers can use this tool by first uploading their customers' data through the "custom audiences" feature. Then, Facebook's algorithms look for people similar to them. In addition, advertisers can also install a Facebook "pixel" on their site, a piece of code that tracks what people do off of Facebook.— DYNAMIC ADSA new type of ad Facebook launched recently, this lets businesses target people who have already shown interest in them. It uses "retargeting" — that sometimes-annoying way that a handbag you looked on a website can follow you around the internet regardless of whether you want to buy it. Dynamic ads, though, go a step further, and know if you were just browsing or if you put that handbag in your online shopping cart, and may nudge you with a 10 percent of coupon.As Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg explained in a recent earnings call, dynamic ads let Holiday Inn target people who searched for hotels on its website but hadn't yet booked. The ads these Facebook users saw had a video personalized to the dates and places they searched for. The result: the hotel chain got three times the return on what it spent on these ads than on their previous ad campaigns, according to Sandberg.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Sui-Lee Wee and Elsie ChenBEIJING — Deng Yufeng wanted to create art that prods people to question their lack of data privacy. What better way, he reasoned, than to buy the personal information of more than 300,000 Chinese people off the internet and display it in a public exhibition?The police did not appreciate the irony.Last week, the authorities in the Chinese city of Wuhan shut down Mr. Deng’s exhibition in a local museum after two days and told him that he was being investigated on suspicion of amassing the information through illegal means.Mr. Deng’s project coincides with a growing debate about the lack of data privacy in China, where people are starting to push back against tech companies and their use of information. Online brokers regularly, and illegally, buy and sell personal information online. Chinese people are often bombarded with calls and text messages offering bank loans or home purchases that seem too personalized to be random.Mr. Deng, a 32-year-old artist based in Beijing, said he hoped to get Chinese people to question that everyday scenario.“When these nuisance text messages become a daily routine, we develop a habit of ignoring and avoiding these text messages in a numb state,” he said in a telephone interview. “This is actually the mental state of most people here: a state of helplessness.”Last month, Robin Li, the chief executive of the search giant Baidu, set off a firestorm when he said that Chinese people were willing to trade privacy for convenience, safety and efficiency. In December, the software developer Qihoo 360 angered many internet users when a blogger discovered that the company was taking surveillance footage from restaurants and gyms in Beijing and broadcasting it without permission onto its platform.The rising public anger is taking place amid a similar debate in the United States, over Facebook. But Beijing officials keep the volume lower because personal data is broadly available to another powerful constituency: the Chinese government. Tech companies cooperate with the police in handing over information, with few questions asked. Citizens are resigned to the fact that they are tracked by the government, and there is little pushback about the increased state of surveillance.So six months ago, Mr. Deng started buying people’s information, using the Chinese messaging app QQ to reach sellers. He said that the data was easy to find and that he paid a total of $800 for people’s names, genders, phone numbers, online shopping records, travel itineraries, license plate numbers — at a cost at just over a tenth of a penny per person.He said he knew he was breaking the law. He wanted to prove a point.“Artists are not merely aesthetic creators,” Mr. Deng said. “In the very complicated state of our world today, we should also bear social responsibility.”At his exhibition, called “346,000 Wuhan Citizens’ Secrets,” he printed the pieces of personal data on sheets of paper using a special liquid solution. The sheets were hung in neat rows and columns on a wall. Museumgoers could only see the data under a special light source, and key identifying details were redacted.According to Mr. Deng, plainclothes police officers took him away on April 6, two days after his exhibition opened. They told him that he was being investigated for the buying of citizens’ information online and was barred from leaving Wuhan. When reached for comment, a Wuhan-based police officer from the station investigating the case said she did not know anything about it and hung up.Under Chinese criminal law, Mr. Deng faces up to seven years in jail. But Raymond Wang, a lawyer who specializes in data security, said he believed it was unlikely that Mr. Deng would be sentenced because there were no “damaging consequences.”Whether Mr. Deng’s exhibit will catch the attention of China’s leaders isn’t clear. But Legal Daily, an official, government-run publication, said Mr. Deng’s project showed how the existing laws on the protection of personal information were weak and enforcement was poor.“The organizer’s purpose was to call for the protection of personal privacy, and he himself violated the law to purchase personal information,” the newspaper wrote in an opinion piece. “Due to the complexity of the plot, it will make for a lively legal lesson.”The privacy project is just one of Mr. Deng’s many works of art touching on social issues. He has gone undercover to investigate the kidnappings of children, a major problem in China. He has also worked on a project on how people buy fake identification cards and guns.Mr. Deng pointed out that the lack of data privacy was also a global problem.With the help of volunteers, Mr. Deng sent about 10,000 text messages to the people whose information he used in the exhibition, inviting them to come.One of them was not amused, according to Mr. Deng, responding back: “You’re sick.”Follow Sui-Lee Wee on Twitter: @suilee.AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 2:13 A.M. E.D.T.
TOKYO —  Yahoo Japan Corp said on Friday it would buy a minority stake in a Tokyo-based cryptocurrency exchange, becoming the latest major Japanese financial services provider to shrug off security concerns and join the digital money industry.Yahoo Japan, which is also the country's biggest online auction site, said in a statement it would buy through a subsidiary a 40 percent stake in BitARG Exchange Tokyo, with services planned for launch in the autumn.Yahoo Japan did not give details of the value of the investment. But a person familiar with the matter said it would likely total 2 billion to 3 billion yen ($18.6 million to $27.9 million).Shares in Yahoo Japan closed down 0.2 percent, against a 0.6 gain for the benchmark Nikkei average.The deal comes after Japanese online brokerage firm Monex Group Inc said last week it would buy hacked cryptocurrency exchange Coincheck Inc for $34 million.That saw Monex join other mainstream financial services providers such as larger peer SBI Holdings Inc and messaging app operator Line Corp in looking to enter the cryptocurrency industry.(Reporting by Thomas Wilson and Yoshiyasu Shida)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 9:37 A.M. E.D.T.
(Reuters) - Oxygen supply device maker Inogen Inc said on Friday it was notifying 30,000 existing and former customers following a data breach that led to improper access of personal details of some rental clients.The company, which makes portable devices that supply oxygen to patients with breathing difficulties and lung diseases, said some non-public financial information was also leaked after an employee's email account was compromised.The unauthorized access appeared to have occurred between Jan. 2 and March 14 and involved rental customers' personal information such as names, contact details, Medicare identification numbers and insurance policy information.However the affected data did not include payment card information or medical records, the company said in a filing https://bit.ly/2GUP8xE.AdvertisementInogen said it has hired a forensic firm to investigate and will provide credit monitoring and an insurance reimbursement policy to assist affected customers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company said its insurance policy may not be adequate to protect against all costs arising from the incident.Inogen's shares have risen about 81 percent over the past year and on Thursday closed at their highest level since the company went public in 2014.Advertisement(Reporting by Tamara Mathias in Bengaluru; Editing by Shounak Dasgupta and Sriraj Kalluvila)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 6:28 A.M. E.D.T.
MOSCOW —  Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said on Friday that Russia would not have decided to block the Telegram messenger service if the company had fulfilled the requirements of Russian law."Restricting access has not been an aim," Peskov told a conference call, adding that a compromise would have been possible if the company had observed the law."Unfortunately, they did not manage to reach such a consensus," Peskov said.(Reporting by Maria Tsvetkova; Editing by Hugh Lawson)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 12:40 A.M. E.D.T.
BRUSSELS —  The European Union is set to demand tech giants like Facebook and Google do more to stop the spread of fake news on their websites by the end of the year to avoid possible regulatory actions, according to a draft document seen by Reuters.The draft document sets out for the first time the measures the EU would like to see the tech giants take within a certain timeline. The companies have come under fire in Europe for not doing enough to remove misleading or illegal content, including incitement to hatred, extremism and the online sale of counterfeit products.The European Commission plans to draw up a "Code of Practice" by July that will commit online platforms and advertisers to take a number of measures to prevent fake news being both uploaded and disseminated, "with a view to producing measurable effects by the end of 2018", the draft policy document says."Should the results prove unsatisfactory, the Commission may propose further actions, including actions of a regulatory nature, if necessary."AdvertisementThe measures include improving the scrutiny of advertisement placements, stepping up efforts to close fake accounts, ensuring that fighting disinformation is factored in by design when developing online tools and preventing the unauthorised use of users' personal data by third parties - a clear reference to the Cambridge Analytica scandal engulfing Facebook.AdvertisementThe revelations that political consultancy Cambridge Analytica - which worked on U.S. President Donald Trump's campaign - improperly accessed the data of up to 87 million Facebook users have hit the social network's share price and led to 10 hours of questioning for its CEO by U.S. lawmakers."So far, platforms have been unable to address the challenge posed by disinformation and some have turned a blind eye to the manipulative use of their infrastructures," the document says."The gravity of the threat, however, has become increasingly clear as exemplified by the recent revelations about personal data mined from social media used in a electoral context."Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Facebook has stepped up fact-checking in its fight against fake news and is working on making it uneconomical for people to post such content by lowering its ranking and making it less visible.The world's largest social network is also working on giving its users more context and background about the content they read on the platform.Some European countries have already moved to tackle the problem, like Germany which has passed a law requiring social media companies quickly remove hate speech. France is also looking at rules to block fake news.Facebook disclosed in September that Russians under fake names used the social network to try to influence U.S. voters in the months before and after the 2016 election, writing about inflammatory subjects, setting up events and buying ads."Platforms have by and large failed to ensure sufficient transparency on political advertising and sponsored content," the Commission document - which is due to be published at the end of April - says.The Commission also wants companies and advertisers to "establish clear marking systems and rules for bots and ensure their activities cannot be confused with human interactions."Advertisement(Editing by Alexandra Hudson)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 2:46 A.M. E.D.T.
TOKYO —  Yahoo Japan Corp said on Friday it would buy a minority stake in a Tokyo-based cryptocurrency exchange, becoming the latest major Japanese financial services provider to shrug off security concerns and join the digital money industry.Yahoo Japan, which is also the country's biggest online auction site, said in a statement it would buy through a subsidiary a 40 percent stake in BitARG Exchange Tokyo, with services planned for launch in the autumn.Yahoo Japan did not give details of the value of the investment. But a person familiar with the matter said it would likely total 2 billion to 3 billion yen (13.06 million pounds to 19.59 million pounds).Shares in Yahoo Japan closed down 0.2 percent, against a 0.6 gain for the benchmark Nikkei average.The deal comes after Japanese online brokerage firm Monex Group Inc said last week it would buy hacked cryptocurrency exchange Coincheck Inc for $34 million.That saw Monex join other mainstream financial services providers such as larger peer SBI Holdings Inc and messaging app operator Line Corp in looking to enter the cryptocurrency industry.(Reporting by Thomas Wilson and Yoshiyasu Shida)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 2:43 A.M. E.D.T.
PARIS —  Private equity firm Permira said on Friday it had agreed to buy a majority stake in Exclusive Group, in a deal that secures substantial funding for the future development of the French cyber security group.A source close to the matter said the deal was worth some 1.3 billion euros ($1.60 billion).Created in 2003, Exclusive Group had 2017 sales of 1.75 billion euros, a rise of 38 percent from 2016.The transaction is expected to close during the summer.(Reporting by Dominique Vidalon, Pascale Denis; Editing by Leigh Thomas)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

 Kevin Roose
 

THE SHIFT
APRIL 11, 2018
WASHINGTON — When it comes to regulating Facebook, Congress is in over its head. But does that matter?This week’s marathon testimony by Mark Zuckerberg, the social network’s chief executive, revealed the limited understanding many lawmakers have of what Facebook is and how it works. Members of Congress came with a mixed bag of concerns for Mr. Zuckerberg, including a few incisive points about Facebook’s privacy and data collection policies and a lot of off-topic ramblings about how computers work, but these questions never amounted to a unified theory of Facebook’s troubles, or suggestions of how they might be solved.It’s tempting to claim that technological illiteracy is the problem — that some older and tech-phobic lawmakers are fundamentally incapable of regulating Facebook properly.But I want to suggest another takeaway. The biggest obstacle to regulating Facebook is not Congress’s lack of computer literacy, which gave Mr. Zuckerberg the upper hand this week. It’s a lack of political will, and an unwillingness to identify the problems they’re trying to fix in the first place.AdvertisementAfter all, Congress typically does not require subject matter expertise of its members. Most politicians in Washington did not understand the complexities of mortgage-backed securities in 2009, when Wall Street executives testified in the wake of the financial crisis. The lawmakers also are not pharmaceutical experts, or transportation policy wonks or deeply knowledgeable in many of the other complex issues that come before them. And yet, Congress — with the help of staff experts and outside advisers — has managed to pass sweeping legislation to prevent excesses and bad behavior in those sectors.Advertisement“It’s never an issue of the members being able to do it — their staff is often incredibly dedicated and can dig into these issues,” said Ashkan Soltani, a former chief technologist at the Federal Trade Commission. The challenge, Mr. Soltani said, is that there’s a “lost in translation” problem of trying to condense complex, multifaceted issues into easily digested sound bites that will play well with constituents.Members of the Energy and Commerce Committee pressed Facebook’s chief executive on data privacy, security and political bias on the social media platform.“This isn’t just about news,” Mr. Soltani said of Facebook’s issues. “It’s not just about privacy and commercialization, it’s not just about political speech. It’s all of those things and more.”If Congress wants to rein in Facebook’s enormous power — and the questions lawmakers asked left little doubt that it does — then the first step is identifying what, specifically, they think is wrong with Facebook.Is it that Facebook is too cavalier about sharing user data with outside organizations?Is it that Facebook collects too much data about users in the first place?Is it that Facebook is promoting addictive messaging products to children?Is it that Facebook’s news feed is polarizing society, pushing people to ideological fringes?Is it that Facebook is too easy for political operatives to exploit, or that it does not do enough to keep false news and hate speech off users’ feeds?Is it that Facebook is simply too big, or a monopoly that needs to be broken up?All of these are concerns lawmakers brought up during this week’s hearings, and they would all require different and narrowly tailored regulatory solutions.For example, Congress’s goal may be to stop outside companies from getting access to people’s Facebook data — avoiding another scandal like the one involving Cambridge Analytica, the political consulting firm that improperly obtained data on up to 87 million Facebook users. Lawmakers could propose a bill that would prevent large social media platforms from opening themselves up to outside developers. (They should note, though, that Facebook has already limited the data available to outside companies, so this would not necessarily have the intended effect.)AdvertisementCongress could address the issue of data collection by adopting European-style data protection policies, requiring stronger user controls for personal information or requiring social networks to delete certain types of user data automatically after a given time.If it wanted to, Congress could address the issue of hateful content by adopting strict hate speech laws like the ones that exist in Germany, which make social platforms liable if they fail to remove hate speech in a timely manner.It could address the problem of transparency in political ads by passing the Honest Ads Act, a bill that would subject online political ads to similar disclosure standards as TV and radio political ads. (Mr. Zuckerberg has already indicated that he supports the measure, so this should be an easy one.)Or, if it decides that Facebook is just too darn big, Congress could spearhead an effort to break it up.All of these are theoretically possible outcomes, depending on which of Facebook’s many issues lawmakers decide to address. Lawmakers do not need to be computer scientists, or to come up with an omnibus bill to address all of Facebook’s flaws in one fell swoop. It could pick off one issue at a time, consult with the experts and take a piecemeal approach.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But first, it needs to understand which pieces need fixing, and how to carry out fixes without creating unintended consequences. And it needs to demonstrate that it has the political resolve to push these changes through, even as the tech industry furiously lobbies against them, as it undoubtedly will.Perhaps the most dispiriting exchange all week was when Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, asked Mr. Zuckerberg about Facebook’s market power, and the notion that it is too dominant for any other social network to compete with.Advertisement“Is there an alternative to Facebook in the private sector?” Mr. Graham asked.Mr. Zuckerberg dodged the question, saying that people use lots of apps to communicate.“You don’t feel like you have a monopoly?” Mr. Graham wondered.“It certainly doesn’t feel that way to me,” Mr. Zuckerberg said.By raising the issue of Facebook’s lack of competition, Mr. Graham was circling around an important point. Facebook has, indeed, taken steps to acquire or crush multiple apps that have posed a competitive threat. It even runs a service called Onavo, which allows it to keep tabs on which other apps its users are using and functions as a kind of early-warning system for possible competitors.But when it came time to draw the conclusion his questions had been leading to — that Facebook’s primary problem was its size, and that regulation should address its anticompetitive tendencies — Mr. Graham pulled his punches, even asking Mr. Zuckerberg for advice about regulating his own company.“Would you work with us in terms of what regulations you think are necessary in your industry?” Mr. Graham asked.This week’s hearings proved that a groundswell of support is building on Capitol Hill to regulate Facebook and other internet companies. But until Congress stops asking these companies how they want to be regulated and starts making its own decisions about what problems it wants to fix, its targets will continue to slip through its fingers.Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tugging on the Reins Of Facebook’s Power.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
APRIL 11, 2018
What makes you tick, whom you know, where you go, even where you might end up. The information you share in your profile is a mere snippet of what Facebook and its partners really know about you. Kevin Roose, a technology columnist for The Times, explains.When I downloaded a copy of my Facebook data last week, I didn’t expect to see much. My profile is sparse, I rarely post anything on the site, and I seldom click on ads. (I’m what some call a Facebook “lurker.”)But when I opened my file, it was like opening Pandora’s box.With a few clicks, I learned that about 500 advertisers — many that I had never heard of, like Bad Dad, a motorcycle parts store, and Space Jesus, an electronica band — had my contact information, which could include my email address, phone number and full name. Facebook also had my entire phone book, including the number to ring my apartment buzzer. The social network had even kept a permanent record of the roughly 100 people I had deleted from my friends list over the last 14 years, including my exes.There was so much that Facebook knew about me — more than I wanted to know. But after looking at the totality of what the Silicon Valley company had obtained about yours truly, I decided to try to better understand how and why my data was collected and stored. I also sought to find out how much of my data could be removed.How Facebook collects and treats personal information was central this week when Mark Zuckerberg, the company’s chief executive,  answered questions in Congress about data privacy and his responsibilities to users. During his testimony, Mr. Zuckerberg repeatedly said Facebook has a tool for downloading your data that “allows people to see and take out all the information they’ve put into Facebook.” (Those who want to download their own Facebook data can use this link.)AdvertisementBut that’s an overstatement. Most basic information, like my birthday, could not be deleted. More important, the pieces of data that I found objectionable, like the record of people I had unfriended, could not be removed from Facebook, either.Advertisement“They don’t delete anything, and that’s a general policy,” said Gabriel Weinberg, the founder of DuckDuckGo, which offers internet privacy tools. He added that data was kept around to eventually help brands serve targeted ads.Beth Gautier, a Facebook spokeswoman, put it this way: “When you delete something, we remove it so it’s not visible or accessible on Facebook.” She added: “You can also delete your account whenever you want. It may take up to 90 days to delete all backups of data on our servers.”Digging through your Facebook files is an exercise I highly recommend if you care about how your personal information is stored and used. Here’s what I learned.
                A history of the steps the company took to become an advertising giant.            When you download a copy of your Facebook data, you will see a folder containing multiple subfolders and files. The most important one is the “index” file, which is essentially a raw data set of your Facebook account, where you can click through your profile, friends list, timeline and messages, among other features.One surprising part of my index file was a section called Contact Info. This contained the 764 names and phone numbers of everyone in my iPhone’s address book. Upon closer inspection, it turned out that Facebook had stored my entire phone book because I had uploaded it when setting up Facebook’s messaging app, Messenger.This was unsettling. I had hoped Messenger would use my contacts list to find others who were also using the app so that I could connect with them easily — and hold on to the relevant contact information only for the people who were on Messenger. Yet Facebook kept the entire list, including the phone numbers for my car mechanic, my apartment door buzzer and a pizzeria.This felt unnecessary, though Facebook holds on to your phone book partly to keep it synchronized with your contacts list on Messenger and to help find people who newly sign up for the messaging service. I opted to turn off synchronizing and deleted all my phone book entries.AdvertisementMy Facebook data also revealed how little the social network forgets. For instance, in addition to recording the exact date I signed up for Facebook in 2004, there was a record of when I deactivated Facebook in October 2010, only to reactivate it four days later — something I barely remember doing.Facebook also kept a history of each time I opened Facebook over the last two years, including which device and web browser I used. On some days, it even logged my locations, like when I was at a hospital two years ago or when I visited Tokyo last year.Facebook keeps a log of this data as a security measure to flag suspicious logins from unknown devices or locations, similar to how banks send a fraud alert when your credit card number is used in a suspicious location. This practice seemed reasonable, so I didn’t try to purge this information.But what bothered me was the data that I had explicitly deleted but that lingered in plain sight. On my friends list, Facebook had a record of “Removed Friends,” a dossier of the 112 people I had removed along with the date I clicked the “Unfriend” button. Why should Facebook remember the people I’ve cut off from my life?Facebook’s explanation was dissatisfying. The company said it might use my list of deleted friends so that those people did not appear in my feed with the feature “On This Day,” which resurfaces memories from years past to help people reminisce. I’d rather have the option to delete the list of deleted friends for good.What Facebook retained about me isn’t remotely as creepy as the sheer number of advertisers that have my information in their databases. I found this out when I clicked on the Ads section in my Facebook file, which loaded a history of the dozen ads I had clicked on while browsing the social network.Lower down, there was a section titled “Advertisers with your contact info,” followed by a list of roughly 500 brands, the overwhelming majority of which I had never interacted with. Some brands sounded obscure and sketchy — one was called “Microphone Check,” which turned out to be a radio show. Other brands were more familiar, like Victoria’s Secret Pink, Good Eggs or AARP.Facebook said unfamiliar advertisers might appear on the list because they might have obtained my contact information from elsewhere, compiled it into a list of people they wanted to target and uploaded that list into Facebook. Brands can upload their customer lists into a tool called Custom Audiences, which helps them find those same people’s Facebook profiles to serve them ads.AdvertisementBrands can obtain your information in many different ways. Those include:■ Buying information from a data provider like  Acxiom, which has amassed one of the world’s largest commercial databases on consumers. Brands can buy different types of customer data sets from a provider, like contact information for people who belong to a certain demographic, and take that information to Facebook to serve targeted ads, said Michael Priem, chief executive of Modern Impact, an advertising firm in Minneapolis.Last month, Facebook announced that it was limiting its practice of allowing advertisers to target ads using information from third-party data brokers like Acxiom.■ Using tracking technologies like web cookies and invisible pixels that load in your web browser to collect information about your browsing activities. There are many different trackers on the web, and Facebook offers 10 different trackers to help brands harvest your information, according to Ghostery, which offers privacy tools that block ads and trackers. The advertisers can take some pieces of data that they have collected with trackers and upload them into the Custom Audiences tool to serve ads to you on Facebook.■ Getting your information in simpler ways, too. Someone you shared information with could share it with another entity. Your credit card loyalty program, for example, could share your information with a hotel chain, and that hotel chain could serve you ads on Facebook.The upshot? Even a Facebook lurker, like myself, who has barely clicked on any digital ads can have personal information exposed to an enormous number of advertisers. This was not entirely surprising, but seeing the list of unfamiliar brands with my contact information in my Facebook file was a dose of reality.I tried to contact some of these advertisers, like Very Important Puppets, a toymaker, to ask them about what they did with my data. They did not respond.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Let’s be clear: Facebook is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to what information tech companies have collected on me.Knowing this, I also downloaded copies of my Google data with a tool called Google Takeout. The data sets were exponentially larger than my Facebook data. For my personal email account alone, Google’s archive of my data measured eight gigabytes, enough to hold about 2,000 hours of music. By comparison, my Facebook data was about 650 megabytes, the equivalent of about 160 hours of music.AdvertisementHere was the biggest surprise in what Google collected on me: In a folder labeled Ads, Google kept a history of many news articles I had read, like a Newsweek story about Apple employees walking into glass walls and a New York Times story about the editor of our Modern Love column. I didn’t click on ads for either of these stories, but the search giant logged them because the sites had loaded ads served by Google.In another folder, labeled Android, Google had a record of apps I had opened on an Android phone since 2015, along with the date and time. This felt like an extraordinary level of detail.Google did not immediately respond to a request for comment.On a brighter note, I downloaded an archive of my LinkedIn data. The data set was less than half a megabyte and contained exactly what I had expected: spreadsheets of my LinkedIn contacts and information I had added to my profile.Yet that offered little solace. Be warned: Once you see the vast amount of data that has been collected about you, you won’t be able to unsee it.Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes Tech Fix, a column about solving tech problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What frustrates you about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Remember Those Friends You Deleted Long Ago? Facebook Does.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By SHEERA FRENKEL, MATTHEW ROSENBERG and NICHOLAS CONFESSOREAPRIL 10, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Facebook has said that political data firm Cambridge Analytica improperly harvested the public profile data of up to 87 million of its users, including their political beliefs, interests and friends’ information.Now the social network has revealed that the extent of the harvesting went even further — it included people’s private messages, too.On Monday, Facebook began informing people whose data may have been compromised by Cambridge Analytica through an app developed by the researcher Aleksandr Kogan. In its notifications, Facebook said that while the information harvested was largely limited to what was on people’s public profiles, “a small number of people” also shared information from their Facebook timeline, posts and messages.Facebook did not specify how many people’s messages were gathered and said it was taking as broad a view as possible when notifying people that their data may have been taken.AdvertisementThe revelation widens the scope of data that was harvested from people on Facebook and how it went beyond what was publicly available. The development may provide grist to lawmakers on a day when Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, is set to be grilled on Capitol Hill over data privacy and other matters, such as Russian misuse of the social network to influence the 2016 election.AdvertisementHow Mr. Zuckerberg publicly addresses these problems in congressional hearings on Tuesday and Wednesday will be closely scrutinized. Facebook faces possible regulation and other changes amid a backlash over the lack of data privacy.The Cambridge Analytica outcry was triggered after The New York Times and others reported last month that a quiz app made by Mr. Kogan had collected information on Facebook users. That information was then used by Cambridge Analytica to build psychological profiles of voters in the United States and others.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is not clear whether the direct messages were among the data eventually provided to Cambridge Analytica. In an interview on Tuesday, Mr. Kogan told The Times that the private messages were harvested from a limited number of people, likely “a couple thousand,” as part of a separate academic research project and never provided to Cambridge Analytica.He said the messages were collected as part of research that he conducted at Cambridge University in 2013 and the first half of 2014, before he began working with Cambridge Analytica. The messages were collected for research into how people use emojis to convey emotions.Mr. Kogan said the messages were kept securely in his university lab, known as the Cambridge Prosociality and Well-Being Lab, and access was restricted to a small group of people.The message data “was obviously sensitive so we tried to be careful about who could access it,” Mr. Kogan said. He stressed that his Facebook app collected messages only from a “couple thousand” people who completed his questionnaire, not from their friends.During Mr. Kogan’s later work for Cambridge Analytica, his Facebook app took data from people who took his questionnaire and from all their friends. But the data did not include private messages — it included only names, birth dates, locations and pages the users had liked, he said.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of a headline with this article misidentified the entity that improperly harvested the personal information of up to 87 million Facebook users. The information was collected though a quiz app developed by the researcher Aleskandr Kogan, not by the consulting firm Cambridge Analytica.Follow Sheera Frenkel, Matthew Rosenberg and Nicholas Confessore on Twitter: @sheeraf and @AllMattNYT and @nickconfessore.Sheera Frenkel reported from San Francisco, Matthew Rosenberg from Washington and Nicholas Confessore from New York.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Sheera Frenkel and Linda QiuMark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, is testifying before Congress on Tuesday and Wednesday to answer questions about the social network’s failure to protect the data of millions of its users and its role in Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election. Here are some of Mr. Zuckerberg’s claims, as well as some claims from the lawmakers, which we fact checked. The page will be updated throughout the hearings. Not quite …Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm, used information that had been harvested from as many as 87 million Facebook users several years ago to build psychological profiles of voters. Facebook did announce changes in 2014 to limit the access that new apps had to data about its users, but it was not until 2015 that the company rolled out the changes to affect all of the apps on the platform. This contradicts earlier statements.Facebook has long maintained that it did not learn about how Russian agents had used its platform to influence the presidential election until the summer of 2017. While Alex Stamos, Facebook’s chief information officer, warned the company that Russian hackers may have been active on the platform in the summer of 2016, he has said he was looking at cybersecurity breaches, not disinformation campaigns tied to the elections.Tuesday was the first time that Mr. Zuckerberg cited 2016 as the date when the company identified new operations linked to the election.This is true, but …Facebook requires people to register for accounts with their real names. But the fact is that fake accounts and false pages have persisted on the social network. Russian agents set up accounts on Facebook with false identities before the 2016 presidential election. And just this week, Facebook removed a popular Black Lives Matter page after it was discovered to be inauthentic.False.Former employees of Cambridge Analytica have told The New York Times that they were using Facebook as early as 2014. Mr. Zuckerberg later said he had misspoken.This is true, but … During the hearing, Mr. Zuckerberg was shown the terms of service of the quiz app that Aleksandr Kogan, a Russian-American academic, used to gather data from Facebook users. The fine print may have told users that their data could be used for commercial purposes, according to a draft of the app’s terms of service that was reviewed by The Times, and which was shown to Mr. Zuckerberg by Senator Richard Blumenthal, a Democrat from Connecticut. In other words, it appears that Facebook may not have regularly checked to make sure that apps complied with its rules. The final wording of the terms of service for Mr. Kogan’s app is now most likely unknowable. Facebook executives said they deleted the app in December 2015 after they found out about the data harvesting.Not exactly.Facebook users who downloaded Mr. Kogan’s quiz app did consent to sharing their own and their friends’ information by agreeing to the app’s terms and conditions. But their friends were not aware that their information had been shared and did not knowingly grant permission. And notices in fine print are often ignored or misunderstood. Several people who used the app told The Times that they were not aware that it had harvested their data. Studies and surveys have shown that most people click agree to terms and conditions without actually reading them.— Senator Chuck Grassley, Republican of IowaThis comparison is misleading. More than a million people downloaded the 2012 Obama campaign’s app, which gained access to the data of supporters and their friends. Facebook users who downloaded the Obama campaign app were aware of its aims: supporting and campaigning for a political candidate. Those who downloaded the app from Mr. Kogan, however, believed they were taking a personality quiz for academic purposes and did not know that their data would end up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.This requires context.How successful Facebook has been at finding and eliminating terrorist propaganda from its platform is still up for debate. Facebook and other social media companies were chastised by the British Parliament in a 2017 report for “failing to remove illegal content when asked to do so — including dangerous terrorist recruitment material, promotion of sexual abuse of children and incitement to racial hatred.” The report called the companies’ lack of enforcement shameful. Last week, the Counter Extremism Project, a nonprofit that combats extremist groups, also said it had found accounts of some extremists that remained active on Facebook.— Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of TexasThis requires context.A former Facebook employee told Gizmodo in 2016 that people working at the social network prevented stories about right-wing conferences and candidates from trending on Facebook. Other former employees disputed this suggestion and Gizmodo said it was “unable to determine if left-wing news topics or sources were similarly suppressed.” Facebook denied the allegations at the time, but the episode underscored the question of whether the social network was a media entity.Not exactly.While Facebook recently introduced a tool that allows people to download data that Facebook has collected on them, the tool appears to be incomplete. Some people have noticed that some data are missing, such as a long-forgotten feature of Facebook that lets you “poke” people.Facebook now allows users to opt-out of certain categories of data, including deciding what is shared with advertisers. But certain basic data will always be shared with the company unless a Facebook account is permanently deleted by the user.This is a true, but …While Facebook doesn’t collect the content of phone calls, it has been collecting call records and SMS data from Android devices that have the Facebook app installed. Android users who recently downloaded the data that Facebook stores about them were surprised to learn that the company had information on their entire call history, going back years. Facebook recently explained in a blog post that users can opt out of Facebook collecting this data.Sheera Frenkel covers cybersecurity from San Francisco. Previously, she spent over a decade in the Middle East as a foreign correspondent, reporting for BuzzFeed, NPR, The Times of London and McClatchy Newspapers.@sheerafLinda Qiu is a fact-check reporter, based in Washington. She came to the Times in 2017 from the fact-checking service PolitiFact.@ylindaqiuAdvertisementBy CECILIA KANG, TIFFANY HSU and SHEERA FRENKELAPRIL 9, 2018
WASHINGTON — Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, tried to get ahead of a week of intense scrutiny for him and his company by visiting several top lawmakers in Washington on Monday and reiterating how sorry he was for the social network’s failings.Mr. Zuckerberg, in a dark suit and tie and accompanied by an entourage of aides, held several meetings with leaders of the Senate Commerce and Judiciary Committees. He also posted testimony apologizing for Facebook’s role in false news, data privacy leaks and foreign interference in elections, as his company announced that it would form an independent commission of academic researchers to study social media’s impact on elections.The blitz of actions preceded Mr. Zuckerberg’s facing lawmakers for the first time over Facebook’s role and influence on society, set off by revelations that the data of up to 87 million Facebook users was improperly harvested by a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica. Lawmakers, furious over the reports, called on Mr. Zuckerberg to explain himself. He is scheduled to testify before congressional committees on Tuesday and Wednesday, when he is set to be publicly grilled.The prospect that Mr. Zuckerberg, a 33-year-old billionaire, will be taken to task on Capitol Hill has created intense interest and a media circus. On Monday, he was trailed by more than a dozen television cameras and numerous reporters when he exited the office of Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida and a Senate Commerce Committee leader. Mr. Zuckerberg said nothing as he strode out of an Senate office elevator, accompanied by Joel Kaplan, Facebook’s vice president for global public policy, who is based in Washington, and Brian Rice, a leading Democratic lobbyist for the social network, among others.AdvertisementMr. Nelson, who met with Mr. Zuckerberg for an hour, said the chief executive was taking the situation “seriously.”Advertisement“He knows regulation could be around the corner,” Mr. Nelson said, adding that Mr. Zuckerberg was forthright and answered questions to the best of his ability. Among the topics the two discussed was Russia’s interference in the 2016 election, when Russian agents used Facebook to spread divisive messages to the American electorate, Mr. Nelson said.But when asked whether the meeting helped assuage his concerns about Facebook’s privacy violations, Mr. Nelson said, “Count me as skeptical.” He also said it was to be determined whether Facebook would be able to stave off more foreign disruption in the American midterm elections this fall.“I think he’s trying,” Mr. Nelson said of Mr. Zuckerberg, “but I think if we don’t get our arms around this, none of us is going to have any privacy anymore.”Staff for Senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota and chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, said Mr. Zuckerberg and the senator were scheduled to meet on Monday. In addition, Mr. Zuckerberg met with the Judiciary Committee leaders, Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, according to a person briefed on the visits, who asked not to be named because the information was not public.Senator Grassley did not respond to a request for comment. Mr. Thune’s and Ms. Feinstein’s offices confirmed the meetings with Mr. Zuckerberg but declined to elaborate.Facebook described Mr. Zuckerberg’s interactions with lawmakers as “courtesy meetings” and pointed to Mr. Zuckerberg’s prepared testimony that was released on Monday. In those comments, which were posted by the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, Mr. Zuckerberg reiterated how Facebook needed to do better in data privacy and other matters.“We didn’t take a broad enough view of our responsibility, and that was a big mistake,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in prepared testimony. “It was my mistake, and I’m sorry. I started Facebook, I run it, and I’m responsible for what happens here.”
         Revelations that consultants to the Trump campaign misused millions of Facebook users’ data set off an international furor. This is how The Times covered it.
      Mr. Zuckerberg added that Facebook must do more to protect its users’ personal information and summarized some of the measures the Silicon Valley company is taking to lock down the data privacy of its more than 2.2 billion members. Those include blocking app developers from gaining access to the data of users who have been inactive for three months, restricting the ability of users to inadvertently share information about others in their networks and adopting stricter permissions guidelines and search features.AdvertisementOn Monday, Facebook also began notifying the 87 million people whose data may have been harvested by Cambridge Analytica by posting a notification that they would see when they logged into the social network. In addition, all Facebook users will see a new feature highlighting which apps they use and which information they have shared with those apps.In recent days, Facebook also suspended two data analytics companies for inappropriately gathering data from their platform. AggregateIQ, a Canadian firm associated with Cambridge Analytica, was suspended on Friday, Facebook said. The company was accused of using data inappropriately harvested from Facebook to support the “Vote Leave” campaign for Britain to exit the European Union.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AggregateIQ did not respond to a request for comment about its suspension, which was earlier reported by The Financial Times. According to a statement on its website, “AggregateIQ has never managed, nor did we ever have access to, any Facebook data or database allegedly obtained improperly by Cambridge Analytica.”Facebook also said it had suspended CubeYou for inappropriately harvesting data, using tactics similar those of Cambridge Analytica. The company collected information on Facebook users through quizzes. CNBC, which earlier reported the firm’s suspension, said people had been misled into believing the quizzes would be used for nonprofit academic research; instead, the data was sold to marketers.“Our apps and activity on Facebook have been subject to regular audits and reviews with the company,” a CubeYou spokeswoman said. She added that the company was in compliance with Facebook’s data policy and rules and that CubeYou’s terms informed users that their data would be used for academic and business research purposes.Yet even as Facebook suspended data firms and took other actions over data privacy, worries about what can be posted on the social network continued. Facebook confirmed on Monday that it had removed a popular Facebook page with nearly 700,000 followers that was associated with the Black Lives Matter movement after it was discovered to be inauthentic.A Facebook spokesman said the individual who started the page was not who he claimed to be on Facebook. The inauthentic page was earlier reported by CNN.In a separate post on Facebook on Monday, Mr. Zuckerberg addressed how the social network was misused by Russians in the 2016 presidential election and said that Facebook would create the commission of researchers to study social media’s impact on elections.AdvertisementThe commission’s goal, Mr. Zuckerberg wrote, “is both to get the ideas of leading academics on how to address these issues as well as to hold us accountable for making sure we protect the integrity of these elections on Facebook.”The researchers chosen to participate will have access to privacy-protected sets of Facebook data, but only after being vetted by a review board, external privacy experts, and Facebook’s privacy and research review teams. The company said it would not review or approve the researchers’ findings before they are published.Financing for the project is being provided by, among others, the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, the Charles Koch Foundation and the Omidyar Network.Elliot Schrage, Facebook’s vice president for communications and public policy, and David Ginsberg, its director of research, said in a blog post on Monday that the company had made “real progress” in dealing with hoax stories and sham accounts since the 2016 election and the campaign, known as Brexit, to withdraw Britain from the European Union.“But there is much more to do — and we don’t have all the answers,” they said.Follow Cecilia Kang, Tiffany Hsu and Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @ceciliakang and @tiffkhsu and @sheeraf.Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, Tiffany Hsu from New York and Sheera Frenkel from San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Warming Up for His Grilling In Jacket, Tie and Hair Shirt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIAPRIL 9, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Uber started a pilot program in San Francisco to allow its customers to reserve “pedal-assist” electric bicycles within its ride-hailing app in January. Now, Uber says it plans to buy the company behind the bike-sharing service and bring that capability to other cities around the world.In a blog post Monday morning, Uber said it reached an agreement with Jump Bikes, a provider of battery-powered bicycles, for an undisclosed sum. It would be the first acquisition for Uber since Dara Khosrowshahi took over as the company’s chief executive in August.Uber did not say how much it paid for the bike start-up, but TechCrunch reported earlier that Jump was considering an acquisition from Uber for more than $100 million.Even as Uber is backing away from some international markets, the Jump acquisition shows the company is still willing to invest in new ways to reach customers.AdvertisementMr. Khosrowshahi said in an interview that Jump was “a perfect fit” for Uber’s expanding portfolio beyond its core ride-hailing service. Uber’s food delivery service, UberEats, is growing fast, and the company also aims to provide a variety of transportation options to consumers including bike sharing.AdvertisementUber said that the data from its ride network allows the company to understand the best locations to place the bicycles in different cities, so they can be used more frequently.Since starting the pilot program a few months ago, Uber has found that the average distance of a ride on a Jump bike is about 2.6 miles — which is not much different from how far customers travel on average for an Uber car ride. Each bike is also being used six or seven times a day.“The utilization of the bikes has been higher than expected,” Mr. Khosrowshahi said. “People are using these bikes for multiple trips a day.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bright red Jump bikes are part of a growing market for dockless bike-sharing services. Unlike the rows of Ford GoBikes available around the Bay Area or Citi Bikes in New York City, which have designated pickup and drop-off locations, dockless bikes like Jump are picked up wherever the last rider left them.The idea is that the rider is supposed to leave the bike on the sidewalk without impeding pedestrians or attached to a public bike rack. However, some cities have complained that dockless bikes have become a nuisance, clogging sidewalks or left damaged in strange locations.Ryan Rzepecki, Jump’s chief executive, started working on bike sharing almost a decade ago, initially with a company called Social Bicycles, which sold bicycles to different cities. Progress was slow. However, in the last few years, as companies sought to do for other modes of transportation what Uber did for cars, on-demand bicycles have become a hot area of investment.The company renamed itself Jump Bikes and focused on electric bicycles. It raised $10 million last fall and received permission from San Francisco to start operating a bike-sharing service with 250 battery-powered bicycles.Jump is also operating around 200 bikes in Washington, D.C., and plans to double the number of bikes there in the next few months. It also expects to expand to 500 bikes in San Francisco in September.As part of its pilot program with Uber, the Uber app presented users with a “bike” option in a drop-down menu. From there, the customer reserved a bicycle and was charged $2 for 30 minutes and then a per-minute fee after that.AdvertisementSince Jump owns the bicycles, the acquisition introduces Uber to a new business model. Unlike the cars on its ride-hailing network, which belong to the drivers, Uber will have to own and maintain the Jump bicycles. Mr. Khosrowshahi said that while it made sense for Uber to own the bicycles in the early days, other companies may want to finance the bikes in the future when the market is more mature.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber Plans to Buy Jump, Maker of Electric Bicycles, After Bike-Sharing Test.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

 Kevin Roose
 

THE SHIFT
APRIL 8, 2018
For the past two years, Ryan Hamilton has been getting Facebook-famous. Mr. Hamilton, 28, manages a network of Facebook pages and makes viral videos for his “Hammy T.V.” channel — mostly lowbrow fare with titles like “Shocking Pit Bull Social Experiment” and “World’s Hottest Pepper on Girlfriend’s Thong” — that have earned him a level of popularity typically associated with Kardashians and BuzzFeed food clips.But to hear Mr. Hamilton tell it, Facebook has failed him.“It’s a complete mess,” he said. “No one trusts Facebook.”Unlike the lawmakers who will grill Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, in congressional testimony this week, Facebook influencers generally aren’t bothered by data privacy issues or Russian propaganda campaigns. Their concerns are closer to home.They say that the company’s recent decision to emphasize stories shared by friends and family as well as trusted news outlets — part of the company’s response to an epidemic of sensationalized clickbait and false news, and an attempt to foster what Mr. Zuckerberg has called “meaningful social interaction” — has hidden them from view. They argue that Facebook owes much of its growth to the kinds of entertainment they offer, and that users will spend less time on the social network if it’s not shown to them.“Facebook has got to start treating influencers with more respect,” said Roozy Lee, a social media promoter who manages a network of celebrity and influencer Facebook pages with more than 200 million combined followers. “These people need to make a living.”AdvertisementChief among influencers’ complaints: Even though Facebook has made it easy for them to reach enormous audiences, it has been slow to deliver tools that would let them share in the advertising revenue their posts generate. Facebook has also cracked down on certain types of link-sharing deals that many influencers have used to earn money on the side.AdvertisementFidji Simo, a vice president of product at Facebook, said the creator community is “incredibly important” to the company. “We’ve been listening closely to them to better understand what more we can do to help them achieve their goals and develop their presence on Facebook,” she said.Until recently, Facebook influencers mostly kept their complaints to themselves out of fear of angering the company. But as Facebook flails in the public eye over its data and privacy issues, some power users are seizing on a moment of vulnerability to push for change.Facebook appears to be listening. In recent weeks, the company has invited groups of influencers to meetings at its headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. Topics discussed at the meetings included improving reach for creators, branded content policies and better lines of communication with company leadership, according to a person with knowledge of the meetings, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the talks were confidential.Arguments about monetization, as the practice of letting creators share directly in advertising proceeds is called, are as old as the system itself. YouTube, which opened a revenue-sharing program more than a decade ago, has long been accused by angry creators of demonetizing videos for arbitrary and inscrutable reasons.Those complaints gave rise to violence last week, when Nasim Najafi Aghdam, a YouTube creator who had been angered by the platform’s revenue-sharing policies, shot and injured three employees at YouTube’s headquarters in San Bruno, Calif., and then killed herself.Instagram, the Facebook-owned photo and video app, has long hosted a thriving community of influencers. But Facebook itself, which was seen by some creators as old and uncool, has had a harder time attracting them. It has been trying to steal attention from YouTube in recent years by courting popular creators, and promising them access to the platform’s gargantuan user base. In 2016, Mr. Zuckerberg proclaimed a “new golden age of video,” and the company spent millions of dollars enticing media organizations and celebrities to create videos on Facebook.In 2015, the social network began testing a revenue-sharing program with a limited group of creators, and last November, it rolled out Facebook Creator, a special app designed for professional users. Recently, the social network announced that it was testing some additional tools for creators, including a way for users to purchase monthly subscriptions to their favorite creators’ pages.AdvertisementBut some of these features are still not widely available, and many influencers say that Facebook’s charm campaign amounts to too little, too late.“It feels like they’ve pulled the biggest bait-and-switch of all time,” said Dan Shaba, a co-founder of The Pun Guys, a Facebook page with 1.2 million followers. “They’ve been promising monetization from the moment we got in.”Mr. Hamilton, he of the hot-pepper thong video, said, “I did 1.8 billion views last year. I made no money from Facebook. Not even a dollar.”Many of the influencers I spoke with recognized that Facebook had given them large audiences in the first place, and that it was the company’s right to change its policies at will. Several also acknowledged that some of their videos represented the kind of cheap entertainment that Facebook has consciously chosen to de-emphasize, as it tries to prioritize high-quality and local news. (In January, Mr. Zuckerberg said that the company had “made changes to show fewer viral videos to make sure people’s time is well spent.”)Still, the influencers said, the company owes its most popular creators something. And they warned that by making it harder for users to see viral videos, Facebook may be jeopardizing its own business, which relies on users spending lots of time on the platform.“I understand where they’re coming from,” said Mr. Shaba. “Facebook was turning into a viral media dumpster, and they wanted to eliminate that. Still, I’d still prefer that over seeing a million wedding pictures.”Rick Lax, a magician whose videos garner more than a billion views per month, said that while he largely agreed with Mr. Zuckerberg’s position, he disagreed with the idea that viral videos couldn’t be worthwhile.“A good video can be the catalyst for a meaningful connection,” Mr. Lax said. “Think of a good Facebook video like a Mother’s Day card. It doesn’t stop someone from sharing her feelings with her mom — it gives her a jumping-off point.”AdvertisementWhile waiting for Facebook to invite them into a revenue-sharing program, some influencers struck deals with viral publishers such as Diply and LittleThings, which paid the creators to share links on their pages. Those publishers paid top influencers around $500 per link, often with multiple links being posted per day, according to a person who reached such deals.In January, Facebook threw a wrench into that media economy by changing its branded content policy to prohibit creators from accepting money for such link-sharing deals, and re-engineering its News Feed algorithms. Traffic to many viral publishers plummeted overnight. LittleThings, a female-focused digital publisher that had amassed more than 12 million Facebook followers, announced that it was shutting down and blamed Facebook’s News Feed changes for cratering its organic traffic.“People are saying that their feeds are getting stale, and they’re missing the diversity of content they felt they had selected,” Gretchen Tibbits, the president of LittleThings, told me. “People carefully curated their feeds, and Facebook took that away.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Simo, the Facebook executive, said in a statement that “our branded content policies prohibit Pages and Profiles from accepting payment to share content they did not have a hand in creating, since the spirit behind branded content is to have a collaboration between brands and creators to produce content.”In Facebook’s defense, it’s hard to feel entirely sympathetic for the people who built huge followings with videos like “Sweater Pill Hacks” and “Tinder Girl Gets High Off Fake Weed,” only to have them pushed out of sight. Facebook is attempting to clean up its platform, and some creators did clutter the site with clickbait and spammy links. But all of this jockeying raises a larger question about how well Facebook truly knows its users, and how much it can steer their media preferences without veering into paternalism.Right now, the social network is working to improve what Mr. Zuckerberg has called the “long-term well-being” of its users. But what if what many Facebook users really want — as measured by their clicks and eyeballs — are prank videos, D.I.Y. hacks, and sensational headlines?Mr. Shaba, the co-founder of The Pun Guys, said that he had been trying to produce more high-quality content that would have a better chance of getting boosted by Facebook’s algorithms. But he said that he hadn’t yet cracked the code.“Our fans are messaging us being like, ‘You guys don’t post videos anymore,’” Mr. Shaba said. “We have. You just aren’t seeing them.”Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘No One Trusts Facebook,’ Its Viral Stars Complain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byFacebook just promised to offer its users around the world the same privacy controls required under a new European data protection law. What does that mean? And can the company deliver?By Natasha SingerNext month, a comprehensive new data protection law goes into effect in the European Union, placing greater requirements on how companies like Facebook and Google handle users’ personal information. It also strengthens individuals’ rights to control the collection and use of their data. Last week, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, said his company would offer its users all over the world the same privacy controls required under the European law. What would that look like for Facebook users? That is still a work in progress.  A Facebook spokeswoman said the company would provide more details about its plans in the coming weeks.In the meantime, here are some of the general requirements and rights under the new European law. Although some of the practical steps that companies must take are still being worked out, several European privacy and consumer advocates, who had pushed for the new law, offered their thoughts on what Facebook might need to do to extend the protections to its users worldwide.Minimizing Data CollectionThe European law, called the General Data Protection Regulation, requires companies to collect and store only the minimum amount of user data needed to provide a specific, stated service. That means a flashlight app should not be asking users for access to their photos or contacts.Anna Fielder, a senior policy adviser at Britain-based Privacy International, said she thought the new law would require the social network to change certain advertising and other settings to make privacy, and not sharing, the default. Currently, the company makes certain user profile details public by default. And the default advertising settings allow targeted ads based on a user’s relationship status, employer, job title, education and use of websites and apps.Facebook currently has controls that allow users to choose who can see their posts. There is also a “privacy checkup” feature where users can adjust their sharing settings.In a statement in response to questions, Rob Sherman, Facebook’s deputy chief privacy officer, said, “We need to do more to keep people informed and in control.” He noted that the company had recently introduced a new “privacy shortcuts” menu that centralized major privacy, security and ad settings. “These are just a few small steps and there’s more to come,” he said.Obtaining Users’ ConsentThe European law requires companies like Facebook and Google to use clear and plain language to explain how they will use their users’ personal details. The companies must also provide information about what other kinds of entities users’ data will be shared with. Digital platforms must also obtain consent from individuals for many uses of their data. When companies want to use individuals’ data for a new purpose, they must explain that new purpose and obtain users’ permission.  And companies must get special permission from users to collect and use sensitive details like health information, unless that data is clearly related to the purpose of the service, such as a diabetes management app.That means Facebook will probably need to rework its data policy and terms of service, said Finn Lützow-Holm Myrstad, director of digital policy at the Norwegian Consumer Council, a nonprofit group in Oslo. He added that he thought the law would also require Facebook to give users more “real choices, not take it or leave.” The current data policy requires people who sign up for the social network to allow Facebook to, among other things, track them on many other apps and websites.Mr. Sherman, Facebook’s deputy chief privacy officer, said that Facebook was updating its terms of service and data policy to ensure that it complied with the new European law. Those updates cover users worldwide, with legal variations in some places.Algorithmic Decision-MakingThe European law gives individuals the right not to be subject to completely automated decisions which significantly affect them. These decisions could include credit algorithms that use an individual’s data to decide whether a bank should grant him or her a loan. Privacy International said the clause on automated decisions could allow consumers to challenge Facebook practices like political advertising, which can be sent to users based on algorithms, because the ads are meant to sway users’ votes.Facebook currently has a section called “Your Ad Preferences” that allows users to opt out of seeing ads based on their relationship status, employer, education, interests, and use of websites and apps. Users can also hide ads related to three topics — alcohol, pets and parenting — or suggest a topic they would rather not see ads about. Accessing Data About YouThe European law gives people the right obtain a copy of the records that companies hold about them.Facebook already allows users to download a copy of their information — such as the messages they have sent on the service and the status updates they have posted.At the end of March, the company announced new tools to let its users see and delete information such as their friend requests and their Facebook searches.But if Facebook wants to offer European-level privacy protection to all, it would also need to provide its users with the data that Facebook itself collected or created about them, including any categories, descriptions or behavior scores Facebook assigned to them, European privacy experts said. And it should provide users who seek their own records with any data that Facebook has obtained from tracking them around the web as well as any data that Facebook obtained about them from third parties, like data brokers, they said.“You exercise your access rights and you have the right to know everything about you,” said Giovanni Buttarelli, the European data protection supervisor who oversees an independent European Union authority that advises on privacy-related laws and policies.Natasha Singer is a business reporter covering health technology, education technology and consumer privacy.@natashanytAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Kevin Roose, Cecilia Kang and Sheera FrenkelFor Facebook, Tuesday is being seen as a kind of dreaded final exam.That’s when Mark Zuckerberg, the company’s chief executive, will swap out his trademark gray T-shirts for a suit and tie, and embark on a two-day marathon of testimony on Capitol Hill. His goal? To apologize for Facebook’s missteps, reassure Congress that Facebook intends to stop foreign powers from using its service to meddle in American elections and detail the company’s plans to better protect its users’ privacy.In preparation for Mr. Zuckerberg’s testimony, his first such appearance, Facebook has spent the last couple of weeks trying to transform its public image from a defiant, secretive behemoth into a contrite paragon of openness, announcing a string of new privacy and anti-abuse measures and making company executives available for numerous interviews.It has also hired a team of experts, including a former special assistant to President George W. Bush, to put Mr. Zuckerberg, 33, a cerebral coder who is uncomfortable speaking in public, through a crash course in humility and charm. The plan is that when he sits down before the Senate Commerce and Judiciary committees on Tuesday, Mr. Zuckerberg will have concrete changes to talk about, and no questions he can’t handle.“For every major C.E.O., and now for Mark Zuckerberg, this is a rite of passage,” said Reed E. Hundt, a former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. “Facebook has become so important — not just to business but to society — it can’t avoid having to run the congressional gantlet.”Mr. Zuckerberg’s testimony will represent one of the biggest tests of his career, and a pivotal moment for the company’s future. Facebook’s data collection practices, the core of its ad-based business model, have come under broad scrutiny in recent weeks as the company has been forced to raise its estimates of how much user information was leaked and to admit that “most” of its more than two billion users may have had their public profile data scraped by outside harvesters. Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, has emerged as a prominent critic of Facebook’s approach to making money from user data, calling user privacy a “human right.”Ahead of Mr. Zuckerberg’s trip to Washington, Facebook has hired a team from the law firm WilmerHale as well as outside consultants to coach him on questions lawmakers may ask, and on how to pace his answers and react if interrupted, according to people close to the preparations, who would speak only anonymously because the sessions were private. Facebook has also set up mock hearings involving its communications team and outside advisers who role-play members of Congress. (Mr. Zuckerberg’s approachability and mannerisms were even lampooned by “Saturday Night Live” this weekend.)Internal staff has pushed Mr. Zuckerberg to answer lawmakers’ questions directly, and not to appear overly defensive. Their goal is to make Mr. Zuckerberg appear as humble, agreeable and as forthright as possible, the people close to the preparations said. Reginald J. Brown, a former special assistant to President George W. Bush, is leading the WilmerHale group. A spokesman for Facebook declined to comment.As questions about Facebook’s role in the 2016 election and its privacy issues mounted, Mr. Zuckerberg initially tried to avoid the limelight, dodging requests for public testimony by lawmakers in the United States and Europe. He instead sent lieutenants, including Sheryl K. Sandberg, the company’s chief operating officer, and Colin Stretch, Facebook’s general counsel, to answer tough questions from lawmakers and reporters.But last month, the latest Facebook scandal turned up the heat on Mr. Zuckerberg, when it was disclosed that Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm connected to President Trump’s 2016 campaign, improperly obtained the personal data of what Facebook now estimates to be up to 87 million of its users. The news made it nearly impossible for him to avoid a public appearance.Facebook is normally tight-lipped about its inner workings, but company officials have sharply shifted their tone in the past few weeks. On Wednesday, Mr. Zuckerberg held a rare conference call with reporters, in which he admitted that the company’s failure to anticipate how its tools could be misused was a “huge mistake.” And on Friday, Mr. Zuckerberg said in a statement that the company had started requiring advertisers to verify their identities and locations before running political ads on Facebook. He also said the company supported a bill in Congress that would require such disclosures.The company has also in recent weeks tightened its data sharing policies and rolled out a simplified system for its users to control their privacy and security settings.Mr. Zuckerberg is set to testify before the Senate Commerce and Judiciary committees on Tuesday and the House Energy and Commerce Committee on Wednesday. In these hearings, Democrats are expected to grill Mr. Zuckerberg about the privacy scandals, and how the social network is guarding against possible interference in this fall’s midterm elections. Republicans are expected to be more reticent about privacy regulations, and may use the hearings to raise suspicions of political bias on the social network.The risk for Mr. Zuckerberg is appearing evasive or further angering government officials, which could lead them to attack the company even more aggressively. The company’s stock has fallen about 15 percent in the three weeks since Cambridge Analytica’s misuse of data became public.Facebook’s damage control efforts, which are being overseen by a policy and communications team of more than 500 employees as well as a handful of outside crisis communications firms, are unprecedented in the company’s 14-year history.The company is used to dealing with criticism, dating back to its early days, when Mr. Zuckerberg was forced to calm users who were angry about the introduction of the news feed, a feature that is now central to Facebook’s design. But most of its scandals have been short-lived, with a few days of backlash followed by a quick return to normality.The 2016 election, and revelations that Russians used the platform to spread misinformation, have proved to be more intractable problems. In the fall, when Mr. Stretch testified before a Senate subcommittee about why Facebook had failed to stop Russian interference, his remarks were not warmly received.The Cambridge Analytica scandal seems to have unlocked even larger worries about the influence of social media, the power of Silicon Valley and the cavalier approach many tech companies have taken toward user privacy. While the vast majority of users and advertisers have not abandoned Facebook, Mr. Zuckerberg has acknowledged that the company’s reputation has taken a hit.“So far, they’ve failed at every state of this, and at every level of the organization,” said Ari Ratner, a former Barack Obama administration official who now runs Inside Revolution, a strategic communications firm. “They have the potential to reset with Zuckerberg’s appearance before Congress.”In addition to mollifying lawmakers and investors, Mr. Zuckerberg needs to impress another important audience during next week’s hearings: Facebook’s rank-and-file employees, who have begun to question the company’s leadership as the latest crisis has spiraled.This past week, internal tension began to simmer after a 2016 internal memo from Andrew Bosworth, a high-ranking Facebook executive, was published by BuzzFeed News. The appearance of the memo, a strident defense of Facebook’s growth-at-all-costs strategy, left some employees fearful of future leaks. Others argued that Facebook should use the episode to reflect on its responsibilities to protect user privacy.As the scrutiny of Facebook’s core product has risen, some unhappy engineers have tried to transfer to the company’s Instagram and WhatsApp divisions. On Wednesday, Westin Lohne, a product designer at Facebook, said on Twitter that he had left his job at the company, citing his ethical concerns with its direction.“Morally, it was extremely difficult to continue working there,” Mr. Lohne wrote.OpinionJonathan ZittrainOpinionTim WuAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Is it possible to read Nook books on a Kindle? Is there an e-reader that handles books from multiple e-bookstores?A. The Barnes & Noble Nook e-books and Amazon’s Kindle e-books use different formats, but dedicated users have shown it is possible to convert and read Nook books on an Amazon device. How you do it depends on the hardware you have — and can take some technical fiddling to copy over Nook books to a Kindle e-reader or Fire tablet.Slinging e-books between two brands of e-readers is generally unsupported by all companies. It can also involve breaking the built-in copyright protections — so read all the fine print to fully understand what is allowed.One approach is sideloading the Barnes & Noble Nook app (or even the Google Play store) for Android onto an Amazon Kindle Fire tablet, which allows you to download and read your Nook books within their own app. You can find various book-moving tutorials for e-readers and Fire tablets online with a quick search.If you do not want to put a lot of effort into corralling all your digital books on one tablet, you can go another route. If you have an Android, iOS or Windows 10 tablet at your disposal, you can install the Nook, Kindle, Kobo and other e-book mobile apps there to unify your collection on one device. If you are looking to replace an old Nook e-reader with something more versatile, an inexpensive Android-based tablet stocked with e-book apps can serve as an all-purpose portable library for all your e-books.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy TIFFANY HSU and JACK NICASAPRIL 5, 2018
The laid-back companies of Silicon Valley are known for corporate headquarters that resemble universities, where employees mingle with tourists taking selfies and collaborations take shape out on the quad.At the Google campus in Mountain View, Calif., employees say the co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin stroll between meetings without an obvious security detail, and locals make off with the free bicycles for employees.But those generous green spaces and relaxed atmospheres come with a trade-off: They’re difficult to secure.Many Google employees love the headquarters’ open nature but some worry about it, according to one current and one former Google employee who declined to be named because of a company policy barring workers from speaking to the news media. There is often no barrier between employees and the public, they said. People — most likely other employees — sometimes slip into buildings behind workers with badges, they said, and neither had ever seen an armed guard on campus. Google declined to comment.AdvertisementThe shooting this week at the headquarters of YouTube, a Google-owned company about 25 miles north in San Bruno, has highlighted the security risks of Silicon Valley’s relatively open corporate campuses — particularly as tech companies’ expanding influence angers more people online.AdvertisementBut the risk is not confined to the tech sector. Many companies across the country are similarly exposed, reflecting an open-door policy that for generations has pervaded corporate America, where safety training has long focused on fire drills, earthquake-sheltering procedures and accident cleanup.Some of that trust has eroded over the years. After the World Trade Center attacks in 2001, companies fearing terrorist bombings and biochemical attacks taught employees how to handle suspicious packages. But a sharp increase in mass shootings over the past two decades has made companies increasingly nervous about gun violence from disgruntled workers and customers.Last year, an employee fatally shot three people at the United Parcel Service complex in San Francisco. In 2016, an employee fatally shot three colleagues and injured 14 more at a lawn care equipment factory in Kansas. In 2012, a man shot seven people and himself at a Minneapolis sign company hours after he was fired.“I just don’t know how we got here,” said James D. Smith, president of the American Society of Safety Engineers. “We would never be thinking 10, 15 years ago that this would be an issue.”On Tuesday, Nasim Najafi Aghdam, a YouTube user upset about the company’s policies, shot three people at the company’s headquarters before killing herself, police said.Ms. Aghdam shot the people in an enclosed courtyard where employees dined. YouTube said she had entered the courtyard through a parking garage. The gate between the parking garage and the courtyard was unlocked, according to Zach Vorhies, an engineer at YouTube. A former YouTube employee who used to handle threats from disgruntled video creators, but was not allowed to speak about it publicly, said his team repeatedly warned YouTube security about the risk of the parking garage and unlocked gate, but it was never fixed.YouTube said in a statement on Wednesday that Ms. Aghdam never entered the building itself thanks to other security protections. The company said it was “revisiting this incident in detail” and would be increasing security at all of its offices around the world.AdvertisementThe F.B.I. identified 160 so-called active-shooter incidents in the United States between 2000 and 2013, which left 486 people dead and 557 wounded. Nearly 46 percent of the attacks took place in commercial locations. Dozens of other attacks have occurred since 2013.
            An F.B.I. study found that nearly half of 160 active-shooting incidents over more than a decade occurred in business settings.        APRIL 5, 2018
Workplace shootings have fueled a cottage industry of security consultants who show employees how to manage panic, when to run or hide, and how to fight as a last resort. Lesson plans identify which filing cabinets or pieces of furniture offer the best protection, and which office tools can become improvised weapons. A full day of training can cost companies thousands of dollars.Companies are sending their employees to self-defense classes and their security personnel to gun ranges to test active-shooter threats in virtual reality. Architects are designing offices with designated safe rooms. Insurance providers are offering lower premiums for corporate clients with stronger security.“If you can’t protect the work force, you’re putting your entire operation at risk,” said Arnette Heintze, a former Secret Service agent who runs the security consulting firm Hillard Heintze, which posted record revenue in the most recent quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At Apple’s new campus in Cupertino, Calif., visitors are required to enter through a single, guarded entrance. The headquarters have a large courtyard, but reaching it requires someone to pass through the building.One former Facebook employee who worked on the company’s security protocols, who declined to be named because of Facebook’s prohibition on discussing internal company matters, said the company received dozens of threats a week.In recent years, Facebook has increased security at the entrances to its headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif., but its parking lots and surrounding areas remain accessible. “The safety of our employees is paramount, and we work hard every day to maintain a safe and secure environment for our community,” Jamil Walker, a Facebook spokesman, said in an email.Facebook could soon find security trickier. It has proposed expanding into a nearby neighborhood, with housing and public space for local residents alongside its offices.Some security experts instruct clients to shift their parking lots farther away from the main facility, giving more time for potential attackers to have second thoughts and for guards to act on a threat. Consultants recommend that executive offices remain unlabeled to make them less of a target.AdvertisementCompanies of all kinds have stepped up security. General Mills said it made physical changes to its building in Minneapolis to better prepare for an active shooter situation, but did not provide specifics. Wendy’s said it had installed upgraded security cameras throughout its headquarters in Dublin, Ohio; set up advanced access control systems that can lock down different parts of the facility; and upgraded its phone systems with emergency messaging capabilities.Hallmark and Hershey said they show employees a training video from the Center for Personal Protection and Safety that covers active shooter protocol. Some companies use a softer term — “hostile intruder” — to describe the training, while others add customized introductions to the footage.Employees are being asked to download internal apps loaded with safety plans, maps and emergency alerts. Some are told that their bonuses will be withheld if they do not attend mandatory drills.And preventive tactics are gaining traction. Employers are hiring social media trackers and data analysts to search for warning signs in employee behavior. Accenture said it has a behavioral threat assessment team made up of human resources representatives, lawyers, on-call psychologists and others.But security remains a matter of balance.“You don’t want a security program so restrictive that it hinders the company from doing the business it’s in,” Mr. Heintze said.And vulnerabilities remain common, security consultants said. So-called penetration tests frequently show how easily an outsider can slip into an office through the employee smoking area, past an unmonitored camera, into a door held open by a polite employee, or through a metal detector being overseen by an underpaid and overworked security contractor.Employees looking for convenience tend to prop open automatically locking doors. Some will pass a badge over a turnstile to a friend who forgot his or hers.One corporate client described its facility to John M. White, the chief executive of the Protection Management security consulting firm, as being fully secure. Within three hours, Mr. White found that he could waltz through most of the building’s doors without being screened and that some were so old they would not lock.Another customer spent several hundred thousand dollars installing security cameras, only to find that their views were obstructed. Mr. White said he has spoken to employees who, in a theoretical attack, said they would be unwilling to break a window to escape out of fear of being fired later.Advertisement“You can’t just throw a million dollars at security and say that now the problem’s gone,” he said. “In some ways, it can be a facade — you could have the most secure facility in the world, and there will still be some risks you’re going to have to accept and manage.”Follow Tiffany Hsu and Jack Nicas on Twitter: @tiffkhsu and @jacknicas.Sheera Frenkel contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Reconsidering Office Safety In Shooter Era.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Cade MetzSAN FRANCISCO — Google has been using artificial intelligence to build other artificially intelligent systems for the last several months.Now the company plans to sell this kind of “automated machine learning” technology to other businesses across the globe. On Wednesday, Google introduced a cloud-computing service that it bills as a way to build a so-called computer vision system that suits your particular needs — even if you have little or no experience with the concepts that drive it.If you are a radiologist, for example, you can use CT scans to automatically train a computer algorithm that identifies signs of lung cancer. If you run a real estate website, you can build an algorithm that distinguishes between living rooms and kitchens, bathrooms and bedrooms.At least that is the pitch. “You don’t need a Ph.D. in machine learning,” said Diane Greene, who oversees Google’s cloud computing group. “But you can still build a highly accurate machine learning model.”Like many of the world’s largest internet companies in recent years, Google has begun relying on machine learning — computer algorithms that can learn tasks on their own by analyzing large amounts of data. These include systems that learn to recognize commands spoken into smartphones or translate one language into another. They also include algorithms that learn to build other machine learning systems.Google uses the technique while building systems that can recognize faces, products, landmarks and other objects in photos. In some cases, these algorithms are more accurate than something that is designed solely by engineers.The new service is part of a widespread effort to expand the power of modern A.I. to businesses that are largely unfamiliar with this rapidly evolving technology. Like Google, a New York start-up called Clarifai offers an online service that helps customers train computer vision algorithms.At the same time, several other start-ups, like Boston’s DataRobot and Silicon Valley’s H2O.ai, offer services designed to help businesses analyze the way products, customers, markets and employees behaved in the past and predict how they will perform in the future.“They aim to automate data science in general,” said Randy Olson, a data scientist at Life Epigenetics, a company in Portland, Ore.Tech giants like Google, Amazon and Microsoft have hired a large portion of the people who specialize in the machine learning techniques that are rapidly accelerating the progress of A.I. — a community of only 10,000 researchers worldwide, according to one estimate. That means most businesses don’t have the talent needed to explore the latest machine learning.The question is whether these new services will work as advertised and how rapidly they will evolve in the years to come.Google, Amazon, Microsoft and others already offer cloud-computing services that let businesses add existing machine learning algorithms to their own products. A company can take a Microsoft computer vision algorithm, for example, and slip it into a new smartphone app.But with its new service, Google goes a step further, providing an automated way for businesses to build new algorithms. Businesses can upload their own images, provide a list of objects pictured in these images and train their own computer vision systems, tackling tasks that aren’t necessarily handled by existing technology, according to Google.Initially, Google will open this service only to a small group of businesses. A Google product manager, Rajen Sheth, said the company would work with these customers to determine the price.Risto Miikkulainen, a professor of computer science at the University of Texas at Austin who has long explored the kind of technology that underpins Google’s new service, agreed that it had the potential to help other businesses build their own A.I.“It is really powerful technology,” said Mr. Miikkulainen, who is also vice president of research at Sentient Technologies.But sometimes, there is no substitute for good old human labor. With Google’s new service, humans must label the data before the system can learn from it. Google can provide the human labelers, as do companies like CrowdFlower.And even when an online service successfully automates a task, it’s not necessarily worth using.James Bradley and his London company, NMT Vision, once used Clarifai to train and operate algorithms to identify websites that are selling products that infringe on copyrights. But he and his company now handle this on their own, mainly because the cost is lower.Services like DataRobot and H20.ai may bill themselves as automated data scientists, but here, too, automation has its limits. “These services are only as good as their parts,” said Patrick Dougherty, a data scientist with the Seattle-based firm Slalom Consulting. “And humans still supply some of the parts.”Google says that once images are labeled, its new service operates without human involvement. In a matter of minutes, it can retrain an existing algorithm using the customer’s images. Given more time, it can build a model from scratch, specifically for the problem at hand.If you are a zoologist who wants an algorithm that identifies jaguars and giraffes, said Fei-Fei Li, chief scientist inside the Google cloud group, all you have to do is supply the right images. “You upload jaguars and giraffes,” she said. “And you are done.”All that remains is determining how well it works.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.Advertisement
Tech We’re Using By                     
THE NEW YORK TIMES

JAN. 17, 2018
How do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Alexandra Alter, who covers the books industry for The Times, discussed the tech she’s using.Given that you write about the books industry, how do you prefer to read books? On a Kindle or iPad or some other device, or printed books? I came a little late to e-books, but I became a convert in 2010 when my older daughter was born. I needed a way to read books with one hand (and in a dark room), so I got a Kindle. The Kindle and ice cream sandwiches — also easily managed with one hand — are what got me through the brutal early weeks with a newborn, when you basically can’t put them down. Now I’m on my fifth Kindle.I still love print books and find it to be a much more relaxing and immersive experience, but when I’m reading books for work — honestly, the bulk of my reading — the Kindle is incredibly convenient. I have all my books on a single device that I always have with me. I read advance copies of books that way: Publishers send me digital copies through NetGalley or Edelweiss, sites where book industry professionals and critics can get digital copies of books before they’re published.AdvertisementI like that e-books are searchable, which is helpful for fact-checking, and the device stores all my notes and highlights, so I can quickly look stuff up when I’m writing. And I can read with one hand on a crowded train. One of my mild phobias is being trapped somewhere, on a plane or a stalled train or in a line, with nothing to read, and I also have the Kindle reader app on my iPhone, so I always have my entire library with me.AdvertisementHow is technology affecting the publishing industry?About a decade ago, when Amazon introduced its first e-reader, publishers panicked that digital books would take over the industry, the way digital transformed the music industry. And for a while, that fear seemed totally justified. At one point, the growth trajectory for e-books was more than 1,200 percent. Bookstores suffered, and print sales lagged. E-books also made self-publishing easier, which threatened traditional publishers.But in just the last couple of years, there has been a surprising reversal. Print is holding steady — even increasing — and e-book sales have slipped.One possible reason is that e-book prices have gone up, so in some cases they’re more expensive than a paperback edition. Another possibility is digital fatigue. People spend so much time in front of screens that when they read they want to be offline. Another theory is that some e-book readers have switched to audiobooks, which are easy to play on your smartphone while you’re multitasking. And audiobooks have become the fastest-growing format in the industry.Social media has also had an enormous impact on publishing, as it has on all corners of the media industry. It has definitely become a new way for readers to connect with authors and discover books, but it has probably also cut into the time that people spend reading. (A depressing  article in Quartz estimated that if people spent the same amount of time reading that they did on social media, they could read 200 books a year easily.)Many new authors are skipping traditional publishers and use tech tools to go straight to self-publishing their own e-books or print books. What will be the fate of traditional publishers in the next few years?Self-publishing has been one of the most fascinating corners of the industry to me. There have been a handful of massively successful self-published authors who have started their own publishing companies, and they’ve started to publish other “self-published” authors. But publishers have survived so far through consolidation, and we’ll probably see more of that.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What will be the fate of physical bookstores? And what do you think about Amazon’s bookstores?Indie bookstores have made a surprising comeback in recent years (a trend that might be connected to the resurgence of print books). A lot of independent stores have been so successful that they’ve expanded into mini-chains.The future of Barnes & Noble looks uncertain, and the company has suffered setbacks after a few disastrous strategies. It made a huge and, in retrospect, unwise investment in digital hardware and its Nook device, and then tried to become more of a general-interest gift and toy and books store, which probably alienated some of its core customers. Lately, it has tried smaller concept stores, with cafes with food and wine and beer. There was some snickering online after its new chief executive announced that its latest strategy was to focus on selling … books. Snickering aside, I think it’s the smartest thing the company can do. In many parts of the country, Barnes & Noble is the only place people can buy books, and it’s still a beloved brand.AdvertisementAmazon’s entry into the physical retail space has been fascinating. I’m not sure how successful the experiment has been. When I visited the Amazon bookstore at New York’s Columbus Circle, it definitely felt like a device store that also sold books. The store even looks like a 3-D version of the website, with book covers facing out and curated sections that reflect what’s popular with Amazon’s customers. But they’re expanding rapidly across the country, so something must be working.I’ll be curious to see how Indigo Books, the Canadian chain, will do here next year when it expands into the United States. Maybe it will shake up the model.Outside your job, what tech product are you currently obsessed with?I am, my family would confirm, not great with gadgets. It would be fair to say that I’m actively bad with them. I’m wary of some of the new home assistants like Amazon’s Echo and Google Home, not necessarily because I’m paranoid about my conversations being recorded — Amazon and Google already know everything about me — but because my kids would likely be yelling at the devices all the time, and the Taylor Swift and Ariana Grande songs would play in an endless loop.I have become a podcast junkie. I found The Daily to be habit forming. My other go-tos are Planet Money (disclosure: my husband is a reporter there), The New York Times Book Review podcast (where I sometimes appear), Longform, the New Yorker Radio Hour and some of the shows from Gimlet Media, like StartUp and Reply All. (Heavyweight, Jonathan Goldstein’s show, is hilarious and engrossing.)What tech is popular with your family?The one app that’s popular with the whole family is this Japanese game Neko Atsume: Kitty Collector. You buy virtual presents for these cartoon cats, which come and go as they please, and the cats leave you fish. You can’t really control the cats or win in any way. Just like with real cats, I suppose.Follow Alexandra Alter on Twitter: @xanalter.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Kindle Is Convenient, but Print Is Immersive.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CADE METZJAN. 4, 2018
PALO ALTO, Calif. — Before the car can drive without a human, one must first get behind the wheel.As the driver at this company accelerates, stops and turns on local streets, sensors on the car record what he sees and track how he responds. Then a team of engineers builds software that can learn how to behave from that data.The software is installed in the car, and it can drive on its own. In the end, the car mimics choices made by the human driver.This is how things work at Aurora Innovation, a start-up founded by three veterans of autonomous vehicle research, including Chris Urmson, who previously led the self-driving car project at Google.JAN. 3, 2018
The company’s methods are part of a change sweeping across the world of self-driving cars: a kind of so-called machine learning technology that promises a chance for little companies like Aurora to compete with the giants of both the tech and automotive industries. With it, researchers can build and improve autonomous vehicles at a far more rapid pace — one of the reasons Aurora believes it can close the gap on companies that have been working on self-driving technology for years.AdvertisementOn Thursday, the year-old start-up said that it had agreed to supply self-driving technology to the Volkswagen Group and Hyundai, two of the world’s largest car companies. Johann Jungwirth, the chief digital officer at the Volkswagen Group, which owns Audi, Porsche and six other major automotive brands including the flagship VW brand, said the company has been working with Aurora for several months, with an eye toward developing both autonomous cars and driverless taxi services.AdvertisementIn 2010, when Mr. Urmson and his colleagues at Google launched the autonomous vehicle movement, writing the computer code to guide their vehicles was a painstaking, line-by-line effort. But in recent years, a type of computer algorithm called a deep neural network has come in from the edges of academia to reinvent the way many technologies are built, including autonomous vehicles.These algorithms can learn tasks on their own by analyzing vast amounts of data. “It used to be that a real smart Ph.D. sat in a cube for six months, and they would hand-code a detector” that spotted objects on the road, Mr. Urmson said during a recent interview at Aurora’s offices. “Now, you gather the right kind of data and feed it to an algorithm, and a day later, you have something that works as well as that six months of work from the Ph.D.”The Google self-driving car project first used the technique to detect pedestrians. Since then, it has applied the same method to many other parts of the car, including systems that predict what will happen on the road and plan a route forward. Now, the industry as a whole is moving in the same direction.But this shift raises questions. It is still unclear how regulators and lawyers — not to mention the general public — will view these methods. Because neural networks learn from such large amounts of data, relying on hours or even days of calculations, they operate in ways that their human designers cannot necessarily anticipate or understand. There is no means of determining exactly why a machine reaches a particular decision.“This is a big transition,” said Noah Goodall, who explores regulatory and legal issues surrounding autonomous cars at the Virginia Transportation Research Council, an arm of the State Department of Transportation. “If you start using neural networks to control how a car moves and then it crashes, how do you explain why it crashed and why it won’t happen again?”The seeds for this work were planted in 2012. Working with two other researchers at the University of Toronto, a graduate student named Alex Krizhevsky built a neural network that could recognize photos of everyday objects like flowers, dogs and cars. By analyzing thousands of flower photos, it could learn to recognize a flower in a matter of days. And it performed better than any system coded by hand.Soon, Mr. Krizhevsky and his collaborators moved to Google, and over the next few years, Google and its internet rivals broke new ground in artificial intelligence, using these concepts to identify objects in photos and to recognize commands spoken into smartphones, translate between languages and respond to internet search queries.Over the holiday break at the end of 2013, another Google researcher, Anelia Angelova, asked for Mr. Krizhevsky’s help on the Google car project. Neither of them officially worked on the project. They were part of a separate A.I. lab called Google Brain. But they saw an opportunity.AdvertisementRather than trying to define for a computer what a pedestrian looked like, they created an algorithm that could allow a computer to learn what a pedestrian looked like. By analyzing thousands of street photos, their system could begin to identify the visual patterns that define a pedestrian, like the curve of a head or the bend of a leg. The method was so effective that Google began applying the technique to other parts of the project, including prediction and planning.“It was a big turning point,” said Dmitri Dolgov, who was part of Google’s original self-driving car team and is now chief technology officer at Waymo, the new company that oversees the project. “2013 was pretty magical.”Mr. Urmson described this shift in much the same way. He believes the continued progress of these and other machine learning methods will be essential to building cars that can match and even exceed the behavior of human drivers.Mirroring the work at Waymo, Aurora is building algorithms that can recognize objects on the road and anticipate and react to what other vehicles and pedestrians will do next. As Mr. Urmson explained, the software can learn what happens when a driver turns the vehicle in a particular direction at a particular speed on a particular type of road.Learning from human drivers in this way is an evolution of an old idea. In the early 1990s, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University built a car that learned relatively simple behavior. Last year, a team of researchers at Nvidia, the computer chip maker, published a paper showing how modern hardware can extend the idea to more complex behavior. But many researchers question whether carmakers can completely understand why neural networks make particular decisions and rule out unexpected behavior.“For cars or flying aircraft, there is a lot of concern over neural networks doing crazy things,” said Mykel Kochenderfer, a robotics professor who oversees the Intelligent Systems Laboratory at Stanford University.Some researchers, for instance, have shown that neural networks trained to identify objects can be fooled into seeing things that aren’t there — though many, including Mr. Kochenderfer, are working to develop ways of identifying and preventing unexpected behavior.Like Waymo, Toyota and others, Aurora says that its approach is more controlled than it might seem. The company layers cars with backup systems, so that if one system fails, another can offer a safety net. And rather than driving the car using a single neural network that learns all behavior from one vast pool of data — the method demonstrated by Nvidia — they break the task into smaller pieces.AdvertisementOne system detects traffic lights, for example. Another predicts what will happen next on the road in a particular kind of situation. A third chooses a response. And so on. The company can train and test and retrain each piece.“How do you get confidence that something works?” asked Drew Bagnell, a machine learning specialist who helped found Aurora after leaving the self-driving car program at Uber. “You test it.”Mr. Goodall, the Virginia Department of Transportation researcher, said car designers must reassure both regulators and the public that these methods are reliable.“The onus is on them,” he said.An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of a researcher at the Virginia Department of Transportation. He is Noah Goodall, not Goodhall.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetzA version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: As Machines Learn, Self-Driving Technology Advances.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Raymond ZhongBEIJING — A Chinese start-up that appears to have mastered the art of keeping people glued to their smartphones also has a knack for something else: drawing the ire of China’s censors.The country’s top media regulator on Tuesday ordered the company, Bytedance, to shut down its app for sharing jokes and silly videos. Vulgar content on the Neihan Duanzi app had “caused strong dislike among internet users,” a brief notice from the State Administration of Radio and Television said. The company was told to clean up its other platforms, too.The shutdown was only the latest blow for Bytedance, one of the world’s most successful technology start-ups. Just a day earlier, its flagship app, a popular news aggregator called Jinri Toutiao, was pulled from app stores for unspecified reasons.And last week, Huoshan, the company’s platform for sharing slice-of-life video clips, vanished from app stores after China’s official television broadcaster rapped it for glorifying underage pregnancy.In a statement posted Wednesday morning, Zhang Yiming, Bytedance’s founder and chief executive, said he had spent the previous, sleepless night in deep reflection, gnawed by “a guilty conscience.”“Content had appeared that did not accord with core socialist values and was not a good guide for public opinion,” Mr. Zhang wrote. “Over the past few years, we put more effort and resources toward expanding the business, and did not take enough measures to supervise our platform.”He added that Bytedance would expand its team for monitoring content to 10,000 people from 6,000 currently.The company’s travails show how the government in Beijing has broadened its restrictions on what people see and say on the internet. Regulators are increasingly suppressing content that they deem pornographic or in poor taste, and not merely material that touches on politically sensitive topics such as regime change or personal freedoms.The authorities are also scrambling to keep up as a new wave of Chinese apps, many of them built around short, spontaneously recorded video clips or live streams, helps people communicate and express themselves in new and hard-to-supervise ways.Bytedance — which investors valued at more than $30 billion recently, putting it more in the financial league of Airbnb or SpaceX than of Buzzfeed or Vice — has assembled a confederation of these buzzy new apps. And it has made no secret of its desire to dominate phone screens across the rest of the world, too.The company says it uses artificial intelligence technology to figure out what users like, then makes sure they are fed more and more of it. Read a few articles on the trade spat between the United States and China, and soon your Toutiao feed will be populated with news on international relations. Watch a bunch of stand-up comedy shows, and before long the app will suggest new comics who might appeal.Bytedance has spent top dollar hiring engineers and software experts to fine-tune its recommendation technology.“It’s like having a chef in your house who knows what kind of food you like,” said Xu Qinglu, a 22-year-old student and Toutiao user in Beijing.“I think the app is not harmful,” she added. “The people who use it should be responsible for their own behavior.”At an event in Beijing last month, Mr. Zhang said he hoped that more than half of the company’s users would come from outside China within the next three years. At the moment, he said, one in 10 of its users was overseas.First, though, the company needs to continue thriving in China. Bytedance’s detractors say that salty, unwholesome material — the sort that has the Chinese government on edge these days — is exactly what the company’s apps have specialized in, and is a major reason for its popularity.“Will a cleaned-up Toutiao still have an edge?” said Neil Arora, an American investor who previously worked in venture capital in Beijing.“Toutiao’s strong team, refined algorithms and locked-in users may help it adapt,” said Mr. Arora, who is not a Bytedance shareholder. “However, the bigger danger is that all news apps may lose out, with users pulling away from sanitized news feeds for entertainment elsewhere.”Hans Tung of GGV Capital, a venture firm that operates in both China and the United States and is a Bytedance shareholder, said he was confident the company would continue to add more types of material — not just the lowbrow kind — to its platforms. “The Toutiao we see today is not the Toutiao it will be five years from now,” he said.“It’s better to go through this rodeo a few times,” Mr. Tung said of the latest rebuke from regulators. This way, he said, the company will be motivated to move more quickly in courting users who want higher-minded stuff.Toutiao aside, three other popular news apps — including one run by Tencent, the giant Chinese conglomerate — were also taken down from stores this week.Another fast-growing video app, Kuaishou, was removed last week alongside Huoshan, and also for featuring videos made by teenage mothers. In response, Kuaishou’s parent company said it would increase the size of its content-monitoring team to 5,000 from 2,000.A posting from Kuaishou on one hiring website last week says the company is looking for people with bachelor’s degrees or higher. Candidates with “good political awareness” and “strong political sensitivity and discernment” are preferred. Being a member of the Communist Party or Communist Youth League is also a plus, the listing says.Duanzi, Bytedance’s now-shuttered humor app, trafficked in dirty jokes, goofy comedy sketches and well-worn but persistent gender stereotypes. One post that appeared on the app before it was closed down declared that the way to know that a man won’t cheat on his wife is to place a beautiful woman before him — but the way to test a woman’s fidelity is to try seducing her with a lot of money.Another post, unprintable in a family newspaper, was a ribald joke involving a seller of fried dough sticks, his wife and an irate customer.Even Bytedance’s news app, Toutiao, featured plenty of edgy material that kept users coming back, sometimes reluctantly, for more. Xiao Lin, a 29-year-old programmer in Beijing, called the app “spiritual opium.”“On a typical night, I would keep clicking on news items the app recommended to me while telling myself, ‘After this, I will sleep,’ ” Mr. Xiao said. “But I ended up reading more and more, for hours. I couldn’t stop.”He deleted the app in January.Karoline Kan contributed research.Follow Raymond Zhong on Twitter: @zhonggg.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 5, 2018
Q. I’ve been backing up my computer to two different external hard drives — one made by Seagate and the other by Western Digital. The backup drives are now six years old. I know hard drives fail after a while, so when should I replace these drives with new ones?A. The life span of hard disk drives, both internal and external, can be difficult to predict. The mechanical state of the drive’s motor, the number of hours the drive has been in use and its environmental conditions are just a few factors that could alter its condition. Manufacturer warranties on the hardware — often two or three years for consumer-focused products — are no guarantee of the drive’s life expectancy, either.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While it may not be possible to predict exactly when an external drive will fail, closely monitoring the device for grinding noises or other erratic behavior (like unusual slowness) can offer clues to its health. Many manufacturers, including Seagate and Western Digital, offer utility and diagnostic programs in the support areas of their sites. You can use these programs to periodically test the health and file systems of your drives.Backing up the computer is vital if you have your digital life stored there in documents, photos, videos and other files. If you are getting concerned about the age of your backup drives, swapping them out for new hardware might provide peace of mind. Wirecutter, a product review and recommendation site owned by The New York Times, has done extensive testing on external desktop hard drives and currently favors a 4-terabyte Seagate Backup Plus Desktop model.Mixing in cloud-based backup along with alternating external drives also adds a layer of data protection. Depending on your system, you might be able to back up your photos and files to services like Apple’s iCloud, Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive or another third-party file-sharing service.Dedicated online backup services are another option to supplement your data security. Backblaze, in addition to being Wirecutter’s pick for best online backup service, has been running an independent study on hard drive reliability since 2013. The Hard Drive Stats survey can get a bit technical, but it does provide a snapshot of drive failure rates over a period of several years — if you want to see one attempt to collect information about the life of the average hard drive.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NICK WINGFIELDAPRIL 4, 2018
SEATTLE — Five times in the last week, President Trump has pointed his Twitter arrows at Amazon over what he insists is a bad deal for the United States Postal Service.Mr. Trump wrote on Tuesday that the agreement, which sets what Amazon pays the Postal Service for many orders, costs American taxpayers billions of dollars. “I am right about Amazon costing the United States Post Office massive amounts of money for being their Delivery Boy,” he wrote.The details about the deal are not public — they are considered commercially sensitive information — but some of the available evidence suggests the opposite: that Amazon has been a boon to the Postal Service.The Postal Service has experienced a steady decline in the amount of mail it ships as more of its customers turn away from postcards and letters in favor of email, texting and other forms of digital communication. The total pieces of mail it shipped last year was 149 billion, down from 212 billion a decade earlier.AdvertisementYet there is a bright spot — its business of package shipping, including Amazon orders, which grew to 5.7 billion packages last year from 3.3 billion in 2008. Several years ago, the Postal Service added Sunday delivery for Amazon packages.The agency reported a net loss of $2.7 billion on $69.6 billion in revenue during its last fiscal year, which ended Sept. 30, and faces huge retirement benefit obligations. Without Amazon’s business, the financial picture at the Postal Service would most likely be bleaker, many analysts say.“It is one thing to demand better financial performance from the U.S.P.S., but something very different, in our view, to equate the U.S.P.S. financial struggles with the rise of Amazon,” Colin Sebastian, an analyst at Baird, a stock research firm, wrote in a research report on Tuesday. “If nothing else, the U.S.P.S. was already generating billions of dollars in operating losses well before Amazon became a large customer.”Of course, Amazon very much depends on the Postal Service to take their packages the last mile to their destination. By one estimate, about 40 percent of Amazon’s orders are delivered by the agency, with the rest handled by U.P.S., FedEx and a hodgepodge of other carriers.Companies that do a lot of shipping, like Amazon, often negotiate deals with the Postal Service to pay less than an ordinary person would to send goods. It is essentially a discount for buying in bulk.AdvertisementThat is where the president seems to be focused, and partly why Amazon’s stock has fallen sharply in the last week. Its shares are down more than 20 points — nearly 1.5 percent — since March 28.But the Postal Service says all such deals it makes are profitable — and must be by law.An independent body, the Postal Regulatory Commission, oversees the rates that the Postal Service charges for its products. By law, the agreements it cuts with corporate customers like Amazon must cover their “attributable costs” that directly result from their use of the postal network.Amazon helps lower those costs by organizing the packages it takes to the Post Office by destination ZIP code in over 35 sorting centers around the country, leaving less work that must be done by postal workers. The company relies on the Postal Service strictly for last-mile delivery to customers, short trips that further limit the cost of delivering each package.But in one of his tweet attacks, Mr. Trump seemed to dispute whether Amazon was covering the Postal Service’s costs, saying that “it is reported that the U.S. Post Office will lose $1.50 on average for each package it delivers for Amazon.”
            While we are on the subject, it is reported that the U.S. Post Office will lose $1.50 on average for each package it delivers for Amazon. That amounts to Billions of Dollars. The Failing N.Y. Times reports that “the size of the company’s lobbying staff has ballooned,” and that...        Mr. Trump’s figure appears to have come from an opinion piece published last year in The Wall Street Journal and written by an investor whose firm held shares in FedEx. The piece argued that the Postal Service was undercharging for the agency’s fixed costs, like its post offices and trucks, when calculating its package contracts. The investor said that the minimum amount that the agency allocates to package delivery and similar products — 5.5 percent of the agency’s total fixed costs — is far too low.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The piece relied on a research report from last April by Citigroup, which said that if those costs were fairly accounted for, it would cost $1.46 more to ship an average package through the Postal Service. Joseph Corbett, the chief financial officer of the Postal Service, said previously that it provided an “inaccurate and unfair account” of its package business.While the Postal Service is subject to Freedom of Information Act requests, there is an exemption in the federal law that allows it to avoid releasing particulars of its deals with private businesses like Amazon, said Kevin Kosar, vice president of policy at the R Street Institute, a nonprofit conservative-leaning think tank, who has studied the Postal Service.AdvertisementAmazon’s silence about the details of its contract haven’t helped clarify matters. Spokesmen for both the Postal Service and Amazon declined to comment for this article.A spokesman for the White House, Raj Shah, didn’t respond to a request for comment.Mr. Kosar said he considered it “wildly unlikely” that Mr. Trump has reviewed the Postal Service’s contract with Amazon and that the president is “kind of talking through his hat.” Still, he said the Citigroup analysis of the accounting of the Postal Service’s deals with companies like Amazon shouldn’t be dismissed.There are four commissioners on the Postal Regulatory Commission, none of whom was nominated by Mr. Trump, with one vacancy. The nominations require Senate confirmation.Mr. Kosar said he expected rates to rise. He said the commission had indicated in regulatory filings — before the flurry of tweets by Mr. Trump — that it would consider increases in shipping prices.“It’s just a question of magnitude,” he said.Ron Nixon contributed reporting from Washington, D.C.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Chides A Package Deal, But Is He Right?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI, THOMAS ERDBRINK and MATTHEW HAAGAPRIL 4, 2018
Nasim Najafi Aghdam, the woman who the police say attacked the YouTube headquarters on Tuesday before killing herself, created and posted videos that show her to be a passionate animal rights activist and vegan. But they also reveal her anger toward the video internet giant.SAN BRUNO, Calif. — In Iran, she was known as Green Nasim, a social media star with followings on YouTube, on Instagram and elsewhere.In the United States, she cast a very different profile, a proponent of vegan diets, animal rights and home exercise who had increasingly become agitated by one of the tech companies that helped give her a platform.On Tuesday afternoon, Nasim Najafi Aghdam sneaked into YouTube’s headquarters in San Bruno, Calif., and opened fire, shooting three people before taking her own life. The police said Ms. Aghdam’s anger over what she believed to be unfair treatment by YouTube had set her on a 500-mile drive from her home near San Diego to YouTube’s offices on the northern edge of Silicon Valley.“People like me are not good for big business, like for animal business, medicine business and for many other businesses. That’s why they are discriminating and censoring us,” she said in a video posted online last year criticizing YouTube. “This is what they are doing to vegan activists and many other people who try to promote healthy, humane and smart living.”AdvertisementInvestigators on Wednesday were still retracing Ms. Aghdam’s steps. About 11 hours before the shooting, she was found sleeping in her car by the police in Mountain View., Calif., about 30 miles from San Bruno and home to YouTube’s parent company, Google. After checking records on her license, they discovered that her family had reported her missing several days earlier.AdvertisementMs. Aghdam told the Mountain View officers that she had been having issues with her family, and that she had come to Northern California to find a job. She didn’t appear to the police to be a danger, to herself or others, so they soon let her go.Ms. Aghdam was in her late 30s. In several of her videos, she said she was born in Iran, in the city of Urmia, where most people also speak Turkish, as she does in some of her videos. Ms. Aghdam had YouTube pages in Persian, Turkish and English. She explained that she and her family were members of the Baha’i faith, which faces persecution in Iran, a country with a Muslim majority.Several of her colorful — and sometimes bizarre — videos had gone viral in Iran. Her website, which said it was quoting Western news outlets, identified her as “the first Persian female vegan bodybuilder.”“Now the media will be faced with a new type of Iranian female which does not fit within any of their usual categorizations,” a Twitter user named Katayoon said Wednesday.
            خيلى قشنگ مى‌شه. الان رسانه‌ها با یه نوع جدیدی از زن ایرانی روبرو‌ می‌شن که تو هيچ كدوم از دسته بنديهاشون از زن خاورميانه جا نمی‌شه : وِگَن، مخالف با اسلحه، طرفدار حقوق حيوانات، هفت‌تیرکش، سینه بادکنکی و غيره#نسیم_اقدم#YouTube shooter        “This was shocking and saddening,” one Iranian, Bahare, wrote on Twitter of Ms. Aghdam. “We laughed so much but now it turns out all those videos were so serious for herself.”
            شوکه کننده ست و ناراحت کننده ست از ین جهت که ما انقدر خندیدیم و اون انقدر ویدیوهاش برای خودش جدی بودن. نکنه زیباترین دختر سال 2016 هم جدی میگه اینا رو ؟؟؟ #نسیم_اقدم Ms. Aghdam became especially famous for one clip in which she wears a revealing purple dress, showing cleavage, and begins to slowly strip off her clothes to reveal a pair of fake plastic breasts. “Don’t trust your eyes,” read a caption in English on the clip.After letting her go, the Mountain View police spoke to Ms. Aghdam’s father and brother and let them know she was safe. The police said there was no mention in that conversation of her issues with YouTube.AdvertisementBut in a second call, her father said YouTube had recently done something that “had caused her to become upset” and that may have been why she was in the area. Still, the police said, the father did not seem concerned and “simply wanted to let us know that may have been a reason for her to move up here.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Later Tuesday morning, Ms. Aghdam went to a nearby shooting range. Then, just after noon, she parked at a business near YouTube’s offices. She walked into one of YouTube’s parking garages, and then emerged into an outdoor courtyard where employees were eating lunch.Emergency officials arrived at YouTube’s offices two minutes after the police received 911 calls about shots being fired. When they arrived, they found Ms. Aghdam dead. A 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun, registered in her name, was found at the scene.By Tuesday night, YouTube, as well as Instagram and Facebook, had taken down her pages and videos.Ed Barberini, the chief of the San Bruno Police Department, said: “At this point in the investigation, it is believed that the suspect was upset at the policies and practices of YouTube. This appears to be the motive for this incident.”On Wednesday, two of the people who were shot were released from Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital. A third was still in the hospital, but his condition was upgraded to serious from critical.Ms. Aghdam dedicated several of her videos to promoting animal rights, vegan diets and healthy living. In one video, she sat in front of a screen with a rabbit, as she tried to explain in Persian the differences between vegetarianism and veganism. In another, she presented her viewers with a papaya, extolling the benefits of the fruit. “Eat it when it turns yellow,” she said, sporting dark sunglasses and a zebra-striped cowboy hat.But Ms. Aghdam’s activism was accompanied by anger at YouTube and frustration with living in the United States.Her personal website and videos posted to YouTube and elsewhere were filled with complaints about YouTube. “When searching for my website in google, at top of link they add ‘an error occurred’ but there is no error!” a website under Ms. Aghdam’s name, NasimeSabz.com, said in February 2016. “They add it to keep you from my visiting my site.”Life in the United States had not been good, she said in one video from March 30. “There they kill you by ax,” she said of Iran. “Here they kill you with cotton,” referring to an Iranian expression meaning dying by something that you do not know is dangerous.AdvertisementIn another video, she responded to viewers who had begun to wonder if she was mentally ill: “I don’t have any special mental or physical disease, but I live on a planet filled with disease, disorders, perversions and injustices.”The American dream appeared to be tarnished for her after she began to face hurdles in the United States.“If you are superficial, you will think it is heaven here, that you can go naked outside and have sex left and right like other animals without any morality,” she said in one video in Persian. “But if you enter the system, you will see that it is worse than Iran,” she said. “Those who want to inform people against the system and big companies get censored.”On her channel on Telegram, a social media network extremely popular in Iran, her last post is a childhood picture of herself standing among flowers. It has no caption.Daisuke Wakabayashi reported from San Bruno, Thomas Erdbrink from Tehran, and Matthew Haag from New York. Nellie Bowles and Jack Nicas contributed reporting from San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2018, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: Online, a Trail of Popular Lifestyle Videos, Followed by Anger at YouTube.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nellie Bowles and Jack NicasSAN FRANCISCO — The authorities believe a woman who shot three people at YouTube’s headquarters before killing herself on Tuesday was angered by the social media outlet’s policies.While the police did not specifically say what those policies were, they likely had to do with a concept called “demonetization.” In response to pressure from advertisers and consumers, YouTube has been pulling ads from thousands of videos that it decides do not meet its standards for content. That has sparked an outcry from many of the people who post videos to the service.One of those creators was Nasim Najafi Aghdam, the woman the police said had shot YouTube employees in San Bruno, Calif. She frequently posted videos to several YouTube channels and had become increasingly angry over the money she was making from them.“My Revenue For 300,000 Views Is $0.10?????” Ms. Aghdam wrote on her website, while calling YouTube “a dictatorship.” “There is no equal growth opportunity on YOUTUBE or any other video sharing site, your channel will grow if they want to!!!!!”Ms. Aghdam’s complaints echoed what a wide range of YouTube posters — from self-described animal rights activists like her to right-wing political provocateurs — have increasingly been protesting over the last year.When YouTube was started in 2005, it took a hands-off approach to much of what was posted, so long as the content was not overly violent or sexual. In 2012, YouTube began allowing almost any video to carry ads, enabling advertisers to reach consumers where they were on the internet. It also gave video creators, from commercial giants to one person recording on a laptop computer, a way to make money off their work.But a series of news reports revealed big brands’ ads running alongside extremist, racist and other hateful videos, leading some companies to pull their money from the site. YouTube has since clamped down and pulled ads from thousands of controversial videos.YouTube declined to comment on Wednesday.Video creators take a share of the money from ads running before or alongside their videos. But YouTube has been raising the bar on qualifications for running ads.Last April, the company said it would set a requirement for 10,000 cumulative lifetime views before allowing videos to gain ads. In January, the company raised that requirement to 4,000 hours of watch time in the past year and 1,000 subscribers.When YouTube pulls ads, it tells creators which videos violated the standards, though it doesn’t elaborate very much on what they did wrong. It’s unclear whether YouTube pulled ads from Ms. Aghdam’s videos.The anger around demonetization has been growing for more than a year.One of YouTube’s most popular personalities, Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg, who goes by PewDiePie, posted videos with Nazi imagery, including a sign that called for “Death to Jews.” As a punishment, YouTube demonetized some of his videos in early 2017, though it didn’t outrightly bar him. Mr. Kjellberg, now calling himself “family-friendly,” still posts regularly and has a booming business on the platform.In December, YouTube’s chief executive, Susan Wojcicki, said the company would hire 10,000 people to enforce company policies regarding videos.Around that time, another YouTube star, Logan Paul, posted video of himself nervously laughing at the dead body of a man who appeared to have committed suicide. The company again had to apologize and announced that it was removing Mr. Paul from its top-tier payment system and canceling plans to pay him to make a show.Ms. Wojcicki said in January that YouTube was looking to hire an even bigger team of monitors to look more closely at the platform’s content and decide what should belong.A wide spectrum of YouTube creators, from the conspiracy-minded to the most popular stars, have been vocal about what they see as censorship on YouTube.After a popular video blogger who posts about news, Philip DeFranco, saw his videos demonetized, he called demonetization “censorship with a different name.” On Twitter, he wrote: “Producer just got off the phone with Youtube and it wasn’t a mistake. Feels a little bit like getting stabbed in the back after 10 years.”Luke Rudkowski, an independent journalist who describes conspiracy theories to his more than 500,000 subscribers on YouTube, has repeatedly complained about the site pulling ads from his videos.In August, he posted a video criticizing news that YouTube would start removing more terrorist content. “We are seeing the purging, the cleaning of this major online institution to be more favorable towards corporations and governments,” Mr. Rudkowski said. “Now that’s why I think we’re finally reaching the end time of this beautiful and amazing platform.”A few days later, he said YouTube had pulled ads from 660 of his videos, “basically eviscerating my main source of revenue for this news organization.”Mr. Rudkowski has continued to upload videos to his YouTube channel, WeAreChange, every few days. In a message on Wednesday, he distanced himself and other YouTube creators from Ms. Aghdam.“In my opinion she was failing and blaming Youtube for her problems,” he said. “I dont think its actually about being censored but more about a delusional woman who couldn’t accept failure.”On her own website, Ms. Aghdam frequently complained about YouTube’s policies, influence and employee politics. In particular she said her animal-rights activism made her a target for scrutiny. She included another video, called “I’m being censored. YouTube’s war against vegans,” made by the video blogger Emily Moran Barwick, who runs a site called Bite Size Vegan.Ms. Aghdam posted a video claiming that YouTube had set age restrictions, which would require many viewers to be over 18 years old, on a workout video even though videos from pop stars like Nicki Minaj were much more provocative. And she believed that YouTube’s parent company, Google, was targeting her.“When searching for my website in google, at top of link they add ‘an error occurred’ but there is no error!” she wrote on her site in February 2016. “They add it to keep you from my visiting my site.”Follow Nellie Bowles and Jack Nicas on Twitter: @NellieBowles and @jacknicas.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 4, 2018
Q. I installed ad-blocking software on my computer, but I still see advertisements on some pages, even though the site did not ask me to turn off the blocker. Why is this?A. Even when you have the software enabled, browser utilities like AdBlock or AdBlock Plus may still display less-intrusive advertisements from companies that have been approved by the independent Acceptable Ads Committee. The Acceptable Ads initiative was  started by AdBlock Plus, which makes money by allowing the ads through its filters.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The initiative attempts to balance the needs of web surfers who do not want to be pelted with aggressive online ads and the needs of websites that rely on advertising revenue to support their content. (Google recently began to filter intrusive ads in its Chrome browser in a similar manner.)“Acceptable” ads include those that lack animation and do not jam themselves into the middle of the reader’s experience on the site. Even if the ad-blocker program is set to allow nonintrusive ads by default, you can disable the feature in the program’s settings. However, if you use a site frequently and find it worthwhile, you may want to consider allowing its advertising through your filter by allowing acceptable ads or by adding the site to the ad-blocking program’s white list.To “white-list” a site basically means to make an exception for it in your ad-blocking program to allow advertising to appear. While advertising on some web pages can be distracting, excessive and sometimes even laden with malware, most sites run ads because they need the money to sustain themselves.Some sites have put in ad-blocker detection tools and will stop your browser from loading the page you want to see unless you white-list the site. Some sites ask you to white-list them in exchange for displaying a minimal amount of advertising. If you need to white-list the site you are trying to visit, click the ad-blocker icon in the browser’s tool bar and look for the option to pause or disable the current filtering. The program’s tool-bar menu might have a list of sites you have white-listed, along with controls for fine-tuning your ad filters.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI, MAGGIE ASTOR, MAYA SALAM and MATT STEVENSAPRIL 3, 2018
Four people were injured in an attack by a woman at the YouTube headquarters on Tuesday, the police in San Bruno, Calif., said.SAN BRUNO, Calif. — A woman opened fire with a handgun at YouTube’s headquarters in California on Tuesday afternoon, shooting three people — one of whom was critically injured — before killing herself, the authorities said.The San Bruno Police Department identified the attacker late Tuesday as Nasim Najafi Aghdam, who was in her late 30s. The motivation for the shootings was under investigation, the police said, although her social media postings included criticisms of YouTube.Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital received three patients: a man, 36, in critical condition; a woman, 32, in serious condition; and a woman, 27, in fair condition, a hospital spokesman, Brent Andrew, said at a news conference. A fourth person had injuries that weren’t from a gunshot, the police said.“At this time there is no evidence that the shooter knew the victims of this shooting or that individuals were specifically targeted,” the San Bruno Police Department said in a written statement.AdvertisementWord of the attack in San Bruno at YouTube, which is owned by Google and is one of the world’s largest social media companies, quickly spread online through employees’ social media feeds.AdvertisementVadim Lavrusik, a YouTube employee who formerly worked for The New York Times, tweeted just before 1 p.m. that there was an “active shooter at YouTube HQ” and that he had “heard shots and saw people running while at my desk.” He was barricaded in a room with co-workers, he said, but moments later tweeted that he had been safely evacuated.The last known address for Ms. Aghdam was in Menifee, a city in Southern California about halfway between Los Angeles and San Diego.Ms. Aghdam was active on various social media outlets, including YouTube, where she had a number of channels in Persian, Turkish and English. On YouTube, she published an eclectic set of videos, including music parodies and workouts, on topics like animal cruelty and vegan cooking.In February 2017, she recorded a video on Facebook criticizing YouTube for taking measures that decreased the number of views on her videos.She said that she had contacted YouTube, but that the site’s support staff told her that her workout videos contained inappropriate scenes and needed to be restricted from younger audiences.“This is what they are doing to vegan activists and many other people who try to promote healthy, humane and smart living — people like me are not good for big business, like for animal business, medicine business and for many other businesses. That’s why they are discriminating and censoring us,” she said in the video on Facebook.YouTube had pulled down all of her channels as of Tuesday night.A 2009 story by The San Diego Union-Tribune quoted a woman with the same name as Ms. Aghdam at an animal rights protest outside Camp Pendleton, the Marine Corps base in Southern California. Two dozen attended the protest organized by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals against the use of pigs in military trauma training.Advertisement“For me, animal rights equal human rights,” said Ms. Aghdam, then 29, who attended the protest carrying a plastic sword and wearing a wig and jeans painted with drops of blood.The shootings on Tuesday took place in a courtyard at YouTube’s offices, the police said. Those offices, like other Google facilities, maintain light security, with employees using badges to go through security gates or doors. Usually, the main lobby is attended by a receptionist. There are no visible metal detectors or armed guards.San Bruno is about nine miles south of San Francisco, with a population around 43,000. YouTube is the city’s biggest employer, and many workers commute here from San Francisco. Though YouTube is owned by Google, it operates in a separate office, about 20 miles from Google’s main campus in Mountain View, Calif.Outside the YouTube headquarters, armed police officers waded into a crowd of 200 or so employees who had evacuated to a nearby parking lot Tuesday afternoon. The police asked for employees who had witnessed something firsthand to come forward, and about two dozen, some visibly distraught, walked over to the officers.Many employees said they had initially thought the episode was a fire drill. Others said they had run when people started shouting that there was a shooter. Two hours after the attack, YouTube employees, including Susan Wojcicki, the chief executive, continued to stream slowly down the hill, away from the office.Footage broadcast by CNN showed people leaving the building in single file with their hands raised above their heads. Separate footage showed a large crowd lining up to be frisked, one by one, by the police.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Zach Vorhies, 37, a senior software engineer at YouTube, said in an interview that he had been sitting at his desk when the fire alarm went off. He grabbed his electric skateboard and headed for a back exit, he said. As he rode down a gravel hill, he heard someone shouting and saw a man lying motionless in one of the office’s outdoor dining areas.“He had a red spot on his stomach, and he was lying on his back, not moving,” Mr. Vorhies said. “I saw the blood soak through the shirt.”About 25 feet away from the victim, he said, a man was shouting, “Come at me!” Mr. Vorhies thought the man was the attacker, but he did not see a gun and said it was possible that the man had actually “been taunting the shooter.”AdvertisementA moment later, an armed police officer entered the patio area, and Mr. Vorhies quickly left, he said.The dining area can be reached from an adjacent parking structure without an employee badge, Mr. Vorhies said.By 2:15 p.m., President Trump had been briefed on the attack. He tweeted a short time later: “Was just briefed on the shooting at YouTube’s HQ in San Bruno, California. Our thoughts and prayers are with everybody involved. Thank you to our phenomenal Law Enforcement Officers and First Responders that are currently on the scene.”
            Was just briefed on the shooting at YouTube’s HQ in San Bruno, California. Our thoughts and prayers are with everybody involved. Thank you to our phenomenal Law Enforcement Officers and First Responders that are currently on the scene.        Cameron Rogers Polan, a spokeswoman for the San Francisco Division of the F.B.I., said in an email that the agency was in contact with the San Bruno police. The San Francisco division of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives tweeted that it, too, was responding to the shooting.Google said on Twitter that it was “coordinating with authorities.”“I know a lot of you are in shock right now,” Google’s chief executive, Sundar Pichai, said in a statement posted to Twitter. “Over the coming days, we will continue to provide support to help everyone in our Google family heal from this unimaginable tragedy.”Executives at other Silicon Valley companies took to Twitter to send their condolences to YouTube employees.“From everyone at Apple, we send our sympathy and support to the team at YouTube and Google, especially the victims and their families,” Apple’s chief executive, Timothy D. Cook, wrote.Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, wrote on Twitter: “I can’t imagine what our friends at YouTube are feeling and dealing with right now. We‘re here for you and your families and friends.”Others, including a trauma surgeon at the hospital where shooting victims were taken, expressed anger at continued gun violence.Advertisement“You’d think that after we’ve seen Las Vegas, Parkland, the Pulse nightclub shooting, that we would see an end to this, but we have not,” the surgeon, Dr. Andre Campbell, told reporters Tuesday afternoon.An earlier version of this article misquoted a comment made by Nasim Najafi Aghdam in one of her YouTube videos. She said, “This is what they are doing to vegan activists and many other people who try to promote healthy, humane and smart living,” not “what they are doing to weekend activists.”An earlier version of this article misspelled the name of the city in California where Ms. Aghdam’s last known address was. It is Menifee, not Menefee.Daisuke Wakabayashi reported from San Bruno, and Maggie Astor, Maya Salam and Matt Stevens from New York. Reporting was contributed by Cade Metz from San Bruno; Nellie Bowles, Jack Nicas and Sheera Frenkel from San Francisco; Daniel Victor, Keith Collins and Liam Stack from New York; and Austin Ramzy in Hong Kong.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2018, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Shooting at YouTube’s Offices Rattles Silicon Valley.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CECILIA KANG and SHEERA FRENKELAPRIL 4, 2018
WASHINGTON — Facebook on Wednesday said that the data of up to 87 million users may have been improperly shared with a political consulting firm connected to President Trump during the 2016 election — a figure far higher than the estimate of 50 million that had been widely cited since the leak was reported last month.Mark Zuckerberg, the company’s chief executive, also announced that Facebook would offer all of its users the same tools and controls required under European privacy rules. The European rules, which go into effect next month, give people more control over how companies use their digital data.Facebook had not previously disclosed how many accounts had been harvested by Cambridge Analytica, the firm connected to the Trump campaign. It has also been reluctant to disclose how it was used by Russian-backed actors to influence the 2016 presidential election.Among Facebook’s acknowledgments on Wednesday was the disclosure of a vulnerability in its search and account recovery functions that it said could have exposed “most” of its 2 billion users to having their public profile information harvested.AdvertisementThe new effort to appear more transparent about the data leaks — including a rare question-and-answer session with Mr. Zuckerberg and reporters — came just before Mr. Zuckerberg’s expected testimony next week on Capitol Hill, where he will most likely face criticism over how the company collects and shares the personal data of its users. Sheryl Sandberg, Mr. Zuckerberg’s top deputy, has several national television interviews scheduled for later this week.AdvertisementThe company said that on Monday it would start telling users whether their information may have been shared with Cambridge Analytica.Andy Stone, a spokesman for Facebook in Washington, said the 87 million figure was an estimate of the total number of users whose data could have been acquired by Cambridge Analytica. He said that the estimate was calculated by adding up all the friends of the people who had logged into the Facebook app from which Cambridge Analytica collected profile data.“We wanted to put out the maximum number of people who could have been affected,” Mr. Zuckerberg told reporters.It remains unclear exactly how many users had their personal information accessed by Cambridge Analytica. The firm said Wednesday that it had licensed data for no more than 30 million users of the social network.
         Revelations that consultants to the Trump campaign misused millions of Facebook users’ data set off an international furor. This is how The Times covered it.
      Facebook also released a lengthy document describing how it would protect personal data in the future. In that document, Facebook said its search and account recovery systems had been open to abuse by anyone who already had some information about an individual, such as a phone number or email address. The vulnerability extended to much of the platform’s user base before it was closed on Wednesday, Facebook said.The company also said it would limit the types of data that can be harvested by software used by outside businesses. The changes mean that users will have to give permission before an app can collect information beyond their names and addresses.The company also said it would no longer allow outsiders to use apps to gather information about the religious or political views of its users. And it will stop using third-party data from companies such as Experian and Acxiom to help supplement its own data for ad targeting.Advertisement“It’s clear now that we didn’t focus enough on preventing abuse,” Mr. Zuckerberg said. “We didn’t take a broad enough view of what our responsibility is. That was a huge mistake, and it was my mistake.”The Federal Trade Commission is investigating whether Facebook violated a 2011 agreement meant to protect users’ privacy. User data is crucial to the company’s business, because it is used to deliver advertising to users.Mr. Zuckerberg is scheduled to testify about the company’s handling of sensitive user data before the Senate’s Commerce and Judiciary committees on Tuesday and the House Energy and Commerce Committee on Wednesday.“This hearing will be an important opportunity to shed light on critical consumer data privacy issues,” said Representatives Greg Walden, Republican of Oregon, and Frank Pallone, Democrat of New Jersey, of the House committee.Senator Chuck Grassley, the Republican chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said, “With all of the data exchanged over Facebook and other platforms, users deserve to know how their information is shared and secured.”Facebook’s problems stretch back before the reports about Cambridge Analytica, to earlier investigations into how Russian actors infiltrated the platform by placing ads and posts to influence the 2016 election. Mr. Zuckerberg initially dismissed the idea of foreign interference on Facebook as a “crazy idea.”Since then, the company has been the focus of investigations by law enforcement and congressional committees that are delving into the Russian influence campaign. Facebook now acknowledges that its platform was used to sway voters.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All those troubles have prompted investors to flee the company, and its stock has fallen sharply in recent weeks.AdvertisementIn response, the company has put its executives front and center.Mr. Zuckerberg typically talks to groups of reporters only after the company releases its quarterly financial reports. But after not responding in public for several days following the Cambridge Analytica disclosure, he has given a series of interviews.And Ms. Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer and the second most recognizable face at the company, is set to be interviewed this week by Fox News, “PBS NewsHour,” NBC’s “Today” show and Bloomberg. Ms. Sandberg will be interviewed remotely from California.Facebook said its new openness was meant to show that it takes the intense criticism over its handling of user data seriously.In Washington, Facebook employees and public relations firms retained by the company have talked to regulators and congressional staff members about new privacy measures, including updates to policies that are intended to make them easier to understand.On Wednesday, Mr. Zuckerberg provided a preview of what he will tell Congress next week. He said Facebook was “an idealistic and optimistic company.”But he acknowledged that the company had committed serious errors by not ensuring that robust safeguards were in place for users.Asked if he should still be leading the company, he said, “Yes. Life is about learning from the mistakes and learning what you need to go forward.”Terrell McSweeny, a Democratic member of the Federal Trade Commission, said that Mr. Zuckerberg has a big task ahead of him in Washington.“I think it is important for Zuckerberg to clearly explain how Facebook plans to earn back consumer trust,” Ms. McSweeny said. “Consumers need reassurance that their data are not being misused.”An earlier version of this article attributed incorrectly an estimate that 50 million Facebook users’ personal information may have been improperly shared during the 2016 election. The estimate was based on documents and former Cambridge Analytica employees and associates. It did not come from Facebook.Matthew Rosenberg contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook Puts Profile Breach At 87 Million.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. When I write emails to colleagues and friends after typing the first several letters of the email address on my Mac using the Mail app, the program automatically fills in the balance of the address. I have 20 years of history of email, and often the address used is no longer the correct one. How do you get rid of old addresses?A. When some of the email addresses in the Mail program’s memory become obsolete, you can prune the outdated entries or update them on the spot. In the Mail app, go to the Window menu and choose Previous Recipients. The Previous Recipients box opens with a list of addresses you have used for earlier messages.To delete an old address, select it and click the Remove From List button in the bottom-left corner of the box. To select multiple names for removal at once, hold down the Mac’s Command key and click through the list.If you do not see the address you are looking for right away, enter it in the Search box in the upper-right corner of the Previous Recipients window. The entries in the window are grouped into columns showing the person’s name or email address or the last time you used the address; click the top of the appropriate column to sort the list on that criteria.Names in the first column that have address-card icons next to them are stored in your Mac’s Contacts list. You can change the information by double-clicking the name to open the Contacts entry. Click the Edit button in the lower-right corner to update the address and other details in the Contacts app. You can add addresses in your Previous Recipients list to your Contacts app by selecting the entry and click the Add to Contacts button in the lower-right corner of the window.Removing outdated addresses in other mail programs works in a similar fashion. Some programs, like Microsoft Outlook, let you delete entries directly from the open autocomplete list. In Gmail, you can tidy things up by deleting or editing your Google Contacts list.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy NATHANIEL POPPERAPRIL 2, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Federal authorities have arrested two founders of a virtual currency that raised $32 million from investors last year and won an endorsement from the boxer Floyd Mayweather.The co-founders of the Centra virtual currency, Sam Sharma and Robert Farkas, were arrested on Sunday, a day before the Securities and Exchange Commission released a complaint against the men and announced that it was halting the project.Centra raised $32 million last summer and fall in a so-called initial coin offering, a method of fund-raising in which companies sell custom virtual currencies. The Centra team said at the time that the Centra token would give investors access to a new virtual currency exchange and a virtual currency debit card that would operate on the Visa and Mastercard networks.The S.E.C. said in its complaint that the Centra team had never received approval from Visa and Mastercard and had misled investors on several other counts. The S.E.C. said that several of the executives listed on the Centra website were fictitious.AdvertisementMost of the claims in the S.E.C. complaint were detailed in an article in The New York Times about Centra in October.AdvertisementA co-director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, Stephanie Avakian, said in a statement that the Centra co-founders had “sold investors on the promise of new digital technologies by using a sophisticated marketing campaign to spin a web of lies about their supposed partnerships with legitimate businesses.”Lawyers for Mr. Sharma and Mr. Farkas did not respond to emails seeking comment Monday evening. The authorities did not charge a third man who had been listed as a Centra co-founder, Raymond Trapani.Initial coin offerings, or I.C.O.s, emerged suddenly last year to become one of the most popular ways for start-ups to raise money, with investors pouring more than $6 billion into such offerings. But I.C.O.s operate in a regulatory gray area, and that has drawn a swift blowback from authorities around the world.The S.E.C. is said to have sent subpoenas to dozens of I.C.O. projects, and has already sought to halt a handful of such projects.The Centra founders appear to have been the first people arrested because of a coin offering. In addition to the S.E.C. complaint, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York brought criminal charges against Mr. Sharma and Mr. Farkas — including conspiracy to commit securities fraud, securities fraud, conspiracy to commit wire fraud and wire fraud.Mr. Farkas had a flight reservation to leave the country on Sunday but was arrested before he could board the plane, according to the S.E.C. complaint.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The complaint alleges that the men “engaged in an illegal unregistered securities offering and, in connection with the offering, engaged in fraudulent conduct and made material misstatements and omissions designed to deceive investors in connection with the offer and sale of securities in the Centra I.C.O.”The chairman of the S.E.C., Jay Clayton, has said that most tokens offered through coin offerings should be categorized as securities and registered with regulators, which few have done.AdvertisementMr. Sharma announced that he was leaving Centra after the Times article was published last fall, but the company has continued its operations and said this week that it would release the “Centra Roadmap 3.0” at a conference in South Korea.After the arrests were announced on Monday, the price of Centra’s token on virtual currency exchanges crashed and the administrators of a Centra chat room on the Telegram messaging app expressed confusion.“The admins have no more info then you,” an administrator named Tomo wrote to the other users.Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopperA version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Founders of Centra, a $32 Million Virtual Currency Project, Are Arrested.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
APRIL 2, 2018
Q. How do I see what version of Google Chrome is on my computer?A. For both the Windows and the Mac versions of Google’s Chrome browser, open the program and click the three-dot More menu icon in the upper-right corner of the tool bar. On the More menu, select Help and then choose About Google Chrome. You then land on the About Chrome page, which displays the software’s version number in the middle of the window.Visiting this page also prompts the program to check for any new updates to itself. Chrome is typically set to keep itself updated automatically and downloads new versions of itself in the background as you use it. The updates — which can include security patches, new features and bug fixes — are installed when you quit the program and reopen it.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To see what version of Mozilla Firefox is running on a Windows PC, open the program, click the Help menu and choose About Firefox. On the Mac edition, click the Firefox menu in the upper-left corner of the screen and choose About Firefox; the steps for checking Apple’s Safari browser are similar, except you click on Safari in the menu bar and choose About Safari.For Microsoft’s Internet Explorer and Edge browsers, check the Options or the Settings menu. In Internet Explorer, click the gear-shaped icon in the upper-right side of the tool bar and select About Internet Explorer. For the Edge browser, select the three-dot more menu in the top-right corner of the browser window and scroll to the bottom of the menu that opens — where the Edge version is listed.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Checking Your Browser Version.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu Goel and Rachel AbramsSaks has been hacked — adding to the already formidable challenges faced by the luxury retailer.A well-known ring of cybercriminals has obtained more than five million credit and debit card numbers from customers of Saks Fifth Avenue and Lord & Taylor, according to a cybersecurity research firm that specializes in tracking stolen financial data. The data, the firm said, appears to have been stolen using software that was implanted into the cash register systems at the stores and that siphoned card numbers until last month.The Hudson’s Bay Company, the Canadian corporation that owns both retail chains, confirmed on Sunday that a breach had occurred.“We have become aware of a data security issue involving customer payment card data at certain Saks Fifth Avenue, Saks Off 5th and Lord & Taylor stores in North America,” the company said in a statement. “We have identified the issue, and have taken steps to contain it. Once we have more clarity around the facts, we will notify our customers quickly and will offer those impacted free identity protection services, including credit and web monitoring.”Hudson’s Bay said that its investigation was continuing but that its e-commerce platforms appeared to have been unaffected by the breach. The company declined to identify how many customer accounts or stores were affected.The theft is one of the largest known breaches of a retailer and shows just how difficult it is to secure credit-card transaction systems despite the lessons learned from other large data breaches, including the theft of 40 million card numbers from Target in 2013 and 56 million card numbers from Home Depot in 2014. Last year, Equifax, a credit reporting firm, disclosed that sensitive financial information on 145.5 million Americans had been exposed in a breach of the company’s systems.The research firm that identified the Saks breach, Gemini Advisory, said on Sunday that a group of Russian-speaking hackers known as Fin7 or JokerStash posted online on Wednesday that it had obtained a cache of five million stolen card numbers, which the thieves called BIGBADABOOM-2. The hackers, who have also hit other retail chains, offered 125,000 of the records for immediate sale.Fin7 did not disclose where the numbers had been obtained. But the researchers, working in conjunction with banks, analyzed a sample of the records and determined that the card numbers all seemed to have been used at Saks and Lord & Taylor stores, mostly in New York and New Jersey, from May 2017 to March 2018.Although it’s unclear exactly how the malware was installed in the stores’ checkout systems, Gemini said it was most likely through phishing emails sent to Hudson’s Bay employees. In a phishing attack, hackers send seemingly legitimate emails to a company’s employees that encourage them to click on a link or attached file that secretly installs software on their computers, giving the attackers a back door into the systems.The breach comes at a difficult time for Saks and Lord & Taylor, and retailers more generally.Online shopping has cut deeply into the traditional brick-and-mortar retail industry, and department stores have been particularly slow to adapt to the new ways that people shop.Chains that cater to a spectrum of income levels and affluence have seen their sales dwindle. The once-mighty Macy’s has closed stores and laid off thousands of employees. Neiman Marcus, a high-end brand, was at one point mulling a merger with Hudson’s Bay. And last year, Lord & Taylor, a jewel of luxury shopping in the Hudson’s Bay portfolio, sold its 676,000-square-foot flagship Manhattan location, the latest retail titan to acknowledge that much of its value now comes simply from the physical buildings where shoppers once flocked.As digital forces reshape the retail industry, Hudson’s Bay executives have watched the company’s stock plummet in recent years. Comparable store sales — one important measure of performance — dropped 2.6 percent in its department stores group in the most recent quarter.In October, Hudson’s Bay announced that its chief executive, Gerald L. Storch, would step down, a departure that shook up the top ranks just ahead of the crucial holiday shopping season. Helena Foulkes, a veteran of the pharmacy giant CVS Health Corporation, was appointed to the position in February.Hudson’s Bay said customers could get further information on dedicated pages on the websites of Saks Fifth Avenue, Saks Off 5th and Lord & Taylor.Follow Vindu Goel and Rachel Abrams on Twitter: @vindugoel and @RachelAbramsNY.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 30, 2018
Q. My office uses the business version of Gmail and Google Calendar. Can other people see my appointments on Google Calendar even if I haven’t sent a sharing invitation?A. Google’s G Suite is the paid version of its mail, calendar, office software and file-sharing applications, and is designed for businesses. The company’s designated administrator controls the default settings for users, so ask your corporate G Suite master about the specific calendar visibility used across your company.Google notes that it is “common practice” to use the “See all event details” setting as the default for corporate calendars. This means that other people can add your office calendar to their own list of calendars to manage and plan meetings, videoconferences and other collaborative events. Some offices allow people to see when co-workers have time blocked out on their calendars, but generically label the events as “busy” so that co-workers can still look for mutually open time slots for meetings.If you prefer to keep an appointment to yourself, you can set the event as Private. To do that, create or edit an event and, use the drop-down menu in the Visibility section of the event details screen to select Private instead of Public.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.You can also decide who can see your calendar by sharing it with certain people, which should override the company’s default sharing settings. If you would like to take this approach, click the arrow next to your calendar name on the main Google Calendar page, choose “Share this calendar” and then, in the “Share this calendar with others” menu, choose the settings you want to use.If this option is not available, you can share your calendar with other people by clicking on gear-shaped Settings icon in the upper-right corner of the screen and selecting Settings from the menu. On the left side of the screen under “Settings for my calendars,” choose your own calendar. Under the “Share with specific people” section in the middle of the screen, click the Add People button and enter the names and email addresses.As the software gatekeeper for the company, your G Suite administrator can still see the contents of your office calendar. If you have appointments you want to keep really private, consider listing them in another calendar app, perhaps on your phone or tablet, where you can link your office calendar but keep it separate from your personal schedule.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By SHEERA FRENKEL and NELLIE BOWLESMARCH 30, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Facebook employees were in an uproar on Friday over a leaked 2016 memo from a top executive defending the social network’s growth at any cost — even if it caused deaths from a terrorist attack that was organized on the platform.In the memo, Andrew Bosworth, a Facebook vice president, wrote, “Maybe someone dies in a terrorist attack coordinated on our tools. And still we connect people. The ugly truth is that we believe in connecting people so deeply that anything that allows us to connect more people more often is *de facto* good.”Mr. Bosworth and Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, have since disavowed the memo, which was published on Thursday by BuzzFeed News.But the fallout at the Silicon Valley company has been wide. According to two Facebook employees, workers have been calling on internal message boards for a hunt to find those who leak to the media. Some have questioned whether Facebook has been transparent enough with its users and with journalists, said the employees, who asked not to be identified for fear of retaliation. Many are also concerned over what might leak next and are deleting old comments or messages that might come across as controversial or newsworthy, they said.The brouhaha follows a period of intense scrutiny for Facebook and questions over what its responsibilities are to its more than 2.2 billion users. The company has been grappling this month with revelations that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, improperly harvested data from 50 million of the social network’s users. Mr. Zuckerberg has since been on an apology tour over data privacy and is expected to testify before lawmakers in Washington.AdvertisementFacebook did not respond to a request for comment over employees’ reaction to the leaked memo.In the aftermath, some Facebook executives have taken to Twitter for a public charm offensive, sending pithy phrases and emoticons to reporters who cover the company. Adam Mosseri, Facebook’s head of news feed, in recent days wrote unprompted to a BuzzFeed editor and to its chief executive reminiscing and telling a story about his mother. He also wrote to a reporter from the Verge tech site about the songs played at his wedding reception.AdvertisementIn some of his tweets, Mr. Mosseri also defended Facebook. When writers from Vox and BuzzFeed tweeted that they noticed that stories critical of Facebook were receiving surprisingly low levels of traffic on Facebook, Mr. Mosseri jumped in.“We 100% do not take any action on stories for being critical of us,” he tweeted.
            We 100% do not take any action on stories for being critical of us.        Mr. Bosworth, the author of the 2016 memo, also took to Twitter. Late Thursday, he said he did not agree with what he wrote in the memo “and I didn’t agree with it even when I wrote it.” He added that “the purpose of this post, like many others I have written internally, was to bring to the surface issues I felt deserved more discussion with the broader company.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After BuzzFeed published the memo, Mr. Bosworth deleted it from an internal message board where it had originally been posted. In a statement to BuzzFeed, Mr. Zuckerberg praised Mr. Bosworth as “a talented leader who says many provocative things” and said that he and most people at Facebook did not agree with the memo and that the company had realized that it could not just be about connecting people.Facebook employees said on Friday that discussions were raging across the company regarding the merits of the post. Some called for executives to aggressively pursue action against those leaking to the media, said two Facebook employees, as well as for the company to do more to screen for potential whistle-blowers during the hiring process.At least one former Facebook employee, Alec Muffett, wrote on Twitter that Mr. Bosworth’s memo was responsible for his decision to leave the company.“Between overwork and leadership direction evidenced thusly, I could never stay,” wrote Mr. Muffett, who formerly worked as a Facebook engineer.
            Backplot: my "goodbye" posting to Facebook was in significant part in response to this work by @boztank, and subsequently garnered considerable support from Facebook's under-represented Engineering community, who genuinely do care about user privacy: https://t.co/GaoHLYoh17 “There are some amazing engineers working at Facebook, folks who care deeply about user privacy, security, and how people will use the code that they write,” Mr. Muffett said later in a message. “Alas this episode may not help” to achieve more transparent internal product discussion, he said.Follow Sheera Frenkel and Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @sheeraf and @NellieBowles.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Memo on ‘Ugly Truth’  Angers Facebook Staff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 29, 2018
Q. Is there a way to record and save Skype video calls with family members on my computer?A. For most versions of its Skype software, Microsoft recommends using a third-party program to record your audio and video calls. The company’s site hosts a list of recording programs that work with Skype for Windows, Mac and Linux systems but notes, “Third-party applications have not been checked, verified, certified or otherwise approved or endorsed by Skype.” (Also, saving conversations with consenting members of your family is one thing, but keep in mind that laws about recording other people vary by state.)Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More than a dozen programs are listed, with a link to each one available. Apple’s built-in QuickTime Player software for the Mac can also record screen video. When trying to decide which app to use, check out the program’s list of features and reviews — and make sure the software that interests you records video as well as audio. Depending on your Windows settings, you may get a warning about installing software from outside the Windows App Store, so make sure the program you choose is from a trusted source.You may be asked to configure the recorder program’s settings when you first open it; this typically involves choosing a video format, file-storage location and other preferences. Once you have installed a recording program, start your Skype call and then click the record button on the recording app. After you complete the call, click the Stop button on the recorder and save the captured video file for later playback.Microsoft’s paid Skype for Business software within its Office 365 suite includes tools for recording and playing back audio and video meetings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NICOLE PERLROTHMARCH 28, 2018
Boeing said on Wednesday that it was hit by a cyberattack that some Boeing executives identified as the same WannaCry computer virus that struck thousands of computer systems in more than 70 countries around the world last year.In an internal memo, Mike VanderWel, chief engineer of Boeing Commercial Airplane production engineering, said the attack was “metastasizing” and he worried it could spread to Boeing’s production systems and airline software.“We are on a call with just about every VP in Boeing,” Mr. VanderWel wrote. The memo called for “All hands on deck.”WannaCry is a particularly vicious form of what is known as ransomware — malware that locks up victims’ computers and data with encryption, until attackers’ extortion demands are met, often in the form of the virtual currency Bitcoin. Even for victims who agree to pay, decryption is not always guaranteed. The City of Atlanta was hit with a different form of ransomware last week and was still reeling from the fallout on Wednesday.AdvertisementIn a statement Wednesday evening, Boeing played down the attack and said it was limited in scope and that it had not affected the company’s production lines.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A number of articles on a malware disruption are overstated and inaccurate,” Boeing’s statement said. “Our cybersecurity operations center detected a limited intrusion of malware that affected a small number of systems. Remediations were applied and this is not a production or delivery issue.”AdvertisementCharles Bickers, a Boeing spokesman, declined to elaborate or confirm whether the attack was indeed WannaCry, the computer virus United States officials officially blamed on North Korea last December.What made WannaCry so much more destructive, security experts discovered during last year’s outbreak, was that it employed an automated tool that was first developed at the National Security Agency and later dumped online in 2016 by mysterious hackers called the “Shadow Brokers.”That tool, which the N.S.A. code-named Eternal Blue, exploited a vulnerability in Microsoft Windows software that allowed attackers to spread their malware automatically through vulnerable machines. In other cases, ransomware attackers had to manually encrypt victim’s systems.By incorporating the N.S.A.’s tool into their ransomware last May, hackers ensured their attack would encrypt as many vulnerable machines as possible, causing maximum disruption. White House officials said North Korea was “directly responsible” for the attack.The WannaCry attacks paralyzed computers and business operations in more than 74 countries, forcing Britain’s public health system to turn patients away and freezing computers at government agencies in Russia and FedEx in the United States, in what was the largest known ransomware assault.Microsoft offered an emergency “patch” that effectively neutralized the vulnerability WannaCry’s attackers used to spread, but unpatched systems remain vulnerable.Follow Nicole Perlroth on Twitter: @nicoleperlrothWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 28, 2018
Q. After many years, I started using the Firefox browser again, and the start page for this new version is covered with links and icons. Can I change it?A. Mozilla, which released Firefox 1.0 in 2004, significantly overhauled the browser last year and named it Firefox Quantum. In addition to retooling the software to make it faster and use less of the computer’s memory than previous versions, the program got a bit of a visual redesign, including a new look for the New Tab page.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The first row of the New Tab page displays icons for the “Top Sites” you visit frequently or have used recently. If you have specific sites you would like to pin to the page or remove from view, you can customize the Top Sites collection. Just move the cursor over the top-right corner of an icon and click to get a menu of options.The Recommended by Pocket section of the New Tab page shows trending or currently relevant news stories collected by Pocket and based on your browsing history. (Pocket’s software lets users save online content for later consumption, and Mozilla owns the company.) The Highlights section at the bottom of the New Tab page displays sites you have recently browsed or bookmarked. To pin or remove these from the page, graze the cursor over the top-right corner of the item and click the three-dot icon to get to the options menu.You can remove entire sections from the New Tab page by clicking the menu arrow next to the titles. To set all of your preferences for the look of the New Tab page at once, click the gear-shaped icon in the top-right corner.If you do not want to see any of the bookmark icons and stories on the New Tab page when you start Firefox, you can choose a site to be your regular home page instead. To set a new start page, go to the site you wish to see each time Firefox opens. Next, drag the page’s tab at the top of the window and drop it on the house icon in the Firefox tool bar. Click Yes in the box to confirm your intention to set the open page as your new home page.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech FixBy Brian X. ChenYou may be reeling from revelations that the private Facebook data of millions unwittingly got in the hands of a voter-profiling firm with ties to President Trump. And you may be weighing the pros and cons of deleting your social media accounts altogether.But before you go there, ask yourself a simpler question: Why do you hoard so much data on social networks in the first place?For many of us, our timeline of posts has piled up since we signed up for Facebook and Twitter. While the social networks portray their products as time capsules of your fondest memories and conversations, the experience of poring through past posts is more like rummaging through a digital junk drawer of good, bad and ugly moments. And the hoarded data is just sitting out there for others to see, including potential employers who are doing background checks and any enemies who may be trying to dig up something against us.So why keep eternal timelines?I posed my question to Zizi Papacharissi, a professor of communication at the University of Illinois-Chicago who teaches courses on social media. She said many of us leave up our timeline of posts because Facebook and Twitter don’t make it simple to clean them up. There’s no button to set ablaze a large swath of content, like a year’s worth or even a month’s worth of posts. So we leave everything, including silly comments from our college years and rants we made when we were angry about politics or other matters.“If you say something online, it has a different kind of permanence,” Ms. Papacharissi cautioned. “It’s always there to haunt you.”So over the last two months, I decided to do something different by trying to erase that permanence. Specifically, I used web tools to eradicate the vast majority of my Facebook and Twitter posts. Those turned out to be impractical and tedious to use — though automated, the programs were flawed and missed many posts after several attempts. The chore took about five hours, spread out over weeks.While I walked away from the ashes of my digital self feeling less haunted, I confess my methods may not be worth the trouble, though there are other, more practical solutions. Yet cleaning up your timeline is an exercise I recommend in moderation if you care about your privacy.Here’s how I did it — and what I learned.Since Facebook and Twitter offer no simple method for doing a mass purging of timelines, you will likely have to rely on third-party tools. I picked two well-reviewed programs: TweetDelete for cleaning up my Twitter account and Social Book Post Manager for handling my Facebook account.TweetDelete was simple to put to work. It’s a web app you install by visiting the tool’s website, tweetdelete.net, and authorizing the application to connect with your Twitter account.From there, you can choose to delete tweets that are more than a week old. The app takes a few minutes to delete large batches of your tweets. One major caveat: Because of a technical limitation, TweetDelete can delete only the last 3,200 tweets on your account. So to clear out roughly 14,000 tweets that were more than a year old, I had to run the app four times. (I’ve had a lot to say on Twitter over the last decade, O.K.?)My Facebook timeline was tougher to manage. After skimming my last 14 years’ worth of Facebook posts, I concluded there was nothing worth keeping. So I opted to purge everything.I installed Social Book Post Manager, a free add-on for the Chrome web browser. This app was more rudimentary: It essentially scrolled through my timeline and clicked on the “delete” button for each of my posts for me.Social Book Post Manager lets you delete months’ or years’ worth of content — or everything, which I chose. The problem was, even after I used the app to scrub through my entire timeline six times, the tool missed about a dozen posts. There is a setting to adjust the speed at which the app deletes posts, and I had to choose the minimum speed to do a complete purge.The process was agonizing: I watched years of my youth play back in slow motion, including dated, satirical jokes and photos of myself wearing vintage clothing back when that was a fashion trend, before the tool deleted each post one at a time.After I finished scrubbing my Facebook timeline, I concluded that my delete-everything approach was probably not worth most people’s time. And even after all that time, my Facebook timeline was still decorated with posts that my friends had published about me — including photos from my 21st birthday (need I say more?) — because that content was not mine to delete.Gennie Gebhart, a researcher who follows privacy and surveillance issues for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a digital-rights nonprofit, found a simpler approach. She connected her Facebook and Twitter accounts with the app Timehop.To help people reminisce, Timehop every day surfaces photos and posts published from years past on Twitter and Facebook. Ms. Gebhart uses the tool to incrementally audit her timeline to see if there was something from the past she might not want lingering around.She said that she rarely found posts worth deleting, but that most people might enjoy this light exercise for peace of mind — and to protect their public reputations.Facebook representatives said that based on feedback, the company recognized that people had different needs for managing their timelines. So it offers a privacy setting for people to limit the visibility of their older timeline posts. Similar to Timehop, Facebook also occasionally surfaces old memories from people’s timelines to help them reminisce.Twitter did not respond to requests for comment.Beyond the technological difficulties of doing a social media purge, you may decide it’s not right for you. Ms. Papacharissi, the communication professor, said people formed sentimental attachments to their memories on social media, as they do with clothing and old photographs.“They present a timeline of who we were, of who we are now and who we would like to be,” she said. “It’s like this always-on story. It’s difficult to disconnect that.”Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes about solving tech-related problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What frustrates you about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Cecilia KangWASHINGTON — The head of Turner Broadcasting on Wednesday pushed back against one of the central arguments of the government’s case to block the AT&T and Time Warner merger, saying that his company’s channels would not be used as a weapon against rivals if the deal went through.The Justice Department has argued that Turner, which is owned by Time Warner, owns “must-have” channels like CNN and TNT that the merged company would use as leverage in negotiations with other cable and satellite TV operators. But John Martin, the chief executive of Turner, told a federal court that his channels were not absolutely vital for a cable or satellite business.“I believe we have must-have, as do other programmers,” Mr. Martin said. “Must-have is another way of saying we have popular programming.”Much of the Justice Department’s argument in the trial, which started last week, has centered on the importance of Turner’s exclusive sports rights, which include professional and college basketball games. Mr. Martin’s testimony had been one of the most anticipated moments of the trial.The Justice Department called on Mr. Martin as an adversarial witness in large part to present emails and memos he wrote that revealed how important Turner content is to Time Warner’s business, and how critical Turner is for cable and satellite operators.In one memo presented Wednesday, from 2016, Mr. Martin emphasized the importance of renewing rights to the N.C.A.A. college basketball championships, known as March Madness.“March Madness plays a critical role” for Turner, Eric Welsh, a lawyer for the Justice Department, read from the email.It’s “not just important but has a critical role,” he said to Mr. Martin.Mr. Martin, who joined Time Warner in 1993, was one of the first witnesses called by the Justice Department. He has been vocal critic of the government’s lawsuit to block the merger, calling the Justice Department “clueless” last month.Mr. Martin’s testimony revealed how the trial has placed company executives, who normally put a bold face on their businesses for investors, in a tricky position. AT&T and Time Warner played down their influence. Their rivals have described their weaknesses in full detail.Mr. Martin tried to walk a thin line of presenting Turner’s sports and entertainment networks as important but not too important.During cross-examination by AT&T, Mr. Martin disputed the government’s idea that the merger would give AT&T the incentive to use Turner Broadcasting as a negotiating weapon to extract higher fees from cable, satellite and online streaming providers.Cable channels, he said, need to be distributed to make money — and can’t do that if rival cable operators decide that the price is too high to carry a channel.“Distribution is the most important variable for success for any programmer,” Mr. Martin said. He said revenue for cable television networks come from two sources: subscription revenue and advertising. “Distribution affects both of those,” he said. “It’s simple math.”The trial, which started last week, has attracted huge public interest, with the courtroom packed with company and government officials, investors, reporters and industry analysts. On Tuesday, executives from AT&T and Time Warner were in attendance. John Stankey, an AT&T executive poised to lead Time Warner if the merger is approved, has attended every day.Judge Richard Leon of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia will decide the case. He has not indicated an inclination toward any arguments.On Wednesday, in one of his few comments so far in the trial, he expressed astonishment at the $1 billion Turner pays each year for rights to broadcast National Basketball Association games.“You said billion?” he said, eyebrows raised.The Justice Department has called all the witnesses so far, and the early testimony by AT&T’s rivals has supported the Justice Department’s claim that the huge media merger would unfairly harm their businesses that depend on offering Turner’s channels. AT&T owns a nationwide satellite TV operator.Warren Schlichting, the president of SlingTV, a streaming video service owned by Dish Network, another national satellite TV company, took the stand on Monday and Tuesday. He said Turner’s “hard-core” negotiating tactics in the past had led to blackouts of its channels and a loss of subscribers. Mr. Schlichting warned that things would get worse with a merger.“With the merger, all the incentives change, and we have one of our most important licensers teaming up with our biggest adversary,” Mr. Schlichting said. “I just don’t know what incentive Time Warner would have to get a deal done.”The government’s witnesses have faced tough questioning from Daniel Petrocelli, the lead litigator for AT&T and Time Warner. To show SlingTV’s history of contract disputes and willingness to lose customers, Mr. Petrocelli presented a long list of occasions when Dish allowed channels to go dark after contract negotiations failed. Mr. Petrocelli also pointed a several public statements by Dish’s chairman, Charlie Ergen, that appeared to diminish the importance of Turner channels to Dish.The trial has moved slowly and is expected to last more than six weeks, with testimony from AT&T’s Randall Stephenson and Time Warner’s chief, Jeff Bewkes. Among the most important witnesses may be Carl Shapiro, an antitrust economist for the Justice Department who is not expected in coming days. Mr. Shapiro has projected that the merger would lead to a 45-cent monthly price increases for cable and satellite customers.Mr. Petrocelli has previewed a plan to attack Mr. Shapiro’s analysis, which he has said is flawed and cherry-picks data.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe ShiftBy Kevin RooseI don’t need to tell you that something is wrong with social media.You’ve probably experienced it yourself. Maybe it’s the way you feel while scrolling through your Twitter feed — anxious, twitchy, a little world weary — or your unease when you see a child watching YouTube videos, knowing she’s just a few algorithmic nudges away from a rabbit hole filled with lunatic conspiracies and gore. Or maybe it was this month’s Facebook privacy scandal, which reminded you that you’ve entrusted the most intimate parts of your digital life to a profit-maximizing surveillance machine.Our growing discomfort with our largest social platforms is reflected in polls. One recently conducted by Axios and SurveyMonkey found that all three of the major social media companies — Facebook, Twitter and Google, which shares a parent company with YouTube — are significantly less popular with Americans than they were five months ago. (And Americans might be the lucky ones. Outside the United States, social media is fueling real-world violence and empowering autocrats, often with much less oversight.)But it would be a mistake to throw up our hands and assume that it has to be this way. The original dream of social media — producing healthy discussions, unlocking new forms of creativity, connecting people to others with similar interests — shouldn’t be discarded because of the failures of the current market leaders. And lots of important things still happen on even the most flawed networks. The West Virginia teachers’ strike and last weekend’s March for Our Lives, for example, were largely organized on Facebook and Twitter.The primary problem with today’s social networks is that they’re already too big, and are trapped inside a market-based system that forces them to keep growing. Facebook can’t stop monetizing our personal data for the same reason that Starbucks can’t stop selling coffee — it’s the heart of the enterprise.Many of the fixes being proposed involve regulation. The Honest Ads Act, a bill in the Senate, would require greater transparency for online political ads. The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation, which goes into effect in May, aims to give users greater control of their digital information trails.But these efforts don’t touch the underlying problems, and in fact could make it harder for start-ups to compete with the giants.If we’re really serious about changing how social networks operate, far more radical interventions are required. Here are three possible ways to rescue social media from the market-based pressures that got us here.In their book “New Power,” which comes out next week, Jeremy Heimans and Henry Timms write about the struggle between centralized, top-down institutions, which represent “old power,” and decentralized, bottom-up movements, which represent “new power.”Facebook, they write, is an example of a new power institution that serves old power interests. It harvests the creative output of billions of people and turns it into a giant, centralized enterprise, with most users sharing none of the economic value they create and getting no say in the platform’s governance.Instead, the authors ask, what if a social network was truly run by its users?“If you’re contributing economic value to something of this much social consequence, you should share in the value you’re creating,” Mr. Heimans told me.Nathan Schneider, a professor of media studies at the University of Colorado, had a similar idea in 2016, when he proposed that Twitter users band together to buy the platform from its shareholders and convert it into a user-run collective, similar to the way a local credit union is run. People who made valuable contributions to the network, such as employees and power users, would receive bigger stakes and more voting power. And users would have a seat at the table for major decisions about the platform’s operations.It’s exceedingly unlikely that Mark Zuckerberg, who has fought hard to keep control of Facebook, will ever convert the company into a user-owned and run collective. But Mr. Schneider believes that giving more control to responsible users could help restore trust in the network, and signal the kind of values Mr. Zuckerberg says he wants Facebook to represent.“He could show that he takes democracy seriously enough to start with his own baby,” Mr. Schneider said.Another radical approach would be to make social networks work more like email — so that independent apps could seamlessly work together with one another, across a common protocol.Instead of one big Facebook, a federated social network would look like clusters of independent nodes — Mombook and Athletebook and Gamerbook — all of which could be plugged into the umbrella network when it made sense. Rather than requiring a one-size-fits-all set of policies that apply to billions of users, these nodes could be designed to reflect users’ priorities. (A network for privacy hawks and one for open-sharing maximalists could have different data-retention rules, and a network for L.G.B.T. users and one for evangelical pastors could have different hate speech rules.) If a node became too toxic, it could be removed without shutting down the entire network.“Email is the most resilient social network on the internet,” Mr. Schneider said, “and the thing that allows it to adapt is that it’s an open protocol, and people build apps on top of it, and we evolve how we use it.”Versions of this kind of network already exist. Mastodon, a decentralized Twitter-like social network, has gotten more than a million registered users since its debut in 2016. And various social networks based on the blockchain — the ledger system that underlies virtual currencies like Bitcoin — have sprung up in recent months.To be sure, decentralized networks have their own problems. They’re messy to administer, and they can still be gamed by bad actors. They can also fall prey to the same kind of privacy issues that Facebook is being criticized for. (In fact, part of the reason users are angry at Facebook right now is that the company’s data infrastructure was too open, and made it overly simple for third-party app developers to take user information outside Facebook.)None of this is a panacea. But experimenting with more decentralized models could give social media users a sense that platforms represented their interests, rather than those of a faceless corporation.A single friend of mine once remarked that the major difference among dating apps like OKCupid, Tinder and Bumble wasn’t the way they were designed or the companies behind them — it was how long they had existed.New apps, she said, were more likely to attract interesting and smart people who were actually looking for dates. Older apps, by contrast, were eventually overrun with creeps and predators, no matter how well built they were.A similar theory might apply to social networks. Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Instagram and Snapchat all had plenty of issues in their early years, but they were by and large cleaner, with fewer types of exploitation and malicious behavior. Today, the enormous size and influence of these platforms have made them irresistible honey pots for bad actors, and many of our “social graphs” — Facebook’s term for the webs of digital connections we create — are clogged with years’ worth of clutter.In a blog post last year, the venture capitalist Hunter Walk proposed an interesting idea: a legally mandated “start over” button that, when pressed, would allow users of social networks to delete all their data, clear out their feeds and friend lists, and begin with a fresh account.I’d go even further, and suggest that social networks give their users an automatic “self-cleaning” option, which would regularly clear their profiles of apps they no longer used, friendships and followers they no longer interacted with, and data they no longer needed to store. If these tools were enabled, users would need to take affirmative action if they didn’t want their information to disappear after a certain number of months or years.Making social graphs temporary, rather than preserving them forever by default, would undoubtedly be bad for most social networks’ business models. But it could create new and healthy norms around privacy and data hygiene, and it would keep problems from piling up as networks get older and more crowded. It might even recapture some of the magic of the original social networks, when things were fresh and fascinating, and not quite so scary.Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 27, 2018
Q. How do I delete Facebook Messenger from my phone?A. Facebook Messenger, the company’s chat program, was spun out of the Facebook mobile app in 2011, before the social network removed the chat function from the main app in 2014. As with other third-party apps, you can remove it from your phone with a few taps.If you use Messenger on a phone running a recent version of Android, open the Settings icon and select Apps & Notifications. Find the Messenger icon; if you do not see it, tap See All Apps (or App Info) first. Tap the Uninstall option. You can also delete an app from the Android home screen by pressing its icon and then dragging it to the Uninstall symbol that appears at the top of the screen.You can also remove Android apps by opening the Google Play store icon on your phone, tapping the three-lined menu icon in the top-left corner and selecting My Apps & Games. On the next screen, tap the Installed tab, find the Messenger icon and tap the Open button. When the app’s page is open, tap the Uninstall button.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To delete Messenger on an iPhone, go to the home screen, find the app’s icon and press your finger on it until the tile begins to wiggle. Once the wiggling starts, a small X appears in the icon’s top-left corner. Tap the X, and when the alert box pops up, confirm you wish to delete the app.Even if you remove the mobile Messenger app (and do not delete your Facebook account), your Facebook friends can still send you messages when you are logged into the desktop version of the site. A stand-alone web version is also available at Messenger.com. If you prefer not to use the chat function, tell your friends to reach you by other means.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Killing Messenger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CECILIA KANG and SHEERA FRENKELMARCH 27, 2018
WASHINGTON — For 10 days, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, has been under increasing pressure from lawmakers and regulators to answer questions about the improper harvesting of data of 50 million Facebook users by a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica.Now Mr. Zuckerberg plans to go to Washington to explain himself.The chief executive has agreed to testify in at least one congressional hearing over the social network’s handling of customer data, according to people familiar with the decision. Specifically, he plans to appear next month before the House Energy and Commerce Committee, said the people, who asked not to be identified because the arrangements were not public. Mr. Zuckerberg may make other appearances; he has also been asked to testify before the Senate and House Judiciary and Commerce Committees.His appearing on Capitol Hill could create a spectacle that is replayed online and on television for years to come, especially amid a backlash against the power of tech behemoths. Late last year, executives from Facebook, Google and Twitter showed up at congressional hearings to discuss Russian meddling online in the 2016 presidential election, putting faces to the tech platforms during criticism of their misuse.Congressional testimony by Silicon Valley chief executives is rare, and their appearances have each set off a media circus. In 2013, Apple’s chief executive, Timothy D. Cook, addressed senators about his company’s tax practices. In 2011, Google’s chairman at the time, Eric Schmidt, spoke about the company’s search practices in front of the Senate Judiciary Committee. And in 1998, Bill Gates, who was Microsoft’s chief executive, defended his company against lawmakers’ assertions that he was building a monopoly — an argument he eventually lost in court.Advertisement“The committee is continuing to work with Facebook to determine a day and time for Mr. Zuckerberg to testify,” said Elena Hernandez, a spokeswoman for the House Energy and Commerce Committee.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CNN earlier reported that Mr. Zuckerberg had decided to testify in front of Congress.He has been under pressure to appear before Congress since reports on March 17 that Cambridge Analytica improperly obtained and used the data of 50 million Facebook users. The revelations immediately sparked a furor on both sides of the Atlantic, with regulators in Britain and the United States calling for Mr. Zuckerberg to discuss what happened.AdvertisementThose calls haven’t subsided, even though the chief executive issued a public statement last week outlining the steps that Facebook was taking to prevent improper  harvesting of the data of its 2.2. billion users. On Monday, the Federal Trade Commission confirmed that it was investigating how Facebook handles information about its users. Politicians including Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, have also pressed for Mr. Zuckerberg to appear on Capitol Hill.Mr. Zuckerberg has turned down some requests to go before lawmakers. He declined to appear this week before the British Parliament and answer questions about data privacy.Facebook staff have held marathon meetings and phone calls with staff from congressional committees over the past week, according to Facebook employees and others briefed on the matter. Rob Sherman, Facebook’s deputy chief privacy officer, and Molly Cutler, its associate general counsel, have met with staff from the House and Senate Commerce, Judiciary and Intelligence Committees, they said.Mr. Zuckerberg initially resisted speaking to Congress, and had asked if a senior Facebook executive could be sent to represent the company in his name, two Facebook employees familiar with the conversations said.Christopher Wylie told British lawmakers that President Trump’s election made him realize the wider impact of the techniques used by the data analytics firm he helped found.After the public outcry over Facebook’s data and privacy settings, Mr. Zuckerberg was persuaded that he needed to appear, they said. In recent days, he told Facebook employees that he had come to understand he would have to testify.In an interview with CNN last week, Mr. Zuckerberg said that he would be “happy to” testify in front of Congress and that “it’s the right thing to do.” He added of Cambridge Analytica, “This was a major breach of trust, and I’m really sorry that this happened.”AdvertisementGoogle and Twitter have also been called to testify before Congress on data privacy. The companies didn’t respond to requests for comment.Lawmakers have been frustrated in the past by Mr. Zuckerberg’s absence from hearings. Last year, Facebook sent its general counsel, Colin Stretch, to join lawyers from Twitter and Google to testify about social media’s role in spreading disinformation during the 2016 election. Lawmakers noted the absence of senior executives, including Mr. Zuckerberg, and repeatedly challenged Facebook to send its leaders to answer questions.In a recent interview, Senator John Kennedy, Republican of Louisiana, said Mr. Zuckerberg needed to directly answer questions from Congress about what kind of user data was being gathered and shared, because Facebook has been too vague about its practices. He said the attorneys for Facebook, Google and Twitter who testified about the 2016 election had “dodged questions.”“They didn’t say a damn thing, which was what they were paid to do,” Mr. Kennedy said. “I’d encourage Mr. Zuckerberg to do the common-sense thing and roll up his sleeves and take a meaningful amount of time talking to us about this.”Follow Cecilia Kang and Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @ceciliakang and @sheeraf.Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, and Sheera Frenkel from New York.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Zuckerberg Makes Date For Live Chat With Congress.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By TIFFANY HSU and CECILIA KANGMARCH 26, 2018
A parade of regulators, politicians and law enforcement officials demanded to know more about Facebook’s privacy practices on Monday, as the fallout from the company’s relationship with a political data firm continued to spread.Early in the day, the Federal Trade Commission confirmed reports that it was investigating how Facebook handles information about its users.Soon after, Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, invited Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, to testify about privacy standards next month. He also extended invitations to Google’s chief executive, Sundar Pichai, and Twitter’s chief executive, Jack Dorsey.And a group of 37 attorneys general sent Mr. Zuckerberg a letter asking for details about Facebook’s privacy safeguards.AdvertisementBut one group of people interested in Facebook — investors — had a muted reaction to the growing regulatory threat. Shares of Facebook fell sharply after the F.T.C. confirmed its investigation but ended the day up 0.4 percent as overall trading on Wall Street recovered from a big drop last week.AdvertisementThe federal investigation and threats followed recent news that the data collection firm Cambridge Analytica, which worked on the 2016 Trump presidential campaign, gained access to the personal data of more than 50 million Facebook users.The F.T.C. said it planned to determine whether the social media giant had violated a consent decree it signed in 2011 to protect users’ privacy.The decree required Facebook to notify and receive explicit permission from users before sharing their personal information beyond the limits dictated by their privacy settings. Each violation of the agreement, which the agency reached with Facebook as part of a settlement over third-party apps, carries a penalty of up to $40,000 a day.The agency’s acknowledgment of its investigation helped push Facebook’s stock down as much as 6.5 percent on Monday morning before it recovered. Facebook said last week that it was anticipating an inquiry by the agency.The F.T.C. said in a statement on Monday that it “takes very seriously recent press reports raising substantial concerns about the privacy practices of Facebook.”Lawmakers have repeatedly called for Mr. Zuckerberg to appear in hearings on Capitol Hill. Last week, the Republican and Democratic leaders of the House and Senate commerce committees formally invited him to testify.“I’m sure this is much bigger than Cambridge Analytica, and I’m sure there are other Cambridge Analyticas out there,” Senator John Kennedy, Republican from Louisiana, said in an interview. “Facebook isn’t just a company. It is so powerful it is like a country.”AdvertisementSome lawmakers, such as Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat from Connecticut, asked the F.T.C. to look into whether Facebook should pay damages to users.“The sphere of scrutiny must be broader than just the consent decree,” he said in a statement. “There is no excuse for delay.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cambridge Analytica is facing intense criticism, too. On Monday, Common Cause, a government watchdog group in Washington, filed complaints seeking federal investigations into allegations that the company violated federal election law.In an article that detailed how Cambridge Analytica obtained information about millions of Facebook users, The New York Times reported this month that employees of the data research firm with European or Canadian citizenship had worked extensively for its American clients during the 2014 and 2016 elections, despite a warning from its own election lawyer.The employees worked on polling, message development, and the designing of target audiences for digital ads and fund-raising appeals.The company said the work was permissible because none of the foreign employees had “strategic” or “operational” roles. But former employees contradicted that account, suggesting that the work violated laws in the United States that strictly limit what non-Americans can do for American political campaigns.Common Cause filed one complaint with the Justice Department, which has authority to investigate “knowing and willful” violations of campaign law. The group also filed a complaint with the Federal Election Commission, which has day-to-day jurisdiction over enforcing election rules.“It defies belief that even after their own attorney warned them that they would be violating the prohibition on performing certain election-related activities in U.S. elections that they did so anyway,” said Paul S. Ryan, Common Cause’s vice president for policy and litigation.In the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco, lawyers appealed two lawsuits that challenged the social media company’s privacy and user data policies. One lawsuit claims that Facebook violates the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (Wiretap Act) and state law equivalents because of the way it monitors its users on and off the platform.AdvertisementThe second suit claims that Facebook has been capturing and selling the details of users’ browsing of third-party health sites. Any site with a Facebook “like” button, including those of medical institutions such as the American Cancer Society and the American Society of Clinical Oncology, could be used to track users as they browsed outside Facebook, according to the lawsuit.Facebook also has been targeted by several shareholder lawsuits since the reports detailing Cambridge Analytica’s use of Facebook user information.In the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal, in which data from over 50 million Facebook profiles was secretly scraped and mined for voter insights, many Facebook users have decided to delete their accounts — but untangling yourself from a site like Facebook is not as easy as pressing “delete.”Many users have threatened to deactivate or delete their accounts to protest Facebook’s stewardship of their personal data. The #deletefacebook campaign, as it has been called, has even received support from a creator of WhatsApp, one of Facebook’s most popular services, who sold his company to the social media giant for $19 billion in 2014. Elon Musk, the chief executive of SpaceX and Tesla, removed the Facebook pages of both companies on Friday.While the Cambridge Analytica revelations have renewed regulatory interest in Facebook in the United States, pressure on the company in other countries has been building for years.The company has been the subject of several privacy investigations and charges by European regulators. And Europe has approved a new privacy law, which takes effect in May, that will give users of Facebook, Google and other internet services more control over how their data is collected and what Silicon Valley companies know about them.Follow Tiffany Hsu and Cecilia Kang on Twitter: @tiffkhsu, @ceciliakangNicholas Confessore and Sheera Frenkel contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Regulators Hammer Facebook.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By RAYMOND ZHONGMARCH 25, 2018
Uber, which for years spread across the globe with command-and-conquer rapaciousness, is pulling back from another major ride-hailing market.The company said on Sunday that it would sell its Southeast Asia ride and food-delivery businesses to Grab, a rival based in Singapore, in the latest move to shore up its finances and refocus its business ahead of a planned public listing.Uber will get a 27.5 percent stake in Grab in exchange. Uber’s chief executive, Dara Khosrowshahi, will join Grab’s board. Further financial terms were not disclosed.The détente in Southeast Asia, which is similar to deals Uber has made in China and Russia in recent years, comes at a time of larger changes at the company, based in San Francisco.AdvertisementSoftBank, the Japanese conglomerate that recently took a big stake in Uber, has also backed a host of its competitors, including Grab in Southeast Asia, Ola in India and Didi Chuxing, which bought Uber’s China business in 2016. That means SoftBank would rather these companies did not spend too much money competing against one another.AdvertisementUber’s exit from Southeast Asia, a region of more than 600 million people, also reflects the new direction the company is taking under Mr. Khosrowshahi, who replaced Travis Kalanick as chief executive last year.Mr. Khosrowshahi has forsworn his predecessor’s infamously pugnacious way of doing business. And with a mandate to take Uber public, he has set out to repair relations with regulators, fix a troubled workplace culture and calm Wall Street about the company’s financial prospects. Uber said it lost $1.1 billion in the last three months of 2017, somewhat less than it lost in the preceding quarter.“It is fair to ask whether consolidation is now the strategy of the day,” Mr. Khosrowshahi wrote in an email to staff. “The answer is no.”He continued: “One of the potential dangers of our global strategy is that we take on too many battles across too many fronts and with too many competitors. This transaction now puts us in a position to compete with real focus and weight in the core markets where we operate.”Grab was introduced in 2012 and now operates in eight Southeast Asian countries: Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam. And it has put up a tough fight.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With passengers in nearly 200 cities across the region, the company is aiming to be more than just a transportation provider. It wants its digital wallet, GrabPay, to replace cash as a way to pay for things at offline shops and restaurants. And in a region where many people lack credit histories or even bank accounts, Grab is undertaking a venture to make loans to consumers and small businesses. Data collected through Grab’s app, on users’ movements and transactions, is used to assess their creditworthiness.Grab also offers a wide variety of ways for people to get around. In Singapore, you can hop on a GrabShuttle that, like a public bus, will take you between points along a fixed route. In jam-packed Jakarta, you can use Grab’s app to hail a nearby motorbike taxi right off the street, forgoing the usual process of prebooking and waiting for the driver to arrive at your location.The company is generally regarded as the market leader in Southeast Asia. But in Indonesia, the region’s most populous country, it  is taking on Go-Jek, a local rival whose apps offer services, such as massages on demand and motorbike parcel deliveries, that go beyond just rides. Go-Jek’s investors include Google and Tencent, the Chinese internet conglomerate.AdvertisementIn an interview, Ming Maa, Grab’s president, said that the deal with Uber would help Grab move closer to profitability, although he declined to give specifics. One key benefit of combining with Uber, Mr. Maa said, is that it immediately expands Grab’s food-delivery operations.“That has massive, massive benefits to our consumer base,” he said, “but is also a key driver for our mobile payments business.”For Uber, ceding Southeast Asia still leaves it with plenty of challengers elsewhere in the world. Didi Chuxing, based in Beijing, invested alongside SoftBank in Grab last year. It recently raised money from SoftBank and other investors at a valuation of $56 billion — higher than the $48 billion at which Uber was valued as part of last year’s stake sale to SoftBank.Now, Didi wants to go global. The company, whose full name is pronounced “dee-dee choo-SHING,” recently took control of 99, an Uber rival in Brazil, and is recruiting on LinkedIn ahead of a planned opening in Mexico.Didi is also aiming to expand soon into Japan — a market in which Uber, too, will make a big push this year, according to Mr. Khosrowshahi. SoftBank, despite being an investor in both Uber and Didi, announced recently that it would partner with Didi in Japan.Follow Raymond Zhong on Twitter: @zhonggg.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber to Sell to Regional Rival in Southeast Asia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byIn 2011, the F.T.C. first required a company to create a comprehensive data privacy program for consumers. Europe will soon take another big step.By Natasha SingerOver the years, regulators on both sides of the Atlantic have cracked down on Facebook and Google for privacy violations. But as the European Union prepares to introduce comprehensive new data protection regulation in May, European regulators have been stepping up investigations into tech industry data practices.MARCH 2011Google reaches a settlement with the F.T.C., which charged the company with using deceptive tactics and violating its own privacy promises to consumers. Google had enrolled Gmail users in its social network, Buzz, without effective ways for them to opt out of the service or limit the sharing of their personal details, the agency said. NOVEMBER 2011Facebook agrees to settle charges by the F.T.C. that it deceived users by telling them that they could keep their profile information private and then repeatedly allowing it to be shared and made public.AUGUST 2012 Google agrees to pay $22.5 million to settle F.T.C. charges that the company misled people who used Apple’s Safari browser by placing advertiser tracking codes, called cookies, on their computers after Google told them that they would be opted out of such tracking. Google also violated a previous settlement that prohibited it from misleading consumers over how they could control collection of their data, the agency said.SEPTEMBER 2012After an audit by Ireland’s data protection commissioner, regulators report that Facebook turned off its photo-tagging facial recognition feature for new users in the European Union and will delete facial template data it had already collected from users there. The commissioner’s office said Facebook had not sufficiently notified users or obtained their explicit consent to use the feature.May 2017 The European Commission fines Facebook $122 million for misleading regulators during their investigation of the company’s acquisition of the WhatsApp messaging service. The commission, the executive arm of the European Union, says Facebook told regulators that it would be unable to automatically match an individual user’s Facebook account with his or her WhatsApp account. But WhatsApp later announced that it would begin sharing user data with Facebook.In December, the French Data Protection Authority orders WhatsApp to stop sharing data with Facebook or face penalties. And in March, a German court bars Facebook from using data from German users of WhatsApp for Facebook’s own purposes, upholding the ruling of a lower court.DECEMBER 2017In a preliminary finding, Germany’s Cartel Office reports that Facebook has abused its dominant position in the country by requiring users to allow it to endlessly amass data by tracking them through other online services. In February, the regulator says it planned to investigate whether the ability of large platforms like Facebook and Google to set up closed advertising systems and have access to user data was limiting market competition.FEBRUARY 2018 A court in Belgium rules that Facebook must stop tracking users on third-party sites and delete the data it had already collected. The court says Facebook hadn’t sufficiently informed users about the data it gathered on their use of sites outside the social network or how it used that data. May 2018 The European Union will put into effect a comprehensive privacy law, called the General Data Protection Regulation, that requires companies to obtain consent from users before processing their data and allows the authorities to fine companies up to 4 percent of their annual revenue if they fail to comply.Natasha Singer is a business reporter covering health technology, education technology and consumer privacy.@natashanytAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Sheera FrenkelSAN FRANCISCO — For the past week, Mark Zuckerberg has grappled with a backlash from lawmakers, regulators and users over Facebook’s mishandling of data privacy. He has also had to face another restive group: his own employees.The Facebook chief executive has taken multiple steps over the past few days to communicate with the social network’s 25,000 employees over revelations last week that a British political consulting firm, Cambridge Analytica, had improperly obtained data of 50 million Facebook users.The Silicon Valley company held a staff meeting on Tuesday to answer questions about Cambridge Analytica, featuring one of Facebook’s lawyers, Paul Grewal. On Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Zuckerberg addressed employees directly, according to two Facebook employees who asked not be identified because the proceedings were confidential. Mr. Zuckerberg also spoke with staff on Friday at a regularly scheduled employee meeting, said two people who attended the event.Facebook declined to comment on the meetings.Speaking to Facebook’s employees was a crucial prong of what has become an apology tour of sorts for Mr. Zuckerberg over the Cambridge Analytica fallout. The revelations have raised calls for Mr. Zuckerberg to appear before Congress to explain himself, as well as a #DeleteFacebook movement and other criticism.Mr. Zuckerberg had stayed silent on the matter for days, until he released a statement on Wednesday vowing that Facebook had to do better and gave several interviews to quell the crisis. That has not stopped pressure from Congress, with bipartisan leaders of the House Energy and Commerce Committee saying on Friday that they had sent a formal request for Mr. Zuckerberg to appear in a hearing over Facebook’s “harvesting and sale of personal information” related to Cambridge Analytica.Calming employees was particularly vital because morale had sunk at the company, Facebook employees have said, especially after months of scrutiny over how the social network was used by Russian agents to influence the 2016 presidential election. Keeping workers engaged is crucial in Silicon Valley’s highly competitive job market, where recruiting and retaining talent often is difficult against deep-pocketed rivals.Earlier this week, some Facebook employees had said that colleagues had started looking to transfer from the main social network product to other branches of the company, such as to messaging app WhatsApp and photo-sharing site Instagram, which have been relatively unscathed by the recent scandals.One Facebook recruiter, who declined to be identified because of a nondisclosure agreement, said there were concerns that top talent might choose other Silicon Valley companies over Facebook.“It’s such a shocking difference for company employees who are used to having esteem for where they work,” said Eric Schiffer, chairman of Reputation Management Consultants, a consulting firm, and who has been speaking with people at Facebook. “Ten years ago, Facebook was the hottest place to go out of college. This year, the best graduates are not necessarily looking at Facebook.”When Mr. Zuckerberg did not appear at the Tuesday staff meeting hosted by the company lawyer, Mr. Grewal, his absence made headlines.When he spoke to workers on Wednesday, Mr. Zuckerberg focused on concrete measures that Facebook was taking following the Cambridge Analytica reports, two employees said. Staff members asked questions about how Mr. Zuckerberg planned to regain user trust, especially in light of the #DeleteFacebook campaign from users, the two employees said.Mr. Zuckerberg said the social network was investigating apps like the third-party quiz app that had obtained access to “large amounts of information” from the social network, which had then been used by Cambridge Analytica. He also said the company would restrict third-party developers’ access and would notify users whose data had been harvested by Cambridge Analytica.Of the #DeleteFacebook campaign, Mr. Zuckerberg told The New York Times in an interview, “I think it’s a clear signal that this is a major trust issue for people, and I understand that.”Three Facebook employees said morale had improved following the interviews and the internal communications that Mr. Zuckerberg did on Wednesday. One of them said he had avoided a trip home to see his family last weekend because he did not want to answer questions about the company he worked for.On Friday, Facebook’s senior managers promised an open line of communication as the company continued to re-evaluate its privacy and security measures, said two employees.There was a feeling, said one of the people, that Facebook wanted to take aggressive steps to make sure it could regain user trust. And over all, he said, confidence was up.Follow Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @sheerafCecilia Kang and Scott Shane contributed reporting.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 23, 2018
Q. How do you do picture-in-picture video with Safari on a Mac? A. In macOS Sierra and later, you can use the Picture in Picture mode to pop out a floating video-player window on the screen while you have other pages and programs open on the desktop. The feature works in the Safari browser for videos on sites that use the HTML 5 standard for playback, like Vimeo and YouTube. Videos from Apple’s iTunes Store support the Picture in Picture view, as do some other apps.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To use the Picture in Picture mode, open a compatible video and, in the tool bar of playback controls, click the icon on the right that looks like two rectangles. The video should pop out in a small, separate window that you can resize by dragging its corner with the cursor. To reposition the video window, drag it to your preferred side of the screen. If you do not want to anchor the window in a screen corner, hold down the Mac’s Command key while you drag the window to your preferred position on the desktop.When you hover the cursor over the video window, you get controls to pause or play the clip, or to exit the Picture in Picture mode. (You can also click the X in the upper-left corner of the video window to close it.) To fast-forward or rewind through the clip, however, you need to use the playback controls on the video’s page in the main Safari window.Some videos may not display the Picture in Picture icon on the playback tool bar. In this case, hold down the Mac’s Control key and double-click the video window. When the shortcut menu appears, look for an “Enter Picture in Picture” option. Some videos may not have even that, but for those video apps that do not work with the Mac’s Picture in Picture mode, a Safari extension called PiPifier might coax the clips into their separate windows.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Cecilia KangWASHINGTON — The much-watched antitrust trial between the Justice Department and AT&T began on Thursday, with opening statements that presented starkly different visions for how the company’s blockbuster merger with Time Warner would fit into a media industry upturned by the internet.Before a packed courtroom with some of the industry’s leading figures, the two sides zeroed in on the case’s central question: Whether the deal would force consumers to pay more to watch their favorite shows on Time Warner cable channels like CNN and TNT.The Justice Department, which is suing to block the $85 billion deal, argued that AT&T, with its nationwide wireless and satellite TV business, could use Time Warner’s content as a “weapon” by raising the licensing fees those channels command. The government said that the merged company could charge rival cable and streaming companies more for popular channels. Those increases, the agency argued, would be passed on to consumers.“If the merger goes forward, consumers all across America will be worse off as a result,” said Craig Conrath, the Justice Department’s lead lawyer.AT&T and Time Warner said they would disprove the notion that the deal would raise prices. And they said that the combined company could compete with the giants of Silicon Valley: Amazon, Facebook, Netflix and Google. Those companies now produce their own shows and distribute them on their popular websites. They also dominate the market for the advertisements that run with videos streamed over the internet.“The government’s theory is fundamentally stuck in the past,” said Daniel Petrocelli, the lead lawyer for AT&T and Time Warner. He said the merger would do the opposite of what the government asserts: The company would have no incentive to withhold Turner channels, which are owned by Time Warner.“It would be financially ruinous if Turner were not as widely distributed as possible,” Mr. Petrocelli said.The opening statements previewed the fierce legal battle that will play out before Judge Richard Leon of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. His decision in the case will help set the direction for antitrust law for years to come. It will also frame the shape of the media industry, which is facing major shifts as more people move from cable television to viewing streaming entertainment over the internet.Hundreds of company officials, reporters, hedge fund investors, antitrust scholars and industry analysts stood in line for hours to get a seat at the trial. Randall Stephenson, AT&T’s chief executive, and Jeffrey Bewkes, Time Warner’s chief executive, sat together during the 90 minutes of opening remarks. Makan Delrahim, the Justice Department’s top antitrust official, watched from the front row on the other side of the room. The chief executives and Mr. Delrahim did not interact.The case has drawn unusual public attention partly because of questions about whether it had a tinge of political interference. The Justice Department’s opposition came as a surprise when it was announced in November, and AT&T suggested it had been instigated by President Trump, who has said that he opposed the deal. The government said that Mr. Trump did not communicate with antitrust officials on the deal and that their decision to oppose the merger had not been ordered by the White House.Judge Leon has rejected many of AT&T’s efforts to introduce evidence about political interference into the case. Instead, the trial, which is expected to last six to eight weeks, will largely focus on fundamental principles of antitrust law: whether the merger would cause prices to increase and competition to decrease.The court’s decision will determine what sort of media mergers will be permitted between the creators and the distributors of content. Such deals, called “vertical mergers,” generally pass regulatory scrutiny because they don’t make a company dominant in one specific market area. Judge Leon has noted the unusual case is like a “rare horse” but not a “unicorn.”Blair Levin, an analyst for New Street Research, a firm focused on the telecommunications industry, wrote in a research note that a Justice Department victory would “set a standard for what constitutes substantial harm that would call into question a number of other potential and pending mergers.”About 60 witnesses are expected to take the stand over the course of the trial, including Mr. Stephenson of AT&T and Mr. Bewkes of Time Warner, and executives from digital services like SlingTV and YouTube.The Justice Department said it would present internal documents from Time Warner and AT&T to show that the merged company would have the incentive to raise prices on rivals and consumers. In one email Mr. Conrath mentioned on Thursday, a Turner executive explained how Dish TV, AT&T’s top rival in satellite TV service, would be weakened without his company’s channels.“Time Warner,” Mr. Conrath said, “would be a weapon for AT&T because AT&T’s competitors need Time Warner programming.” The government said consumers would have to pay an extra $436 million a year because of the deal.Mr. Petrocelli foreshadowed a plan to attack that economic analysis. He said the Justice Department’s calculations, made by the antitrust economist Carl Shapiro, had omitted key information and were therefore flawed.Mr. Petrocelli promised to show Judge Leon that cable consumers could end up paying about 50 cents less a month if the deal goes through.“This is what I call the government’s shrinking case,” he said.AdvertisementBy JACEY FORTINMARCH 22, 2018
Instagram is changing its algorithm to make things a little more timely.Users are now likely to see newer posts higher up, the image-sharing app said in a statement on Thursday, adding that its feeds will “feel more fresh.” Instagram’s algorithm, in other words, won’t be meddling quite as much. More images and videos will be allowed to bubble up as they come.The company also said it was testing a “New Posts” button so that users can refresh their feeds when they want to, rather than automatically being transported to the top in the middle of browsing.The changes are in response to user feedback. They appear to address some common gripes, like how certain posts can keep appearing on your screen for days and days and days, or how your feed can begin to feel skewed in favor of the same old friends you habitually double-tap.“We did this via a number of changes, including an adjustment so that very old content does not get bumped up higher in feed,” said Gabe Madway, Instagram’s spokesman.AdvertisementHe added that the company was not returning to a chronological feed. As Instagram said in its statement (apparently addressing users in the Western Hemisphere): “If your best friend shares a selfie from her vacation in Australia, it will be waiting for you when you wake up.”AdvertisementStill, the move appears to dial back, even if only slightly, the major change that came in March 2016 when Instagram said feeds would be “ordered to show the moments we believe you will care about the most.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Instagram is one of several social media companies that are striving to find the right balance between arranging content chronologically and ranking it according to machine-learned impressions of relevance.Twitter’s feed is largely chronological — though it is has been known to experiment with ranking, sometimes irritating users — while Facebook, which owns Instagram, relies more heavily on algorithms, meaning well-liked content and posts from good friends tend to show up front and center.“Instagram’s feed ranking is powered by machine learning, which is constantly adapting and improving based on new data,” Mr. Madway said. “But this is a nice change that people should notice.”Pew Research Center reported this month that Instagram use is higher than that of Twitter, Snapchat and WhatsApp, at least in terms of the percentage of Americans who say they use it. (By that measure, only Facebook and YouTube are more popular.)Last year the company said it had 800 million users interacting with the app on at least a monthly basis.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By KEVIN ROOSE and SHEERA FRENKELMARCH 21, 2018
For much of the past week, Facebook has been embroiled in a controversy involving Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm with ties to Donald J. Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign, and how the firm improperly obtained and exploited personal data from 50 million Facebook users.On Wednesday, following widespread questions about his whereabouts, Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, spoke with two New York Times reporters, Sheera Frenkel and Kevin Roose, about the controversy and the steps he was taking to make the social network less prone to abuse.Recent reports of a Facebook data breach by Cambridge Analytica has caused some to reconsider staying with the social media platform. Following a conversation with Mark Zuckerberg, NYT tech reporter, Kevin Roose, chatted with Facebook live viewers about whether or not they plan to sign-off for good.Below is a transcript of the conversation, edited for length and clarity.Sheera Frenkel: Did it come as a surprise to you, the user response to the news that Cambridge Analytica had accessed this trove of data?Mark Zuckerberg: Privacy issues have always been incredibly important to people. One of our biggest responsibilities is to protect data. If you think about what our services are, at their most basic level, you put some content into a service, whether it’s a photo or a video or a text message — whether it’s Facebook or WhatsApp or Instagram — and you’re trusting that that content is going to be shared with the people you want to share it with. Whenever there’s an issue where someone’s data gets passed to someone who the rules of the system shouldn’t have allowed it to, that’s rightfully a big issue and deserves to be a big uproar.AdvertisementFrenkel: It took quite a few days for your response to come out. Is that because you were weighing these three action points that you noted in your post?AdvertisementZuckerberg: The first thing is, I really wanted to make sure we had a full and accurate understanding of everything that happened. I know that there was a lot of pressure to speak sooner, but my assessment was that it was more important that what we said was fully accurate.The second thing is, the most important thing is that we fix this system so that issues like this don’t happen again. It’s not like there aren’t going to be other different kind of things we’ll also have to fix. But when there’s a certain problem, we have a responsibility to at least make sure we resolve that problem.So the actions here that we’re going to do involve first, dramatically reducing the amount of data that developers have access to, so that apps and developers can’t do what Kogan did here. The most important actions there we actually took three or four years ago, in 2014. But when we examined the systems this week, there were certainly other things we felt we should lock down, too. So we’re going ahead and doing that.Even if you solve the problem going forward, there’s still this issue of: Are there other Cambridge Analyticas out there, or other Kogans who, when the platform worked a certain way in the past, were there apps which could have gotten access to more information, and potentially sold it without us knowing, or done something that violated people’s trust? We also need to make sure we get that under control. That’s why we spent a lot of time figuring out, O.K. here’s what it’s going to take to do a full investigation of every app that got access to a large amount of information before we changed the platform policies to dramatically reduce the data access that developers had. For any app that we uncover that has any suspicious activity, we’re going to go do a full forensic audit, and make sure we have the capacity to do that, to make sure that other developers aren’t doing what Kogan did here.The third thing is, it’s really important that people know what apps they’ve authorized. A lot of people have been on Facebook now for five or 10 years, and sometimes you signed into an app a long time ago and you may have forgotten about that. So one of the steps we’re taking is making it so apps can no longer access data after you haven’t used them for three months.But it’s also just really important to put in front of people a tool of, here are all the apps you’ve connected to and authorized, here’s an easy way to deauthorize them, to revoke their permission to get access to your activity.Kevin Roose: Is Facebook planning to notify the 50 million users whose data was shared with Cambridge Analytica?AdvertisementZuckerberg: Yes. We’re going to tell anyone whose data may have been shared.Now, there’s a question of whether we have the exact record in our systems today of who your friends were on that day when there was access three and a half or four years ago, so we’re going to be conservative on that and try to tell anyone whose data may have been affected, even if we don’t know for certain that they were. It’s likely that we’ll build a tool like we did with the Russian misinformation investigation, that anyone can go to it and see if their data was affected by this.Roose: Do you have a preliminary estimate of how many apps you’ll be investigating?Zuckerberg: It will be in the thousands.Frenkel: Were those app developers notified that you’ll be investigating this yet?Zuckerberg: Just when I posted. And we’ll be reaching out in the near term.Frenkel: Are you going to be hiring people to help conduct those investigations?Zuckerberg: Yes, I would imagine we’re going to have to grow the team to work on this.Roose: You mentioned a contract that developers will have to sign in order to ask anyone for access to broader profile information. What will be the terms of that contract, and what will be the penalties for violating it?Zuckerberg: So, the important thing there is that it’s a high-touch process. The specific point we were trying to make is that it’s not going to be some terms of service that a developer can sign up for just on their computer when developing something. I guess technically, that would be a contract as well.The point of what we’re trying to do here is to create a situation where we have a real person-to-person relationship with any developer who is asking for the most sensitive data. That doesn’t mean that — if you’re a developer and you want to put Facebook Login on your website, you can do that. If you want to get access to ask people for their religious affiliation, or their sexual orientation, for data that could be very sensitive, we want to make sure we have a clear relationship with those people.Frenkel: We understood that Cambridge Analytica had reached out to Facebook and asked that its ban on the platform be reconsidered. Are you giving any thought to allowing Cambridge Analytica back in?AdvertisementZuckerberg: The first thing we need to do is conduct this full forensic audit of the firm, that they don’t have any people’s data from our community and that they’ve deleted anything, including derivative data, that they might have. We’re working with the regulator in the U.K. on this, so our forensic audit was actually paused in the near term to cede the way for the ICO there to do their own government investigation. We’re certainly not going to consider letting them back onto the platform until we have full confirmation that there’s no wrongdoing here.Roose: There were reports as far back as 2015 that Cambridge Analytica had access to this data set. Why didn’t you suspend them then?Zuckerberg: So, we actually heard, I think it was at the end of 2015 — some journalists from The Guardian reached out to us and told us what you just said. And it was not just about Cambridge Analytica, it was about this developer, Aleksandr Kogan, who had shared data with them.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We took action immediately at that point. We banned Kogan’s app from the platform, we demanded that Kogan and Cambridge Analytica and a couple other parties that Kogan had shared the data with would legally certify that they didn’t have the data, and weren’t using it in any of their operations. They gave us that formal certification. At the time, they told us they never had gotten access to raw Facebook data, so we made that decision.Frenkel: In retrospect, do you wish you had demanded proof that the data had been deleted?Zuckerberg: Yes. They gave us a formal and legal certification, and it seems at this point that that was false.Again, we haven’t done our full investigation and audit yet so I can’t say definitively that they actually have data. I’ve just read all the same reports that you have, including in The New York Times, that says that journalists have seen evidence that they have the data, which is a strong enough signal for us to go on, and take action here.That’s the basic driver behind us now needing to go and do a full investigation into any app that had access to a large amount of data before we locked down the platform policies in 2014. Just having folks tell us that they were using the data correctly, I think, does not satisfy our responsibility to our community to protect their data.Frenkel: Are you actively looking at some of these dark web data brokers that have been in news reports recently, that say that other independent researchers are potentially trading in this data?AdvertisementZuckerberg: Yes, we’re investigating that too.Roose: Are you worried about the #DeleteFacebook campaign that’s been going around? Have you seen meaningful numbers of people deleting their accounts, and are you worried that will be a trend?Zuckerberg: I don’t think we’ve seen a meaningful number of people act on that, but, you know, it’s not good. I think it’s a clear signal that this is a major trust issue for people, and I understand that. And whether people delete their app over it or just don’t feel good about using Facebook, that’s a big issue that I think we have a responsibility to rectify.Frenkel: We’re now heading into the 2018 midterms. Could you speak about what Facebook is going to do ahead of the 2018 midterms to make people feel more confident that the platform won’t be used this way again?Zuckerberg: This is an incredibly important point. There’s no doubt that in 2016, there were a number of issues including foreign interference and false news that we did not have as much of a handle on as we feel a responsibility to for our community.Now, the good news here is that these problems aren’t necessarily rocket science. They’re hard, but they’re things that if you invest and work on making it harder for adversaries to do what they’re trying to do, you can really reduce the amount of false news, make it harder for foreign governments to interfere.One of the things that gives me confidence is that we’ve seen a number of elections at this point where this has gone a lot better. In the months after the 2016 election, there was the French election. The new A.I. tools we built after the 2016 elections found, I think, more than 30,000 fake accounts that we believe were linked to Russian sources who were trying to do the same kind of tactics they did in the U.S. in the 2016 election. We were able to disable them and prevent that from happening on a large scale in France.In last year, in 2017 with the special election in Alabama, we deployed some new A.I. tools to identify fake accounts and false news, and we found a significant number of Macedonian accounts that were trying to spread false news, and were able to eliminate those. And that, actually, is something I haven’t talked about publicly before, so you’re the first people I’m telling about that.I feel a lot better about the systems now. At the same time, I think Russia and other governments are going to get more sophisticated in what they do, too. So we need to make sure that we up our game. This is a massive focus for us to make sure we’re dialed in for not only the 2018 elections in the U.S., but the Indian elections, the Brazilian elections, and a number of other elections that are going on this year that are really important.AdvertisementFrenkel: The Times reported that [Facebook chief security officer Alex] Stamos will be leaving toward the end of this year. Is there a broader plan for how Facebook is going to structure security on its platform ahead of all these important elections?Zuckerberg: Sure. One of the important things we’ve done is, we want to unify all of our security efforts. And you reported on a reorg around Alex Stamos, and I’ll say something about him in a second. He’s been a very valuable contributor here and was a really central figure in helping us identify the foreign interference with Russia. And I think he has done very good work, and I’m hopeful he’ll be engaged for a while here on that.One of the big things we needed to do is coordinate our efforts a lot better across the whole company. It’s not all A.I., right? There’s certainly a lot that A.I. can do, we can train classifiers to identify content, but most of what we do is identify things that people should look at. So we’re going to double the amount of people working on security this year. We’ll have more than 20,000 people working on security and community operations by the end of the year, I think we have about 15,000 now. So it’s really the technical systems we have working with the people in our operations functions that make the biggest deal.The last thing I’d add on this. Take things like false news. You know, a lot of it is really spam, if you think about it. It’s the same people who might have been sending you Viagra emails in the ’90s, now they’re trying to come up with sensational content and push it into Facebook and other apps in order to get you to click on it and see ads. There are some pretty basic policy decisions we’ve made, like O.K., if you’re anywhere close to being a fake news site, you can’t put Facebook ads on your site, right? So then suddenly, it becomes harder for them to make money. If you make it hard enough for them to make money, they just kind of go and do something else.Roose: Is the basic economic model of Facebook, in which users provide data that Facebook uses to help advertisers and developers to better target potential customers and users — do you feel like that works, given what we now know about the risks?Zuckerberg: Yeah, so this is a really important question. The thing about the ad model that is really important that aligns with our mission is that — our mission is to build a community for everyone in the world and to bring the world closer together. And a really important part of that is making a service that people can afford. A lot of the people, once you get past the first billion people, can’t afford to pay a lot. Therefore, having it be free and have a business model that is ad-supported ends up being really important and aligned.Now, over time, might there be ways for people who can afford it to pay a different way? That’s certainly something we’ve thought about over time. But I don’t think the ad model is going to go away, because I think fundamentally, it’s important to have a service like this that everyone in the world can use, and the only way to do that is to have it be very cheap or free.Roose: Adam Mosseri, Facebook’s head of News Feed, recently said he had lost some sleep over Facebook’s role in the violence in Myanmar. You’ve said you’re “outraged” about what happened with Cambridge Analytica, but when you think about the many things that are happening with Facebook all over the world, are you losing any sleep? Do you feel any guilt about the role Facebook is playing in the world?AdvertisementZuckerberg: That’s a good question. I think, you know, we’re doing something here which is unprecedented, in terms of building a community for people all over the world to be able to share what matters to them, and connect across boundaries. I think what we’re seeing is, there are new challenges that I don’t think anyone had anticipated before.If you had asked me, when I got started with Facebook, if one of the central things I’d need to work on now is preventing governments from interfering in each other’s elections, there’s no way I thought that’s what I’d be doing, if we talked in 2004 in my dorm room.I don’t know that it’s possible to know every issue that you’re going to face down the road. But we have a real responsibility to take all these issues seriously as they come up, and work with experts and people around the world to make sure we solve them, and do a good job for our community.It’s certainly true that, over the course of Facebook, I’ve made all kinds of different mistakes, whether that’s technical mistakes or business mistakes or hiring mistakes. We’ve launched product after product that didn’t work. I spend most of my time looking forward, trying to figure out how to solve the issues that people are having today, because I think that’s what people in our community would want.Follow Kevin Roose and Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @kevinroose and @sheerafA version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Zuckerberg Reiterates Obligation To Privacy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Tiffany HsuDebates over privacy have plagued Facebook for years.But the news that  Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm that worked on President Trump’s 2016 campaign, was able to gain access to private data through the social network has sparked an unusually strong reaction among its users.The hashtag #DeleteFacebook appeared more than 10,000 times on Twitter within a two-hour period on Wednesday, according to the analytics service ExportTweet. On Tuesday, it was mentioned 40,398 times, according to the analytics service Digimind.Cher was one such deserter, writing on Twitter that the decision to quit Facebook, although “very hard,” was necessary because she loves the United States.2day I did something VERY HARD 4 me.Facebook has helped me with my Charity, &there are amazing young Ppl there.I have a special friend (Lauren)who I Respect & Admire,but today I deleted my Facebook account .I Love My🇺🇸🙏🏻.I Believe....There are Things MORE”IMPORTANT”THAN💰💰Brian Acton, a co-founder of the WhatsApp messaging service, told his tens of thousands of followers on Tuesday to delete Facebook. The social network acquired WhatsApp in a $19 billion deal in 2014.For people who aren’t celebrities or billionaires, the decision to abandon Facebook came reluctantly, because the platform often served as their sole connection to certain relatives, friends and professional opportunities.Here, some newly Facebook-free users of social media discuss why they left.______Richard H. PerryA filmmaker in Los AngelesFor a long time now, Mr. Perry had wanted to leave Facebook.He never felt comfortable knowing that the company had access to much of his personal information. In the months before the 2016 presidential election, he watched the social network become what he called “a garbage platform of ads and weird reposted articles and people that you care about exposing themselves as racists.”But Facebook was also where Mr. Perry promoted his films, where he posted ads seeking help on the set, and where he communicated with colleagues and a “massive number” of his friends and relatives.Until he heard about Cambridge Analytica.“I suspected this stuff was going on, but this is the first time it’s been plainly exposed,” he said. “It seems so malicious, and Facebook seems so complicit all the way up and down, like it doesn’t care about its users.”Mr. Perry, 39, has since deleted his profile and plans to switch to Twitter and Instagram for his social media needs.“It was an easy decision,” he said. “It’s not going to be the end of the world.”______Dan ClarkA retired Navy veteran in MaineMr. Clark kept one Facebook account to chat with friends and a separate account to keep tabs on members of his family nationwide. This week, he deleted both.“Facebook was the main platform I used to keep in touch with all of them, and it was a difficult decision to give it up,” he said. “But you have to stand for something, so I just put my foot down and said enough is enough.”Mr. Clark, 57, said he had already been angry with Facebook for censoring some of his posts, which he said expressed his staunchly conservative views but were “never evil or putting anybody down.” He could not abide the idea that his personal information was also being sold or given away without his consent.Before cutting the cord, Mr. Clark posted on Facebook inviting his contacts to ask him for his personal phone number. More than 100 people reached out within three days.“There are just so many ways nowadays to stay in contact: phones, email, instant message, Gab, which is a social network that doesn’t censor anything,” he said. “Facebook is more obsolete than people would think.”______Alexandra KleemanA writer on Staten IslandHer first experience with fake news — a Facebook post claiming that Pope Francis had endorsed Mr. Trump’s candidacy — altered the way Ms. Kleeman looked at Facebook.“It changed the psychological and emotional feel of the platform for me,” she said. “I don’t have a great feeling when I log in.”The Cambridge Analytica scandal led her to remove the Facebook app from her phone. “I’m not going to give them my engagement clicks,” Ms. Kleeman, 32, said. But she is keeping the messaging function open for professional purposes and will continue using Instagram.She doesn’t mind the idea that some personal data can be made public — she used to have a blog, she said.“But the idea that my data could be used for purposes that I expressly don’t want, that freaks me out.”______Paul MusgraveAn assistant professor in Amherst, Mass.Twitter makes Mr. Musgrave feel depressed about the world, but Facebook is the social media platform he is trying to abandon.As a political science teacher at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Mr. Musgrave, 36, feels a professional responsibility to keep abreast of the news and academic chatter hurtling at him in the form of tweets.Facebook was more valuable to him as a “low-key, offstage networking tool,” a “replacement for end-of-year family newsletters” that allowed him to “passively keep up with people,” he said. He joined the platform more than a decade ago and before that had been a member of Friendster, a precursor to Facebook.But in 2016, while helping his mother during her campaign for a government position in Indiana, Mr. Musgrave discovered a “poisonous swamp” of content on the site. The Cambridge Analytica findings were even more disturbing, he said."This is a company that has Orwellian levels of data about us, truly Big Brother-level, but it’s behaving as if it has no social responsibility and is a purely neutral medium of communication,” he said. "That’s what’s really been scary.”Having deactivated his Facebook account, with plans to delete it, he now worries about connecting with people who use the social network as their main conduit of communication.“I’m definitely pruning myself away from some of those really important branches,” he said. “I watch my own students try to navigate the world of apps and smartphones, and even they don’t really know how the internet works outside these enclosed garden spaces.”______Ben GreenzweigAn entrepreneur in Westchester, N.Y.Once Mr. Greenzweig confirms that the 1,195 photos and 85 videos in his Facebook profile have downloaded, he plans to delete the account he has maintained for nearly a decade.Mr. Greenzweig, 40, said the Cambridge Analytica news was “the last straw.”“We have surpassed the tipping point, where the benefit now fails to outweigh the cost,” he said. “But I will definitely miss what the promise of Facebook used to be — a way to connect to community in a very global and local context.”A year ago, Mr. Greenzweig was an “extraordinarily active” Facebook user who juggled conversations with friends, managed several groups, took out ads for his business and maintained professional contacts.But on Tuesday night, in his final post, he asked his network to connect with him through email, LinkedIn, Twitter or phone.“See everyone in the real world,” he wrote.Follow Tiffany Hsu on Twitter: @tiffkhsu.Talya Minsberg contributed reporting.videoAdvertisement
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
MARCH 21, 2018
In the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal, in which data from over 50 million Facebook profiles was secretly scraped and mined for voter insights, many Facebook users have decided to delete their accounts — but untangling yourself from a site like Facebook is not as easy as pressing “delete.”In the wake of news that the Facebook data of 50 million people was obtained by Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm, many users are mulling whether it is time to leave the social network. Even a co-founder of WhatsApp, which Facebook bought for $16 billion in 2014, declared that it was time to delete Facebook.But while deleting your account is as simple as clicking on a few buttons, Facebook may be too ubiquitous to truly quit. For one, it would probably be inaccurate to say you have removed Facebook from your life just by leaving the site. Chances are you still use WhatsApp, the largest messaging app in the world, or Instagram, the most popular photo-sharing app. Facebook owns both.Keep in mind that Facebook isn’t the only company capable of collecting your information. One big culprit: Web trackers, like cookies embedded into websites and their ads. They are everywhere, and they follow your activities from site to site.You can quit Facebook if you simply find no joy in it. But if you’re looking to leave for philosophical reasons concerning privacy, it’s a futile effort. You may be better off tweaking your privacy settings on the site.AdvertisementHere are some answers to questions that many people are posing to The New York Times via social media.AdvertisementWhat are the alternatives to using Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp?There is no real substitute for Facebook if you’re looking for a social network that includes virtually everyone you meet in real life. Social networks are all about the people on them, and Facebook has more than 2 billion monthly users. You could consider Snapchat, which has about 187 million daily users, but it’s a far different experience — you primarily use it to send photos that self-destruct — with an interface that many people find confusing.There are plenty of alternatives to WhatsApp. But they have drawbacks and aren’t as far-reaching as WhatsApp, which has more than 1.5 billion monthly users.Signal is a solid app for secure encrypted messaging — but it is still a young service with a relatively small number of users. You might be able to get hundreds of your friends to join Signal. But chances are you have friends or family in other countries, and WhatsApp is the go-to messaging service internationally. For example, practically every smartphone user in India — more than 200 million people — uses WhatsApp.Another WhatsApp alternative is WeChat, a Chinese messaging app that has about a billion monthly users. But the majority of people on that service are in China. And WeChat faces its own privacy issues because of China’s notorious reputation for mass surveillance. Tencent, the company that runs WeChat, denies that it stores the chat histories of its users. But WeChat users have been arrested over conversations they have had in the app, and chat transcripts have been used as evidence in court proceedings.Instagram, which has more than 800 million monthly users, is also a tough one, giving Facebook a stranglehold on photo sharing. The only real competitor to Instagram is Facebook itself, which has its own photo-sharing features. Remember Flickr? The Yahoo-owned site is the closest thing either has to a competitor, and it’s like a graveyard of people’s digital memories before they abandoned it for Facebook and Instagram.Google Photos is a compelling service, but it is a photo album management tool, not so much a social network.How else do you keep in touch with friends and family? How do you create and discover events? How do you market and manage customer service for your small business? How do you spark and build grass-roots movements?Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Facebook is the one-stop shop to accomplish all those tasks. But if you have the patience, you can juggle multiple apps to cobble together the same experience.AdvertisementMessaging apps are popular for keeping in touch with friends and family — a group chat between family members via text message, for example, is still an efficient way to keep in touch. And sites like MeetUp are designed for hosting and discovering events.As for customer service, many companies use Twitter to engage with their customers and resolve complaints. Yelp, the reviews site for local businesses, is a common place for customers to talk about their experiences, and business owners often engage with people there.For grass-roots movements, a Twitter hashtag might be enough. Recent examples include #metoo, the movement for people to discuss sexual assault, #deleteuber, the campaign to protest Uber last year amid political controversy, and now, there is the movement to #deletefacebook in response to the Cambridge Analytica controversy.What does it mean to delete Facebook? How can you actually delete your account?You can permanently delete your account by clicking a few buttons on Facebook’s website. The company delays deletion for a few days, so do not log back in. Facebook also offers a tool for extracting a copy of your data before deleting your account.After you delete your account, it won’t be recoverable. But there are caveats.Shadows of your digital self would remain on the site. For example, if people uploaded photos of you, those photos will still be there. The conversations you had with friends through Facebook won’t disappear, either.When you delete your account, you are only deleting the media you posted, like your status updates and photos that you uploaded. That’s not going to do much for your privacy, considering that an overwhelming amount of what you do on Facebook involves engaging with other people. All of your friends (and their friends, too) would also have to delete their accounts in order to have any sort of meaningful effect.What other things are you losing access to if you delete Facebook? Why do so many apps require a Facebook login?AdvertisementOne painful part of breaking up with Facebook would be potentially losing access to the many third-party apps and websites that are tied to your account. Over the past decade, many shopping sites and apps teamed up with Facebook to use the company’s login tool, Facebook Login.Facebook Login became popular because it was a good product. By clicking a button, you could sign up for an account with an app or website just by sharing your Facebook account data. That allowed you to skip manually entering details like your name and email address — a process that is especially cumbersome on a small smartphone screen. This sped up the process of signing up for an account to buy that pair of shoes you saw go on sale.If you were to delete Facebook, you would break your access to many sites and apps that you signed up for using Facebook Login. But fortunately, many sites and apps still let you sign up for accounts directly through them, and many also let you log in through your Google account.It’s not impossible to delete Facebook. But it would be a long and tedious process to create new accounts for all the apps and sites you use.Where does Facebook really equal the internet?Keep in mind that Facebook reaches well beyond the United States. As my colleague Sheera Frenkel noted on Twitter, deleting Facebook is a privilege. In some parts of the world, like Myanmar, Egypt and Indonesia, people rely on Facebook as a primary means to conduct business and stay in touch with friends and family. In Africa, Facebook has struck deals that offer basic services — centered on those provided by Facebook — to residents for free.Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes about solving tech-related problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What frustrates you about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Want to #DeleteFacebook? Well, You Can Try.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byPhotographs and Text by Jack NicasPALM SPRINGS, Calif. — “I get invited to everything, and everywhere I go, everyone wishes they had my job. But that’s not true here,” said Pablos Holman, a self-described futurist and inventor who has worked on lasers that kill mosquitoes and machines that suppress hurricanes.“There’s geniuses everywhere,” he said, motioning to the pair talking next to him, the theoretical physicist Lisa Randall and the computer scientist Stephen Wolfram. “I don’t even register on this scale.”We’re at Mars, an exclusive three-day conference at a midcentury-modern hotel here in the California desert run by Amazon and its founder, Jeff Bezos, for some of the world’s most successful geeks. For its first two years, Mars was largely secret; the most prominent image that leaked was a photo of Mr. Bezos piloting a 13-foot robot last year. This year, Amazon lifted the veil and invited a handful of reporters into Mr. Bezos’s brainiac pow-wow. Amazon is eager to buoy its reputation in artificial intelligence, a focus of the conference, amid tight competition with Google. And Mr. Bezos, who according to Bloomberg is the world’s richest person with a roughly $130 billion fortune, is growing more comfortable in the spotlight, particularly as a modern-day Renaissance man. His side projects now include The Washington Post, the space firm Blue Origin and a 10,000-year clock in a West Texas mountain that ticks once a year.For Mars, Amazon and Mr. Bezos handpick the roughly 200 attendees, most from the fields of artificial intelligence, robotics and space. There are astronauts, philosophers, rocket scientists, Nobel prize winners and gravitational-wave astrophysicists. Attendance and everything else — room service, the crab legs at breakfast, seaweed wraps at the spa — were free. (The New York Times paid my way.)Mr. Bezos was visible throughout, sitting front and center at presentations and posing for photos with attendees in front of a Blue Origin space capsule. His booming laugh was easy to pick out in the crowd. When I arrived at the Parker Palm Springs hotel where the conference was held, three separate conference workers tried to carry my bag. In my room, the lights were dimmed, a cheese plate was waiting, and an Amazon Echo was playing bossa nova. A note said to keep the Echo. (I didn’t.) Atop a collection of more high-end swag was a note from Mr. Bezos: “We’ll consider this gathering a big success if you find something inspiring.” While there were dozens of multimillionaires among the attendees, many savored the luxury. “This is quite opulent compared to what I’m used to,” said Ann Karagozian, a rocket scientist from the University of California, Los Angeles. “Definitely not any academic conferences.”At dinner, seats were preassigned. After dark, free booze flowed from makeshift bars and attendees lit up high-end cigars. Mr. Bezos held court around the fire pit Sunday night, tumbler of whiskey in hand. He wore the down Patagonia jacket given to each guest — a style that has become a sort of tech-industry uniform — with jeans and cowboy boots. One attendee described the get-up as Silicon Valley meets West Texas, where Blue Origin has its main launch site. Mornings were reserved for show and tell. About a dozen attendees presented on novel businesses or scientific breakthroughs, from new techniques for studying supermassive black holes to computer chips implanted in brains that can resolve symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Rich Mahoney, head of a “powered-clothing” start-up called Seismic, showed off leotards with built-in sensors and electric motors to mimic muscles — designed to help elderly or disabled wearers stand from chairs.“Intelligent, wearable strength,” he said. “This is a new clothing paradigm.”There was one clear rock star: A yellow four-legged robot named SpotMini that strutted back and forth on stage as a sea of smartphone cameras focused in. It was the newest invention from Boston Dynamics, the Defense Department-funded firm that Google recently sold to SoftBank. After the presentation, Mr. Bezos and SpotMini led the crowd to lunch. To get to lunch, attendees passed under a colorful spiked 16-foot plexiglass archway coated in a reflective dichroic film, which was originally designed to protect spacesuits from cosmic radiation — and now costs about $125 per square foot. “Four people have proposed to their girlfriends underneath it,” said Davis McCarty, the Chicago artist who built the gate in 2016 for Burning Man, the arts festival in the Nevada desert. Throughout, Amazon executives referred to repeat guests as alumni or “returning campers.” Attendees seemed universally smitten with the conference; some suggested they were a part of history. Ken Goldberg, a roboticist from the University of California, Berkeley, compared Mars to Athens 2,000 years ago, showing Raphael’s fresco “The School of Athens” during a presentation. “People would be hanging out, discussing ideas, having arguments, and a big topic at the time was space,” he said.“It’s like a true salon of its time,” said Brogan BamBrogan, an entrepreneur with a walrus mustache who now runs Arrivo, which aims to build high-speed transportation networks using levitating cars in highway medians. At lunch, Mr. Bezos played beer pong, minus the beer, against a robotic arm. (He lost.) Across the lawn, attendees played a different robotic arm in table tennis, and SpotMini — piloted by a human — mugged for cameras and snatched phones with the arm that extended from its neck. Some attendees said they were so impressed by the guest list they were unsure they belonged. The serial entrepreneur Dean Kamen, best known for inventing the Segway, said, “You feel like you’re walking around here as an intellectual midget.”In the afternoon, we had a choice of activities, from falconry to Navy Seal training to sausage making. Group meditation was popular. On Tuesday, a collective “ohhhmmm” rang out across the hotel grounds. Eighteen of us, including me, flew aerobatic planes. Most who signed up were eager to hop into the cockpit; a few later had to use the barf bag. Many were paired up for “dogfights” in which they chased each other in the sky. We were allowed to steer the plane for periods; the pilot in back also had a hand on the controls.In one dogfight, Takeo Kanade, 72, a professor at Carnegie Mellon University and robotics pioneer, vanquished his opponent, Aaron Dollar, 40, an up-and-coming roboticist at Yale. “Old-man wisdom won,” Mr. Kanade said after getting out of the plane, still wearing a flight suit with his pilot call sign for the day Velcroed on: “Wolfman.” Mr. Dollar’s call sign was “Tinkerbell.”On Tuesday at about 5:45 a.m., more than a dozen attendees gathered on one lawn and craned their necks toward the sky, looking for the Humanity Star, a satellite covered in mirrors that one of them, Peter Beck, had launched into orbit. The pre-dawn group included Bob Smith, chief executive of Blue Origin, and Adam Savage, co-host of the former Discovery show “MythBusters.” About 90 seconds after the satellite was supposed to be glittering across the sky, nothing had appeared. Then, for a moment, there was a flash in the sky. “That was it!” someone shouted. Then another flash. “It reflects the sunlight from the sun and it strobes the earth like a giant disco ball,” said Mr. Beck, a New Zealander with curly hair who founded the space firm Rocket Lab. “The point is to really get people to look up and have an overview effect, and realize they’re standing on a rock in the middle of the universe.”AdvertisementBy KEVIN ROOSE and SHEERA FRENKELMARCH 21, 2018
When a former engineer revealed a pattern of sexual harassment at Uber last year, Travis Kalanick, then the company’s chief executive, said he would immediately open an investigation.When users complained about bugs and problems with the Apple Maps app in 2012, Tim Cook, the company’s chief executive, released a statement that said “we fell short.”And in 2011, when Netflix tried to split off its mail-order DVD business into a company called Qwikster, its chief executive, Reed Hastings, wrote a letter to the public. “I messed up,” he said. “I owe everyone an explanation.”But in the past week, as Facebook plunged into a crisis over how Cambridge Analytica, a political consulting firm that provided voter-targeting services to the Trump campaign, improperly obtained data on 50 million Facebook users, Mark Zuckerberg, the social network’s chief executive, said, well, nothing.AdvertisementNeither Mr. Zuckerberg nor Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, has made any public appearances this week. Mr. Zuckerberg’s last public post on Facebook was a March 2 photo of himself and his wife, Priscilla Chan, baking hamantaschen cookies to celebrate the Jewish holiday of Purim; Ms. Sandberg’s most recent post was a four-day-old photo from her child’s debate competition.Advertisement[Updated: Mark Zuckerberg Breaks His Silence, Vows Action to Bolster Data Privacy]Facebook employees have described a tense atmosphere in which some joked about selling their stock in the company before it took another dip. The company has lost about $50 billion in market value in the last couple of days. Over the past few months, as criticism of the company’s role in the 2016 election has escalated, some employees have sought to transfer to other divisions of the company, such as WhatsApp and Instagram, calling their work on Facebook’s main product “demoralizing.”On Monday, The New York Times reported that Alex Stamos, the company’s chief security officer, was slated to leave the company in August after disagreements with other top executives over the handling of Russia’s exploitation of Facebook’s platform during the 2016 election season. On Tuesday, Brian Acton, a co-founder of WhatsApp, which was acquired by Facebook in 2014 for $19 billion, posted a tweet that read, “It is time. #deletefacebook.” Mr. Acton did not return a request for comment.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two people familiar with the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the discussions were confidential, said that Mr. Zuckerberg planned to address the Cambridge Analytica situation and the larger data privacy issues with a public statement on Wednesday. The statement will be aimed at rebuilding trust with users, one of the people said. In the past week, one of the people said, Mr. Zuckerberg has spent significant time hunkered down with a small group of engineers to discuss how to make Facebook’s users more secure, with more control of their data.Kate Losse, an early Facebook employee and Mr. Zuckerberg’s former speechwriter, said that the Cambridge Analytica controversy was different from previous Facebook privacy scandals, in that it was about an issue at the core of the company’s business model that will not be easily remedied: the disclosure of Facebook data to outside sources through its third-party developer platform.“My guess is that what is giving Zuckerberg pause at this point is the question of how to acknowledge and explain this state of affairs while at the same time mitigating the concerns that will come from people finally understanding how this all worked,” she said.Mr. Zuckerberg is no stranger to speaking out during times of company crisis. In 2006, users rebelled after Facebook introduced the first version of its news feed, which showed users for the first time what their friends were doing on the social network. As groups formed to protest what they felt was an incursion on their privacy, Mr. Zuckerberg posted a peacemaking note on his Facebook page.“Calm down. Breathe. We hear you,” he wrote.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I keep getting Instagram alerts on my phone that say someone has updated a “story.” What exactly is an Instagram story?A. Instagram, primarily known as a social network for sharing smartphone camera photos in a square format, added a feature called Stories in 2016. Stories are basically temporary compilations of photos and videos on a theme, like a visit to a theme park. You add to the collection over the course of the day and can annotate the material with text, virtual stickers and digital doodles. Instead of posting multiple pictures and clips separately, where your friends might miss some of them, you can start a Story that lets all the content be viewed in one place.To see a Story in the Instagram mobile app, tap the house icon in the lower-left corner of the screen to go to the Feed page. Stories shared by accounts you follow appear at the top of the screen, so tap a profile icon to see the content. The app automatically moves to the next Story in your feed unless you tap the X in the corner to stop.If you want to start your own Story, tap your own profile icon in the top-left corner of the Feed page. The Instagram camera app appears, inviting you to snap, annotate and add the first photo or video to your Story. You can then repeat this process throughout the day.Stories can be a concise way to share scenes from a nature hike, a parade or some other activity. After 24 hours, a Story disappears from view, although you can archive it to your account or save any of the photos or videos to your phone’s camera roll. The Instagram Help Center has more information on using the Stories feature, including how to configure your privacy settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy CADE METZMARCH 21, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — In 1980, Dave Patterson, a computer science professor, looked at the future of the world’s digital machines and saw their limits.With an academic paper published that October, he argued that the silicon chips at the heart of these machines were growing more complex with each passing year. But the machines, he argued, could become more powerful if they used a simpler type of computer chip.This counterintuitive idea spread across Silicon Valley, driven by the work of Mr. Patterson at the University of California in Berkeley and a second academic, John Hennessy, about 40 miles away at Stanford University. They called it RISC, short for “reduced instruction set computer.”On Wednesday, the Association for Computing Machinery, the venerable computing society that represents industry professionals across the world, announced that Mr. Patterson and Mr. Hennessy had won this year’s Turing Award, often called the Nobel Prize of computing. They will share a $1 million cash prize.AdvertisementNamed for the British mathematician and pioneering computer scientist Alan Turing, the award carries an added resonance this year, as the chip industry takes another step toward the kind of future envisioned by Mr. Patterson and Mr. Hennessy.AdvertisementToday, more than 99 percent of all new chips use the RISC architecture, according to the association.“This is the one fundamental idea that has been sustained over the last several decades of chip design,” said Dave Ditzel, a chip industry veteran who studied with Mr. Patterson at Berkeley. Mr. Ditzel helped popularize many of the same ideas and is now building a new RISC chip at a start-up called Esperanto.Mr. Patterson and Mr. Hennessy were interested in simpler chips because they ran faster, consumed less power, made life easier for chip designers and allowed machines to evolve at a faster rate. In the mid-1980s, new RISC chips emerged from two Silicon Valley start-ups, Sun Microsystems and MIPS Technologies, becoming the standard for the computer workstations and servers that underpinned big corporate operations.Those processors were eventually eclipsed by chips from Intel, which put its considerable muscle behind a competing design. But as computing expanded into smartphones, tablets, and other small devices — where power and space are at a premium — more and more chips used designs from a British company called ARM, short for Advanced RISC Machine.As a book written by the two researchers in 1989, Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, became the standard text for chip design, even Intel took a partial step toward the RISC idea. Its chips continued to use their own complex way of talking to a computer’s software, but started to use some aspects of RISC.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Intel chips still drive the data centers that power the internet. But as these chips approach their physical limits, internet giants like Google, Facebook, and Amazon are pushing tasks onto a wide range of simpler processors that consume much less power, sparking a renaissance in chip design.“Complexity is even more of an enemy than it was before,” Mr. Ditzel said. “We have to design differently.”Mr. Patterson and Mr. Hennessy are at the heart of this change. Their book is now in its sixth edition. Mr. Hennessy is on the board of directors of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, after serving as the president of Stanford for 16 years. And Mr. Patterson works in the Google research lab that is designing low-powered chips specifically for artificial intelligence.As time goes on, the world could move even more toward the RISC way of doing things, thanks to an organization called the RISC-V Foundation, which has published a chip architecture that anyone can use for free, said industry veteran Dennis Allison. The organization was founded by Dave Patterson and others from Berkeley.Advertisement“I expect this to play a vital role in the future,” Mr. Patterson said. “And the architecture is not that different from what John and I described back in 1980.”Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetzA version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Chip Design Visionaries Share Turing Award.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byThe ShiftBy Kevin RooseThe room was full of stressed-out cryptocurrency traders. And for once, they weren’t nervous about the price of Bitcoin, or the roller coaster swings of the virtual currency markets.No, the subject of this gloomy affair was taxes. Specifically, how — and whether — to pay them.With this year’s April 17 tax filing deadline fast approaching, many virtual currency traders are sweating over their tax returns. They’re confused by the complicated rules, many of them stemming from guidelines issued by the I.R.S. in 2014, governing the taxation of virtual currencies. They’re afraid that the windfall profits created by last year’s cryptocurrency boom, which sent currencies like Bitcoin and Ether skyrocketing and created a new class of crypto-millionaires, have left them with huge tax bills. And, of course, they’re worried about drawing the eye of the Internal Revenue Service.“I’ve lost sleep over it,” said Shaun, a trader who said he was still figuring out how to properly account for last year’s cryptocurrency profits on his taxes. Shaun, who asked that his last name not be used because he has been audited in the past, said he was scared that increased scrutiny of the cryptocurrency market could lead the I.R.S. to pay special attention to cases like his.“I don’t want to be made an example of,” he said.This gathering, which took place last week in Manhattan and was organized by Blockmatics, a research and education company, featured three accountants who specialize in cryptocurrency tax preparation. For an hour, the audience peppered them with tax-prep questions that ranged from common (Do I have to pay taxes on Bitcoin if I haven’t sold yet?) to esoteric (If my Bitcoin wallet got hacked and all my coins got stolen, can I deduct my losses?). By the end of the hour, there seemed to be many more questions than answers.For answers to some common questions about cryptocurrencies and taxes, see my colleague Tara Siegel Bernard’s column on the topic.“It’s complicated as heck,” said Mike Schreibman, an I.T. consultant who attended. Mr. Schreibman pulled out his phone to show me a dashboard of all the cryptocurrencies he trades, and said that he was considering filing an extension to buy himself more time for analysis.“Nobody knows what’s going to happen,” said Jeanne Lowdermilk, a lawyer who trades cryptocurrencies. “But the I.R.S. is the one agency you don’t want to mess with.”Taxes have become an increasingly divisive topic among cryptocurrency fans. On Reddit forums devoted to cryptocurrency trading, some users exchange tips for dodging their tax obligations, including a method of hiding their assets by converting them into “privacy coins,” such as Monero, which are designed to be opaque and untraceable. They argue about whether the I.R.S. could use the blockchain, the digital ledger that records all Bitcoin transactions, to identify tax evaders in the future. And they ask for tax advice on complex situations, such as fly-by-night cryptocurrency exchanges that vanish suddenly, erasing the records of users’ transactions.Cryptocurrencies are tax-unfriendly by design. Many of the early adopters of Bitcoin were libertarians and anarchists who were drawn to the technology’s stateless, decentralized nature. And while cryptocurrency transactions are permanently recorded on the blockchain, it’s possible for users to conceal their identities.Until recently, the I.R.S. showed little desire to go after cryptocurrency income, since there was so little of it. But last year’s boom changed all that. The agency has formed a team of specialists to investigate cryptocurrency-related crimes, including international money laundering and tax evasion. In November, after a yearlong lawsuit, the agency won a judgment that forced Coinbase, the largest American-based cryptocurrency exchange, to turn over account records for more than 14,000 customers. In January, Coinbase sent 1099-K forms to a number of its current users, informing them that their trading proceeds were being reported to the I.R.S. and reminding them to pay the taxes they owed.All of this confusion has created a cottage industry of specialized accountants who can keep traders out of tax trouble. Many of these accountants are cryptocurrency fans themselves, and they are more likely than your average C.P.A. to understand concepts like airdrops, hard forks and other bits of confusing crypto-jargon.Mario Costanz, the chief executive of the tax preparation firm Happy Tax, told me that an influx of cryptocurrency trading clients had helped his business more than triple in the past year. Last year, Happy Tax opened a separate cryptocurrency division, Crypto Tax Prep, which already has several thousand clients and is the fastest-growing segment of his business.“We’re preparing for a pretty insane last seven to 10 days of the tax season,” Mr. Costanz said.Laura Walter, a Tokyo accountant who goes by Crypto Tax Girl on Twitter, said she had been inundated with requests for help with tax preparation this year.“A lot of crypto investors are younger and don’t have a lot of experience trading stocks,” she said. When they find out they owe taxes on their cryptocurrency trades, she said, “a lot of people are kind of shocked.”Part of what makes paying cryptocurrency taxes so difficult is that current I.R.S. rules treat cryptocurrency as property rather than currency. That means that every time you sell or transfer a digital coin for something else — whether you’re cashing out Ether for dollars, trading Bitcoin for another cryptocurrency or using Ripple to buy a cup of coffee — you’re creating a taxable event that must be separately recorded and accounted for.Complicating matters even more, the timing of last year’s cryptocurrency boom made for some extra tax headaches. The price of Bitcoin rose more than 1,500 percent last year, with most of the gains coming during the last two months of the year. High prices caused many traders to sell Bitcoin in 2017, in order to lock in their profits. But instead of cashing out into dollars, many traders put their 2017 profits into new cryptocurrency investments, most of which have lost money in this year’s market slump. That decline has left some investors short of the funds they need to pay the taxes they owe on last year’s gains.Ms. Walter said she had seen clients with cryptocurrency gains as large as $400,000 who did not withhold taxes during the year and subsequently lost money trading. “Now they’re stuck with these huge tax bills, and they don’t have the capital to pay it.”Faced with such problems, some cryptocurrency traders have decided to avoid the issue entirely, by not declaring any cryptocurrency on their taxes and hoping for the best. According to Credit Karma, which provides tax-filing services, fewer than 100 of the 250,000 people who had used the company’s tax-filing software as of February reported cryptocurrency transactions, a rate below 0.04 percent.Even the people at the cryptocurrency tax event in Manhattan admitted that most of the traders they knew weren’t planning to pay taxes on their crypto-gains.“This is the smallest crypto event I’ve been to,” said Mr. Schreibman, the I.T. consultant. “No one believes they’ll get in trouble.”All the traders at the event said they would do their best to pay their taxes in full. And they looked a little shellshocked, as if they had been rudely yanked out of a thrilling, consequence-free virtual world back into the real one.Peter Baniuszewicz, a cryptocurrency trader from Brooklyn, told me that this year’s tax season had come as a jolt of reality.“It’s not Monopoly money anymore,” he said.Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.AdvertisementBy NICOLE PERLROTH and SHEERA FRENKELMARCH 20, 2018
Alex Stamos, the Facebook executive who plans to leave the company by August amid a backlash over disinformation, has not been one to hold back.Mr. Stamos, Facebook’s chief information security officer, was often known to push superiors on security matters beyond where they were comfortable, people who have worked with him have said. He once challenged the National Security Agency director to his face, sparred with the media on Twitter and took his former bosses at Yahoo — and more recently at Facebook — to task over security issues.At times, Mr. Stamos’s outspokenness made him an asset. But it also made him a nuisance in Silicon Valley, where tech executives publicly praise a spirit of openness even as many of them become more opaque.At Facebook, Mr. Stamos favored more disclosure about how Russian agents used the site to influence the 2016 presidential election and beyond. He also pushed for organizational changes to better prevent misinformation. But Mr. Stamos, 39, was met with resistance and now plans to leave the company just ahead of the midterm election.Advertisement“It is a hard decision, weighing the potential future good you might do in an organization vs. how likely they will let it happen,” Jeff Moss, founder of the Black Hat and DefCon cybersecurity conferences, posted about Mr. Stamos on Twitter. “Put another way ‘You can eat well or sleep well, but seldom both.’”AdvertisementFacebook did not have a comment for this article and referred to Mr. Stamos’s previous comments and his posts on Twitter. On Tuesday, Mr. Stamos tweeted that Facebook executives, including the chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, and the chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, “supported the investigation and disclosure of our work, and I’m glad we put out what we found.” He did not address the disputes over the reorganization of Facebook’s security team.Mr. Stamos, a California native and a graduate of the University of California, Berkeley, previously worked at start-ups and founded a security consulting firm in San Francisco before joining Yahoo as its chief security officer in mid-2014.He became somewhat of a legend in 2015 when he pushed back on government efforts to weaken security. At the time, after surveillance disclosures by the former National Security Agency contractor Edward J. Snowden, Silicon Valley companies were adding anti-surveillance protections including encryption to their data centers and messaging tools. Washington accused tech companies of going too far, and the F.B.I. pressed companies like Apple to weaken their encryption or build in a government back door.In February 2015, at a cybersecurity conference in Washington, Mr. Stamos stood up to Adm. Michael S. Rogers, the N.S.A. director, by likening the government’s requests to “drilling a hole in the windshield.” A video of the encounter went viral, making Mr. Stamos a celebrated figure in privacy and security circles.Within Yahoo’s security team, known as the “Paranoids,” Mr. Stamos was considered an inspiration by many of its young engineers. But his vocal — at times abrasive — advocacy for privacy and anti-surveillance measures often put him at odds with Yahoo’s leadership, including the chief executive, Marissa Mayer.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Stamos had successfully campaigned for Yahoo to encrypt the data flowing through its data centers. But when he pushed for end-to-end encryption — which ensures that only the parties in a conversation can see what is being said, leaving even Yahoo unable to read it — Ms. Mayer and other executives scoffed.Some of Mr. Stamos’s other security proposals at Yahoo, such as resetting customers’ passwords after a breach, were rejected because the added inconvenience might encourage Yahoo customers to leave.AdvertisementBy then, Mr. Stamos had drawn the notice of Facebook executives. Some at the social network worried aloud whether he was too much of a firebrand to join the social network, according to three current and former Facebook employees who declined to be named because of nondisclosure agreements. But others argued that his activism was a benefit for the company.Mr. Stamos joined Facebook in June 2015. From the start, the current and former employees said, he got off on the wrong foot with some executives, including Ms. Sandberg, over how best to police the platform. Facebook was increasingly grappling with cyberattacks from countries like Iran, whose hackers were caught trying to break into the accounts of State Department employees, and from Russia, the current and former employees said.In a statement on Monday, Mr. Stamos said his relationship with Ms. Sandberg was “productive.”After a breach of the Democratic National Committee in June 2016, Mr. Stamos pulled together a team to investigate Russian interference on Facebook. The findings pit him against executives in the company’s legal and communications groups. While Mr. Stamos argued to disclose more, others said that by proactively disclosing what they had found, Facebook had become a target of further public ire, according to seven current and former Facebook employees.Internally, Mr. Stamos repeatedly argued that Facebook needed to act more like a defense contractor in dealing with security, given that the social network was becoming a similar target for nation states.In audio leaked in October to ZDNet, a tech news site, he told his security team that he explained to management “that we have the threat profile of a Northrop Grumman or a Raytheon or another defense contractor, but we run our corporate network, for example, like a college campus, almost.”The tape infuriated Mr. Stamos’s bosses, according to the current and former employees. A leak investigation is continuing, two of the people said. They said some executives believed Mr. Stamos had leaked the audio himself to get Facebook to take his entreaties more seriously.Mr. Stamos later tweeted that the audio was “not a criticism of anybody, just a statement of why our team needs to be creative in how we protect our corporate network.”By October, the relationship between Mr. Stamos and Ms. Sandberg had deteriorated over how to handle Russian interference on Facebook and how best to reorganize Facebook’s security team before the midterm elections, according to more than half a dozen people who work or formerly worked at the company. Mr. Stamos proposed that instead of reporting to Facebook’s general counsel, Colin Stretch, he report directly to Facebook’s higher-ups.Instead, executives released Mr. Stamos from much of his day-to-day responsibility, employees said.Mr. Stamos has said his remaining days at Facebook will be spent “exploring emerging risks and working on election security.”Follow Nicole Perlroth and Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @nicoleperlroth and @sheeraf.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: The End for Facebook’s Security Evangelist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Cecilia KangWASHINGTON — The Justice Department’s case to block AT&T and Time Warner’s $85 billion blockbuster merger heads to trial this week, with opening statements expected on Thursday. The case is being billed as one of the most important antitrust trials in years.The deal, if approved, would create a media giant that combines AT&T’s nationwide mobile and satellite distribution networks with Time Warner’s huge collection of popular movies and television offerings, including “Game of Thrones” on HBO, news on CNN, and college and professional basketball on TNT. The central question of the trial: Would that combination hurt consumers or help them?Here’s what you need to know.Opening statements are scheduled for Thursday, with the Justice Department and AT&T getting 45 minutes each to lay out their main arguments. Expect lots of colorful claims and defenses from both sides. Top officials from the Justice Department, including the head of its antitrust division, Makan Delrahim, are expected to show up in United States District Court in Washington to watch. AT&T’s chief executive, Randall Stephenson, and Time Warner’s chief executive, Jeff Bewkes, will be there, too — as will scores of other media, telecom and tech executives, as the outcome of the trial could reshape the media industry.Read more on what the trial could mean for the future of TV.The trial is expected to last six to eight weeks — unless there is a settlement — with each side calling about 30 witnesses and presenting reams of evidence. The Justice Department alone plans to show 519 exhibits. It could take many weeks longer for Judge Richard J. Leon to make a decision on the $85 billion merger.The Justice Department sued to block the merger because it believes the combination of AT&T with Time Warner would hurt competition and lead to higher prices for consumers.AT&T and Time Warner argue that the opposite will happen. With their combination, they say, they will be a stronger competitor to the giants of Silicon Valley, such as Facebook, Amazon, Apple and Google, which are spending billions of dollars on video that they can then distribute on their services.Judge Leon has experience in antitrust disputes, giving final approval of Comcast’s merger with NBCUniversal in 2011 — a case that many have looked to for precedent.The Justice Department’s legal team is led by Craig Conrath, a longtime government litigator who has argued for government antitrust actions throughout several administrations.AT&T and Time Warner’s defense team is led by Daniel Petrocelli, a Los Angeles litigator who doesn’t have experience in antitrust law. He gained fame for his successful case against O. J. Simpson in a wrongful-death suit brought by the family of Ron Goldman.The most interesting testimony will probably come from company executives. Mr. Stephenson and Mr. Bewkes are expected to take the stand. Ahead of the opening statements, Judge Leon said he also wanted to question third parties including Google. Last fall, Google argued in a deposition that shows made by Turner, which is owned by Time Warner, were important to its YouTube service.Turner, which owns CNN, TBS and TNT, is a key focus of the Justice Department’s case. The department says that those channels are “must watch” television that is valuable to the health of rivals like Dish and Google, and that combining them with AT&T’s wireless and satellite services would encourage the new company to withhold those shows or make them much more expensive.If Judge Leon sides with the Justice Department, it will be much harder for telecom, tech and media firms to strike deals with each other. Blocking the so-called vertical merger of two companies that don’t directly compete with each other would set a higher bar for other deals.If AT&T and Time Warner win, expect further consolidation in the industry. Several deals are already in the works or being discussed, pending a sign from the court on whether they can proceed.AdvertisementBy KEITH COLLINS and GABRIEL J.X. DANCEMARCH 20, 2018
Perhaps at some point in the past few years you’ve told Facebook that you like, say, Kim Kardashian West. When you hit the thumbs-up button on her page, you probably did it because you wanted to see the reality TV star’s posts in your news feed. Maybe you realized that marketers could target advertisements to you based on your interest in her.What you probably missed is that researchers had figured out how to tie your interest in Ms. Kardashian West to certain personality traits, such as how extroverted you are (very), how conscientious (more than most) and how open-minded (only somewhat). And when your fondness for Ms. Kardashian West is combined with other interests you’ve indicated on Facebook, researchers believe their algorithms can predict the nuances of your political views with better accuracy than your loved ones.As The New York Times reported on Saturday, that is what motivated the consulting firm Cambridge Analytica to collect data from more than 50 million Facebook users, without their consent, to build its own behavioral models to target potential voters in various political campaigns. The company has worked for a political action committee started by John R. Bolton, who served in the George W. Bush administration, as well as for President Trump’s presidential campaign in 2016. “We find your voters and move them to action,” the firm boasts on its website.Cambridge Analytica now says it has destroyed the user data it collected on Facebook. Raw data reviewed by The Times suggests the information, or copies of it, may still exist. In either case, specific user information was merely a means to an end, a building block in a far more ambitious construction: a behavioral model powerful enough to manipulate people’s activity and, potentially, sway elections.AdvertisementThe firm adapted its approach to personality modeling from studies conducted by researchers at Stanford University and the Psychometrics Center at the University of Cambridge. The studies relied on data collected by a Facebook app called myPersonality, a 100-question quiz developed by the Psychometrics Center that assessed a person’s openness, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness and neuroticism, traits commonly referred to in the academic community by the acronym Ocean.AdvertisementMany respondents who took the quiz through the myPersonality app authorized it to gain access to their Facebook profile data, and information about their friend network — access that was allowed by the social network at the time. That allowed researchers to cross-reference the results of the quiz — numeric Ocean scores — with the users’ Facebook “likes,” and build a model from the correlations they found between the two. With that model, the researchers could often make precise guesses about subsequent users’ personalities using only a list of their likes, no 100-question quiz necessary.One of the studies the Psychometrics Center produced, published in 2015 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, was built on the “likes” and Ocean scores of more than 70,000 respondents who took the myPersonality quiz on Facebook. It found that a person who liked the movie “Fight Club,” for example, was far more likely to be open to new experiences than a person who liked “American Idol,” according to a review of data provided to The Times by Michal Kosinski, an author of the 2015 study and a professor of organizational behavior at Stanford.Researchers at Stanford University and Cambridge University’s Psychometrics Center built a model that could assess a person’s personality using Facebook “likes” alone. The model can use the likes to score a person’s openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness and neuroticism.Most open Least openTom Waits musicianCheryl Cole musicianSalvador Dalí artist“The Hills” TV showBjörk musicianLuke Bryan musician“A Clockwork Orange” movieAdidas Football brandWriting hobbyJason Aldean musicianMost conscientious Least conscientiousRunning hobbyBring Me the Horizon musician“Private Practice” TV showEscape the Fate musicianTraveling hobby“Adventure Time” TV showCooking hobbyMinecraft GameHiking hobby“The Skins” TV showMost extroverted Least extrovertedDJ Pauly D musicianAnimeMichael Kors brandNightwish musicianWaka Flocka Flame musicianMangaJWoww TV starVideo Games hobbyGucci Mane musicianDrawing hobbyMost agreeable Least agreeableCasting Crowns musicianMarilyn Manson  musicianThe BibleRammstein  musicianGodPlacebo  musicianRascal Flatts musicianJudas Priest  musicianRelient K musician“Californication” TV showMost neurotic Least neuroticPlacebo  musician“SportsCenter” TV showEscape the Fate  musicianESPN TV networkBring Me the Horizon musicianDerrick Rose athleteMarilyn Manson musicianMiami Heat sports teamThe Smiths  musicianFootball sportIn that study, the researchers compared the accuracy of their model with personality assessments made by the respondents’ friends. The friends were given a 10-question version of the myPersonality quiz and asked to answer based on their knowledge of the respondents’ personalities.Based on a sample of more than 32,000 participants who were assessed by both the model and one or two friends, the researchers found that the model, using just 10 likes, was more accurate than a work colleague. With 70 likes, it was more accurate than a friend or roommate; with 150, more accurate than a family member; and with 300, more accurate than a spouse.The model, the researchers said, was particularly adept at “predicting life outcomes such as substance use, political attitudes and physical health.” The real-world efficacy of the approach, however, has been called into question.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When Cambridge Analytica approached the Psychometrics Center about using its models, the center declined. Cambridge Analytica then turned to Aleksandr Kogan, a psychology professor at Cambridge University who was familiar with the center’s work. Dr. Kogan developed a Facebook app called “thisisyourdigitallife,” a quiz similar to myPersonality, and used it to harvest data from more than 50 million Facebook profiles. Of those, 30 million contained enough information to generate personality profiles. Only 270,000 users authorized Dr. Kogan’s app to have access to their data, and all were told that their information was being used for academic research.Cambridge then pitched its services to potential political and commercial clients, ranging from Mastercard and the New York Yankees to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.Facebook has now banned Cambridge Analytica from its platform, as well as its parent company and Dr. Kogan. In Facebook’s eyes, Dr. Kogan’s infraction was not collecting the data, but giving it to Cambridge Analytica.Advertisement“Although Kogan gained access to this information in a legitimate way and through the proper channels that governed all developers on Facebook at that time, he did not subsequently abide by our rules,” Facebook’s deputy general counsel said in a statement on Friday.By handing over that information to a private company, Facebook said, Dr. Kogan violated its terms of service.Facebook in 2015 changed its policies, including altering rules about how third-party apps can gain access to information about users’ friends. But user data collected through such apps over the years probably remains in the wild, not to mention the models that can continue to be used to target people around the world.An earlier version of this article misstated the title of Michal Kosinski, a researcher who helped develop the model that created personality profiles from Facebook “likes.” He is a professor of organizational behavior, not a professor of computer science.A version of this article appears in print on March 21, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: What ‘Likes’ Say About You.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By KEVIN GRANVILLEMARCH 19, 2018
Our report that a political firm hired by the Trump campaign acquired access to private data on millions of Facebook users has sparked new questions about how the social media giant protects user information.Cambridge Analytica, a political data firm hired by President Trump’s 2016 election campaign, gained access to private information on more than 50 million Facebook users. The firm offered tools that could identify the personalities of American voters and influence their behavior.Cambridge has been largely funded by Robert Mercer, the wealthy Republican donor, and Stephen K. Bannon, a former adviser to the president who became an early board member and gave the firm its name. It has pitched its services to potential clients ranging from Mastercard and the New York Yankees to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.On Monday, a British TV news report cast it in a harsher light, showing video of Cambridge Analytica executives offering to entrap politicians. A day later, as a furor grew, the company suspended its chief executive, Alexander Nix.Read more about how Cambridge Analytica and the Trump campaign became linked.Behind the data: How researchers use Facebook “likes” to sway your thinking. AdvertisementThe data, a portion of which was viewed by The New York Times, included details on users’ identities, friend networks and “likes.” The idea was to map personality traits based on what people had liked on Facebook, and then use that information to target audiences with digital ads.Researchers in 2014 asked users to take a personality survey and download an app, which scraped some private information from their profiles and those of their friends, activity that Facebook permitted at the time and has since banned.The technique had been developed at Cambridge University’s Psychometrics Center. The center declined to work with Cambridge Analytica, but Aleksandr Kogan, a Russian-American psychology professor at the university, was willing.Dr. Kogan built his own app and in June 2014 began harvesting data for Cambridge Analytica.He ultimately provided over 50 million raw profiles to the firm, said Christopher Wylie, a data expert who oversaw Cambridge Analytica’s data harvesting. Only about 270,000 users — those who participated in the survey — had consented to having their data harvested, though they were all told that it was being used for academic use.Facebook said no passwords or “sensitive pieces of information” had been taken, though information about a user’s location was available to Cambridge.Read more about the internal tension at the top of Facebook over the platform’s political exploitation.Facebook in recent days has insisted that what Cambridge did was  not a data breach, because it routinely allows researchers to have access to user data for academic purposes — and users consent to this access when they create a Facebook account.AdvertisementBut Facebook prohibits this kind of data to be sold or transferred “to any ad network, data broker or other advertising or monetization-related service.” It says that was exactly what Dr. Kogan did, in providing the information to a political consulting firm.Dr. Kogan declined to provide The Times with details of what had happened, citing nondisclosure agreements with Facebook and Cambridge Analytica.Cambridge Analytica officials, after denying that they had obtained or used Facebook data, changed their story last week. In a statement to The Times, the company acknowledged that it had acquired the data, though it blamed Dr. Kogan for violating Facebook’s rules and said it had deleted the information as soon as it learned of the problem two years ago.But the data, or at least copies, may still exist. The Times was recently able to view a set of raw data from the profiles Cambridge Analytica obtained.Read more about how Facebook allows third-party apps to collect users’ data.The company issued a statement on Friday saying that in 2015, when it learned that Dr. Kogan’s research had been turned over to Cambridge Analytica, violating its terms of service, it removed Dr. Kogan’s app from the site. It said it had demanded and received certification that the data had been destroyed.Facebook also said: “Several days ago, we received reports that, contrary to the certifications we were given, not all data was deleted. We are moving aggressively to determine the accuracy of these claims. If true, this is another unacceptable violation of trust and the commitments they made. We are suspending SCL/Cambridge Analytica, Wylie and Kogan from Facebook, pending further information.”In a further step, Facebook said Monday that it had hired a digital forensics firm “to determine the accuracy of the claims that the Facebook data in question still exists.” It said that Cambridge Analytica had agreed to the review and that Dr. Kogan had given a verbal commitment, while Mr. Wylie “thus far has declined.”Read more about how to protect your data on Facebook.Facebook, already facing deep questions over the use of its platform by those seeking to spread Russian propaganda and fake news, is facing a renewed backlash after the news about Cambridge Analytica. Investors have not been pleased, sending shares of the company down more than 8 percent since Friday.Advertisement■The Federal Trade Commission said Tuesday it is investigating whether Facebook violated a 2011 consent agreement to keep users’ data private.■ In Congress, Senators Amy Klobuchar, a Democrat from Minnesota, and John Kennedy, a Republican from Louisiana, have asked to hold a hearing on Facebook’s links to Cambridge Analytica. Republican leaders of the Senate Commerce Committee, led by John Thune of South Dakota, wrote a letter on Monday to Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, demanding answers to questions about how the data was collected.■ A British Parliament committee sent a letter to Mr. Zuckerberg asking him to appear before the panel to answer questions on Facebook’s ties to Cambridge Analytica.■ The attorney general of Massachusetts, Maura Healey, announced on Saturday that her office was opening an investigation. “Massachusetts residents deserve answers immediately from Facebook and Cambridge Analytica,” she said in a Twitter post. Facebook’s lack of disclosure on the harvesting of data could violate privacy laws in Britain and several states.Read more details on the fallout.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By PUI-WING TAMMARCH 20, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — When Trevor McFedries set out last year to raise money for Brud, his robotics and artificial intelligence start-up, he found himself in many meetings with “a ton of white guy” venture capitalists.So Mr. McFedries, who is black, and his co-founder, Sara DeCou, a Latino woman, added a condition for investors: The pair would accept money only from venture firms that had a woman or a person of color in a position to write them a check.“It was counterintuitive for us to raise money from a bunch of white guys who want to extract all the value from the world,” said Mr. McFedries, who eventually collected several million dollars from firms that met the condition. “We’re interested in reshaping the way that tech looks.”Mr. McFedries is one of more than 400 tech entrepreneurs and chief executives who have now banded together, in a loose coalition known as Founders for Change, to pressure the venture capital industry to diversify its ranks. The group includes Dropbox’s chief executive, Drew Houston; Logan Green and John Zimmer of Lyft; Airbnb’s chief executive, Brian Chesky; and founders of public companies such as Katrina Lake of Stitch Fix.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, in a statement underlining the importance of diversity in the tech industry, the tech executives said the racial and gender makeup of a venture capital firm would be “an important consideration” when they were raising money:I believe in a more diverse and inclusive tech industry. I am dedicated to having a diverse team and board, and when I have a choice of investment partners, the diversity of their firms will be an important consideration.The entrepreneurs’ public statement is unusual. In Silicon Valley’s start-up ecosystem, founders and investors have generally maintained a delicate power equilibrium. Venture capitalists strive to get into the hottest start-ups, aiming for a big payoff when those companies go public or are sold. Entrepreneurs, in turn, take money and guidance from the investors to help their start-ups grow and flourish.AdvertisementBut a new generation of entrepreneurs is ready to upset that balance. Spurred on by the #MeToo movement and fed up after several Silicon Valley scandals last year revealed how investors had abused their power with female start-up founders, these entrepreneurs have become impatient for change in the industry.“It’s pretty obvious the venture industry is not where it needs to be” in diversity, said Jack Conte, chief executive of Patreon, a San Francisco start-up that runs a subscription platform for artists, musicians and others. The founders’ statement, which he signed on to, “is a market signal to venture capitalists that their customers care about solving a problem,” he said.The American venture capital industry, which invested $84 billion in more than 8,000 companies last year, has long faced little to no impetus to alter its demographics. Venture firms are usually small private companies made up of former tech executives or financial types, who are mostly male and white. And because venture firms operate with long-term horizons — their funds generally invest over a 10-year period — the industry’s pace of change is often glacial.In 2016, 11 percent of venture capital firms’ investment partners were women, according to a survey by the National Venture Capital Association and Deloitte. The survey found no black investment partners at venture firms, while 2 percent of investment partners were Latino.Venture capital firms have made some attempts to diversify their own ranks, as well as in the companies they invest in. Several high-profile Silicon Valley partnerships have recently hired female investment partners. Others have pledged to take more meetings with female entrepreneurs. To cut down on harassment, more than 40 venture firms also  made their codes of conduct public this month.“Change has picked up and it’s coming, but I do think it’s measured in years, not months,” Greg Sands, a venture capitalist at Costanoa Ventures, said. Costanoa has made its code of conduct public and recently held “Seat at the Table” events to meet more female entrepreneurs.Part of the pressure to diversify the venture capital industry is coming from within — in particular, from a small group of female venture capitalists. The Founders for Change movement, for example, originated with Aileen Lee of Cowboy Ventures and Jenny Lefcourt of Freestyle Capital.AdvertisementOver dinner in September, the two women shared stories of different entrepreneurs who were agitating for more diversity in tech. They decided to corral those founders together to publicly seek change.“Founders tell us: ‘I cannot believe your industry. It’s like ‘Mad Men,’” Ms. Lee said.She added that it might seem self-serving for female investors to push founders to seek more diversity. But, she said, it is not a case of “us versus them.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Instead, Ms. Lefcourt said, it is about everyone realizing that diversity can be a competitive advantage.How much impact these founders might have is unclear. Some said they themselves needed to do better diversifying their own start-ups. And while many have individual diversity initiatives that they plan to share with one another, there has been little discussion of how to follow up on their public statement.These entrepreneurs also acknowledged that they were in an advantageous position because venture capitalists were competing for their companies and they could choose which investors to work with. Other entrepreneurs may not have that luxury.Still, Sarah Nahm, chief executive of Lever, a recruiting software start-up, said joining Founders for Change and standing with other entrepreneurs to promote diversity was important.Since she helped found Lever in 2012, Ms. Nahm has raised $73 million from venture capitalists for her San Francisco company. For much of that time, she said, investors cared little about diversity and inclusion — including sometimes mistaking her for an executive assistant during pitch meetings.In 2015, Ms. Nahm said, she deliberately chose to take funding from a woman at Scale Venture Partners. “So much of Silicon Valley is diversifying, but venture capital is the slowest part of the tech industry to bring change,” she said.Now making a statement might enable other founders to have earlier conversations about diversity with investors, Ms. Nahm said.Advertisement“Unless investors are hearing it from companies, they are not going to think that changing is critical,” she said. “We want people to realize they can get started today.”Follow Pui-Wing Tam on Twitter: @puiwingtam.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
MARCH 19, 2018
Revelations that a voter-profiling company that worked Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign harvested private information from 50 million Facebook profiles have many people wondering: What, if anything, can they do to protect their data connected to the social network?Here’s the harsh truth: Not much, short of ceasing to browse the web entirely or deleting your Facebook account.Yet there are some best practices you can employ to help safeguard your data, such as installing software to block web tracking technologies and carefully vetting the apps that you use on Facebook.But it also helps to understand what exactly happened with those 50 million profiles in order to determine how you can better protect your data. Here’s what you need to know.AdvertisementAn academic researcher at Cambridge University built an app called thisisyourdigitallife, which offered to pay Facebook users to take a personality test and agree to share that data for academic use. About 270,000 people participated in the study — enough to extract information on tens of millions of Facebooks users.AdvertisementHow did Cambridge Analytica get data on 50 million people when only 270,000 people had agreed to hand over their information to a third party? Facebook said people who downloaded the app gave consent for the app to collect limited information about their friends whose privacy settings were set to allow it.That information was eventually paid for by Cambridge Analytica, the voter profiling company that worked with the Trump campaign.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There is a multipronged approach you can take to protect yourself from data-harvesting apps and programs. That includes tools you can install in your browser and settings you can tweak on Facebook. Here’s a run down of what you should do:• Audit your Facebook apps. If you used Facebook to sign in to a third-party website, game or app, those services may continue to access your personal data. On Facebook, go to the settings page and click on the Apps tab to see which apps are connected to your account. From there, you can take a closer look at the permissions you granted to each app to see what information you are sharing. Remove any apps that you find suspicious or no longer use. (Facebook has also made some changes to prevent the gathering of detailed information of friends of users.)On the App Settings page there is another setting called Apps Others Use. This is where you choose which details are shared about you when your friends use apps. Make sure to uncheck all the boxes if you don’t want any of your information, like your birthday or hometown, accessed by your friends’ apps.• Audit your Facebook privacy settings. If you are concerned about what details apps can see about you and your Facebook friends, now is a good time to check your privacy settings and minimize the information you share publicly. For example, you can make sure that only your friends can see your Facebook posts, or that only you can see your friends list.• Read privacy policies. When you sign up for a new app or web tool, the company typically asks you to agree to its terms of service. Make it a habit to peruse the terms and pay particular attention to the privacy policy. If you see language that suggests your data could be shared in a way that makes you uncomfortable, don’t use the program.• Install a tracker blocker. There are add-ons that you can install in your browser that try to block trackers embedded on websites. But be aware that in some cases, they will make parts of websites work improperly. In our tests, Disconnect and Privacy Badger were useful tools for blocking trackers on Google’s Chrome browser.AdvertisementHere’s a primer on how tracking works, to give you a sense of why blockers are important: When you engage with an app on Facebook, it may plant a tracker in your web browser, like a cookie, that collects information from you. Even when you close out of the app, the tracker can continue to follow your activities, like the other sites you visit or the people you interact with through status updates, according to Michael Priem, chief executive of Modern Impact, an advertising firm in Minneapolis.“It doesn’t go away after you’ve stopped looking at the ad,” he said.• Install an ad blocker. Another way to block trackers is to prevent ads from loading altogether. Ad blockers are also add-ons that you can install for your browser on your mobile device or computer. Mobile ads are fully functioning programs, and they sometimes include malware that harvest some of your data. Even the largest websites do not have tight control over the ads that appear on their sites — and sometimes malicious code can appear inside their ad networks. A popular ad blocker among security researchers is uBlock Origin.• Clear your browsing data. Periodically, you can clear your cookies and browsing history. Apple, Google and Microsoft have published instructions on how to clear data for their browsers Safari, Chrome and Internet Explorer. That will temporarily delete cookies and trackers, though they will probably reappear over time.• Be wary of unknown brands. Even if you read the privacy policies, you still may have to take them with a grain of salt. In the case of the thisisyourdigitallife app, the fine print said the information would be collected for academic use, not commercial purposes. So think twice before sharing information with unfamiliar companies or organizations. (Then again, the researcher came from Cambridge University, one of the world’s top schools — so who can you really trust?)A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2018, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Practical Steps To Protect Your Data  From Harvesters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. Does Google Chrome on the computer have any controls like Safari for stopping ads and videos that start automatically? Preferably, without having to install a browser extension or some other program that wants permission to look at my surfing.A. Apple’s Safari browser introduced new tools for blocking intrusive content last year, and Google recently added a few ad-filtering and sound-blocking tools of its own to its Chrome browser. To help protect users from invasive or obstructive advertising, Chrome now filters web ads that do not comply with the Better Ads Standards guidelines set by the Coalition for Better Ads, an industry group. (Google, Facebook, Microsoft and News Corporation are among the group’s members.)Intrusions from other elements on the page can also be better controlled now in Chrome. In version 64 and later versions of the Chrome browser, you can mute those sites that automatically start rolling videos with the volume cranked up. (Chrome routinely updates itself, but if you want to manually check for any new versions, click the three-dot More menu in the upper-right corner. If you see an “Update Google Chrome” option, choose it and then click Relaunch.)Once you confirm you have Chrome 64 or later, you can silence a noisy page open in your browser by right-clicking the page tab and choosing Mute Site from the menu. This should keep a gag on the site each time you return, but if you do want to hear a sound clip or video there, right-click the tab again and select Unmute Site.You can also adjust how a site behaves by clicking the padlock icon (or the encircled “i” icon) next to the site’s address at the top of the window. Once you click the icon, a menu opens with a list of permissions you can block or allow, like letting the site use your location. Click the Site Settings button to see the expanded menu for controlling things like sound, pop-up windows and automatic downloads from the site.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byA new category of prescription medical treatments, what executives call digital therapeutics, comes in the form of mobile apps. By Natasha SingerHealth tech companies are making a big push to digitize medicine, introducing novel tools like digital pills that track when patients take their drugs and smart spoons that can automatically adjust to hand tremors.Now they want some patients to get prescription treatments from the app store as well.Later this year, doctors treating patients addicted to substances like cocaine and amphetamines will be able to prescribe Reset, an app that gives patients lessons to help them modify their behavior. The Food and Drug Administration cleared it in September as the first mobile medical app to help treat substance-use disorders.“It’s all the things you would traditionally associate with a pill or any other medication,” said Dr. Corey McCann, the chief executive of Pear Therapeutics, the start-up behind Reset. “But it just so happens to be a piece of software.”Pear Therapeutics is at the forefront of a new category of medical treatment, offering what company executives call “prescription digital therapeutics.” These products, they say, are medical apps that have been studied in randomized clinical trials, cleared by the Food and Drug Administration, require a doctor’s prescription and allow doctors to track patients’ progress.This month, in a sign of momentum behind the idea and how it might expand to other health conditions, Novartis, the Swiss pharmaceutical giant, announced that it had teamed up with Pear Therapeutics. Together, they plan to develop prescription apps for schizophrenia and multiple sclerosis.Companies like Pear are trying to stand apart in a global market of more than 318,000 health apps by arguing that their products provide assurance of effectiveness and safety. The advantage of their prescription treatment software, they say, is that apps making general wellness claims — like meditation apps marketed to soothe you to sleep — do not require F.D.A. review. But medical devices like apps that claim to treat or manage disease must submit clinical evidence to the F.D.A. and get clearance.A few medical experts, however, argue that the apps, while promoting themselves as a new medical therapy, are essentially just repackaging and rebranding existing treatments. They note that behavioral therapy done on a computer, instead of on a smartphone, was already a longstanding health treatment and backed by research.“This is a branding effort that is meaningless,” said Dr. Allen J. Frances, a psychiatrist who is a professor emeritus at the Duke University School of Medicine. “F.D.A. approval comes easily, and a prescription doesn’t guarantee greater efficacy.”Dr. McCann, a former neuroscientist and venture capitalist, co-founded Pear Therapeutics in 2013. The start-up has since raised $70 million and licensed a variety of digital therapeutics from researchers and other companies. The Reset mobile app, for instance, is based on a web-based addiction therapy program. It was originally developed in the late 1990s by behavior modification researchers who digitized long-established methods of in-person addiction therapy.Reset is not the first prescription mobile medical app. The F.D.A. previously cleared software like BlueStar Rx, a prescription diabetes management app.But Reset is different because its primary focus is not disease management. It delivers an established behavior-modification treatment for addiction — which traditionally involves face-to-face outpatient therapy — entirely in digital form. In other words, the app itself is the medicine.Anyone will be able to download the Reset app, expected to be available in the second half of the year. But to get it to work on a smartphone, patients must enter a prescription access code. A prescription will be good for 90 days. The F.D.A. cleared the app to be used in conjunction with outpatient therapy.The Reset app contains 61 therapy units, with titles like “Coping With Thoughts About Using,” including lessons, skills-building exercises and quizzes on the material. The recommended dose: four therapy lessons per week.The idea behind the app is to teach patient skills — such as avoiding situations that trigger their substance use or learning how to refuse an offer of drugs — to modify their behavior, thereby promoting abstinence.The app has a dashboard that doctors can use to monitor their patients’ progress. After patients complete a lesson, they receive encouraging feedback or gift cards — an established method for replacing addiction highs with more benign stimuli. Patients also receive rewards if they test negative for substance use.In clinical trial results that Pear submitted to the F.D.A., substance-abuse patients who used online therapy lessons had higher abstinence rates after nine to 12 weeks than patients who had not used them. Addiction is often chronic, however, and six months after the study, abstinence rates among the two patient groups were about the same.The arrival of Reset coincides with an F.D.A. effort to introduce more flexible ways of regulating digital health software for patients. Because such apps pose little risk to patients, they face a lower bar for agency authorization than high-risk prescription drugs or devices implanted in the body, said Bakul Patel, the associate director for digital health at the F.D.A.’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health.“We look for a clinical study that gives reasonable assurance of evidence to the claims that people are making,” Mr. Patel said.Since web-based behavior therapy is already a longstanding treatment, however, critics say the app format isn’t much of a medical innovation.In addition, several medical experts questioned the clinical trial data that Pear provided to the agency, because it came from a study of the precursor desktop-based therapy product, not the mobile app.Dr. Frances, the psychiatrist, said the study was also problematic because it offered financial incentives only to the patients who used the web-based program — making it difficult to determine whether it was the online program, the money or just newness that temporarily increased their abstinence.Dr. McCann, Pear’s chief executive, said that Reset used the same content as the web-based program and that it had been designed to be used with behavioral incentives — which is why it offers financial rewards. “The two, when used in combination, produce the efficacy effect,” he said.Pear has also submitted an opioid addiction treatment app called Reset-O, which works in conjunction with anti-addiction medication, for F.D.A. review.“It’s a very novel approach to treating certain central nervous system conditions,” said Gary Nachman, a specialty pharmaceuticals analyst at BMO Capital Markets who hosted a conference call for investors with Pear executives in January.The Reset app has the potential to gain a slice of the $35 billion addiction treatment market, and pave the way to treat other conditions, like depression and anxiety, Mr. Nachman said. Akili, another digital medicine start-up, is developing prescription video games to treat childhood attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.Even so, Mr. Nachman cautioned that many unknowns remained. For one thing, he said, treatment apps, like other novel medical products, may turn out to be less effective in the real world than in research studies.But big pharmaceutical companies are paying attention. The partnership between Pear and Novartis, a leading maker of neurological drugs, could add some major drug industry credibility and research power to the push for prescription digital therapeutics.Dr. James E. Bradner, president of the Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, said the two companies planned to rigorously test each app first as a stand-alone treatment and then in combination with prescription medications. He added that he believed such treatment apps might one day improve results for patients with psychiatric disorders.“Even five years ago, this was science fiction,” Dr. Bradner said. “We are in a brave new world of therapeutic potential.”Natasha Singer is a business reporter covering health technology, education technology and consumer privacy.@natashanytAdvertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 16, 2018
Q. I have difficulty typing on the computer, and would like to know if there are programs that can convert speech into text with formatting. What can I use?A. Dictation software that transforms spoken words into text formatted with different type styles, subheads and alignments is readily available. With some programs, you can even add bullet lists, adjust line spacing and apply highlight colors to text, all through spoken commands. In fact, you may find that programs you already use can handle basic formatting by dictation — as long as you use the right commands.For example, when used with the Chrome browser and Google’s system of “voice typing,” Google Docs can add quite a bit of text formatting when you tell the program what to do. To compose and edit text this way, you need a microphone connected to your computer; headset microphones from a smartphone may work if the connector is compatible. When the microphone is set up, use the Chrome browser to go to Google Docs, and open (or create) a new document.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the Google Docs Tools menu, choose Voice Typing, click the microphone icon and start dictating your document. You can insert punctuation by saying things like “comma” or “period” aloud as you dictate. To apply formatting to a paragraph, you have just dictated, say “select paragraph” to highlight it and then say how you want it formatted, like “italic.” The Google Docs help site has a list of all the verbal formatting commands you can use and instructions for phrasing your formatting requests.AdvertisementMicrosoft’s Windows 7 and Windows 10 operating systems include speech-recognition software you can use with a word-processing program to format paragraph breaks and other basic elements. If the program is not enabled by default, you can turn it on in the Windows Ease of Access settings. If you plan to use Microsoft Word, the free Dictate add-on utility for the Windows version of Microsoft Office uses the same speech-recognition software the company uses in its Cortana virtual assistant and can translate your speech into other languages.AdvertisementApple’s Mac operating system has been converting text to speech for years, but you may need to set up the software properly on your computer. If your Mac has the Siri assistant, you can tell it to “turn on Dictation.” If you have an older version of the Mac operating system, click the gear-shaped System Preferences icon in the desktop dock, select Keyboard and then Dictation. Click the On button in the Dictation box and click the check box for Enhanced Dictation.The Enhanced Dictation option downloads Apple’s transcription software directly to the Mac. (By default, the Mac operating system converts speech to text over an internet connection to Apple’s servers.) Once the Enhanced Dictation software is installed, you do not have to have to be online for it to work and you can use the program’s dictation commands to format the text.Third-party programs also convert your speech into text. Nuance’s line of Dragon dictation software is a popular choice in this category and Nuance’s site has guides to using the Dragon software to format text specifically with Google Docs or Microsoft Word.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 15, 2018
Q. My kids are growing up fast and they bring home tons of paperwork and memories from school. Is there is an efficient way to scan the projects and even record the children describing the art?A. Inexpensive mobile apps that allow you to photograph your children’s artistic creations and archive the works can be a convenient way to save (and share) the memories. Keepy (for Android, iOS and Kindle) is one well-reviewed app in this category and offers the ability to record audio and video commentary on the saved schoolwork from the child. Canvsly (for Android and iOS) is another app for digitally saving and organizing children’s art and school projects.As with other similar apps, Keepy and Canvsly have built-in tools for creating and purchasing photo-books and other gift items from the saved artwork. Collecting the original art from the refrigerator and having photographs of it in a printed book can also be protection against factors like technology’s constant evolution, companies going out of business and software becoming obsolete. If you do not want to use photos from a smartphone app to create a book, custom-printing companies like Plum Print will professionally photograph children’s artwork and use the high-quality images to create a hardback book for you.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other photo-sharing sites with printing services can create the art books as well. If you do not want to collect the memories in a dedicated smartphone app, and you can take a more free-form approach by snapping pictures and making videos yourself of the children explaining their art projects. Once you have created the photos and clips, you can post the content on regular file-sharing sites like Dropbox, Apple iCloud, Google Drive and Microsoft OneDrive — with password-protection, of course, to allow only relatives to view the galleries.For public display, the Artsonia mobile apps for Android and iOS let teachers and parents share children’s artwork on the Artsonia gallery, which serves as a worldwide student art museum on the web.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NICOLE PERLROTH and CLIFFORD KRAUSSMARCH 15, 2018
In August, a petrochemical company with a plant in Saudi Arabia was hit by a new kind of cyberassault. The attack was not designed to simply destroy data or shut down the plant, investigators believe. It was meant to sabotage the firm’s operations and trigger an explosion.The attack was a dangerous escalation in international hacking, as faceless enemies demonstrated both the drive and the ability to inflict serious physical damage. And United States government officials, their allies and cybersecurity researchers worry that the culprits could replicate it in other countries, since thousands of industrial plants all over the world rely on the same American-engineered computer systems that were compromised.Investigators have been tight-lipped about the August attack. They still won’t identify the company or the country where it is based and have not identified the culprits.But the attackers were sophisticated and had plenty of time and resources, an indication that they were most likely supported by a government, according to more than a dozen people, including cybersecurity experts who have looked into the attack and asked not to be identified because of the confidentiality of the continuing investigation.AdvertisementThe only thing that prevented an explosion was a mistake in the attackers’ computer code, the investigators said.AdvertisementThe assault was the most alarming in a string of hacking attacks on petrochemical plants in Saudi Arabia. In January 2017, computers went dark at the National Industrialization Company, Tasnee for short, which is one of the few privately owned Saudi petrochemical companies. Computers also crashed 15 miles away at Sadara Chemical Company, a joint venture between the oil and chemical giants Saudi Aramco and Dow Chemical.Within minutes of the attack at Tasnee, the hard drives inside the company’s computers were destroyed and their data wiped clean, replaced with an image of Alan Kurdi, the small Syrian child who drowned off the coast of Turkey during his family’s attempt to flee that country’s civil war.The intent of the January attacks, Tasnee officials and researchers at the security company Symantec believe, was to inflict lasting damage on the petrochemical companies and send a political message. Recovery took months.Energy experts said the August attack could have been an attempt to complicate  Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s plans to encourage foreign and domestic private investment to diversify the Saudi economy and produce jobs for the country’s growing youth population.“Not only is it an attack on the private sector, which is being touted to help promote growth in the Saudi economy, but it is also focused on the petrochemical sector, which is a core part of the Saudi economy,” said Amy Myers Jaffe, an expert on Middle East energy at the Council on Foreign Relations.Saudi Arabia has cut oil exports in recent years to support global oil prices, a strategy central to its efforts to make a potential public offering of shares of government-controlled Saudi Aramco more attractive to international investors. The kingdom has tried to compensate for its lost revenue by expanding its petrochemical and refining industry.Some technical details of the attack in August have been previously reported, but this is the first time the earlier attacks on Tasnee and other Saudi petrochemical companies have been reported.AdvertisementSecurity analysts at Mandiant, a division of the security firm FireEye, are still investigating what happened in August, with the help of several companies in the United States that investigate cyberattacks on industrial control systems.A team at Schneider Electric, which made the industrial systems that were targeted, called Triconex safety controllers, is also looking into the attack, the people who spoke to The Times said. So are the National Security Agency, the F.B.I., the Department of Homeland Security and the Pentagon’s Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, which has been supporting research into forensic tools designed to assist hacking investigations.All of the investigators believe the attack was most likely intended to cause an explosion that would have killed people. In the last few years, explosions at petrochemical plants in China and Mexico — though not triggered by hackers — have killed several employees, injured hundreds and forced evacuations of surrounding communities.What worries investigators and intelligence analysts the most is that the attackers compromised Schneider’s Triconex controllers, which keep equipment operating safely by performing tasks like regulating voltage, pressure and temperatures. Those controllers are used in about 18,000 plants around the world, including nuclear and water treatment facilities, oil and gas refineries, and chemical plants.“If attackers developed a technique against Schneider equipment in Saudi Arabia, they could very well deploy the same technique here in the United States,” said James A. Lewis, a cybersecurity expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank.The Triconex system was believed to be a “lock and key operation.” In other words, the safety controllers could be tweaked or dismantled only with physical contact.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So how did the hackers get in? Investigators found an odd digital file in a computer at an engineering workstation that looked like a legitimate part of the Schneider controllers but was designed to sabotage the system. Investigators will not say how it got there, but they do not believe it was an inside job. This was the first time these systems were sabotaged remotely.The only thing that prevented significant damage was a bug in the attackers’ computer code that inadvertently shut down the plant’s production systems.AdvertisementInvestigators believe that the hackers have probably fixed their mistake by now, and that it is only a matter of time before they deploy the same technique against another industrial control system. A different group could also use those tools for its own attack.The August attack was also a significant step up from earlier attacks in Saudi Arabia. Starting on Nov. 17, 2016, computer screens at a number of Saudi government computers went dark and their hard drives were erased, according to researchers at Symantec, which investigated the attacks.Two weeks later, the same attackers hit other Saudi targets with the same computer virus. On Jan. 23, 2017, they struck again, at Tasnee and other petrochemical firms, deploying a computer virus known as Shamoon, after a word embedded in its code.The Shamoon virus first surfaced five years earlier at Saudi Aramco, wiping out tens of thousands of computers and replacing the data with a partial image of a burning American flag. Leon E. Panetta, the United States defense secretary at the time, said the attack could be a harbinger.“An aggressor nation or extremist group could use these kinds of cyber tools to gain control of critical switches,” he said.Government officials and cybersecurity experts in Saudi Arabia and the United States attributed the 2012 Shamoon attack to Iranian hackers.“Another attacker could have adopted that code” for the January 2017 attacks, said Vikram Thakur, a senior researcher at Symantec, “but our analysis showed the likelihood it was the same perpetrator was pretty high.”The attack in August was not a Shamoon attack. It was much more dangerous.Investigators believe a nation-state was responsible because there was no obvious profit motive, even though the attack would have required significant financial resources. And the computer code had not been seen in any earlier assaults. Every hacking tool had been custom built.AdvertisementThe attackers not only had to figure out how to get into that system, they had to understand its design well enough to know the layout of the facility — what pipes went where and which valves to turn in order to trigger an explosion.Investigators believe someone would have had to buy the same version of the Triconex safety system to figure out how it worked. The components, investigators said, could be purchased for $40,000 on eBay.The attack has also shown the challenge of attributing with unquestionable evidence an attack to one country.Security experts said Iran, China, Russia the United States and Israel had the technical sophistication to launch such attacks. But most of those countries had no motivation to do so. China and Russia are increasingly making energy deals with Saudi Arabia, and Israel and the United States have moved to cooperate with the kingdom against Iran.That leaves Iran, which experts said had a growing military hacking program, although the Iranian government has denied any involvement in such attacks.Tensions between Iran and Saudi Arabia have steadily escalated in recent years, and the conflict has drifted online.United States officials and security analysts blamed Iranian hackers for a spate of attacks on American banks in 2012 and more recent espionage attacks on the airline industry. Iranian hackers were blamed for the 2012 Aramco attack and are also the leading suspects in the more recent Shamoon attacks.The August attack was far more sophisticated than any previous attack originating from Iran, Mr. Thakur of Symantec said, but there is a chance Iran could have improved its hacking abilities or worked with another country, like Russia or North Korea.Tasnee said in an email that it had hired experts from Symantec and IBM to study the attack against it. The company said it had also “completely overhauled our security standards” and started using new tools to prevent attacks.Advertisement“Being a global business,” the company said, “we believe that cybersecurity is a concern wherever you are in the world.”Follow Nicole Perlroth and Clifford Krauss on Twitter: @nicoleperlroth and @ckrausss.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: How Hackers Lit a Fuse.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 14, 2018
Q. The top menu bar of my Mac has become cluttered with these little icons that I rarely use and are more distracting than anything. Is there a way to turn them off?A. Most of the icons clustered on the right side of the Mac’s menu bar — “status icons,” as Apple calls them — can be removed, rearranged or restored according to your personal preferences. The icons are meant to provide quick access to controls like the Mac’s network, Bluetooth and AirPlay settings, and third-part apps may also add their own mini-menus up there. Spotlight search, Siri and the Mac’s Notifications Center are typically on the far right side of the menu bar.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.You can remove unwanted menu-bar icons in a couple of ways. When you click on a status icon and open the preferences for the app, you may get a check box to turn off the menu-bar display. (You should be able to restore the icon in the program’s preferences if you later change your mind.)If you do not want to dig around in menus, you can also hold down the Command key, click on a status icon you do not need and drag it off the menu bar using the Mac’s mouse or track pad. For icons you want to keep but rearrange along the top of the screen, hold down the Command key and drag them into new locations. (However, they may shift positions when you restart, depending on which icons are open.)By default, Windows does not have a top menu bar and keeps its taskbar icons in a row along the bottom of the screen. You can rearrange taskbar icons by dragging them into new positions. If you want to redecorate further, you can change the location of the taskbar itself and adjust other aspects of it by right-clicking an empty section of the taskbar and selecting Settings.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIMARCH 14, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Google is joining Facebook in banning advertising for Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.Google, the largest provider of digital advertising on the internet, announced on Tuesday that it plans to change its advertising policy for certain financial services, including cryptocurrencies, starting in June. The new restriction would apply both to space on Google’s platforms, like YouTube, and to third-party websites where Google sells advertising space.Facebook announced in January that it would ban all ads for Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies in order to stop misleading and deceptive promotions. Together, Google and Facebook account for the majority of advertising on the internet in terms of revenue.The short announcement on Google’s advertising policies page did not specify why Google planned to turn away that advertising. The company said the ban also applied to content related to cryptocurrencies “including but not limited to initial coin offerings, cryptocurrency exchanges, cryptocurrency wallets and cryptocurrency trading advice.”AdvertisementThe frenzy around Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies has raised concerns about scammers using online advertisements to recruit potential marks enticed by the surge in prices for most virtual currencies. Advertising for new virtual currencies exploded late last year when prices jumped.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some of that activity drew skepticism from regulators. Many start-ups sold their own custom virtual currencies in so-called initial coin offerings, which became a popular way to raise money to fund new software projects. Online advertising was a popular way to market the coins to new customers.In recent months, American regulators have made it clear that many of the coin offerings were most likely illegal. That has pushed down the prices of most virtual currencies and dampened the market for the ads.AdvertisementThe restrictions on cryptocurrency advertising are similar to limits Google places on other forms of ads, including the promotion of counterfeit items or sexually explicit content.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.Nathaniel Popper contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 13, 2018
Q. Can rogue Google app developers still sneak malware onto people’s devices with Android app updates once the app has been initially approved as “safe”?Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. Keeping deceptive and malicious apps out of online stores in a continuing battle for Google, as it is for Apple, Microsoft and other companies that invite outside developers to create and sell applications through official channels. Scammers have recently added new tactics to get their wares onto devices, like hiding code in flashlight and utility apps and releasing “multistage” malware that shows no initial security threat — but gradually updates itself with more sinister software once it is installed.Last year, Google announced a new security service for Android devices called Google Play Protect, which tries to thwart more malicious activity. Google Play Protect scans apps for safety before you download them to your device and then scans the apps on your device for malware to warn you of any security concerns. Newer forms of malicious software were originally able to evade detection, but after third-party security researchers notified the company of the deceptive apps, Google used its Play Protect software to remotely remove the malware from devices.You can see the Google Play Protect settings on your device by opening the Google Play store icon, tapping the menu button in the upper-left corner and selecting Play Protect. The Play Protect screen shows the apps that Google has scanned recently for security issues and includes controls for disabling the scans after apps have been downloaded.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 12, 2018
Q. Can you explain “butt-dialing” or, more politely, pocket phoning/texting? What is happening in my pocket to trigger a call or text? How can I set my phone to make sure it doesn’t happen?A. Many unexpected outgoing calls occur when you do not flip on the lock screen when shoving the phone in a purse or pocket. Without the lock screen to temporarily disable input to the phone’s screen or buttons, accidental brushes, taps or bumps can trigger a phone call or garbled text message, especially if the phone was left with the contacts app or keyboard open. (When unlocked phones shoved in a back pocket make a call this way, the incident is colloquially referred to a “butt dial.”)Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Glitchy system software and malfunctioning screens can also cause unplanned communications. Apple’s Siri, Google Assistant, Microsoft’s Cortana or any voice-activated apps may jump in and make a phone call if the software is set to listen for spoken commands and misinterprets your words.To help prevent accidental calls and text messages, make sure you hit the Power/Sleep/Wake button to turn off the screen before putting your phone away. In your phone’s display settings, you should also be able to set the amount of time before the phone shuts itself off, and choosing a minimal period helps if you forget to manually switch off the screen.If you do not have a lock screen and passcode set on the phone, you should add one to prevent unauthorized access to your device from other people (as well as your own body parts). On the iPhone, open the Settings app and choose Touch ID & Passcode, to get to the relevant controls. On an Android phone, go to settings to Security & Location to set up the screen-lock method of your choice.If you your phone is set to respond to spoken input, like voice dialing or waking up when you say “Hey, Siri,” “O.K. Google” or “Hey, Cortana,” your device may also be more prone to accidentally calling out on its own. These features can be controlled in the phone’s settings as well.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Prevent The ‘Butt Dial’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 9, 2018
Q. Now that I’ve figured out how to turn on closed captions, how can I make the text for them bigger?A. Many of the same programs and devices that offer closed captions for videos have settings to change the type size, color and other aspects of the text on the screen. However, if you are using closed captions with your television provider’s set-top box, check with its customer-service department to see if modifying the text size is possible — and, if so, how to find the settings on your specific equipment. (Some systems may not allow modification, but Comcast Xfinity, the Dish Network, Verizon FiOS and Frontier FiOS are among those providers with instructions on their sites. TiVo has them, too.)Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On video-streaming boxes like the Apple TV or one of Roku’s many models, use the remote to navigate your way to the home screen’s Settings area and look for Accessibility. Select Captions and then look for a Style menu where you can adjust text size, color, background and more; the Apple TV also lets you create your own new caption style.On Apple’s iOS devices, you can adjust the look of the closed captions by opening the Settings icon, going to General and then Accessibility to Subtitles & Caption, and tapping Style. On a Mac, open the System Preferences icon from the desktop dock, click Accessibility and then select Captions on the left side of the box to see the style options.To increase the type size and make other changes to closed-captioned video on a Windows 10 computer, go to the Start menu and Settings, open Ease of Access and then select Closed Captions on the left side of the box. Android users should open Settings and then Accessibility and Captions to see similar options.Many online video apps have caption-style settings of their own, including DirecTV Now and Netflix. YouTube, which has automatically added captions to more than one billion videos since 2009, recently announced that it was putting automatic captions on live-streamed clips. If you do not see how to change the closed captions in the app that you use, check its help guide.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
MARCH 8, 2018
Here’s what you need to know about Samsung’s newest flagship smartphone, the Galaxy S9, in five words: The device plays it safe.The S9, which arrives in stores this month, looks nearly identical to its immediate predecessor, the Galaxy S8. It is essentially a replay of last year’s big Samsung phone — with a few tweaks.The main differences are an improved camera and a feature called AR Emoji, which uses a photo of your face to create an animated version of yourself making various expressions, like crying in a bathtub or shaking your head. The phone’s price is steep: $720 or, for a version with a slightly larger screen, $840.That’s underwhelming when you consider that Samsung, the largest phone maker, has been on the bleeding edge of smartphone innovation. The South Korean company was the first to bring us “phablets,” or big-screen phones, and it popularized phones with digital pens.AdvertisementThe Galaxy S9 serves as a reminder that you don’t need to buy a new phone every year (even though the carriers want you to). Cherish and maintain your gadgets, and upgrade to the Galaxy S9 only if you feel like splurging on a device with a powerful camera.But there’s also good news: The new AR Emoji is pretty handy for a tech reviewer like myself. So after a week of testing, here’s how I rated the Galaxy S9’s new features, using a series of AR Emoji.Last year, Apple’s iPhone X introduced Animoji, the ability to create animated emoji that mimic your facial expressions. Samsung’s response is AR Emoji.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To set it up, you smile with your mouth closed and snap a photo of your face, and the phone software creates a computer-generated image of you. You then choose an outfit, facial hair and accessories like glasses. From there, the software creates animated stickers of your emoji conveying various expressions, like blowing a kiss, giving a thumbs up or flashing a peace sign.There’s a problem: The emoji look creepy. It’s like taking a photo and a cartoony 3-D image of yourself and mashing them together. The result is a phenomenon that robotics experts describe as “uncanny valley” — the image looks fake, but it also bears close resemblance to a person and causes psychological discomfort.AdvertisementSuzanne De Silva, a director of product strategy and marketing for Samsung, compared early reactions to AR Emoji to the transition from older television technologies to newer ones.“There was this adjustment period where people said, ‘Why does TV look hyperreal now?’” she said. “And perhaps that’s exactly what we’re seeing in the introduction of AR Emoji. Maybe it’s an adjustment period.”If what you want are custom emoji, there are better options. Bitmoji, an emoji maker acquired by Snap in 2016, generates flat cartoon emoji of you. The cartoon stickers are cute and fun to use, and there are many outfits and expressions to choose from.So would I buy this phone for AR Emoji?Critics gave last year’s Galaxy S8 phone rave reviews, with one caveat: The fingerprint sensor was a few millimeters to the right of the camera lens. That awkward placement made it easy to bump into the camera lens when trying to unlock the phone.For the S9, Samsung listened to feedback and moved the fingerprint sensor to a better place: below the camera. In my tests, I rarely bumped into the camera when unlocking the phone. That’s a win.If you thought Siri or Alexa was inadequate, wait till you try Bixby, the virtual assistant that Samsung introduced last year. To set it up, you create a Samsung account, and you hold down a button on the side of the phone to activate it.Bixby is unreliable. It took me three tries to open the phone camera with the command “Open the camera” before it accomplished the task. I also asked, “Bixby, what can you do?” On my first try, there was an issue connecting to Samsung’s server, and on my second try, Bixby replied: “Maybe a few things here and there, but I’m learning every day.” Yeah.Samsung said it was listening to people’s comments on Bixby.There is a better option: Google’s Assistant, which is a more capable, mature virtual assistant. Unfortunately, you can’t modify the Bixby button to summon Google’s Assistant instead. Your only other option is to disable the button.The Galaxy S9 has what Samsung calls a dual-aperture camera system. The aperture is the opening in the camera sensor that lets in light.AdvertisementTypically, phone makers make the aperture as large as possible to let in more light. But Samsung’s new phone has a mechanical aperture that adjusts to different lighting conditions: In scenes with bright light, it will step down to the narrower aperture to avoid overexposure, and in low light, it will automatically change to a wider aperture to draw in as much light as possible.In my tests, photos in bright light came out extremely crisp and clear — I was surprised that in one photo of my dog, Mochi, the camera even captured beads of saliva on her snout. Yet in other photos, Samsung’s camera software appeared to oversharpen or oversmoothe some textures like patches of grass or the dog’s fur.In low-light settings, photos looked excellent. In pictures I shot of friends in dimly lit restaurants and cocktail bars, their faces were nicely lit up, and backgrounds looked natural. So when you ask a waiter to take a photograph of you and a group of friends at the dinner table, make sure the waiter uses the Samsung — and leaves the flash off.I especially enjoyed using the camera to shoot photos of food. In the camera app, a “Food” mode slightly bumps up the saturation to make colors warmer and the food look more enticing. In a photo I took of a homemade loaf of bread, Food mode made the brown crust appear more appetizing, and in photos I took of a plate of arepas, it made the tomatoes look redder and an avocado slice greener. Instagram fans who obsessively document their meals will love this camera.Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes about solving tech-related problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What frustrates you about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: New Gimmicks, But the Galaxy S9 Mostly Plays It Safe.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu Goel, Hari Kumar and Sheera FrenkelMUMBAI — In many countries, Facebook is contending with a darkening reputation as a vehicle for disinformation and false news. The most recent example: Sri Lanka.This week, the island country sought to block access to the social network, as well as two other platforms that Facebook owns, WhatsApp and Instagram, in an attempt to stem mob violence directed at its Muslim minority. Citing inflammatory posts on Facebook and WhatsApp, the Sri Lankan government ordered internet providers and mobile phone carriers on Wednesday to temporarily block the services along with Viber, another messaging app.“These platforms are banned because they were spreading hate speeches and amplifying them,” Harindra B. Dassanayake, a government spokesman, said in a phone interview on Thursday. Sri Lanka’s government has also imposed a nationwide state of emergency after violence broke out Sunday in one of the island’s central cities, where dozens of Muslim businesses, houses and at least one mosque were attacked. At least one person was killed.Sri Lanka is the latest country to grapple with hate speech being magnified on Facebook, especially in parts of the world that have only recently come online. As use of the social media platform has ballooned in recent years, so have cases of extremist fringe groups using Facebook’s reach to magnify their messages.In Myanmar, where Facebook is so dominant that it is often confused for the internet itself, the social network has been blamed for allowing hate speech to spread, widening longstanding ethnic divisions and stoking violence against the Rohingya ethnic group. In the Philippines, Facebook has been used to spread pro-government propaganda.Internet watchdog groups have long warned that Facebook was being used to distribute hate speech about ethnic minorities in Sri Lanka. Freedom House, a Washington-based nonprofit that advocates for free speech and democracy, said in a recent report that “hate speech against minorities continues to foment on various social media platforms, particularly Facebook.” The report said online campaigns targeting Muslims and other minority groups in Sri Lanka had been ongoing since 2013 and had recently increased.Sri Lankan officials this week blamed Sri Lanka’s Buddhist majority, as well as Muslims, for spreading false information on the social networks.“Some attacks that have actually not taken place are being reported. It spreads that we are being attacked and we have to respond,” said Mr. Dassanayake. In some cases, people were also sharing information on how to make simple bombs, he said.On Thursday, the violence continued, according to news reports. Although Facebook was blocked, WhatsApp was functioning sporadically.On Twitter, two of the country’s legendary cricket players, Kumar Sangakkara and Mahela Jayawardena, tried to defuse tensions.“I strongly condemn the recent acts of violence & everyone involved must be brought to justice regardless of race/ religion or ethnicity,” Mr. Jayawardena tweeted on Wednesday.Sri Lanka is still recovering from a long civil war waged by Tamil separatists. The conflict ended in 2009 after the military crushed the rebels, and hard feelings remain.Facebook said Thursday that it has clear rules against hate speech and incitement to violence. “We are responding to the situation in Sri Lanka and are in contact with the government and nongovernmental organizations to support efforts to identify and remove such content,” the company said in a statement.Mr. Dassanayake confirmed that Facebook was cooperating with the Sri Lankan government. He said that at a meeting in Colombo, the capital, on Thursday morning, the government raised more than 100 items with the company.“Once we come to an agreement on these, and once the situation is under control, Facebook will be live again,” he said. It was not immediately clear what the items entailed.Sri Lanka is hardly the only country to resort to extreme measures like a social media shutdown.Last year, India blocked 22 social networking services — including Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp and YouTube — for one month in the disputed territory of Jammu and Kashmir in a bid to curb street protests there. Mobile internet service is also frequently blocked in Kashmir, which borders Pakistan and has gone through spasms of violence for decades.Turkey has also repeatedly shut down Twitter and YouTube for allowing content opposed by the government of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the country’s president.Vindu Goel reported from Mumbai, India; Hari Kumar from New Delhi; and Sheera Frenkel from San Francisco.Follow Vindu Goel, Hari Kumar and Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @vindugoel and @HariNYT and @sheerafAdvertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 8, 2018
Q. Can you explain just what a recovery drive will do as opposed to a system restore point or a recovery image? How do these features differ from Reset PC? If my Windows 10 Surface Book crashes, which feature do I try first?A. Microsoft provides a slew of troubleshooting options to aid ailing Windows computers, but choosing which one to try first requires close observation of the situation. Minor glitches may be fixed by rolling back to a previous restore point, but a nonstarting computer might need more assistance.A system restore point, which Windows automatically creates once a week or before software updates and installations, is a snapshot of the computer’s settings at that moment — hopefully when things were working well. If you have just installed a program, a driver or a patch and Windows is behaving erratically, it may be a problem with the new software. Reverting to a previous restore point may be enough to get your system functioning properly again.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Recovery drives are USB drives you make that have Windows system files and tools installed on them. You need to create the recovery drive ahead of time, before the computer starts having problems. If Windows cannot start up properly, you can plug in the recovery drive, boot the Surface Book from it and use the tools on it to restore or reset the system.AdvertisementChoosing to reset the Surface Book reinstalls Windows 10 on the computer, and gives you the option to keep your personal files while removing any apps, drivers and settings changes you previously made to the machine. You can also choose to reset the PC and remove all of your files, apps and settings to wipe it clean before reinstalling Windows. (Depending on the version of Windows you are using, you may also see a Fresh Start tool that reinstalls and updates Windows while keeping your files and settings.)If the computer is too disabled and you cannot open the Settings to get to the reset option (or anywhere else), press the Windows and L keys to jump to the sign-in screen. Hold down the Shift key, then go to the Power menu in the lower-right corner and choose Restart. When the computer has restarted, choose Troubleshoot and then Reset This PC.If you did not create a recovery drive ahead of time and the Surface computer will not start up, you can download a system recovery image on another computer to use for reinstalling Windows. Because the system recovery image is a factory-fresh version of the system (installed on a USB drive or DVD), all your personal files and programs will be wiped out unless you have backed them up elsewhere.AdvertisementWiping the computer and installing a clean copy of Windows is the most drastic troubleshooting step, especially if you have not backed up your personal files to another drive or a cloud server. To avoid that situation, regularly back up your files to a safe place and create a USB recovery drive ahead of time, in case the computer’s software is too damaged to use the reset option.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAVID STREITFELDMARCH 7, 2018
Peter Thiel is Silicon Valley’s homegrown Cassandra. He warned for years that the big tech companies were arrogant and clueless and less good for mankind than they believed.Comeuppance, the billionaire investor warned, was coming.Trouble has now arrived. Unfortunately for Mr. Thiel, the storm is centered on Facebook, whose board he has been a member of practically since its founding. The social network, which billed itself as bringing democracy and enlightenment to the world, was used by the Russians to subvert democracy and sow confusion in the United States.Even people paid to see the future didn’t see that one coming.“The board’s role is to help think about some of the medium- and longer-term problems coming around the corner,” Mr. Thiel said. “We were far from perfect in doing that.”Mr. Thiel, 50, is at the center of nearly every issue that roils Silicon Valley, ranging from the tech elite’s fascination with New Zealand hideaways (Mr. Thiel obtained New Zealand citizenship) to Bitcoin (he is a major investor) to the problems of herd thinking (he is moving from San Francisco to Los Angeles to escape it) to the evolving role of content on the internet (he has been exploring the creation of a media company that would outflank Breitbart and Fox for a younger audience).AdvertisementTwo subjects are currently overwhelming everything else: President Trump, whom Mr. Thiel aggressively backed for president, and Facebook, whose core mission is being called into question in the wake of the Russian revelations. In a typical Thiel move — he tends to run toward controversy even as his Silicon Valley peers try to make themselves inconspicuous — he agreed, in a rare interview, to talk about both.Advertisement“It’s been a crazier two years than I would have thought,” Mr. Thiel said in his new Midtown Manhattan apartment, which is so far up in the clouds that it literally looks down on Trump Tower.Despite the proximity, the mutual enthusiasm between Mr. Thiel and Mr. Trump seems to have cooled. After Mr. Thiel spoke at the Republican National Convention in 2016, there were unsourced media reports that said Mr. Trump wanted to put him on the Supreme Court. But now even photo ops are rare.The investor said he had last spoken to the president “a few months ago.”“We don’t talk that often,” he said, but added, “I can get access anytime I want.”The Trump whom Mr. Thiel touted at the Republican convention was a candidate who would “end the era of stupid wars and rebuild our country,” move us past “fake culture wars” and start projects the equivalent of the Apollo space program. That does not seem to be the president he got.“There are all these ways that things have fallen short,” Mr. Thiel said. But he said he had no regrets about his endorsement. “It’s still better than Hillary Clinton or the Republican zombies,” he said, referring to the other candidates.The White House did not respond to a request for comment.Mr. Thiel is routinely labeled a libertarian. On a bookshelf in the apartment, as if in confirmation, is a hardback copy of Ayn Rand’s “Atlas Shrugged,” the bible of the movement. A gift, he said.A lesser-known but possibly deeper influence was the French philosopher René Girard, who taught at Stanford University when Mr. Thiel was an undergraduate there. For 15 years, on and off, Mr. Thiel sat in on a study group about Mr. Girard’s ideas. Mr. Girard believed human beings were deeply mimetic, which is to say they copy one another.Advertisement“It’s very anti-Ayn Rand: There are no self-contained autonomous figures,” Mr. Thiel said. “Our desires are not our own. They get shaped powerfully by the society around us.”It was this illumination that helped him see the potential of Facebook — where people could find out in intimate and addictive detail what their friends were up to — when it was barely a year old. He was the first outside investor, buying 10 percent of the company for $500,000.He sold most of his holdings in 2012 as Facebook went public. A few months ago, with Facebook’s market capitalization at about $500 billion, he sold most of what he had left.Last summer, there was a flap when a memo by a fellow board member, Reed Hastings, the chief executive of Netflix, appeared in The New York Times. In the memo, Mr. Hastings wrote to Mr. Thiel that he displayed “catastrophically bad judgment” in supporting Mr. Trump.Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, did not ask him to step down from the board, and reports that he wants to leave the board are incorrect, Mr. Thiel said, noting that among other things he brings “ideological diversity.” He declined to say exactly how much or what kind of advice the Facebook board was offering Mr. Zuckerberg, but defended the company from criticism that it was slow to wake up to what the Russians did.“Remember when Trump said the election was going to be rigged? People said that was crazy — ‘How dare you question the integrity of the electoral process?’ That was the view of most of the people working at Facebook, too,” he said. “They did not think things were so hackable. It was a mistake, but an understandable mistake.” Facebook declined to comment.The anger now being turned on Facebook, Mr. Thiel argued, is less about Russia specifically and more about tech arrogance — its failure to do so much for so many. It is a sentiment that helped put Mr. Trump in the White House.“The Trump campaign slogan, ‘Make America Great Again,’ was perhaps the single most offensive thing you could say to Silicon Valley,” he said. “Silicon Valley says the future is going to be better than the past. That is the propaganda, if you will.”AdvertisementA friend of his in Silicon Valley had the idea of running for governor of California this year. Mr. Thiel’s advice was that he had better have a good answer to this question: Why is tech good for the average person in California? The answer, he cautioned, couldn’t be a banality, such as “it’s making us more connected,” and it couldn’t be utopian, such as “it’s going to cure all diseases.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He wasn’t able to come up with an answer, and I couldn’t come up with one, either,” Mr. Thiel said. He declined to identify the friend, but it is well known in tech circles that Sam Altman, the president of Y Combinator, the prominent start-up accelerator, was thinking about running. Mr. Altman confirmed it was him and said he had decided not to run “for many reasons.”There is a big painting of a cresting wave in Mr. Thiel’s living room, and it might as well be a visual metaphor for what is going on in big tech now.“Having some ambition that transcends just making money is a critical thing for a company,” he said. “But there is some point where it gets crazy and self-delusional.” He added that the companies “are probably in some trouble — maybe it’s a little, maybe it’s a lot.” The prospect of government regulation looms.In 2015 and 2016, Mr. Thiel gave $300,000 to Josh Hawley, who was campaigning to become Missouri’s attorney general. Mr. Hawley won, and in November he opened an antitrust investigation of Google. A spokeswoman for Mr. Hawley, a Republican who is now challenging the state’s Democratic senator, Claire McCaskill, said there was “no connection” between Mr. Thiel’s donation and the investigation. Google declined to comment.The news last month that Mr. Thiel is moving from San Francisco to Los Angeles reflects a shift that is as much mental as literal. Getting out of the tech bubble, he figures, will give him more clarity about his investments.“Network effects are very positive things, but there’s a tipping point where they fall over into the madness of crowds,” he said.Another of Mr. Thiel’s contentious ideas was destroying Gawker, the online publisher. He secretly financed the privacy lawsuit that Hulk Hogan, the former pro wrestler, filed against the media company, which Mr. Hogan won. That led to Gawker’s bankruptcy in 2016.AdvertisementA news operation that specialized in deflating the arrogance of Silicon Valley should have been to Mr. Thiel’s liking. But he argues that his philosophy is consistent here.“Gawker was trying to cut people down to size for not conforming,” he said. “The ability to speak and not have every word you say get distorted, to have wrong ideas and then be able to correct them — these notions were powerfully undercut by Gawker.”Mr. Thiel is still pursuing the remnants of Gawker in court, which has prompted accusations that he wants to remove all of its content from the internet as a final victory.He denied this. “Terry Bollea, a.k.a. Hulk Hogan, is still owed some money from the Gawker sale, and that is what I am trying to get,” he said. “I don’t want the archives. I don’t think it makes sense to destroy them. Preserve them, study them instead.”Follow David Streitfeld on Twitter: @DavidStreitfeld.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A High Tech Contrarian, Full of Contentious Ideas.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick WingfieldSEATTLE — Amazon has had no problem getting affluent households to buy from its online store. But people with low incomes have been less loyal to the retailer.Now, Amazon is taking another step to persuade them to spend their money on the site.Starting Tuesday, the company will offer a discount on its Prime membership program to the millions of recipients of Medicaid, the public health insurance program for low-income Americans. They can receive the benefits of Prime — including free fast shipping and video streaming — for $5.99 a month, less than half the standard monthly fee of $12.99.The move expands an effort started last year, when Amazon started offering the Prime discount to people with electronic benefit transfer cards, used to distribute aid for food purchases.The push is a further effort by Amazon to go after shoppers who favor Walmart, which has long been a go-to destination for people on tight budgets. AlixPartner, a financial advisory firm, estimates that Walmart accounts for 18 percent of annual spending through the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, the formal name for food stamps.Randy Hargrove, a Walmart spokesman, declined to comment directly on Amazon but said, “While low prices are at the core of who we are, our customer base cuts across all income levels.”Over 68 million people were enrolled in Medicaid at the end of last year, a little over half of them adults. (Amazon says the discount applies to adult holders of Medicaid cards.) Many Medicaid participants also receive electronic benefit transfer cards, and Amazon is “very pleased with the response so far” to the discounted Prime membership for those card holders, a company spokeswoman, Julie Law, said.Amazon has been so successful at attracting upper-income consumers that it increasingly needs to go elsewhere in search of growth, analysts said. Its Prime program has been a hit in many households, making shopping on the site a far more practical substitute for going to stores. Prime members can typically have goods delivered free in two days, with many items available for one-day or same-day shipping.Amazon does not say how many Prime members it has. But Sucharita Kodali, an analyst at Forrester Research, a market research company, said a recent survey of shoppers by her firm had found that a majority of American households with annual income over $100,000 had Prime accounts. The membership rate falls off quickly farther down the income scale, she said.There are a number of reasons that low-income consumers have been less avid online shoppers, including the fact that many do not have credit cards. Some may not have secure places to receive packages.“They are still getting used to the idea of shopping online,” Ms. Kodali said.Amazon has tried to address some of these obstacles. Amazon Cash, for example, allows people to add money to their Amazon accounts by taking cash to CVS pharmacies, GameStops and other retail locations. Amazon Lockers, installed outside convenience stores and other locations, give people a secure place to pick up and return Amazon packages.Amazon said people can sign up for the discounted Prime membership by going to the company’s website and uploading an image of their Medicaid or E.B.T. cards. Like other new Prime subscribers, they can do a free trial of the service for 30 days.Jared Bernstein, a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a left-leaning think tank, said Amazon’s move was clearly a grab for a portion of Walmart’s customers. But he added that he was not entirely convinced that low-income shoppers would be willing to pay a membership fee, even a reduced one, to shop at an online store.“Obviously we’re talking about a few bucks a month,” said Mr. Bernstein, who was an economic adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. “I’m not suggesting that’s a lot of money for low-income families, but these families do have to scrutinize their expenditures.”Michael Corkery contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 6, 2018
Q. Do I have control over my iPhone’s autocorrect function beyond repeatedly correcting words it mistakenly tries to use? A. The iOS keyboard’s auto-correction feature, intended to be a timesaver and an aid for typing on small glass keyboards, checks spelling and automatically fixes mistakes as you enter text. Good intentions aside, the software has been known to insert incorrect words in the process, which has led to embarrassing mistakes and a few websites devoted to collecting the gaffes. However, you do not have to constantly correct the auto-correction tool.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you find the auto-correction feature consistently tries to change the same words that you type to the same wrong words, the keyboard’s dictionary file may have saved incorrect entries. If you do not have a lot of custom words you have saved and want to start over so the auto-correction tool learns new words from scratch, you can dump the old dictionary. To do that, open the Settings app on the home screen, select General and scroll to the bottom of the list. Select Reset and then Reset Keyboard Dictionary, enter your passcode if asked and delete the old dictionary.If you do not want to ditch the dictionary, you can turn off the auto-correction tool and make other adjustments in the iOS keyboard settings. Tap the Settings icon on the iPhone’s Home screen and choose General. Scroll down the screen until you get to Keyboard and select it.You can disable auto-correction entirely but leave the spellchecker on to highlight suspect words. The controls for automatic capitalization and a few other typing aids are also here, as is the setting for the predictive text bar on the keyboard that suggest words as you type. If you have a tendency to repeat typos in certain words or want to expand abbreviations into full phrases, tap Text Replacement to set up automatic conversions as you type.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking Full Control Of Auto Correct.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 5, 2018
Q. Are there any easy database programs I can use to make a visual catalog of my possessions for insurance purposes?A. Check with your insurance company to see if it has any specific tips or tools you should use to make a comprehensive list of your possessions. Some companies, including Nationwide and State Farm, suggest taking a narrated digital video as you walk from room to room in your house, and include the contents of closets, drawers and storage rooms.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although recent reviews have been mixed, Allstate offers a free Digital Locker app for Android and iOS devices that you can use to snap pictures of your belongings and make notes, The list is backed up online and can be exported as a PDF file or a spreadsheet if needed to make a claim.Similar apps with a range of features can also be found for Android, iOS, Mac and Windows systems. Search your preferred app store for “home inventory” to see what is available on your platform. Some inexpensive, feature-rich apps (like Memento Database for Android, Nest Egg for iOS or Sortly for Android, iOS and web) include barcode-scanning to automatically identify books and other items. Some apps also allow you to store images of purchase receipts to record the original value of the item.To make sure the inventory is around when you need it, back up the data securely in a separate location. Many inventory apps include an online backup tool to sites like Dropbox or their own servers. Airtable, an online spreadsheet/database app that allows you to add notes and pictures to entries, is another option. You can also log images of your possessions in web-based spreadsheets like Apple Numbers, Google Sheets or Microsoft Excel.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Nellie BowlesSAN FRANCISCO — In search of reasonable rent, the middle-class backbone of San Francisco — maitre d’s, teachers, bookstore managers, lounge musicians, copywriters and merchandise planners — are engaging in an unusual experiment in communal living: They are moving into dorms.Shared bathrooms at the end of the hall and having no individual kitchen or living room is becoming less weird for some of the city’s workers thanks to Starcity, a new development company that is expressly creating dorms for many of the non-tech population.Starcity has already opened three properties with 36 units. It has nine more in development and a wait list of 8,000 people. The company is buying a dozen more buildings (including one-star hotels, parking garages, office buildings and old retail stores), has raised $18.9 million in venture capital and hired a team of 26 people. Starcity said it was on track to have hundreds of units open around the San Francisco Bay Area this year, and thousands by 2019.These are not micro-units, nor are they like WeWork’s WeLive housing developments, where residents have their own small kitchens, living rooms and bathrooms but share common event space and industrial appliances for parties. These are not single-family homes that are being used as group houses.Instead, Starcity residents get a bedroom of 130 square feet to 220 square feet. Many of the buildings will feature some units with a private bath for a higher rent. But Jon Dishotsky, Starcity’s co-founder and chief executive, said a ratio of one bathroom for every two to three bedrooms makes the most sense for large-scale affordability. The average one-bedroom apartment in San Francisco rents for $3,300 a month, but Starcity rooms go for $1,400 to $2,400 a month fully furnished, with utilities and Wi-Fi included.“If you think about the most private things that you do, a lot of them are related to the bathroom,” said Mr. Dishotsky, 34. “So that’s probably the hardest part.”Starcity’s target demographic makes $40,000 to $90,000 a year. Most of the residents, who range in age from their early 20s to early 50s, have no political philosophy around communes nor any previous experience in them. Moving in was a practical decision they each made. But after they arrive, what they are most surprised by is how much the building changes them.One recent night, the Mission Street house gathered to celebrate a set of birthdays, and there in a party hat was Carla Shiver, 38.Last year, Verizon eliminated Ms. Shiver’s job in Albany, Ga., but offered to transfer her to San Francisco to work at a store. Ms. Shiver, who makes about $85,000 a year, knew she could never afford a house here but moved anyway.“People talk all the time about what they dream of, and I decided to stop talking about it and just do it,” Ms. Shiver said. “I was looking for more meaning.” She divorced her husband, packed her Yorkie Pomeranian, Stanford, in the car and drove west.The idea of sharing a bathroom was initially alarming, but the pictures of the house looked nice and Ms. Shiver wanted to meet new friends. For $2,200 a month, she now rents a Starcity room with a queen-size bed, a bedside table and a chair.She said she could not imagine any other life.“I’ve run a household; I’ve done the bills; I’ve mowed the yard, and I don’t want to be responsible again,” Ms. Shiver said. “I want to paint and learn how to make ramen noodles. And when we run out of tinfoil, there’s just more tinfoil.”The Starcity community manager (a.k.a. the building manager) is extremely involved in household affairs, dropping off care packages when someone is sick and organizing birthday parties. If tenants sign up for premium services, Starcity will do their laundry for $40 a month, clean rooms for $130 a week and even arrange for dog day care. For many residents, the arrangement does not feel temporary.“I never thought I could live like this,” Ms. Shiver said. “But the more I live here, the freer I feel.”She said she had not locked her bedroom door once since moving in, and most days when she gets home from work, a roommate has taken her dog into the shared living room. She said she hardly thought about the dorm-style bathroom setup, that there had never been a line for a shower, and that the building was like a family.“This afternoon we’re going to the Exploratorium,” she said, referring to the science museum located at Pier 15.Mr. Dishotsky looked very much the part one morning as he walked into a building site. Wearing muddy leather boots, black jeans and a hard hat, he examined Mason Street, formerly a residential hotel that served homeless and low-income people in the Tenderloin neighborhood. It will soon be 71 Starcity units. The Tenderloin, a traditionally working-class and diverse neighborhood with a large arts scene and a sizable homeless population, has been slowly gentrifying, leading to rising tensions. (Most of Starcity’s residents are white.) On the sidewalk outside Mr. Dishotsky's construction zone that morning, there were used needles and several tents.He paced through the first floor’s 2,500-square-foot living room. The basement will be a communal kitchen, with a lineup of industrial sized refrigerators.The only thing people really need to do alone is sleep, he said.“What are the things you can do with other people? Eat food, drink wine, watch TV,” he said. “You don’t need to do that in your own unit alone, so why pay for it?”Mr. Dishotsky grew up in Palo Alto, Calif., where housing prices have soared and the median home value is now more than $3 million. His parents were both teachers and left-wing political activists living in an intentional community in the late 1960s before they bought a house for $50,000.After Mr. Dishotsky graduated from college, he spent a decade at a commercial real estate firm making deals until one day in 2015, he had a crisis. His friends were leaving town. The arts scene was fading. He saw a political cause and an economic opportunity.“My mom got shot once protesting for what she believed in,” he said. “And here I am building offices.”So he quit. He wanted to build something that, at market rate, would be affordable.When Mr. Dishotsky first tried to get a bank loan for his new type of pared-down housing, he was turned away by 40 lenders.“They were like, ‘Who would live this way?’” he said. “We’re like, ‘It’s everybody, it’s normal people you know.’”A couple blocks away was the Ellis Street building, a former bathhouse turned into medical offices that became a vacant property. Another developer had tried to turn it into 11 luxury condos. Mr. Dishotsky’s pitch was 52 dorm rooms. The move was both idealistic and practical. Because of arcane permitting rules and neighborhood associations that push against new developments, building new housing in San Francisco is painfully slow. But workers keep flooding the city, so roommates jam tighter into existing housing, already sharing bathrooms and renting living rooms as bedrooms. Mr. Dishotsky said he decided to build for what was already the city’s reality. At the Ellis Street site, his team is digging down about a level and a half to make a basement lounge. Each floor has a communal kitchen for eight to 15 people. He’s working with his co-founder, Mohammad Sakrani, 30, on new beds that can be hoisted up and suspended from the ceiling during the day. They are also trying to design modular bathrooms and even entire bedrooms that can be “plugged in” to buildings.In Starcity’s South of Market building, known as Gilbert House, which has a reputation for being the party house, tenants call themselves the Gilbertines.Migerta Ndrepepaj, 25, the headwaiter at the Nob Hill Club at the Intercontinental Mark Hopkins Hotel, said her favorite tradition was Sunday family days when the housemates cook together and go on adventures like renting go-karts.“That makes us sound like college kids,” Ms. Ndrepepaj said. “But we’re not.”For the annual San Francisco race and parade Bay to Breakers, the housemates rented sets of four-seater tandem bikes and cruised the city. For Halloween, they dressed as characters from “Alice in Wonderland” (Ms. Ndrepepaj was the White Rabbit). Recently, they all went to Lake Tahoe to a house that Starcity supplied.“You don’t have to think up plans anymore because they kind of do it for you,” she said. “And now, I live with my best friends.”The units are fundamentally not fancy, but Starcity adds accents that gives the spaces a trendy millennial look. Furniture is a midcentury-modern aesthetic. Plants hang in concrete pots on the walls alongside art that residents make on painting nights. “I feel like I’m in a relationship with everyone I live with,” Ms. Ndrepepaj said. “If their day is bad, your day is bad.”One evening back at Starcity’s Mission House, Rachel Haltom, 22, an account executive at Yelp, baked a birthday cake with Steph Allen, 24, a fashion boutique merchandise planner, for a housemate.Ms. Haltom had never made meringue, but Chris Maddox, 27, a writer, had come home and took over the egg-white whipping. One tenant announced a secret crush on another, and there was debate about the merits. They joked about alcoholic seltzer water, a new trend they all agreed was absurd, as Ms. Allen drank one.Before Starcity, Mr. Maddox paid $4,100 a month for a one-bedroom apartment and worked near constantly as chief executive of Seneca Systems, a start-up that provides software for local governments.What he wanted was to be a writer. Now, he pays $1,900 a month and lives in a cluttered bedroom with a bed, a record player and an overflowing bookshelf.Katherine McKim, 37, came home with her dog, Zoey, who trotted around the kitchen. Ms. McKim had worked for Penguin Random House in New York but always admired the San Francisco-based publisher Chronicle Books, so when she and her husband divorced, she packed up and moved out. (There are quite a few divorcées in Starcity.)“Everybody told me housing in San Francisco was really expensive, but I was like, ‘I live in New York, how much more expensive can it be?’” she said. “I was a bit cocky.”Now, for $2,050 a month, she has space for a dog bed for Zoey, a full-sized bed for herself, a TV, a mini fridge and a sink.Every other Wednesday is “wine night.” An upcoming Tuesday is “kombucha and yoga night.” On Feb. 14, it was “pal-entines day,” planned and hosted by Starcity.Nellie Bowles covers tech and internet culture from San Francisco. Before joining The Times, she was a correspondent for “VICE News Tonight.”@nelliebowlesAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperSAN FRANCISCO — It took Facebook seven years to raise $1 billion from investors. Uber did it in five.The messaging company Telegram has been around since 2013, but never tried to raise significant money until late last year. Now, thanks to an initial coin offering, or I.C.O., Telegram is on track to pull in a billion dollars in just four months — long before the product the company is raising money for is even built.When programmers or entrepreneurs launch an I.C.O., what they are really doing is selling their own virtual currencies in order to raise money for software they say they are building. In return for real money, investors receive digital tokens, similar to Bitcoin.Regulators worry this novel fund-raising method is allowing people to flout the rules that are supposed to protect investors. Financial authorities around the world have been promising to crack down on coin offerings, which rose out of nowhere last year to become a popular way for start-ups to raise tens of millions of dollars, sometimes in minutes.In recent months, the Securities and Exchange Commission has been sending out subpoenas, asking for information about coin offerings that may have violated the law — although how existing laws may apply remains unclear. Nonetheless, companies like Telegram are still proceeding with their offerings and hoping they can stay out of trouble.Telegram’s supercharged fund-raising has become the most visible and perhaps most lucrative example of an I.C.O. The company has taken in $850 million over the past two months from some of the biggest venture capital firms in Silicon Valley, and it is now aiming to raise another $850 million over the next month or so. A third $850 million round is in the works after that, according to documents associated with the offering.Telegram already runs a popular messaging service. It plans to use the new money to create both an online currency for ordinary people — outside the control of governments — and a new kind of global computing network, combining the attributes of existing virtual currencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum.The project is being led by one of the most vaunted but enigmatic figures in the tech world, Pavel Durov, who built the biggest social network in Russia, VKontakte, before thumbing his nose at Vladimir V. Putin and fleeing the country. He now hops between bases in Dubai and around Europe.Despite Mr. Durov’s credentials, the tech world is divided on the wisdom of putting money into his fund-raising campaign.Some of Silicon Valley’s most prominent venture firms have signed up to invest in the project, including Benchmark, Sequoia and Kleiner Perkins, according to two people briefed on the private deal who were not authorized to speak about it publicly.But the venture capitalists who have invested the most in the virtual currency space, like Union Square Ventures, Andreessen Horowitz, Greylock and Polychain Capital, have stayed away.“It’s a pitch that sounds good to V.C.s that haven’t participated but makes no sense to people that have been in the space,” said Nick Tomaino, the founder of a virtual currency investment fund, 1confirmation, that didn’t invest in Telegram.The most obvious reason to be skeptical of the project is that there is not even a prototype — just a 132-page paper promising what the system will look like one day. The Telegram team is promising to release the software late this year or next year.What’s more, Telegram is promising to do more than any other virtual currency and to fix the intractable problems that have plagued virtual currencies like Bitcoin, such as overcoming the network’s difficulty handling all the transactions that have poured onto the network as it has become more popular.An analyst at one virtual currency-focused hedge fund, Pantera Capital, wrote a scathing essay noting that the Telegram team has given no evidence that they will be able to solve the problems that have dogged everyone else.“I cannot, in 132 pages, gain the slightest intuition as to how to go about proving that the hard problems it needs to solve will be solved,” the analyst, Charles Noyes, wrote about the Telegram project on Medium.Telegram representatives did not respond to requests for comment.Believers in the Telegram project have said that the company has a team of developers that have already proved themselves by building two incredibly popular tech products, VKontakte and Telegram.Mr. Durov, a self-described libertarian, founded VKontakte in 2006, but gave up his role and his ownership stake in 2013 after Mr. Putin’s allies took control of the company.Since then, Mr. Durov and his brother, who is said to be the technical genius behind the projects, have built Telegram into a messaging giant with nearly 200 million users. (When Facebook raised a billion dollars, it already had half a billion users.)The Telegram app has been popular in authoritarian countries because it promises that all messages are encrypted and protected from government snooping. Its pro-privacy stance has made it popular with many in the virtual currency community.The virtual currency network that Telegram is building, known as the Telegram Open Network, or TON, would allow users of the Telegram app to send each other payments when they are not in the same country. It would be a Bitcoin equivalent to the popular payment systems that messaging programs like WeChat have built.“TON can become a VISA/Mastercard alternative for the new decentralized economy,” said a TON primer that was sent to investors. “We believe that a whole new economy saturated with goods and services sold for cryptocurrency will be born.”The Telegram Open Network will use the idea of the blockchain, first introduced by Bitcoin, to maintain all the records of Telegram’s currency, known as the Gram, on computers around the world, without any central authority. But Telegram is promising that its blockchains will do much more than Bitcoin: serve as the basis for a global super computer, somewhat like the popular Ethereum network.The Bitcoin and Ethereum networks have both struggled to keep up with transactions, but Telegram said it will overcome this by using multiple blockchains that will allow it to process millions of transactions a second. The Bitcoin network limit is currently around five transactions a second.The Telegram documents say that 5 billion Grams will initially be released to users. The investors who put the first $850 million into the project paid 37 cents for each token, according to offering documents.The next round of investors, expected to come together over the next month, will pay about three and half times that for each Gram. If the current round raises another $850 million, Telegram said in documents that it may hold yet another round, to raise $850 million more.The price that Telegram is charging in the current fund-raising round — $1.33 a Gram — assumes the entire currency will grow to be worth at least $6.6 billion. There are already eight virtual currencies worth that much, and all the Bitcoin in the world were worth around $185 billion on Sunday. Given Telegram’s experience, many investors think it won’t be hard to achieve that long term value.Telegram’s team has also been careful to stay on the right side of the law, only offering their token to accredited investors, and working with the established Wall Street law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.Telegram initially said in its offering documents that it would do a public sale of Grams, to smaller investors, but it backed away from that after American regulators spoke in congressional hearings in February about their concerns over I.C.O.s, according to the people briefed on the deal.Despite those precautions, many virtual currency investors said the Telegram offering was too risky.“This is an order of magnitude larger than any of the most hyped I.C.O.s we’ve seen,” said Joe DiPasquale, the founder of BitBull Capital, a hedge fund. “As an investor who looks at a lot of projects in this space, that for me is a concern.”Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopperAdvertisement

 Kevin Roose
 

THE SHIFT
MARCH 4, 2018
“Oh my god, this is so cute!”Robin Li, an investor with the San Francisco venture capital firm GGV Capital, was standing in the lobby of the Madison building in downtown Detroit. Built in 1917 as a theater and refurbished several years ago as a tech co-working space, the Madison checks all of the aesthetic boxes of hipsterdom: reclaimed wood, exposed brick walls, pour-over coffee served by tattooed baristas.“This is nicer than San Francisco,” Ms. Li concluded.Last month, I accompanied Ms. Li and roughly a dozen other venture capitalists on a three-day bus trip through the Midwest, with stops in Youngstown and Akron, Ohio; Detroit and Flint, Mich.; and South Bend, Ind. The trip, which took place on a luxury bus outfitted with a supply of vegan doughnuts and coal-infused kombucha, was known as the “Comeback Cities Tour.”It was pitched as a kind of Rust Belt safari — a chance for Silicon Valley investors to meet local officials and look for promising start-ups in overlooked areas of the country.But a funny thing happened: By the end of the tour, the coastal elites had caught the heartland bug. Several used Zillow, the real estate app, to gawk at the availability of cheap homes in cities like Detroit and South Bend and fantasize about relocating there. They marveled at how even old-line manufacturing cities now offer a convincing simulacrum of coastal life, complete with artisanal soap stores and farm-to-table restaurants.Advertisement“If it weren’t for my kids, I’d totally move,” said Cyan Banister, a partner at Founders Fund. “This could be a really powerful ecosystem.”AdvertisementThese investors aren’t alone. In recent months, a growing number of tech leaders have been flirting with the idea of leaving Silicon Valley. Some cite the exorbitant cost of living in San Francisco and its suburbs, where even a million-dollar salary can feel middle class. Others complain about local criticism of the tech industry and a left-wing echo chamber that stifles opposing views. And yet others feel that better innovation is happening elsewhere.“I’m a little over San Francisco,” said Patrick McKenna, the founder of High Ridge Venture Partners who was also on the bus tour. “It’s so expensive, it’s so congested, and frankly, you also see opportunities in other places.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. McKenna, who owns a house in Miami in addition to his home in San Francisco, told me that his travels outside the Bay Area had opened his eyes to a world beyond the tech bubble.“Every single person in San Francisco is talking about the same things, whether it’s ‘I hate Trump’ or ‘I’m going to do blockchain and Bitcoin,’” he said. “It’s the worst part of the social network.”The tour through the Midwest was organized by Representative Tim Ryan, a Democrat who represents northeastern Ohio. Representative Ro Khanna, a Democrat who represents Silicon Valley, came along for the ride, as did J. D. Vance, the author of “Hillbilly Elegy.” (Mr. Vance, a venture capitalist who now seems to magically appear every time the words “Midwest” and “manufacturing” are spoken aloud, has also been leading his own whistle-stop tours of the region.)[Read more here about Mr. Vance scouring the Midwest.]Recently, Peter Thiel, the President Trump-supporting billionaire investor and Facebook board member, became Silicon Valley’s highest-profile defector when he reportedly told people close to him that he was moving to Los Angeles full-time, and relocating his personal investment funds there. (Founders Fund and Mithril Capital, two other firms started by Mr. Thiel, will remain in the Bay Area.) Mr. Thiel reportedly considered San Francisco’s progressive culture “toxic,” and sought out a city with more intellectual diversity.Mr. Thiel’s criticisms were echoed by Michael Moritz, the billionaire founder of Sequoia Capital. In a recent Financial Times op-ed, Mr. Moritz argued that Silicon Valley had become slow and spoiled by its success, and that “soul-sapping discussions” about politics and social injustice had distracted tech companies from the work of innovation.AdvertisementComplaints about Silicon Valley insularity are as old as the Valley itself. Jim Clark, the co-founder of Netscape, famously decamped for Florida during the first dot-com era, complaining about high taxes and expensive real estate. Steve Case, the founder of AOL, has pledged to invest mostly in start-ups outside the Bay Area, saying that “we’ve probably hit peak Silicon Valley.”But even among those who enjoy living in the Bay Area, and can afford to do so comfortably, there’s a feeling that success has gone to the tech industry’s head.“Some of the engineers in the Valley have the biggest egos known to humankind,” Mr. Khanna, the Silicon Valley congressman, said during a round-table discussion with officials in Youngstown. “If they don’t have their coffee and breakfast and dry cleaning, they want to go somewhere else. Whereas here, people are hungry.”This isn’t a full-blown exodus yet. But in the last three months of 2017, San Francisco lost more residents to outward migration than any other city in the country, according to data from Redfin, the real estate website. A recent survey by Edelman, the public relations firm, found that 49 percent of Bay Area residents, and 58 percent of Bay Area millennials, were considering moving away. And a sharp increase in people moving out of the Bay Area has led to a shortage of moving vans. (According to local news reports, renting a U-Haul for a one-way trip from San Jose to Las Vegas now costs roughly $2,000, compared with just $100 for a truck going the other direction.)For both investors and rank-and-file workers, one appeal of noncoastal cities is the obvious cost savings. It’s increasingly difficult to justify doling out steep salaries and lavish perks demanded by engineers in the Bay Area, when programmers in other cities can be had for as little as $50,000 a year. (An entry-level engineer at Facebook or Google might command triple or quadruple that amount.)When you invest in a San Francisco start-up, “you’re basically paying landlords, Twilio, and Amazon Web Services,” said Ms. Bannister of Founders Fund, referring to the companies that provide start-ups with messaging services and data hosting.Granted, California still has its perks. Venture capital investment is still largely concentrated on the West Coast, as are the clusters of talented computer scientists who emerge from prestigious schools like Stanford and the University of California, Berkeley. Despite the existence of tools like Slack, which make remote work easier, many tech workers feel it’s still an advantage to be close to the center of the action.But the region’s advantages may be eroding. Google, Facebook and other large tech companies have recently opened offices in cities like Boulder, Colo. and Boston, hoping to attract new talent as well as accommodating requests from existing employees looking to move elsewhere. And the hot demand for engineers in areas like artificial intelligence and autonomous vehicles has led companies to expand their presence near research universities, in cities like Pittsburgh and Ann Arbor. Then there is HQ2, Amazon’s much-ballyhooed search for a second headquarters, which seems to have convinced some tech executives that cities between the coasts may be viable alternatives.AdvertisementVenture capitalists, who recognize a bargain when they see one, have already begun scouring the Midwest. Mr. Case and Mr. Vance recently amassed a $150 million fund called “Rise of the Rest.” The fund, which was backed by tech luminaries including Jeff Bezos of Amazon and Eric Schmidt, the former executive chairman of Alphabet, will invest in start-ups throughout the region.[Read Andrew Ross Sorkin on the Rise of the Rest fund.]But it’s not just about making money. It’s about social comfort, too. Tech companies are more popular in noncoastal states than in their own backyards, where the industry’s effect on housing prices and traffic congestion is more acutely felt. Most large tech companies still rate highly in national opinion surveys, but only 62 percent of Californians say they trust the tech industry, and just 37 percent trust social media companies, according to the Edelman survey. So you can start to understand the appeal of a friendlier environment.During the Akron stop of the bus trip, while the Silicon Valley investors mingled with local officials over a dinner spread of vegan polenta pizza and barbecue sliders, Mr. McKenna, the San Francisco venture capitalist, told me that he felt a difference in people’s attitudes in cities like these, where the tech industry’s success is still seen as something to celebrate.“People want to be in places where they’re the hero,” he said.An earlier version of a picture caption with this article misidentified the mayors of two cities in Ohio. Mayor Jamael Tito Brown of Youngstown was on the left and Mayor William Franklin of Warren was on the right.An earlier version of this article misstated J.D. Vance’s status as an investor in tech start-ups. He is currently a venture capitalist, not a former investor.Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Silicon Valley Toured the Heartland and Fell in Love.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICHMARCH 3, 2018
YouTube this week cracked down on the videos of some prominent far-right actors and conspiracy theorists, continuing an effort that has become more visible since the school shooting in Parkland, Fla., last month caused a torrent of misinformation to be featured prominently on the site.A week after the shooting, many of the videos on YouTube’s “Trending” list contained misinformation about the teenage survivors of the shooting. The top video on the list for some time falsely claimed that a student at the school, David Hogg, was a paid actor.That video and others like it led to intense criticism of the site. Since then, many prominent right-wing personalities have reported that YouTube has issued them strikes, which the site uses to enforce its community guidelines. If a channel receives three strikes within three months, YouTube terminates it.The company’s guidelines prohibit “videos that contain nudity or sexual content, violent or graphic content, harmful or dangerous content, hateful content, threats, spam, misleading metadata, or scams.”AdvertisementMike Cernovich, the right-wing agitator and conspiracy theorist, said Wednesday that his channel, which has more than 66,000 subscribers, had been given a strike. (Mr. Cernovich said Saturday that YouTube had reversed the strike and that the video that had been banned was again available on the site.)AdvertisementInfowars, the conspiracy theory outlet headed by Alex Jones, said Tuesday that it had received a second strike in two weeks, both for videos about the Parkland shooting. (Infowars, which has more than 2.2 million YouTube subscribers, later said the second strike had been removed.) Infowars’ Washington bureau chief, Jerome Corsi, said on Twitter that his YouTube channel had been terminated without notice or explanation.News outlets including The Outline and Breitbart have pointed to more than a dozen other right-wing or right-leaning accounts that have been disciplined, claiming they have either received strikes or been banned outright in the past several weeks.They include the violent neo-Nazi group Atomwaffen (banned for hate speech) and the YouTube star Carl Benjamin, known by his username Sargon of Akkad, who criticizes feminism and identity politics. Mr. Benjamin posted a screenshot on Facebook on Thursday that said he had been locked out of his Google account because “it looked like it was being used in a way that violated Google’s policies.”YouTube said it was not aware of any prominent accounts that had falsely reported strikes, though it did say that Mr. Benjamin had violated its policy on  copyright infringement.YouTube denied that the deletions and other actions were ideologically driven. It said accounts that had been disciplined or banned were only the most prominent, and vocal, of many across the ideological spectrum who had seen their videos taken down for violating the site’s rules.But critics said YouTube was reacting haphazardly in an attempt to purge actors who have garnered it negative attention. They questioned whether the site was prepared to substantively address the problem of the conspiracy theories that flourish on its platform.And some of the right-wing YouTube stars and conspiracists who were affected saw the disciplinary action as a result of what they say is left-wing ideology flourishing inside Google, of which YouTube is a subsidiary. Mr. Benjamin told Breitbart that the company was “riddled with a far-left ideological orthodoxy that has taken hold to a radical degree.”AdvertisementA YouTube spokeswoman said in a statement that its “reviewers remove content according to our policies, not according to politics or ideology, and we use quality control measures to ensure they are applying our policies without bias.”What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company is in the middle of hiring a large influx of moderators, and it attributed some of its recent enforcement actions to a group who are still learning to apply its rules.“With the volume of videos on our platform, sometimes we make mistakes and when this is brought to our attention we reinstate videos or channels that were incorrectly removed,” the company’s statement said.The moderation efforts of YouTube, like those of Facebook and Twitter, have begun to receive more attention in the last year as academics and journalists have focused on how misinformation — like that sown by Russia during the 2016 presidential election — is spread.In a December blog post, YouTube announced it would add many people to its work force in 2018, hoping eventually to have 10,000 working to moderate or otherwise address content that has violated its rules.The company is in the process of hiring many of those people. A spokeswoman said that applying the company’s standards to any given video required training, and that new moderators were bound to make some mistakes. It said that some of the strikes that had been handed out since the Parkland shooting had been mistaken, though it did not specify which.Jonathan Albright, the research director of the Tow Center for Digital Journalism and an expert on how misinformation thrives on social media, said YouTube has long been inconsistent in its enforcement of its guidelines.“If these accounts are getting deleted at the last minute because people are angry and news organizations are digging into this, should these accounts have existed in the first place?” he asked.AdvertisementNegative news media attention results in more users flagging videos of right-wing conspiracy theorists, leading to a feedback loop in which channels promoting those views are disciplined. The effect is that its disciplinary process is reactive, and relies on users to flag content they find troublesome.A YouTube spokeswoman said the company planned to release a transparency report in the spring that it says will show the full range of videos that have been taken down.Zack Exley, a left-wing populist who runs the YouTube channel Left Right Forward, said that the bans of high-profile right-wing accounts may do more harm than good by building up the reputations of extremists among their bases.“The extreme right loves being censored,” he said. “They become heroes and raise tons of money every time YouTube removes or demonetizes their videos.”YouTube does not police misinformation, which, on its own, does not violate the site’s guidelines. But the company says it is confident that, with its steep increase in moderators and progress in machine learning, it will be capable of enforcing its rules effectively, which will help stem the tide of objectionable videos.Mr. Albright said that hiring many more people would help. But he said that those people would have to be trained to address difficult situations, applying the platform’s rules to nuanced videos in which the right decision was not always clear.“It would take a group of people specifically trained in this kind of situation,” he said. “It’s a problem of scale. This stuff doesn’t scale like algorithms. Humans don’t scale.”“YouTube isn’t in a ‘too big to fail’ situation,” he added. “But they’re potentially too big to moderate.”Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 2, 2018
Q. Can Windows 10 track how much time a child spends playing games?A. If the child is using a specially configured Microsoft account, the “family” feature built into Windows 10 can compile reports about how a session was spent — including any games played on the computer or on an Xbox One console. These activity reports are emailed to a parent’s account and list the games and apps used by the child, along with the websites browsed. The keywords used on search engines are also noted — as long as either the Microsoft Edge or Internet Explorer browser was used.The Windows 10 parental controls can set limits on a child’s screen time, as well as the types of content available without getting permission. To set up the family options, a parent needs to be signed into a Windows 10 PC with a Microsoft account. The parent then needs to create a separate Microsoft account for the child — and persuade the child to log in and use it.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To set up the child’s account, go to the Start menu, select the gear-shaped Settings icon and choose Accounts. On the Accounts screen, select “Family & other people” and then “Add a family member.” Choose “Add a child.” If the child does not have a personal email address already, you can create one here. The child uses this address to log into the new Windows 10 account.Parents can manage children’s accounts online. The Windows 10 Settings area has a link to the Family options, too. A quick way to get there is to tell the Cortana assistant to open the Windows Defender Security Center and then tap Family options.Mac-owning families have similar parental controls built into Apple’s operating system. To set them up, open the System Preferences icon in the Mac’s desktop dock (or under the Apple menu in the upper-left corner of the screen) and click the Parental Controls icon.Third-party parental control programs like Net Nanny and Qustodio cost money, but these programs typically offer a wider range of protection and tools to monitor young users.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick WingfieldSome signs are subtle, like the “Whole Foods + Amazon” one near the bananas. Others are more obvious, like the kiosk with Amazon devices for sale.It has been six months since Amazon took over Whole Foods, a $13.4 billion deal that made the internet retailer a major player in the world of brick-and-mortar retailing. For the most part, the 470 stores are still the same upscale, expensive healthy food emporiums that they have always been.Amazon has grander ambitions as well. The company’s executives are busy devising ways to connect its Prime membership program, which offers benefits like fast and free shipping and video streaming, with the stores.The company has said that Prime will eventually become the Whole Foods customer rewards program. It recently took a baby step in the direction of weaving together Prime and Whole Foods by giving Prime members 5 percent back on Whole Foods purchases made with an Amazon-branded Visa card. Whole Foods has signs about the offer all over its checkout stands.Some of the changes Amazon has made are experiments limited to a few locations. Others, like price cuts on grocery staples, are widespread and a sign of more to come, its executives say.“We’re determined to make healthy and organic food affordable for everyone,” Jeff Wilke, the chief executive of Amazon’s worldwide consumer business, has said.Here are a handful of notable changes Amazon has made to Whole Foods so far.(WATCH: Mr. Wilke, speaking at The New York Times’s New Work Summit, explains his strategic vision for the retailing giant and the critical role Whole Foods will play.)Last month, Amazon allowed people to buy thousands of different items from Whole Foods and have them delivered by Prime Now, a speedy Amazon delivery service that uses contractor drivers in their personal cars. The service, available only for Amazon Prime members, offers free two-hour delivery of orders and one-hour delivery for $7.99 on orders over $35. (Driver tips are optional.)Amazon introduced Prime Now delivery for Whole Foods stores in Austin, Tex.; Cincinnati; Dallas; and Virginia Beach. The company said it would expand the service to the rest of the country in 2018. Inside the Austin store, Prime Now orders in brown paper bags wait on shelves and in refrigerators for drivers to come pick them up and spirit them to customers’ homes. A banner at the entrance to the store promotes the delivery service.A few days before Amazon completed its acquisition of Whole Foods, it announced a series of price cuts on grocery items, a move to change the perception of the chain as “Whole Paycheck.” It slashed the price of a dozen Organic Valley large brown eggs by 27 percent and cut the cost of a 16 ounce jar of 365 brand crunch almond butter by 13 percent. For Thanksgiving, it made turkeys cheaper, and for Valentine’s Day, it dropped the price on roses.Still, much of the selection in Whole Foods stores still carries premium price tags. Studies by analysts have shown that overall prices on typical Whole Foods shopping expeditions have decreased only slightly. Whole Foods said there was more to come. “We’ve done quite a bit,” Brooke Buchanan, a spokeswoman for the market, said. “There’s still so much more we have planned.”The most conspicuous sign of Amazon’s agenda inside Whole Foods is the kiosks containing Amazon electronics that now lurk near store aisles. Not far from the Honeycrisp apples and bulk bins of granola, shoppers can now pick up an Echo, a Fire TV or a Kindle.In a handful of Whole Foods stores, including in Denver and Chicago, Amazon has opened big electronics stands called pop-up shops, which are staffed by Amazon employees who can answer questions about the devices. The pop-up shops, which are at dozens of shopping malls around the country, give shoppers an opportunity to try the devices in person, something they cannot do when they browse online.For years, Amazon has been installing banks of lockers inside and around supermarkets and other buildings, giving people who order items on Amazon a secure place to pick up their packages. The lockers can also be used to return items ordered on Amazon.Since the Whole Foods deal closed, Amazon has put its lockers inside all of the chain’s stores. In some stores, the lockers are smaller and tucked among the wine and other goods. The Austin store has a huge bank of lockers near a set of escalators.So far, much of the changes have gone in one direction: injecting a little Amazon into Whole Foods. But a little Whole Foods is being added to Amazon, too.Amazon has sought to bolster Whole Foods by making the chain’s private label products available through its various online outlets. Whole Paws, the grocer’s pet food brand, and 365 Everyday Value, its line of foods for budget shoppers, can now be purchased through Amazon.com and AmazonFresh, an existing grocery delivery service run by the internet retailer.Amazon even dedicated an area of its automated convenience store in Seattle, Amazon Go, to Whole Foods private label goods.Nick Wingfield is a technology correspondent based in Seattle. He covers Amazon, Microsoft and emerging technologies and has written on technology's impact on economies in the Pacific Northwest. He was previously a reporter at The Wall Street Journal.@nickwingfieldAdvertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 1, 2018
Q. When is the Twitter desktop app for Mac going away, and what are the alternatives if I don’t want to keep the web version open on a browser all day?A. Twitter announced on Feb. 16 that it had just retired its official Mac desktop software from the Mac App Store and planned to support the existing program for only 30 more days. So expect the Mac Twitter app to lose altitude by mid-March.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Twitter suggests using its website for the full “experience on a Mac,” the Mac App Store offers some third-party alternatives if you prefer to stick with a more customizable program. (As it was, Twitter’s stand-alone app for the Mac had not been updated for quite a while, leaving some users frustrated with it.)Tweetbot for Mac ($9.99) and Twitterific 5 for Twitter ($7.99) are the two major replacement options for Twitter’s own Mac app. Both include more features — like the new 280-character limit — than Twitter’s abandoned program. Either program works with multiple Twitter accounts, and if you use the corresponding mobile app, you can keep your feed in sync across devices. Read the features list and reviews for each one if you have not decided which one you want.Twitter’s free TweetDeck dashboard for tracking real-time conversations is still available in the Mac App Store. Additionally, TweetDeck can be used through Twitter’s website.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By SHEERA FRENKELMARCH 1, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Facebook said on Thursday that it would end an experiment in six countries that separated posts from news sites and publishers from other material on the social network.News organizations in the countries — Slovakia, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Bolivia, Guatemala and Serbia — had said they were blindsided by the Facebook experiment when it began in October and complained that it had led to a surprising rise in misinformation.Facebook stopped short of acknowledging that the changes made in the experiment, called Explore, contributed to that increase in misinformation, but the company said it could have done a better job communicating with publishers about what was happening.“In surveys, people told us they were less satisfied with the posts they were seeing, and having two separate feeds didn’t actually help them connect more with friends and family,” Adam Mosseri, who heads Facebook’s News Feed, said in a statement posted online. “We also received feedback that we made it harder for people in the test countries to access important information, and that we didn’t communicate the test clearly.”AdvertisementFacebook and other social media companies are grappling with their role in spreading false information propagated by Russians ahead of the 2016 presidential election. And they face increasing pressure from regulators around the world to get a better handle on what happens on their networks, from misinformation to cyberbullying.AdvertisementAlso on Thursday, Jack Dorsey, the chief executive of Twitter, said his company was looking for ways to measure the “health” of conversations on Twitter.In a series of tweets, Mr. Dorsey acknowledged that Twitter has been home to a number of people who use the platform to harass, bully and mislead.“We have witnessed abuse, harassment, troll armies, manipulation through bots and human-coordination, misinformation campaigns, and increasingly divisive echo chambers,” Mr. Dorsey wrote. “We aren’t proud of how people have taken advantage of our service, or our inability to address it fast enough.”After Facebook released Explore in the six countries, it was quickly criticized by independent news sites and nongovernmental organizations. The changes, they said, made it harder for trusted sources of information to reach local populations. They also said the experiment had led to an increase in false and salacious news being shared in those countries.Stuart White, editor of The Phnom Penh Post, an English-language newspaper in Cambodia, said traffic from Facebook to his site had plummeted because of the changes to Facebook’s main News Feed — the scrolling stream of content that greets people when they log into the social network.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The experiment took place during a crackdown by the country’s leader, Hun Sen, on political opponents, activists and media, effectively transforming the struggling democracy into a one-party state. Journalists were arrested, and newspapers were shut down. Facebook had emerged as an important, more independent channel for information.“Whether or not Facebook likes it, it has established itself as the main market for news in places like Cambodia,” Mr. White said. “It would be helpful if they acknowledged that responsibility.”AdvertisementFabiola Chambi, the web editor of Los Tiempos, the main newspaper of the Bolivian city of Cochabamba, said Explore had reduced traffic to the site by 30 to 60 percent. Ms. Chambi said the Explore function was a constant source of confusion for publishers and readers who thought their access to news had been the subject of an experiment by a foreign company.“It wasn’t an idea that was ever well received, and garnered plenty of rejection,” she said. “And I would guess this had something to do with their decision to reverse course.”However, the move did force the newspaper for the first time to think about life after Facebook. “We had to confront the declines and in the end found some creative ways to improve traffic and maintain a loyal audience,” Ms. Chambi said.Facebook’s role as a kingmaker among publishers has played a central role in a debate over the responsibilities that social media companies have to police content on their own platforms.Facebook has announced a series of changes to its News Feed as it looks to increase “meaningful interaction” on its site by drawing attention to content from family and friends while de-emphasizing content from brands and publishers. Those changes will be introduced gradually around the world.Facebook has said those News Feed changes were not related to Explore, but there are similarities in the way the company is looking to play down material from publishers.While Facebook has said it was emphasizing meaningful interactions, Mr. Dorsey said Twitter was determined to find “holistic and fair solutions” to its problems.The company recently rewrote its user rules and guidelines, and has begun punishing well-known Twitter users who violate those rules by removing their “account verification” status or barring them altogether.It was unclear how either Twitter or Facebook will measure the new method by which they said they will judge their platforms, or how they will affect the billions of people who use them.Follow Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @sheerafNicholas Casey contributed reporting from Medellín, Colombia.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook Experiment Ends as Fake News Rises.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CADE METZFEB. 28, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Microsoft’s co-founder Paul Allen said Wednesday that he was pumping an additional $125 million into his nonprofit computer research lab for an ambitious new effort to teach machines “common sense.”The money for the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence will about double the lab’s budget over the next three years, helping to fund existing research as well as the new effort, called Project Alexandria. In the years and decades to come, the lab hopes to create a database of fundamental knowledge that humans take for granted but machines have always lacked.“To make real progress in A.I., we have to overcome the big challenges in the area of common sense,” said Mr. Allen, who founded the software giant Microsoft in the 1970s with Bill Gates.Today, machines can recognize nearby objects, identify spoken words, translate one language into another and mimic other human tasks with an accuracy that was not possible just a few years ago. These talents are readily apparent in the new wave of autonomous vehicles, warehouse robotics, smartphones and digital assistants.AdvertisementBut these machines struggle with other basic tasks. Though Amazon’s Alexa does a good job of recognizing what you say, it cannot respond to anything more than basic commands and questions. When confronted with heavy traffic or unexpected situations, driverless cars just sit there.A.I. “recognizes objects, but can’t explain what it sees. It can’t read a textbook and understand the questions in the back of the book,” said Oren Etzioni, a former University of Washington professor who oversees the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence. “It is devoid of common sense.”AdvertisementSuccess may require years or even decades of work — if it comes at all. Others have tried to digitize common sense, and the task has always proved too large.In the mid-1980s, Doug Lenat, a former Stanford University professor, with backing from the government and several of the country’s largest tech companies, started a project called Cyc. He and his team of researchers worked to codify all the simple truths that we learn as children, from “you can’t be in two places at the same time” to “when drinking from a cup, hold the open end up.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thirty years later, Mr. Lenat and his team are still at work on this “common sense engine” — with no end in sight.Mr. Allen helped fund Cyc, and he believes it is time to take a fresh approach, he said, because modern technologies make it easier to build this kind of system.Mr. Lenat welcomed the new project. But he also warned of challenges: Cyc has burned through hundreds of millions of dollars in funding, running into countless problems that were not evident when the project began. He called them “buzz saws.”Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetz.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: A.I.’s Greatest Challenge: Digitizing Common Sense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 28, 2018
Q. Last year I opened a Facebook account, and as I entered my information I soon decided I didn’t want to continue. I deleted the app on my phone and tablet. Occasionally, I receive a “Welcome back to Facebook” message and realize I’ve not cut the cord. Is there way to sever this connection for good? Completely? A. Removing the Facebook app from your mobile devices does not delete the user account connected with it. To fully sever your ties with the social network, you need to visit the site’s Account Deletion page and log back in; you can do this from a web browser if you do not want to download the mobile app again. Use the box on the page to officially request that Facebook delete your account.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Facebook’s settings page also offers an account deactivation option, which removes your profile page from view but is not permanent. Accounts are reactivated when you log back in. If you deactivated your account and then started up a laptop that was set to automatically log into Facebook, your account may have revived itself.From your account settings page, you can see on which devices you are logged into Facebook and then log out if necessary. Logging in, then logging out of any forgotten devices and permanently deleting the account should cut your Facebook ties. (More active Facebook users can download an archive of the posts made while using the service by clicking the “Download a copy of your Facebook data” link on the account settings page.)If you deactivated the account and are sure no other devices were set to automatically log into Facebook, receiving “Welcome back” messages may mean Facebook is trying to re-engage you or that someone else is trying to get into your account. You can report the problem at facebook.com/hacked. Change the password of the mail account you used for Facebook and — to be safe — reset your Facebook password before deleting the account.Fake messages purporting to be from Facebook have been flying around the internet for years, so it is also possible you received a phishing attempt urging you to supply your account information to a fraudulent site. Late last year, Facebook announced that its users could see a list of official messages by clicking the link at the bottom of the Security and Login tab on the Settings page. If you see that Facebook has not sent you any legitimate messages, report the one you received to phish@facebook.com.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NATHANIEL POPPERFEB. 28, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The Securities and Exchange Commission has sent subpoenas to dozens of people and companies behind the rise of so-called initial coin offerings, a clear sign of the agency’s desire to rein in the popular new fund-raising method.Over the last few months, the commission has asked for information from companies that have sold new virtual currencies to raise money for their projects, as well as advisory firms and lawyers who have helped with these sales, according to four people who have seen some of the subpoenas. The people asked not to be identified because the subpoenas are part of confidential legal negotiations.The demands for information began last year, and companies have continued receiving them in recent months, the four people said.Nick Morgan, a former lawyer in the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, said that according to his contacts in the industry, the subpoenas had gone out to as many as 80 companies and individuals. Mr. Morgan, who is now a lawyer at the Paul Hastings firm, said those numbers would make this one of the broader regulatory sweeps he had seen.AdvertisementThe S.E.C. had no comment on the subpoenas, which were first reported on Wednesday by The Wall Street Journal.AdvertisementCoin offerings are a way for start-ups or online projects to raise money without selling stock or going to venture capitalists. The money is raised by creating and selling a virtual currency, generally with rules similar to well-known virtual currencies like Bitcoin.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The demands for information are the most concrete sign of the S.E.C.’s intention to crack down on the sudden emergence of coin offerings. Companies raised over $5 billion through coin offerings in 2017, according to the news and data site Coindesk.Jay Clayton, the chairman of the S.E.C., has said on several occasions that most of the virtual currencies that have been sold should have been categorized as securities and registered with regulators, which few companies have done.Companies have been able to get around regulatory checks because they have collected the money in Bitcoin and other virtual currencies, which can be sent without going through any banks or other middlemen that might look into the legality of the transactions.In January, Mr. Clayton said he had asked his agency to go after both the companies that sold virtual currencies and the “gatekeepers” that helped them.“Market professionals, especially gatekeepers, need to act responsibly and hold themselves to high standards,” he said in the speech at the Securities Regulation Institute. “To be blunt, from what I have seen recently, particularly in the initial coin offering space, they can do better.”The S.E.C. has already brought cases against a few small companies that have sold virtual currencies. But the subpoenas are the first concrete sign of a broader regulatory push.In a sign of the breadth of the agency’s effort, the subpoenas have been sent out by S.E.C. offices in multiple cities, including Boston, San Francisco and New York, according to the four people who have seen the subpoenas.AdvertisementThe subpoenas have asked companies for a wide array of information about the virtual currencies they have sold, including the information used to market the digital tokens and the identity of the investors who bought them, the people who saw the subpoenas said.Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopper.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Subpoenas Piling Up Over Sales Of Currency.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
FEB. 27, 2018
Something strange, scary and sublime is happening to cameras, and it’s going to complicate everything you knew about pictures. Cameras are getting brains.Until the past few years, just about all cameras — whether smartphones or point-and-shoots or CCTV surveillance — were like eyes disconnected from any intelligence.They captured anything you put in front of them, but they didn’t understand a whit about what they were seeing. Even basic facts about the world eluded them. It’s crazy, for instance, that in 2018, your smartphone doesn’t automatically detect when you’ve taken naked pictures of yourself and offer to house them under an extra-special layer of security.But all this is changing. There’s a new generation of cameras that understand what they see. They’re eyes connected to brains, machines that no longer just see what you put in front of them, but can act on it — creating intriguing and sometimes eerie possibilities.AdvertisementAt first, these cameras will promise to let us take better pictures, to capture moments that might not have been possible with every dumb camera that came before. That’s the pitch Google is making with Clips, a new camera that went on sale on Tuesday. It uses so-called machine learning to automatically take snapshots of people, pets and other things it finds interesting.AdvertisementOthers are using artificial intelligence to make cameras more useful. You’ve heard how Apple’s newest iPhone uses face recognition to unlock your phone. A start-up called Lighthouse AI wants to do something similar for your home, using a security camera that adds a layer of visual intelligence to the images it sees. When you mount its camera in your entryway, it can constantly analyze the scene, alerting you if your dog walker doesn’t show up, or if your kids aren’t home by a certain time after school.It doesn’t take long to imagine the useful and very creepy possibilities of cameras that can decipher the world. Digital cameras brought about a revolution in photography, but until now, it was only a revolution of scale: Thanks to microchips, cameras got smaller and cheaper, and we began carrying them everywhere.Now, A.I. will create a revolution in how cameras work, too. Smart cameras will let you analyze pictures with prosecutorial precision, raising the specter of a new kind of surveillance — not just by the government but by everyone around you, even your loved ones at home.The companies making these devices are aware of the privacy dangers. Many are moving into the field gingerly, slathering their products with safeguards that they say reduce the creepiness.Take Google’s Clips, which I’ve used for the past week and half. It’s one of the most unusual devices I’ve ever encountered. The camera is about the size of a tin of mints, and it has no screen. On its front, there’s a lens and a button. The button takes a picture, but it’s there only if you really need it.Instead, most of the time, you just rely on the camera’s intuition, which has been trained to recognize facial expressions, lighting, framing and other hallmarks of nice photos. It also recognizes familiar faces — the people you’re with more often are those it deems most interesting to photograph.Clips, which sells for $249, makes taking pictures unconscious and all but invisible. Carry it around wherever you go; the camera has a handy case with a big bendy clip, so it can be affixed to your jacket, set on a tabletop, carried in your palm or placed anywhere else with a view.AdvertisementFrom there, it’s all A.I.Clips watches the scene, and when it sees something that looks like a compelling shot, it captures a 15-second burst picture (something like a short animated GIF or Live Photo on your iPhone).I took a trip with my family to Disneyland last week, and over two highly photographable days, I barely took a photo. Instead, this tiny device automatically did the work, capturing a couple hundred short clips of our vacation.Some of them were quite good, getting the high points of our trip in the same way I might have with my phone. Here’s a clip of my son driving a car.But what was really interesting was the stuff I wouldn’t have consciously captured. I got dozens of pictures like these:Aesthetically, these pictures aren’t masterworks. Emotionally, they’re on a higher plane. Clips caught moments of my kids goofing off and fighting in Disney’s endless lines, playing catch at home, dancing like adorable maniacs — moments too spontaneous or seemingly slight for me to have caught with my camera, but that will probably paint a more accurate and edifying picture of our lives in 30 years.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Regular readers of this column know that capturing moments of my kids’ childhood is an acute anxiety of mine; I’ve even wired my home with cameras to preserve a kind of reality show of life in my house.But you don’t have to be as crazy as I am to share slivers of this fear — that your kids or your pets are constantly doing things that you’ll later want to remember, but that smartphones often miss. An intelligent camera gets these times because it doesn’t ask you to break the moment to capture them.But, obviously, setting up a camera that doesn’t need to be specifically triggered to take a picture is problematic. It raises the worry of spying — that Google can spy on you, or that you can use it to spy on others.Google addresses that creepiness in two ways. The device is mostly unconnected from the internet. It can take pictures without a connection, and it requires your phone for viewing or saving the clips. But even then, all its A.I. happens on the device, and it doesn’t even need you to have a Google account, the company said.Advertisement“We spent a lot of time thinking about privacy, and making sure this was a device people would actually want,” said Eva Snee, who heads Google’s research on how people interact with Clips. “What we learned was that cameras don’t creep people out when they’re used deliberately and the person is part of the process.”Clips also raises the memory of other products in this vein, including Snap’s Spectacles and Google Glass, the search company’s failed attempt to get consumers to use glasses that can take photos.To ensure that, Clips is designed to look like a camera. When it’s on, it flashes a white LED to signal that it could be recording. It also does not record audio, because that might have felt too much like spying.Lighthouse, which I’ve also used for a few weeks, is meant to be an upgrade over the internet-connected home security cameras that have become popular. Those devices can be annoying because they freak out every time they spot any movement.Lighthouse’s special trick is a camera system that can sense 3-D space and learn to recognize faces — intelligence meant to avoid false alarms. It also has a nifty natural-language interface, so you can ask it straightforward questions: “What did the kids do when I was gone?” will show you clips of your kids when you were gone.Lighthouse, which sells for $299 and requires a $10 monthly subscription, feels like a work in progress. It was mostly accurate in differentiating people in my house, but it was also tripped up into thinking I had an intruder by a mylar balloon floating around my living room.The company is young, and I expect its software to improve. I can see it being of genuine use to people who wonder what’s happening at home when they’re away. Want to know if your dog is jumping on your couch? Ask Lighthouse; it can recognize dogs jumping around couches, and will instantly show you the clip. (Well, it can get close. I don’t have a dog, so when I asked Lighthouse that question, it pulled up a clip of my kid kicking his stuffed tiger off the couch.)But what if it’s your spouse, not your pooch, you’re worried about? I trust my wife, but for the sake of this column, I asked the device to show me any clips of her in the house with an unfamiliar person. There she was one evening, with the babysitter, whom Lighthouse hadn’t seen before.AdvertisementIt was a case of straight-up spying on my family. But it’s an obvious possibility with a camera that understands the world so well.Alex Teichman, Lighthouse’s chief executive, said it could add safeguards against inter-family spying, for instance by restricting face identification only to unrecognized faces. He also pointed out that the system has numerous fine-grained privacy controls that allow you to turn off any recording when certain family members are present.I found his response credible. Both Lighthouse and Clips are well crafted against abuse. It should be noted that neither one allows for much more spying than we can already accomplish with smartphones; constant social surveillance is the norm in 2018.But they are guides to the future. Tomorrow, all cameras will have their capabilities. And they won’t just watch you — they’ll understand, too.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjooA version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Making Cameras Eerily Smart.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 27, 2018
Q. Are there any programs that track phone cellular data usage by individual app?A. Third-party apps often use easy-to-read graphics to break down your phone’s cellular data consumption so you can see just which programs are burning through your bytes. Data Usage for Android and iOS as well as My Data Manager (also for Android and iOS) are among the options, and your wireless carrier may have its own data-tracking app. However, depending on your device, you may not need extra software.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In iOS 11, open the Settings icon on the home screen and tap Cellular. Scroll down to the Cellular Data section to see the total amount of data used in the current period noted above a list of apps. (The “current period” is measured between the times you hit the Reset Statistics button at the bottom of the screen — which can be at the beginning of your billing period or whenever you feel like it.)In the list, you can see the amount of data each app has used. If you want to stop an app from pulling down data over the cellular connection, tap the button on the right side of the screen to restrict its network activity to a Wi-Fi connection.The steps for checking your data usage in Android varies based on the operating system and device maker. In several versions, start by opening the Settings app, choosing Network & Internet, then tapping Data Usage and Mobile Data Usage. To see how much an app is eating, tap its name in the list to see its total use, its foreground use and its background use. Android 7.0 and later has a Data Saver mode that can help save megabytes on a limited plan.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Monitoring Cellular Data Use for Apps.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How do you print from a Google Chromebook?A. Wireless printers designated as “cloud-ready” are typically the most straightforward to use with a Chrome OS netbook. But if you have an older “classic” Wi-Fi printer without the “Cloud-ready” label, you should still be able to use it with your Chromebook, as long as you have Google’s Chrome browser on a Windows or Mac computer to handle the setup chores. (Google’s YouTube channel has videos that demonstrate how to set up both cloud-ready and “classic” printers to work with a Chromebook.)If you have a cloud-ready printer already working on your network, sign into your Chromebook and make sure it is connected to the same network as the printer. Click your account’s profile photo and select Settings on the Chromebook. At the bottom of the Settings list, select Advanced, go to the Printing section and choose Printers. Click “Add Printer.” Choose your network’s printer and click Add. (If you do not see your printer, the Chromebook support site has instructions for adding it manually.)To connect an older Wi-Fi printer to the Google Cloud Print service so your Chromebook can use it, open the Chrome browser on a Windows PC or a Mac and log into your Google account. (You cannot use a Chromebook to directly set up a printer on Google Cloud Print.) Open the Chrome Settings menu on the right side of the browser and click Advanced. Under Printing, select Google Cloud Print and then “Manage Google Cloud Print devices.” Choose your printer and click “Add Printer.”Certain Hewlett-Packard printer models work with a special Chromebook app to allow printing over a USB cable connection. If you want to print that way, install the HP Print for Chrome extension from the Chrome Web store. Once the extension is installed, the Google Print window should give you the option to select the connected USB printer.When you have added the printer, press the Control and P keys on the keyboard. Click the Change button next to Destination, select the newly added printer and click Print.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I plan to start really organizing my digital photos on my computer. I would like to be able to sort them by location taken and search for pictures based on who or what is in the photo. Are there photo-editing programs that can also catalog a large personal picture collection?A. Several programs that import and edit digital photographs can also organize the pictures by face, place or even keywords. Depending on the computer and photo tools you already use — and how much more you want to do with your photo library — you may not need to buy or install anything new.If you just want to search for general subjects, like “cars” or “dogs,” Google Photos for the desktop browser and Android and iOS systems can often recognize pictures containing those items without your having to add keywords yourself. The system is not foolproof, but the Google Photos search tool can be quite accurate on some subjects.Google Photos and other programs can perform basic face recognition to label people in your pictures. If you snapped the photo on a smartphone with the location services feature enabled, the photo program can automatically pinpoint the place it was taken. You can also add coordinates manually.If you want to do really fine-tuned searches for photos that may have multiple subjects in the frame, consider a program that lets you create and apply your own keywords. You must take the time to add the keywords to the picture files as you go, but with the right keywords applied, you can do broad searches for photos in your collection containing the keyword “car” — or perform a much more targeted search through your files for photos containing “car” and “1966” and “Ford” and “Mustang” in the keywords field.Apple’s Photos app for the Mac and iOS devices supports manually entered keywords and can automatically recognize people and certain objects in pictures. You can also search for people and places pulled from the software face-recognition software and location services feature.Flickr, Yahoo’s free online photo-sharing site, also supports keyword tags on pictures you upload. The site also has a “Magic View” feature that tries to automatically group images together according to subjects.You can find plenty of desktop programs for Windows for in-depth tagging and sorting of your pictures. Digital photography sites have roundups of the latest programs and features, including ADSee Photo Studio Standard ($90; free trial available).Aside from its Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Photoshop Elements tools for image editing, Adobe makes several programs for organizing and managing your picture collection, including the free Adobe Bridge application. If you want more photo-editing tools alongside the keyword tags and other organizational features, the company’s Adobe Lightroom Classic CC for desktop ($10 a month) or Adobe Lightroom CC for desktop, mobile and web (prices start at $10 a month with Adobe Photoshop CC and 20 gigabytes of cloud storage included) are options. The existence of two Lightroom programs can be confusing, but Adobe’s site further explains the difference between the versions here.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 22, 2018
Q. I know there are sites that convert words and phrases from other languages to English, but how do you translate an entire web page?A. You can find language-translation options from certain browsers, search engines or websites. For example, Google’s Chrome browser for computers, Android and iOS have translation tools built in and may even volunteer to automatically translate a page that is not in your preferred language settings. A free Google Translate extension for Chrome gives you the ability to quickly translate highlighted portions of a page.Google and Microsoft both offer online tools for converting pasted text, documents or entire web pages between dozens of languages. When using either the Google or Bing search engine to look for foreign-language sites, you may see a “Translate this page” link on the results page that transforms the site into your default language with a click.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Google Translate site can convert pasted sections of text, uploaded documents or entire websites when you enter the URL into the box on the page. It can also translate speech. The mobile app version (available for Android and iOS) has even more features, with the ability to translate bilingual conversations, text in images and handwriting. The Android version of Google Translate now works within any app on the device so you do not have to paste text in and out of another program to convert it.AdvertisementMicrosoft’s Bing Translator page converts chunks of pasted text from a site, too. You can also paste a site’s URL into the first box on the Bing Translator page and choose English as the destination language. When you hit the Enter key, the site provides a new link in the translation box that you can click to go read the entire site in English.Windows 10 users can use the Microsoft Translator add-on for the Edge browser to instantly translate web pages, and a Microsoft Translator app for Android and iOS devices translates bilingual conversations and foreign language text in pictures. Microsoft’s Skype program for video, audio and text chat has its own Translator tool you can use with the Skype software on Windows, Mac and Linux systems to translate real-time spoken conversations in eight languages.AdvertisementStand-alone mobile apps and software for language translation are also available around the web. Keep in mind that the instant software translation between languages may not be perfect or as nuanced as what an experienced human interpreter can provide, but you should be able to get a general idea of what the web page or story is about.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 21, 2018
Q. Typing in text on a PDF form is tidier and saves time, but on a touch-screen Windows 10 computer, is it possible to “sign” PDF forms on the screen — instead of having to download a filled-in form, print it out, sign it, scan it and mail it? A. In Windows 10, you have at least two fairly simple ways to electronically scrawl your signature right on the dotted line. For one, you can use the annotation tools in the Microsoft Edge browser to sign a PDF document. Once you have filled out the text fields in the form open in the browser window, click the icon that looks like a moving ballpoint pen on the upper-right side of the Edge tool bar.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When the annotations tool bar opens, select the pen tool. When you tap the pen icon you can choose a digital ink color and thickness of the line. Close the box, scroll to the signature line on the PDF form and write your name with a stylus, fingertip or mouse pointer. Click the Save icon in the Edge tool bar to save a copy of the signed PDF form to your computer, where you can easily upload it elsewhere or send it as an email file attachment.For those who are using older versions of Windows (or who have a Mac), or who do not use the Edge browser, you can also electronically sign PDF forms with the free Adobe Reader DC software. After you install the program (if you do not have it already), download the PDF form, enter your text and then click the Fill & Sign icon in the right pane of the window. Select the Sign icon that appears at the top of the window, choose Add Signature and the Draw icon, and write your name in digital ink. Click Apply and drag your signature to the proper place on the form.Mac users can also sign and annotate PDF files using the built-in Preview program or the markup tools in the Mail app in macOS High Sierra. The Mail markup tools are available in the current version of the iOS software for iPhones, iPads and iPod Touch devices.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
FEB. 21, 2018
My wife and I were just settling into bed one night when Alexa, the other woman in my life, decided to make herself heard.Without being summoned, the Amazon Echo Dot at my bedside — one of the half-dozen devices that Alexa inhabits in our house — lit up its spectral blue ring, as if it had heard its triggering wake word, “Alexa.” But instead of offering help with some household chore, the voice assistant began to wail, like a child screaming in a horror-movie dream.“Huh,” I said to my wife when it was over. She said something less kind.But here’s what’s really strange: By the next morning, we had forgotten all about it.It is a measure of how thoroughly Amazon’s voice assistant has wormed herself into our lives, and into much of the culture beyond, that I never considered unplugging her after the scream. Instead I chalked the incident up to a harmless bug — one of the many mysteries of living with an artificial intelligence life form that can be summoned at a breath. (An Amazon representative offered to investigate, but said the company had never heard of such a thing happening before and didn’t think Alexa was even capable of making such a sound.)AdvertisementWhen Amazon unveiled Alexa three and a half years ago, it was roundly jeered. Now, against all expectations, even though she’s sometimes unpredictable and unpolished, Alexa is here to stay. And that may be underplaying it; people in tech have recently begun to talk about Alexa as being more than just part of a hit gadget.AdvertisementSomething bigger is afoot. Alexa has the best shot of becoming the third great consumer computing platform of this decade — next to iOS and Android, a computing service so ubiquitous that it sets a foundation for much of the rest of what happens in tech.It is not a sure path. Amazon could screw this up, and rivals like Google have many cards to play to curb Alexa’s rise. Amazon’s strategy — something like a mix between Google’s plan for Android and Apple’s for the iPhone — is also unusual. And there are lingering social concerns about voice assistants and, as I discovered, their sometimes creepy possibilities. How many people, really, are willing to let an always-on device in their house?Despite this, Alexa’s ubiquity is a plausible enough future that it is worth seriously pondering. In an effort to do so, I recently dived headlong into Alexa’s world. I tried just about every Alexa gadget I could get my hands on, including many not made by Amazon, such as an Alexa-enabled pickup truck, to see what life with her will be like once she’s everywhere.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What I found was a mess — many non-Amazon Alexa devices aren’t ready for prime time — but an inviting one. Late-night shrieks notwithstanding, one day very soon, Alexa or something like it will be everywhere — and computing will be better for it.“We had a spectacular holiday,” Dave Limp, Amazon’s senior vice president of devices and services, said when I called last month to chat about the assistant’s future.Amazon is famously cagey about sales numbers, but Mr. Limp braved a slight disclosure: “We’ve said we’ve sold tens of millions of Alexa-enabled devices, but I can assure you that last year we also sold tens of millions of just Echo devices. At that scale, it’s safe to now call this a category.”Mr. Limp’s distinction is confusing but important. At Amazon, Alexa lives in two places. She is part of a device category, the Echo smart speaker, which now comes in a variety of permutations, from the $49 Echo Dot to the screen-bearing Echo Show, which sells for $229. (These prices are merely guidelines; in its bid for ubiquity, Amazon often offers steep discounts, with the Dot selling for $29 during last year’s holidays.)AdvertisementBut like Google’s Android operating system, Alexa is also a piece of software that Amazon makes available for free for other device makers to put into their products.At least 50 devices are now powered by Alexa, and more keep coming. They include dozens of Echo-like smart speakers, home thermostats, light fixtures, dashboard cameras, smartphones, headphones, a smoke alarm and a very strange robot.Alexa is spreading so quickly that even Amazon can’t keep track of it. Mr. Limp said that as he wandered the floor at the CES electronics trade show in Las Vegas this year, even he was surprised by the number of different Alexa devices.“To me, that says the strategy is working,” he said.There are some costs to this strategy, which prizes speed over polish. The universe of Alexa-enabled products is shaggy. Many third-party devices get low reviews on Amazon. Many don’t include some of Alexa’s key functions — I tested devices that don’t let you set reminders, one of the main reasons to use Alexa. Technical limitations also prevent non-Amazon devices from taking advantage of some of Alexa’s best new features, like the ability to call phones or other Alexas (creating a kind of home intercom system).Mr. Limp said Amazon was aiming to fix these limitations, but conceded that its strategy necessarily led to some low-end devices. “You’re right, sometimes the ramifications of this will be that some devices will be out there that aren’t perfect,” he said.But there are also advantages to Alexa’s model for ubiquity. Imagine if you could gain access to your smartphone on just about any screen you encountered. Move from your phone to your TV to your laptop to your car, and wherever you went, you’d find all your apps, contacts and data just there, accessible through the same interface.That model isn’t really possible for phones. But because Alexa runs in the cloud, it allows for a wondrously device-agnostic experience. Alexa on my Echo is the same as Alexa on my TV is the same as Alexa on my Sonos speaker.And it’s the same even on devices not in your home. Ford — the first of several carmakers to offer Alexa integration in its vehicles — lent me an F-150 pickup outfitted with Alexa. The experience was joyously boring: I called up Alexa while barreling down the highway, and although she was slower to respond than at home, she worked just the same. She knew my musical tastes, my shopping list, the apps and smart-home services I had installed, and just about everything else.AdvertisementIt was the best showcase of the possibilities of always-on voice computing. In the future, wherever you go, you can expect to talk to a computer that knows you, one that can get stuff done for you without any hassle.There’s a lot of money in the voice game. For Amazon, Alexa’s rise could lead to billions of dollars in additional sales to its store, Mark Mahaney, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets, predicted recently. Amazon is thus not the only company chasing the dream of everywhere voice computing.Google, which is alive to the worry that Alexa will outpace it in the assistant game, is also offering its Google Assistant to other device makers. Though Amazon remains the leader in the business, there’s some evidence that Google’s devices gained market share over the holidays. (Apple, which just released a $349 smart speaker, HomePod, does not seem to be aiming for voice ubiquity.)The emerging platform war between Amazon and Google could lead to fallout for users. But their platforms can also play together. Amazon’s and Google’s relationships with third-party companies are nonexclusive, which means that hardware makers are free to add both Alexa and Google Assistant to their products. Sonos, for instance, now integrates with Alexa, and is planning to add Google Assistant soon.This is not the best outcome for the future; it would be better for all of us if the next computing platform didn’t come from one of the current tech giants, and if start-ups didn’t have to rely on Amazon or Google for this key piece of tech.But that seems unlikely. If Alexa is headed for ubiquity, it’s good that Google may be, too.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Alexa Will Be Everywhere. We’d Better Get Used to It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
FEB. 20, 2018

Judge Richard J. Leon, of the United States District Court in Washington, said AT&T; did not show that it was unfairly singled out by the Justice Department partly to stay in favor with the White House.
AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTech FixBy Brian X. ChenIt still feels magical to light up your living room by saying “Alexa, turn on the lights.” But with all the hype surrounding so-called smart things — everyday devices that are connected to the internet — it’s easy to forget that sometimes the dumb stuff is just better.Tech companies are adding internet connections to just about everything you can imagine so that they can be controlled with smart speakers or phones. Thermostats, surveillance cameras, mosquito zappers, coffee makers — you name it.And smart devices are becoming more popular. In 2017, 15 percent of American households owned a home automation device, up from 10 percent in April 2016, according to NPD Group, a research firm.But before we get carried away setting up the Wi-Fi connections on all our appliances, lights and fashion accessories, let me play Luddite for a second. Some of the most mundane devices are designed to accomplish a simple task extremely well — and in some cases they still execute those duties better than their high-tech brethren.So let’s take a moment to appreciate some of the best dumb things. Here are my top picks.The Apple Watch, by all measures, is a hit. The  latest iteration of the Apple Watch, called Series 3, is fast, water-resistant and versatile with long battery life, making it a superb smart watch for tracking your fitness activity.Yet a normal wristwatch is still superior at one crucial task: Telling the time.The Apple Watch’s screen wakes up when you tilt your wrist at an angle, which indicates you are trying to check the time. That helps conserve battery life. But any Apple Watch wearer is familiar with situations where this feature gets frustrating.While riding a bicycle, for example, you often have to let go of the handle bar and lift the watch toward your face to check the time. When you’re standing on a bus or subway train and holding onto a pole, it is difficult to tilt your wrist at the correct angle to look at the time. Or when you’re in a meeting and want to see if you’re staying on schedule, flicking your wrist isn’t very subtle.Until the Apple Watch manages to constantly display the time without sapping the battery, a normal wristwatch is better for telling the time in all those scenarios. That’s why you’ll see me wearing a normal watch at work but an Apple Watch at the gym.Many cars are now equipped with a touch-screen on the console that essentially mirrors your smartphone screen. Android phone users get to use Android Auto, and iPhone users hook into CarPlay.These smart car systems are designed to seamlessly work with your smartphone. Plugging in an iPhone, for example, loads a screen of apps like Apple Maps, Apple Music and Apple’s podcast app, which you can then control on the console or with Siri instead of fiddling with your smartphone screen.The problem with this concept is there are a limited number of apps that work with these smart infotainment systems. For example, if on CarPlay you prefer to use Google Maps or Waze, you’re out of luck and are stuck with Apple Maps.In addition, if your smart car system needs a major software update, some car brands are lagging in allowing you to download and install the updates yourself. Instead, they require you to bring the car to the dealer and pay for the updates to be installed there. General Motors, for example, has for years declined to offer so-called over-the-air updates and will only say it plans to support them before 2020.Using a phone mount is a cheap and simple solution that is far less frustrating. You just attach the mount to the dash, a CD player slot or an air conditioning vent, mount your phone and plug it into a power charger via the accessories port.Voilà, your phone has become your infotainment system, capable of running your favorite navigation and music apps and using voice controls to place calls over speakerphone. The screen is large enough to clearly read maps, and you can update the operating system on your own. What more do you need?Amazon recently introduced the Echo Spot, a smart alarm clock with a touch-screen and the Alexa virtual assistant. A less desirable feature is a built-in camera for placing video calls.A camera on your nightstand that is constantly pointed at your bed? It’s like asking for your privacy to be violated. You might as well shop for your groceries in your underwear or post all your smartphone photos publicly on the web.Amazon promises the camera software on the Echo Spot can be turned off whenever you aren’t using it. But it’s an obvious feature for hackers to target with malware.So if your primary goal is to have a device that wakes you up on time to go to work, just get an old-school alarm clock.One of the most common uses of Amazon’s Echo is to set a kitchen timer. Just say “Alexa, set a timer for 80 minutes” while you’re busy chopping vegetables.But there are reasons a cheap kitchen timer can be superior.Cooking timing can vary depending on your heating element, among other factors. So if you have to check your food for doneness and change the kitchen timer, an old-school timer — either the analog variety or the type with a digital time display and two or three physical buttons — can be easier. It simply dings or beeps when the time is up and it’s quicker to add or subtract a few minutes by turning a dial or pressing a button or two.You can also constantly see how much time is left on the timer, whereas with the Echo, you have to open a smartphone app to see the remaining time or ask Alexa to tell you how much time is left. Over the long term, using a smart speaker as a timer gets tedious.When people buy new iPads or Amazon Fire tablets, they often give their older tablet a second life by designating it for the kitchen. There, the ancient tablet gets mounted to the refrigerator with a magnet and becomes a glorified recipe reader.Having tried this experiment, it’s a hassle. You often have to clean the tablet after smearing food on the screen. The battery eventually needs to be recharged. And if you want to double or halve a recipe, you have to do some mental math, which makes multitasking more challenging when you are busy in the kitchen.Printing out or jotting down a recipe on a piece of paper is just simpler. You can easily scribble additional notes, like changes and improvements to the recipe. Assuming you have decent handwriting, it’s easy to read the steps and ingredients.And if it gets covered in food, you can just throw it away.Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes Tech Fix, a column about solving tech-related problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What confuses you or makes you angry about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.AdvertisementBy CECILIA KANGFEB. 20, 2018
WASHINGTON — A federal judge blocked AT&T’s move to obtain communication logs between the Justice Department and the White House on Tuesday, hampering the phone giant’s argument that politics played a role in the government’s decision to halt a merger with Time Warner.Judge Richard J. Leon of United States District Court in Washington, who is overseeing a trial over the deal, said AT&T did not sufficiently show in pretrial discussions that it was treated differently from other companies.“Defendants have fallen far short of establishing that this enforcement action was selective,” Judge Leon said.The decision puts a crimp in AT&T’s defense for its $85 billion proposed merger with Time Warner. And it is a big win for the Justice Department, which would like to avoid attention on the role of politics in its decision to stop the deal. The merger would transform the media landscape by combining a television and movie giant with one of the nation’s biggest media distributors.Advertisement“We respect the judge’s decision and look forward to the upcoming trial,” said Dan Petrocelli, lead trial lawyer for both Time Warner and AT&T.AdvertisementIn a statement, the Justice Department said, “We are pleased with and respect today’s decision, which will permit the parties and court to focus on the case at hand.”AT&T has argued that the Justice Department has unfairly singled out its proposed merger with Time Warner partly to stay in favor with the White House. President Trump has been a vocal critic of Time Warner’s news network, CNN, and said before the election that the deal should be stopped.AT&T’s lawyers have requested emails and phone and other communications logs between Justice Department officials and the White House, to see if the White House influenced the agency’s decision. The company also put Makan Delrahim, the head of antitrust for the Justice Department, on its witness list.Last week, the Justice Department asked Judge Leon to block the company’s demands for communications with the White House, saying they were a “sideshow” to the antitrust concerns the government held about the merger. The Justice Department has argued that consumers would be harmed by the deal, saying it would stifle competition and lead to higher prices for consumers.In a hearing on Friday, AT&T agreed to remove Mr. Delrahim from its witness list on the condition the company could call him to testify during the trial if evidence emerged to support its arguments of political interference.The blockbuster trial will begin March 19. It is expected to help set the course for mergers and acquisitions in coming years.The Justice Department’s suit to block AT&T’s merger with Time Warner was unexpected, because the government has a history of allowing mergers between companies that don’t directly compete. Those deals, including Comcast’s merger with NBCUniversal in 2011, contained several conditions to resolve competition concerns. Mr. Delrahim has argued that conditions that restrain a company’s business practices cannot effectively resolve antitrust issues.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the opinion on Tuesday, Judge Leon said that AT&T was able to point only to the Justice Department’s approval of Comcast’s merger as proof of discrimination toward AT&T and Time Warner.Advertisement“The defendants have mustered only one specific transaction,” Judge Leon said.The focus on political interference is highly unusual. AT&T told Judge Leon last week it was reluctant to raise the topic. The Justice Department countered that the company was trying to use the argument as a “get-out-of-jail card.”“Everything about this case has been unusual from the beginning,” said Larry Downes, a project director at Georgetown University’s Center for Business and Public Policy.The result of the trial could set the nation on a new, stricter direction on antitrust policy.“There has not been this kind of a challenge to a vertical merger of companies that don’t compete in decades and this is hugely significant in that it suggests the Justice Department may be going in a radically new direction on antitrust,” Mr. Downes said.AT&T could still focus on its argument of so-called selective enforcement that singles out its proposed merger with Time Warner. But the judge may not be swayed.In his opinion, Judge Leon said the Justice Department’s lawyer explained at length that there was a history of the government’s blocking somewhat similar deals.“So while it may, indeed, be a rare breed of horse, it is not exactly a unicorn,” Judge Leon said.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: AT&T; Loses Bid to See White House Call Logs In Battle Over Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Sheera Frenkel and Daisuke WakabayashiSAN FRANCISCO — One hour after news broke about the school shooting in Florida last week, Twitter accounts suspected of having links to Russia released hundreds of posts taking up the gun control debate.The accounts addressed the news with the speed of a cable news network. Some adopted the hashtag #guncontrolnow. Others used #gunreformnow and #Parklandshooting. Earlier on Wednesday, before the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., many of those accounts had been focused on the investigation by the special counsel Robert S. Mueller III into Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election.“This is pretty typical for them, to hop on breaking news like this,” said Jonathon Morgan, chief executive of New Knowledge, a company that tracks online disinformation campaigns. “The bots focus on anything that is divisive for Americans. Almost systematically.”One of the most divisive issues in the nation is how to handle guns, pitting Second Amendment advocates against proponents of gun control. And the messages from these automated accounts, or bots, were designed to widen the divide and make compromise even more difficult.Any news event — no matter how tragic — has become fodder to spread inflammatory messages in what is believed to be a far-reaching Russian disinformation campaign. The disinformation comes in various forms: conspiracy videos on YouTube, fake interest groups on Facebook, and armies of bot accounts that can hijack a topic or discussion on Twitter.Those automated Twitter accounts have been closely tracked by researchers. Last year, the Alliance for Securing Democracy, in conjunction with the German Marshall Fund, a public policy research group in Washington, created a website that tracks hundreds of Twitter accounts of human users and suspected bots that they have linked to a Russian influence campaign.The researchers zeroed in on Twitter accounts posting information that was in step with material coming from well-known Russian propaganda outlets. To spot an automated bot, they looked for certain signs, like an extremely high volume of posts or content that conspicuously matched hundreds of other accounts.Thirteen Russian nationals have been charged with illegally trying to disrupt the American political process through inflammatory social media posts and organized political rallies.The researchers said they had watched as the bots began posting about the Parkland shooting shortly after it happened.Amplified by bot swarms, Russian-linked Twitter accounts tried to foment discord before and after the election. Hundreds of accounts promoted false stories about Hillary Clinton and spread articles based on leaked emails from Democratic operatives that had been obtained by Russian hackers.Facebook, Google and Twitter have, to varying degrees, announced new measures to eliminate bot accounts, and have hired more moderators to help them weed out disinformation on their platforms.But since the election, the Russian-linked bots have rallied around other divisive issues, often ones that President Trump has tweeted about. They promoted Twitter hashtags like #boycottnfl, #standforouranthem and #takeaknee after some National Football League players started kneeling during the national anthem to protest racial injustice.The automated Twitter accounts helped popularize the #releasethememo hashtag, which referred to a secret House Republican memorandum that suggested the F.B.I. and the Justice Department abused their authority to obtain a warrant to spy on a former Trump campaign adviser. The debate over the memo widened a schism between the White House and its own law enforcement agencies.The bots are “going to find any contentious issue, and instead of making it an opportunity for compromise and negotiation, they turn it into an unsolvable issue bubbling with frustration,” said Karen North, a social media professor at the University of Southern California’s Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism. “It just heightens that frustration and anger.”Intelligence officials in the United States have warned that malicious actors will try to spread disinformation ahead of the 2018 midterm elections. In testimony to Congress last year and in private meetings with lawmakers, social media companies promised that they will do better in 2018 than they did in 2016.But the Twitter campaign around the Parkland shooting is an example of how Russian operatives are still at it.“We’ve had more than a year to get our act together and address the threat posed by Russia and implement a strategy to deter future attacks, but I believe, unfortunately, we still don’t have a comprehensive plan,” said Senator Mark Warner, the Virginia Democrat who is the vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, during a hearing this month on global threats to the United States. “What we’re seeing is a continuous assault by Russia to target and undermine our democratic institutions, and they’re going to keep coming at us.”When the Russian bots jumped on the hashtag #Parklandshooting — initially created to spread news of the shooting — they quickly stoked tensions. Exploiting the issue of mental illness in the gun control debate, they propagated the notion that Nikolas Cruz, the suspected gunman, was a mentally ill “lone killer.” They also claimed that he had searched for Arabic phrases on Google before the shooting. Simultaneously, the bots started other hashtags, like #ar15, for the semiautomatic rifle used in the shooting, and #NRA.The bots’ behavior follows a pattern, said Mr. Morgan, one of the researchers who worked with the German Marshall Fund to create Hamilton 68, the website that monitors Russian bot and fake Twitter activity. The bots target a contentious issue like race relations or guns. They stir the pot, often animating both sides and creating public doubt in institutions like the police or media. Any issue associated with extremist views is a ripe target.The goal is to push fringe ideas into the “slightly more mainstream,” Mr. Morgan said. If well-known people retweet the bot messages or simply link to a website the bots are promoting, the messages gain an edge of legitimacy.An indictment made public on Friday by Mr. Mueller as part of the investigation into Russian interference in the election mentioned a Russian Twitter feed, @TEN_GOP, which posed as a Tennessee Republican account and attracted more than 100,000 followers. Messages from this now-deleted account were retweeted by the president’s sons and close advisers including Kellyanne Conway and Michael T. Flynn, the former national security adviser.The indictment also described how fraudulent Russian accounts on Twitter tried to push real Americans into action. The indictment said the fake Twitter account @March_for_Trump had organized political rallies for Mr. Trump in New York before the election, including a “March for Trump” rally on June 25, 2016, and a “Down With Hillary” gathering on July 23, 2016.By Friday morning, the bots that pushed the original tweets around the Parkland shooting had moved on to the hashtag #falseflag — a term used by conspiracy theorists to refer to a secret government operation that is carried out to look like something else — with a conspiracy theory that the shooting had never happened.By Monday, the bots had new targets: the Daytona 500 auto race in Daytona Beach, Fla., and news about William Holleeder, a man facing trial in the Netherlands for his suspected role in six gangland killings. It is unclear why.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi and Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @daiwaka and @sheeraf.videoAdvertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 19, 2018
Q. How do I find English-language content with English-language subtitles? I am hard of hearing and lots of content, principally movies, will have subtitles in every language under the sun, except English.A. Some video providers may be putting those subtitles in the settings for closed captions, which may be why you do not see English in the list of available languages for English-language content. Even though they may be grouped together by some companies, subtitles and closed captions are technically different features.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Subtitles serve to translate dialogue from one language to another. Closed captions — designed to aid the deaf and hearing-impaired — are transcriptions of spoken dialogue, and can also include written descriptions of other sounds in the scene, like a car honking or a baby crying.Streaming and download services like Amazon Prime, Netflix, Google Play, Hulu, iTunes and the Windows Store are among the many sources of video with closed captions, and caption availability is typically listed in the description of the movie or TV show. To enable the captions, start playing the video and then look for a settings or closed captions icon (CC) in the tool bar.Vimeo and YouTube support videos that contain closed captions, although not every creator includes them. The New York Times began adding closed captions to videos produced by the newsroom last year.If a video includes closed captions but you do not see them, check the settings of your device to make sure the closed captions option is enabled. Apple’s iOS, Mac operating system and Apple TV set-top box all have caption controls in their Accessibility preferences, as do other systems like Google’s Android software systems and Roku’s TV set-top boxes. Microsoft keeps similar settings in the Ease of Access area for its Windows 10 and Xbox One software.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Tracking Down Closed Caption.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byRob Goldman, Facebook vice president for ads, tweeted about Russia’s disinformation effort. President Trump then cited him. We fact-checked Mr. Goldman.By Sheera FrenkelRob Goldman, vice president for ads at Facebook, posted an eight-part thread on Twitter late Friday about his company’s role in Russian disinformation — and quickly caused a firestorm. In his messages, Mr. Goldman discussed the indictment of 13 Russians and three companies accused of carrying out a scheme to subvert the 2016 election. Facebook was frequently mentioned in the indictment as the main tech tool that the Russians had used to tilt the election in favor of Donald J. Trump.Mr. Goldman defended Facebook in his tweets, saying that the Russian-bought ads on the social network were not primarily aimed at swaying the vote result. His posts went viral on Saturday when President Trump cited them as proof that Russia’s disinformation campaign was about something other than giving him an election victory.The Fake News Media never fails. Hard to ignore this fact from the Vice President of Facebook Ads, Rob Goldman! https://t.co/XGC7ynZwYJWe fact-checked Mr. Goldman’s eight tweets. Here’s what we found.When the Russians’ use of Facebook to influence the 2016 election became public last year, the company said it was sharing the Russian-bought ads with Congress and Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel leading the investigation. But Facebook did not directly share the ads with the American people. Instead, the House Intelligence Committee released examples of the ads ahead of congressional hearings last November. The grand jury indictment secured by Mr. Mueller asserts that the goal of Russian operatives was to influence the 2016 election, particularly by criticizing Hillary Clinton and supporting Mr. Trump and Bernie Sanders, Mrs. Clinton’s chief rival for the Democratic nomination.The Russians “engaged in operations primarily intended to communicate derogatory information about Hillary Clinton, to denigrate other candidates such as Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, and to support Bernie Sanders and then-candidate Donald Trump,” the indictment said. Mr. Goldman later wrote in another tweet that “the Russian campaign was certainly in favor of Trump.” According to figures published by Facebook last October, 44 percent of the Russian-bought ads were displayed before the 2016 election, while 56 percent were shown afterward. Mr. Goldman asserted that those figures were not published by the “mainstream media” — however, many mainstream news outlets did print those numbers, including CNN, Reuters and The Wall Street Journal. The indictment does show that Russian operatives used social media — particularly Facebook — to try to sow division among Americans. But to reiterate, the indictment said that the Russians’ goal was to sway the 2016 election toward a particular outcome. That aim was pursued not just through ads, which Mr. Goldman focuses on, but through Facebook pages, groups and events. The protests in Houston in May 2016 were among many rallies organized by Russian operatives through Facebook. While the Houston protest was anti-Islamic, as Mr. Goldman said, he failed to note that the goal in promoting the demonstration was to link Mrs. Clinton’s campaign with a pro-Islamic message. According to the indictment secured by Mr. Mueller, there were many other examples of Russian operatives using Facebook and Instagram to organize pro-Trump rallies. At one protest, the Russian operatives paid for a cage to be built, in which an actress dressed as Mrs. Clinton posed in a prison uniform.American intelligence officials have said that Russia has continued to target the American public and that it is already meddling in the 2018 midterm elections. The New York Times also reported this month on an attempt by a shadowy Russian figure to sell stolen American cyberweapons, as well as compromising material on President Trump, to the United States. While Finland, Sweden and the Netherlands have all made efforts to teach digital literacy, those countries are still grappling with how to handle misinformation. A recent survey in Finland found that 67 percent of respondents “think fake news affects Finns’ perceptions on issues ‘a lot’ or to an ‘extreme’ degree.” Officials in Sweden and the Netherlands have also recently warned that fake news poses a threat to their governments.After initially dismissing concerns that it influenced the 2016 election, Facebook has announced a series of moves to prevent its future misuse. One of those steps includes verifying political advertisers through a system that combines automated and human fact checkers. The company has also said it plans to use postcards sent by regular mail to verify the identities of American political advertisers. Whether these new measures will be effective is unclear. Sheera Frenkel covers cybersecurity from San Francisco. Previously, she spent over a decade in the Middle East as a foreign correspondent, reporting for BuzzFeed, NPR, The Times of London and McClatchy Newspapers.@sheerafAdvertisement

 Kevin Roose
 

THE SHIFT
FEB. 19, 2018
On most days, Facebook doesn’t have much in common with President Trump. But at the moment, both are in the damage-control business, as they try to get out from under the cloud of suspicion related to Russia’s meddling in the 2016 election.Their goals collided in awkward fashion over the weekend when Rob Goldman, Facebook’s vice president of advertising, posted a series of messages on Twitter that were meant to clear up misconceptions about Facebook’s role in the election. Instead, he plunged the company deeper into controversy.“Most of the coverage of Russian meddling involves their attempt to effect the outcome of the 2016 US election,” Mr. Goldman tweeted. “I have seen all of the Russian ads and I can say very definitively that swaying the election was *NOT* the main goal.”
            Most of the coverage of Russian meddling involves their attempt to effect the outcome of the 2016 US election. I have seen all of the Russian ads and I can say very definitively that swaying the election was *NOT* the main goal.        He continued: “The majority of the Russian ad spend happened AFTER the election. We shared that fact, but very few outlets have covered it because it doesn’t align with the main media narrative of Tump [sic] and the election.”Mr. Goldman was tweeting only for himself, but his comments, which drew praise from other Facebook executives on Twitter, were an unusually candid statement that flouted Facebook’s well-sculpted messaging strategy, which has generally been to stay as far away from partisan debates as possible. The tweets arrived soon after the blockbuster indictment of Russian nationals by the special counsel Robert S. Mueller III, and they were noticed by right-wing partisans, who saw them as supporting evidence for Mr. Trump’s “no collusion” claims. Soon, Mr. Trump himself had retweeted them approvingly.AdvertisementMr. Goldman eventually walked back some of his statements, but it was too late. Mr. Goldman had just given Mr. Trump something that looked like a Facebook-stamped exoneration.AdvertisementNow, Facebook is in the uncomfortable position of reining in an off-message executive, while clarifying that it didn’t mean to bolster the president’s position.“The special counsel has issued its indictments, and nothing we found contradicts their conclusions,” Joel Kaplan, Facebook’s vice president of global policy, said in a statement. “Any suggestion otherwise is wrong.”Mr. Goldman did not respond to requests for comment, and the company declined to make him available for an interview.It is Facebook’s right to defend itself, of course. The company has faced a raft of accusations of wrongdoing, some of which have indeed been overblown. Facebook was not the only social network manipulated by Russia’s Internet Research Agency, the company at the heart of Mr. Mueller’s indictment. And other companies, such as Twitter and YouTube, certainly share the blame for fostering a media ecosystem in which false news and propaganda can flourish.But Mr. Goldman’s tweetstorm was unintentionally revealing. It showed that, years after hostile foreign actors first began using Facebook to wage an information war against the American public, some high-ranking officials within the company still don’t understand just how central Facebook was to Russia’s misinformation campaign, and how consequential the company’s mistakes have been. (Last year, in a tweet that fewer people saw, Andrew Bosworth, another Facebook vice president, claimed that the effects of Russian interference and fake news in 2016 were “marginal, even in a close election.”)In real-world terms, a part of Facebook still sees itself as the bank that got robbed, rather than the architect who designed a bank with no safes, and no alarms or locks on the doors, and then acted surprised when burglars struck.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even before Mr. Goldman’s tweets were blasted along to Mr. Trump’s 48 million followers, they lacked crucial context about what exactly Mr. Mueller’s investigation had found. He made sweeping pronouncements about the misuse of Facebook’s advertising products while neglecting to mention that most of Russia’s exploitation took the form of nonadvertising posts. He claimed that swinging the election in Mr. Trump’s favor was not a primary goal of Russia’s Facebook campaign, when Mr. Mueller’s indictment had just concluded that it was. He portrayed Facebook as having been eager to promote its findings on the Russia investigation, when in fact the company has made disclosures only under pressure from regulators, and has deliberately hidden data about Russia’s interference from outside researchers.AdvertisementSome of Mr. Goldman’s claims may have been narrowly true, but they were a prime example of misdirection. Why is educating citizens about digital literacy the solution to misinformation, as Mr. Goldman suggested, rather than fixing the tech platforms that make misinformation hard to distinguish from truth? Why should it reassure us that most of Russia’s Facebook advertising was purchased after the election, rather than telling us that Facebook continued to drop the ball even after it knew it had a Russia problem?More than anything, the details contained in the indictment make clear how vulnerable Facebook still is to a hostile actor. None of the safeguards it has announced so far — such as providing more transparency about political ads, or using snail-mail postcards to verify the identities of certain political advertisers — would stop a sophisticated and well-funded foreign influence operation. And many of the tactics the Internet Research Agency used in 2016 — including posing as American citizens to create large partisan Facebook pages and organizing offline rallies with the help of American co-conspirators — would be just as effective today.In a recent cover story, Wired detailed the soul-searching journey that Facebook’s executives have undertaken since the 2016 election. First, they denied that they’d done anything wrong. Then, after the scope of Russia’s misinformation campaign became clear, they circled the wagons to protect the company’s reputation and appease its critics. Only recently have certain executives, like Mark Zuckerberg, its chief executive, come to appreciate the scale and scope of Facebook’s errors, and publicly accept responsibility for them.We may never get answers about what Facebook knew of the Russian interference campaign in 2016, and why it didn’t act more forcefully to stop it. (Trust me, I’ve tried.) But it’s deeply troubling that eight months before the 2018 midterms, as malicious forces continue to use social media to sow discord and meddle in elections all over the world, some at Facebook seem more interested in defending themselves from criticism than owning their mistakes, fixing their platform’s problems and protecting our democracy.Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: On Russian Meddling, Some Facebook Leaders Are in Denial.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NATHANIEL POPPERFEB. 18, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The currency they were after was virtual, but the guns they carried were anything but.In the beach resort of Phuket, Thailand, last month, the assailants pushed their victim, a young Russian man, into his apartment and kept him there, blindfolded, until he logged onto his computer and transferred about $100,000 worth of Bitcoin to an online wallet they controlled.A few weeks before that, the head of a Bitcoin exchange in Ukraine was taken hostage and only released after the company paid a ransom of $1 million in Bitcoin.In New York City, a man was held captive by a friend until he transferred over $1.8 million worth of Ether, a virtual currency second in value only to Bitcoin.AdvertisementThe rich have always feared robbery and extortion. Now, big holders of Bitcoin and its brethren have become alluring marks for criminals, especially since the prices of virtual currencies entered the stratosphere last year.AdvertisementVirtual currencies can be easily transferred to an anonymous address set up by a criminal. While banks can stop or reverse large electronic transactions made under duress, there is no Bitcoin bank to halt or take back a transfer, making the chances of a successful armed holdup frighteningly enticing.Thieves have taken advantage of this system in a startling number of recent cases, from Russia, Ukraine and Turkey to Canada, the United States and Britain.“This is now becoming more pervasive and touching more law enforcement divisions that deal with organized crime and violent crime on a local level,” said Jonathan Levin, the founder of Chainalysis, which has worked with several law enforcement agencies on virtual currency crimes.Mr. Levin’s company specializes in tracking criminal transactions on the blockchain, the computerized ledger where every Bitcoin transaction is publicly recorded.Chainalysis has helped police attempt to track down criminals in several recent cases, including some that have not been made public, according to Mr. Levin.But even when a transaction can be tracked, the design of Bitcoin means that criminals do not have to associate their identity with their Bitcoin address — as is necessary with most traditional bank accounts. That has stymied police in several cases.“For this, the advantage of Bitcoin is that it’s hard to verify,” said Chanut Hongsitthichaikul, an investigator with the Chalong Police Station, which investigated the case in Phuket. “We asked the victim how to track it since they know Bitcoin better than us. We asked them how to check the receiver. They said there is no way. It is hard to do.”The Thai police tracked the victim’s laptop, which was also stolen, to Kuala Lumpur. That’s where the trail went cold.AdvertisementWhile the recent crime wave has brought a new level of violence, virtual currency holders have been targets for several years. Criminals have been staging a long-running campaign to remotely hijack the cellphone numbers of prominent virtual currency holders in order to gain control of their digital wallets.A few years ago, some of Bitcoin’s earliest proponents had SWAT teams called to their homes by people who demanded big Bitcoin payments to stop the harassment — a tactic called “SWATing” in some online communities.There have also been many documented holdups around the world at in-person meetings where people were looking to convert cash into virtual currency, including one last year in Palm Beach, Fla., where the thief made off with $28,000 before being arrested.But criminals have grown much more brazen as the price of Bitcoin has spiked.The most audacious attack hit Exmo, the virtual currency exchange in Ukraine. The chief executive of the exchange, Pavel Lerner, was abducted the day after Christmas and freed a few days later after the company made a ransom payment of Bitcoin worth around $1 million.A spokeswoman for Exmo said the money came from Mr. Lerner’s personal funds. Mr. Lerner was on leave from the company but would return.A month earlier, a Turkish businessman was forced to hand over the passwords to his virtual currency wallets — containing nearly $3 million worth of Bitcoin — after having his car stopped by an armed gang in Istanbul that appeared to know about his Bitcoin holdings, according to local news reports.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many big virtual currency holders privately say that they will no longer travel to Russia, Turkey or other countries where they assume that attacks may be easier to pull off because of organized crime.But armed attackers have also hit a Canadian Bitcoin exchange in Ottawa, the Ether investor in New York City and a prominent virtual currency trader living near Oxford, England.AdvertisementIn a number of cases, the assailants have been caught — and forced to return money — because of video footage. In other cases, the criminals are still at large.The unsolved crimes have sown fear among the ranks of the so-called crypto rich, which have grown considerably over the past year.At a conference for about 170 leaders in the virtual currency industry this month, there was a panel discussion about how to deal with the threat of robbery, extortion and kidnappings in which the criminals seek Bitcoin or other virtual currencies.Organizers of the conference, known as the Satoshi Roundtable and held near Cancun, Mexico, brought in a security force and instituted significant privacy measures for guests to protect them from criminals while they were in attendance.During the group discussion at the conference, attendees talked about having a “duress wallet” at home that can be handed over to throw an assailant off the trail of a bigger fortune, as well as several other security measures that can be used to deal with the threat.Most of the crypto rich are loath to speak publicly about the risk of physical attacks, for fear of making themselves targets.But Jameson Lopp, a longtime Bitcoin engineer and virtual currency holder, said the community should be proactive in confronting the threat, to let criminals know that people are taking steps to protect themselves.Last summer, someone called a SWAT team to Mr. Lopp’s house to harass him. Since then, Mr. Lopp has installed closed-circuit cameras around his property and posted photos on Twitter of the automatic weapon he has at home.
            Bitcoin security pro tip: protect your software with hardware. pic.twitter.com/R4KeRGRcTP In a more technical defensive measure, Mr. Lopp has long kept his virtual currency in so-called multisignature wallets created by the company he works for, BitGo. These wallets require multiple people to sign off on a transaction before the money can move.AdvertisementMr. Lopp will go even further later this year when he, his girlfriend and his dog move to a new home. He plans to “go dark” — not providing the address to anyone and using a post office box for deliveries. But he said even that will not fully banish his concerns.“If you are rich and you own real estate, or stocks or a sports team, somebody can’t mug you and take your sports team away,” he said. “Having liquid crypto assets makes you much more attractive for that type of criminal attack.”Mr. Levin said programmers are working to develop methods of signing virtual currency transactions that can quietly alert the authorities that a transaction is being made under duress — something like the hidden button under the bank teller’s desk.But he said the most obvious way to thwart attackers is with wallets that require multiple signatures, and with less public discussion about owning virtual currencies.Mr. Lopp said it is important to publicize the many ways in which virtual currency holders can fend off assailants so that criminals reconsider the likelihood of a successful attack.“We’re in the very early days of this becoming a problem,” Mr. Lopp said. “The attackers are still trying to figure out what the risk-reward really is.”Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopper.Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting in Bangkok, and Doris Burke provided research in New York.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Your Bitcoin or Your Life.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATHANIEL POPPERAPRIL 22, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Gary Gensler was one of the top financial regulators in the Obama administration, the finance chief for Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign and, before both of those jobs, a partner at Goldman Sachs.Now, like many other big names from business and government, he is plunging into the world of the blockchain, the data-tracking technology introduced by Bitcoin.Mr. Gensler, 60, has recently gone to work at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he will write and teach about the potential he sees for blockchains to change the financial world.He will also use his position to warn about how many of the current projects in the world of virtual currencies, including some of the biggest, are likely to face a significant moment of reckoning with regulators.AdvertisementMr. Gensler is set to say in a speech at M.I.T. on Monday that the second and third most widely used virtual currencies, Ether and Ripple, have most likely been issued and traded in violation of American securities regulations.Advertisement“There is a strong case for both of them — but particularly Ripple — that they are noncompliant securities,” he said in an interview. He believes Bitcoin, the original virtual currency, can remain exempt from securities regulations.Mr. Gensler will be one of the most influential voices to weigh in on a series of questions that are likely to shape the future of the nascent industry.The Securities and Exchange Commission and the agency that Mr. Gensler led from 2009 to 2014, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, are in the middle of determining how to categorize and crack down on many of the virtual currencies created in recent years.Most of the focus has been on smaller currencies that were issued through so-called initial coin offerings, or I.C.O.s, a method of fund-raising in which entrepreneurs sell custom virtual currencies.But Mr. Gensler believes that better-known virtual currencies like Ether and Ripple should be in that conversation as well and should likely be categorized as securities, given the way they have been created and sold.“2018 is going to be a very interesting time,” Mr. Gensler said. “Over 1,000 previously issued initial coin offerings, and over 100 exchanges that offer I.C.O.s, are going to need to sort out how to come into compliance with U.S. securities law.”The people behind both Ether and Ripple have argued that their tokens are not securities. But there are signs that the S.E.C. could be receptive to Mr. Gensler’s argument. Regulators have indicated in private meetings with industry participants that they are considering whether Ether should be categorized as a security.AdvertisementAll the outstanding Ether were worth around $65 billion at Sunday’s price, while the Ripple tokens in the hands of investors are worth around $35 billion.If they are deemed to be securities, it could become illegal for Americans to trade them on most of the exchanges where they are now traded. That would make it harder to buy and sell them and depress their prices.Mr. Gensler developed a reputation for standing up to powerful financial interests when he was the head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.Before he got into office, some worried that his background at Goldman Sachs would make him hesitant to take on the big banks. But as the chairman of the commission he became one of the most aggressive watchdogs in the effort to rein in Wall Street after the financial crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Joi Ito, the director of the M.I.T. Media Lab and a member of the board of directors of The New York Times, said the combination of Mr. Gensler’s record of independence and his knowledge of finance and policy was what made him so attractive to M.I.T.Mr. Ito has built the Digital Currency Initiative at the Media Lab in an effort to gather a collection of virtual currency experts who don’t have a financial interest in them, though the initiative does provide financial support for some developers working on the Bitcoin software.“It’s important that you have a core group of people who aren’t in it for the money, and who care about the proper architecture for the long run,” he said.Mr. Gensler has a dual appointment as a special adviser to the Media Lab and a senior lecturer at the M.I.T. Sloan School of Management, where he will teach a class on the blockchain in the fall.The original blockchain is the ledger on which all Bitcoin transactions are recorded. The Bitcoin blockchain is updated by a network of computers so that no central authority is needed.AdvertisementWhile most blockchain experiments are in an early stage, Mr. Gensler said he had become convinced that blockchains could replace many of the middlemen in the financial industry.For now, though, his words are likely to have their greatest impact on the quickly evolving debate about how virtual currencies should be regulated.Most industry experts, including Mr. Gensler, assume that Bitcoin is safe from being categorized as a security because it was not originally issued through an initial coin offering or a central organization, and the software is maintained by a decentralized group of developers. Some other virtual currencies, like Litecoin and Monero, have similar designs.But Mr. Gensler said Ether could have more problems because the first Ether tokens were sold in 2014, before the network was functional, by the Ethereum Foundation.Ether could get off the hook, Mr. Gensler said, because its development has been more decentralized recently, and new Ether tokens are now given out to so-called miners through a network.Aya Miyaguchi, the head of the Ethereum Foundation, said in an email that the foundation “neither controls the supply of nor has the ability to issue Ether, and the quantity of Ether that the foundation holds (under 1 percent of all Ether) is already lower than that held by many other ecosystem participants.”But Mr. Gensler said it would be much harder for the Ripple token, known as XRP, to avoid being categorized as a security. The company that oversees Ripple’s development still holds most of the XRP tokens and does most of the work to make the software and the token valuable, he said.A spokesman for the company Ripple, Tom Channick, said XRP should not be a security.“XRP does not give its owners an interest or stake in Ripple, and they are not paid dividends,” he said. “XRP exists independent of Ripple, was created before the company and will exist after it.”Mr. Gensler, who has no virtual currency investments, said he was not tied to any coin’s winning the race. But he does think changes are necessary before blockchains can go mainstream.Advertisement“I would be surprised if 10 years from now this isn’t somewhere in the financial system in a meaningful way,” he said. “But so much of the stuff that is being promoted now will not be around.”Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopper.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Blockchain Believer and Former Regulator Sounds a Warning.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech We’re UsingBy Jonah Engel BromwichHow do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Jonah Bromwich, a breaking news reporter for The Times in New York, discussed the tech he’s using.You cover breaking and trending news with an extremely quick turnaround. What are some of the tech tools you rely on to stay on top of the news and file stories quickly and accurately?It’s true! I use a couple of surfacing tools, most prominently Dataminr. Basically what it does is provide us with a continuously updating feed of tweets that have breaking news in them.For example, we could become aware of a story that we want to monitor (and possibly cover) when a tweet from a local Houston reporter says something like, “Gunshots fired in Harris County Institute of the Forensic Sciences.” And then seconds later, another one from a different account says, “Whoa im in Houston and I think i just heard fireworks or maybe gunfire???”After a couple more tweets like that I might call the Harris County sheriff or the Houston police or whoever else makes sense. They’re often tweets that we might not otherwise have seen, because they come from, for example, a cloud computing consultant in Houston who has 43 followers on Twitter. I wouldn’t see that on Twitter for hours, but Dataminr would bring it to my attention right away.I also use Twitter and Reddit for trending stories. And there are certain aggregator sites that people swear by. I’ve been using Hvper recently, thanks to a recommendation from my editor. And I still sometimes web surf like an old, using an RSS reader (Feedly).Which one is the most important?For breaking news, probably Dataminr. It’s a handy tool. For trending news, what we hope to do is put together patterns that others may not have, or to put a new spin on a story that’s already out there.I also use Twitter to follow the news, which sometimes helps me find patterns. (I can’t use Tweetdeck, and I’m always impressed that people are able to, by the way.)We also have a pretty active Slack culture on my team, and we get a lot of ideas (like one by my teammate Maya Salam on showering) just from talking about dumb things with one another, saying whether we prefer rice, bread or potatoes, that kind of thing.Beyond your job, what tech product do you love using in your daily life?I listen to music near constantly when not at work, so a lot of the technology I use regularly has to do with that.I have a couple of Bose Bluetooth speakers. The Bose SoundLink Mini is one of my favorite things. I got mine years ago, and it still works. The sound quality is strong, and it’s easy to connect to and to carry around. If I need to play music a little louder, I have a Bose SoundTouch system that works O.K.I use Sennheiser headphones when I want to listen to music closely, and those little Sony over-ear headphones (the ones that came with Discmen) for listening to music on the go.There’s a story with those Sennheiser headphones. They were sent to me in the mail and were in a box on my coffee table for a couple of months. I thought they belonged to my roommate (someone had opened the outer layer of the box), but he told me they weren’t his. So I called my parents and some of my best friends to ask if they had gotten me these kind of expensive headphones. No one had.I couldn’t figure out where they had come from and was a little paranoid that someone was spying on me. A year later, I came home and my downstairs neighbor was taking out his trash and wearing those same Sennheisers. Then I thought for a second.“Hey, Evan,” I said. “Did you actually have to order those twice because one package went missing?” He confirmed — I had stolen his headphones. He was very nice about it, and because he had gotten them replaced, he has let me keep them so far.I also gave in and started using a Tile, which is a Bluetooth tracker, to find my keys. It has made it so I never lose my keys.What could be better?The SoundTouch system can be hard to connect to, and it sometimes shuts off inexplicably. The over-ear headphones get blown out kind of easily, but you can order replacements on Amazon and they are super cheap.There is now so much tech out there — tweets, Facebook posts, phone notifications and more — to distract us. What’s your advice for readers who struggle to concentrate on their work?I deleted Facebook from my phone last year, so that’s gone. And I sign up for very few notifications.I don’t have any magic tricks or anything, though, and I get distracted pretty easily. When I really want to concentrate on something, I try to leave my phone in another room. And when I need to write something on deadline, I minimize Slack and put my stolen headphones on.Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman.Advertisement
Bits By                     
 KEVIN ROOSE
 
APRIL 13, 2018
Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Well, friends, we did it again. We got through another week of wall-to-wall news about Facebook. Mark Zuckerberg’s two-day marathon of congressional testimony is over, and if you had better things to do than spend 10 hours watching a group of lawmakers ask an internet billionaire how computers work, you can catch up on our coverage here. (Or here, here, here, here, here, here, here or here. We’ve been busy.)But as always, there is more to tech news than Facebook. So here are a few other stories that might have escaped your attention this week.Reddit is one of the more interesting tech companies out there. I’ve written about how it has battled (somewhat successfully) to keep toxic behavior off its site, by shutting down subforums devoted to racist and hateful topics.AdvertisementBut some troubles remain. This week, Reddit’s chief executive, Steve Huffman, ended up facing questions after revealing that the company had identified 944 Reddit accounts that it suspected of links to Russia’s Internet Research Agency.AdvertisementAs part of the announcement, Mr. Huffman ended up causing an even bigger stir by answering a question from a user about whether open racism was prohibited on the site under Reddit’s rules. “It’s not,” Mr. Huffman replied, explaining that the company’s policies applied to users’ behavior, not their beliefs. After users objected, Mr. Huffman had to add a clarification: “To be perfectly clear, while racism itself isn’t against the rules, it’s not welcome here.”In Uber’s continuing quest to dominate all non-ambulatory modes of transportation, it reached another milestone this week with the acquisition of Jump Bikes, an electric bike-sharing start-up. The deal, reported by TechCrunch to be for more than $100 million, is the first acquisition made by Dara Khosrowshahi as the company’s chief executive, and it follows a successful bike-sharing test in San Francisco.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company is also branching into car rentals, through a partnership with the car-booking service Getaround, and public transportation, with a deal with a mobile ticketing start-up called Masabi. Soon, Uber users will be able to buy bus and train tickets and rent cars inside the Uber app.Notably, as my colleague Daisuke Wakabayashi pointed out, the Jump Bikes acquisition will be Uber’s first experience with actual inventory. In its core car-hailing business, drivers own their cars and connect them to Uber’s network, but Uber will own the bikes itself, and will need to learn how to manage its own fleet of two-wheeled vehicles.My colleague Raymond Zhong had a great story this week about Bytedance, a Chinese internet start-up that has “mastered the art of keeping people glued to their smartphones.” Bytedance, which operates a collection of apps that connect users with news, viral videos and other forms of entertainment, drew the anger of Chinese internet censors.The agency ordered Bytedance to shut down Neihan Duanzi, an app for silly videos and joke memes that “caused strong dislike among internet users,” according to China’s State Administration of Radio and Television. At least two other Bytedance apps have also disappeared from app stores.It’s a fascinating look at the opposition faced by Chinese tech start-ups, which makes Facebook’s grilling before Congress look positively mild. And it’s a glimpse of the kind of dilemmas that could await Facebook if it ever does fulfill Mr. Zuckerberg’s long-held goal of getting into China.AdvertisementIn devastating news for fans of catchy summer jams, the music video for “Despacito,” the Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee song, briefly disappeared from YouTube on Tuesday after hackers broke into the account of Vevo, the company that hosted the video. Other Vevo videos, by artists like Selena Gomez, Drake, Katy Perry and Taylor Swift, were also defaced by hackers calling themselves Prosox and Kuroi’sh.Vevo told The Verge that it was investigating the source of the security breach. Meanwhile, the “Despacito” video, YouTube’s all-time most viewed video, has been restored. Whew.Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer at large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Another Facebook-Free Edition, to Prove There Is Other Tech News.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »Last summer, China unveiled a plan to become the world’s leader in artificial intelligence, challenging the longtime role of the United States.By CADE METZFEB. 12, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — In July, China unveiled a plan to become the world leader in artificial intelligence and create an industry worth $150 billion to its economy by 2030.To technologists working on A.I. in the United States, the statement, which was 28 pages long in its English translation, was a direct challenge to America’s lead in arguably the most important tech research to come along in decades. It outlined the Chinese government’s aggressive plan to treat A.I. like the country’s own version of the Apollo 11 lunar mission — an all-in effort that could stoke national pride and spark agenda-setting technology breakthroughs.The manifesto was also remarkably similar to several reports on the future of artificial intelligence released by the Obama administration at the end of 2016.“It is remarkable to see how A.I. has emerged as a top priority for the Chinese leadership and how quickly things have been set into motion,” said Elsa Kania, an adjunct fellow at the Center for a New American Security who helped translate the manifesto and follows China’s work on artificial intelligence. “The U.S. plans and policies released in 2016 were seemingly the impetus for the formulation of China’s national A.I. strategy.”AdvertisementBut six months after China seemed to mimic that Obama-era road map, A.I. experts in industry and academia in the United States say that the Trump White House has done little to follow through on the previous administration’s economic call to arms.“We are still waiting on the White House to provide some direction” on how to respond to the competition, said Tim Hwang, who worked on A.I. policy at Google and is now the director of the Ethics and Governance of AI Initiative, a new organization created by the LinkedIn founder Reid Hoffman and others to fund ethical research in artificial intelligence.China’s embrace of A.I. comes at a crucial time in the development of the technology and just as the lead long enjoyed by the United States has started to dwindle.AdvertisementFor decades, artificial intelligence was more fiction than science. In the past few years, however, dramatic improvements have prompted some of the biggest companies in Silicon Valley and Detroit — and China — to invest billions on everything from self-driving cars to home appliances that can have a conversation with a human.A.I. has also become a significant part of national defense policy as military leaders and ethicists debate how much autonomy we should give to weapons that can think for themselves.American companies like Amazon and Google have done more than anyone to turn A.I. concepts into real products. But for a number of reasons, including concerns that the Trump administration will limit the number of immigrant engineers allowed into the United States, much of the critical research being done on artificial intelligence is already migrating to other countries, including tech hot spots like Toronto, London and Beijing.To China’s growing tech community, driving the industry’s next big thing — a mantra of Silicon Valley — is becoming a tantalizing possibility.“Thanks to the size of the market and the rapid experimentation, China is going to become one of the most powerful — if not the most powerful — A.I. countries in the world,” said Kai-Fu Lee, a former Microsoft and Google executive who now runs a prominent Chinese venture capital firm dedicated to artificial intelligence.The 2016 A.I. reports were shepherded by President Barack Obama’s Office of Science and Technology Policy.The O.S.T.P., which has overseen science and technology activities across the federal government for more than four decades, is now run by the deputy chief technology officer Michael Kratsios. He had worked as a Wall Street analyst before serving as chief of staff for an investment fund run by Peter Thiel, a venture capitalist who supported Mr. Trump’s presidential run. The administration has yet to name an office director or fill four other assistant posts.In a recent interview, Mr. Kratsios was adamant that any concerns over the administration’s approach to A.I. were unfounded.Advertisement“Artificial intelligence has been a priority for the Trump administration since Day 1,” he said. Mr. Kratsios added that the administration was particularly concerned with the development of A.I. in national security and as a way of encouraging economic prosperity.Many staff members in Mr. Kratsios’s office are exploring issues related to artificial intelligence, he said. Mr. Kratsios also meets with a committee, set up by the Obama administration, that coordinates A.I. policy across the government.“The key thing to remember is that the front line of A.I. policy is at the agencies,” he said. “The White House is a convener and a coordinator.”In an echo of plans laid out by the Obama administration, China’s government said it intended to significantly increase long-term funding for A.I. research and develop a much larger community of A.I. researchers.There are several ways to do that, according to the Obama administration and China. First, educate more students in these technologies. Second, recruit experts from other countries.At the same time, both policy statements urged companies to share more technology and data. Huge pools of data are need to “train” A.I. systems, and in the United States much of this is locked up inside companies like Facebook and Google. Mr. Lee said China already has an enormous advantage here because its large population will generate more data and its companies are more willing to share.Artificial intelligence has been a focus of Chinese technologists for some time. By 2013, China was already producing more research papers than the United States in the area of “deep learning,” the main technology driving the rise of A.I., according to the Obama reports. Deep learning, which allows machines to learn tasks by analyzing vast amounts of data, is one of the main technologies driving the rise of artificial intelligence.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is unclear how much China as a whole is spending. But one Chinese state has promised to invest $5 billion in A.I., and the government of Beijing has committed $2 billion to an A.I. development park in the city. South Korea has set aside close to $1 billion of its own. Canada, already home to many of the top researchers in the field, has also committed $125 million to, in part, attract new talent from other countries.It is also difficult to say just how much the government of the United States is spending. Government organizations like the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and the National Science Foundation continue to fund new research in universities and the private sector. According to an O.S.T.P report, the federal government spent about $1 billion a year in 2015. The Trump administration says that spending jumped to $3 billion in 2017. But the current administration said that was not an apples-to-apples comparison to the 2015 tally, because it was not certain how the Obama administration made it calculations.Advertisement“We may have a bunch of small initiatives inside the government that are doing good, but we don’t have a central national strategy,” said Jack Clark, a former journalist who now oversees policy efforts at OpenAI, the artificial intelligence lab co-founded by Elon Musk, Tesla’s chief executive. “It is confusing that we have this technology of such obvious power and merit and we are not hearing full-throated support, including financial support.”The Trump administration’s budget for 2018 aims to cut science and technology research funding across the government by 15 percent, according to a report from the American Association for the Advancement of Science.“They are headed in precisely the wrong direction,” said Thomas Kalil, who led O.S.T.P’s Technology and Innovation Division under President Obama. “That is particularly concerning given that China has identified this as a strategic priority.”Over the past five years, much of the progress in A.I. technology has been led by American companies like Google, Microsoft, Amazon and Facebook. But these companies don’t need A.I. technologists to work in the United States in order to employ them.Take Geoffrey Hinton, a major figure in the rise of A.I. at Google and across the tech industry. He recently moved back to Toronto, where he was a professor for many years. He now runs a new Google lab in that city. Last year, he took on an Iranian researcher who was denied a visa by the United States government.Google operates another important lab in Montreal. Its London lab, DeepMind, may be home to more top-notch A.I. researchers than any other lab on earth. And Google recently unveiled new labs in both Paris and Beijing. Facebook, after creating its own lab in Canada, recently pumped 10 million euros, or more than $12 million, into its existing operation in Paris. And Amazon is opening a lab in Germany.Inside these facilities, researchers still create technology for their American employers. As the labs grow and the products get better, some employees can be expected to leave to start their own companies and hire their own employees.Google’s and Microsoft’s work in China has already led to Chinese start-ups like Malong, which is building image recognition systems, and a major A.I. investment fund run by Mr. Lee.“When it is close to you, something like Microsoft Research has real economic value,” said Mr. Clark, of OpenAI.Follow Cade Metz on Twitter: @CadeMetzA version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: China’s Blitz to Dominate A.I.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NELLIE BOWLESFEB. 4, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — A group of Silicon Valley technologists who were early employees at Facebook and Google, alarmed over the ill effects of social networks and smartphones, are banding together to challenge the companies they helped build.The cohort is creating a union of concerned experts called the Center for Humane Technology. Along with the nonprofit media watchdog group Common Sense Media, it also plans an anti-tech addiction lobbying effort and an ad campaign at 55,000 public schools in the United States.The campaign, titled The Truth About Tech, will be funded with $7 million from Common Sense and capital raised by the Center for Humane Technology. Common Sense also has $50 million in donated media and airtime from partners including Comcast and DirecTV. It will be aimed at educating students, parents and teachers about the dangers of technology, including the depression that can come from heavy use of social media.“We were on the inside,” said Tristan Harris, a former in-house ethicist at Google who is heading the new group. “We know what the companies measure. We know how they talk, and we know how the engineering works.”AdvertisementThe effect of technology, especially on younger minds, has become hotly debated in recent months. In January, two big Wall Street investors asked Apple to study the health effects of its products and to make it easier to limit children’s use of iPhones and iPads. Pediatric and mental health experts called on Facebook last week to abandon a messaging service the company had introduced for children as young as 6. Parenting groups have also sounded the alarm about YouTube Kids, a product aimed at children that sometimes features disturbing content.Advertisement“The largest supercomputers in the world are inside of two companies — Google and Facebook — and where are we pointing them?” Mr. Harris said. “We’re pointing them at people’s brains, at children.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Silicon Valley executives for years positioned their companies as tight-knit families and rarely spoke publicly against one another. That has changed. Chamath Palihapitiya, a venture capitalist who was an early employee at Facebook, said in November that the social network was “ripping apart the social fabric of how society works.”The new Center for Humane Technology includes an unprecedented alliance of former employees of some of today’s biggest tech companies. Apart from Mr. Harris, the center includes Sandy Parakilas, a former Facebook operations manager; Lynn Fox, a former Apple and Google communications executive; Dave Morin, a former Facebook executive; Justin Rosenstein, who created Facebook’s Like button and is a co-founder of Asana; Roger McNamee, an early investor in Facebook; and Renée DiResta, a technologist who studies bots.The group expects its numbers to grow. Its first project to reform the industry will be to introduce a Ledger of Harms — a website aimed at guiding rank-and-file engineers who are concerned about what they are being asked to build. The site will include data on the health effects of different technologies and ways to make products that are healthier.Jim Steyer, chief executive and founder of Common Sense, said the Truth About Tech campaign was modeled on antismoking drives and focused on children because of their vulnerability. That may sway tech chief executives to change, he said. Already, Apple’s chief executive, Timothy D. Cook, told The Guardian last month that he would not let his nephew on social media, while the Facebook investor Sean Parker also recently said of the social network that “God only knows what it’s doing to our children’s brains.”Mr. Steyer said, “You see a degree of hypocrisy with all these guys in Silicon Valley.”The new group also plans to begin lobbying for laws to curtail the power of big tech companies. It will initially focus on two pieces of legislation: a bill being introduced by Senator Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, that would commission research on technology’s impact on children’s health, and a bill in California by State Senator Bob Hertzberg, a Democrat, which would prohibit the use of digital bots without identification.Mr. McNamee said he had joined the Center for Humane Technology because he was horrified by what he had helped enable as an early Facebook investor.“Facebook appeals to your lizard brain — primarily fear and anger,” he said. “And with smartphones, they’ve got you for every waking moment.”AdvertisementHe said the people who made these products could stop them before they did more harm.“This is an opportunity for me to correct a wrong,” Mr. McNamee said.Follow Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @NellieBowles.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Early Facebook and Google Employees Form Coalition to Fight What They Built.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 16, 2018
Q. Is a System Restore the same as a backup in Windows?A. While System Restore and backups can both help get your computer back to normal if something goes wrong, the two are different things. (The common technical advice to “restore the system from a backup” can also lead to confusion.)System Restore, which was introduced as a troubleshooting tool back in 2000 with the release of the Windows Millennium Edition (Window ME) operating system, allows users to create and save a “restore point,” or a snapshot of their Windows system files at a certain time. Later, if Windows begins to behave erratically because of a corrupted or damaged system file, you can use the restore point to go back to that moment in time when the computer was working properly.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Windows System Restore software automatically creates restore points each week, and makes fresh ones before installing software (like a system update or drivers for new hardware). As a precaution, you can also create a restore point manually.In the current version of Windows 10, you can do so by telling the Cortana assistant, “Open System Restore,” or by entering “Create a restore point” in the Start Menu’s search box. (In earlier versions of Windows, go to the Start Menu to Control Panel, choose System and Security and then System. Click the System Protection link on the left side of the window.) Whichever way you arrive at the System Protection tab of the System Properties box, click the Create button at the bottom to name and save the new restore point.While System Restore is helpful when the Windows system itself is crashing and burning, the utility backs up system files — and not the documents, photos, music, videos and other content you have added to the computer. To preserve copies of your files ahead of potential catastrophes like accidental deletions or dead hard drives, get an external drive to use with the backup software included with Windows (or to use with a third-party backup program), or find an online backup service you like.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 15, 2018
Q. Can I use Microsoft Office on a Chromebook?A. Chromebooks run Google’s Chrome OS, which was introduced in 2009 as a streamlined operating system for netbooks and other lightweight laptops. While you cannot install the traditional Windows or Mac versions of Microsoft Office on a Chromebook and have the software actually work, Microsoft’s Office apps for Android devices can now run on the newer Chromebook models that have the ability to download, install and run apps from the Google Play store.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Office apps are free for devices with screens smaller than 10.1 inches, though a free Microsoft account is required to create and edit files. For Chromebooks and tablets with larger screens, a paid subscription to Microsoft’s Office 365 service is required; the least expensive plan is about $7 a month.The Office apps for Android are not the only way to open and edit Microsoft Word, Excel and PowerPoint files on a Chromebook. If you have a free Microsoft account, you can log in and edit files in Office Online, a browser-based version of the suite.Office-related Chrome browser extensions are available in the Chrome web store, including the Office Editing for Docs, Sheets and Slides add-on, which automatically opens Office files in Google’s own word-processing, spreadsheet and presentation apps. You can also open Office files with Google Docs right in the browser and convert files to either format. Last week, Google announced that Google Drive users could add comments directly to Office files, without having to convert the documents first.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CECILIA KANGFEB. 15, 2018
WASHINGTON — Last April, the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, Ajit Pai, led the charge for his agency to approve rules allowing television broadcasters to greatly increase the number of stations they own. A few weeks later, Sinclair Broadcasting announced a blockbuster $3.9 billion deal to buy Tribune Media — a deal those new rules made possible.By the end of the year, in a previously undisclosed move, the top internal watchdog for the F.C.C. opened an investigation into whether Mr. Pai and his aides had improperly pushed for the rule changes and whether they had timed them to benefit Sinclair, according to Representative Frank Pallone of New Jersey and two congressional aides.“For months I have been trying to get to the bottom of the allegations about Chairman Pai’s relationship with Sinclair Broadcasting,” Mr. Pallone, the top Democrat on the committee that oversees the F.C.C., said in the statement to The New York Times. “I am grateful to the F.C.C.’s inspector general that he has decided to take up this important investigation.”It was unclear the extent of the inspector general’s investigation or when it might conclude, but the inquiry puts a spotlight on Mr. Pai’s decisions and whether there had been coordination with the company. It may also force him to answer questions that he has so far avoided addressing in public.AdvertisementThe inquiry could also add ammunition to arguments against the Sinclair-Tribune deal. Public interest groups and Democratic lawmakers, including Mr. Pallone, are strongly opposed to the deal, arguing that it would reduce the number of voices in media and diminish coverage of local news.AdvertisementSinclair’s chief executive, Chris Ripley, has called Mr. Pai’s relaxation of media ownership rules a “landmark” development for his company and the industry. A union of Sinclair and Tribune would create the nation’s biggest television broadcaster, reaching seven out of 10 American homes. The F.C.C. and Justice Department are widely expected to approve the merger in the coming weeks.The office of F.C.C. inspector general, which is a nonpartisan role that reports to the agency and regularly updates Congress on some investigations, said it would “not comment on the existence or the nonexistence of an investigation.”Mr. Pai’s office and Sinclair declined to comment. When the legislators called for an investigation in November, a spokesman for the F.C.C., representing Mr. Pai, said the allegations of favoritism were “baseless.”“For many years, Chairman Pai has called on the F.C.C. to update its media ownership regulations,” the F.C.C. spokesman said. “The chairman is sticking to his long-held views, and given the strong case for modernizing these rules, it’s not surprising that those who disagree with him would prefer to do whatever they can to distract from the merits of his proposals.”A New York Times investigation published in August found that Mr. Pai and his staff members had met and corresponded with Sinclair executives several times. One meeting, with Sinclair’s executive chairman, took place days before Mr. Pai, who was appointed by President Trump, took over as F.C.C. chairman.Sinclair’s top lobbyist, a former F.C.C. official, also communicated frequently with former agency colleagues and pushed for the relaxation of media ownership rules. And language the lobbyist used about loosening rules has tracked closely to analysis and language used by Mr. Pai in speeches favoring such changes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In November, several Democrats in Congress, including Mr. Pallone, called on the inspector general’s office to explore all communications — including personal emails, social media accounts, text messages and phone calls — between Sinclair and Mr. Pai and his staff.The lawmakers also asked for communications between Mr. Pai’s office and the White House. They pointed to a report in March 2017 from The New York Post, in which Mr. Trump is said to have met with Sinclair’s executive chairman, David Smith, and discussed F.C.C. rules.AdvertisementSome members of Congress have asked Mr. Pai for such communications, but he has not responded.The F.C.C. inspector general, David L. Hunt, and other officials in his office met with aides in the House and Senate, including those for Mr. Pallone, in December. The F.C.C. officials told the aides that they would open an investigation, according to four people with knowledge of the meetings.In later conversations, F.C.C. officials said that an investigation was underway, according to two other aides.The aides, all of whom work for Democratic lawmakers, would speak only on the condition of anonymity because the investigation is private.The investigation could put the F.C.C. inspector general’s office in a high-profile situation.Mr. Hunt was promoted to lead the office in 2011 by Julius Genachowski, a Democrat and the F.C.C.’s then-chairman, after working in the agency for about five years. The office investigates potential violations of civil and criminal laws by agency staff members and companies that receive money from the agency. On Wednesday, the inspector general for veterans affairs, a similar position, released a scathing report about travel spending by the department’s secretary, David J. Shulkin.The F.C.C.’s inspector general does not make public all of its investigations. But details of some investigations have been disclosed through Freedom of Information Act requests and through the office’s reports to Congress.In 2015, the inspector general’s office looked into possible coordination between the Obama administration and the F.C.C. chairman at the time, Tom Wheeler, on the creation of so-called net neutrality rules. The rules prevented broadband providers from blocking or slowing traffic to consumers. The inspector general said its investigation could not find clear improper conduct.Antitrust experts said this new investigation may complicate the reviews of the Sinclair-Tribune deal by the F.C.C. and the Justice Department. Even if the deal were approved, they said, any conclusions of improper conduct by Mr. Pai could give fuel to critics to challenge the review in courts.“An investigation could cast a cloud over the whole process,” said Andrew Schwartzman, a senior fellow at Georgetown Law Center’s Institute for Public Representation. “For the review, knowledge of an investigation could generate caution and even delay completion of the deal.”A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: F.C.C. Link To Sinclair Is Explored.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 14, 2018
Q. I do not have a smartphone. Can I still use Twitter? Do I need an account?A. Using the Twitter app on a smartphone or a computer is a popular way to keep up with the state of the world in 280-character posts. However, you do not need a touch-screen mobile gadget or even an account to sample the free service.With or without an account, it is possible to write posts and follow other Twitter users over S.M.S. text on a feature phone that has texting capability and a data plan. Twitter has a set of S.M.S. commands, described in its online help guide and a frequently asked questions page, that let you perform basic actions, like following or unfollowing another Twitter user.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.You can also browse posts from users with public accounts on the Twitter.com site, as long as you know the name of the account — also called the “handle” — or accounts you want to read. Once you know the account name, just add it (after a slash) and the end of the twitter.com address to go to that user’s page of tweets on the web — like twitter.com/nytimestech or twitter.com/nasa.Using Twitter’s search page to look for account names or topic keywords is another way to see activity on the service. Clicking links or on Twitter posts embedded in other stories can also take you to a user’s account page on the web.If you want to post and experience Twitter without having to fiddle with S.M.S. codes or manually search for content — but are not quite up to being a public presence in the Twitterverse — you can also create a protected account instead of a public one. With a protected account, you can follow other users with public accounts and add their posts to your feed, but people who want to follow and interact with you must send you a request first.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have multiple accounts set up in the Mac’s default Mail program. I notice sometimes when I create a message, Mail automatically sets the sender address to the account I use for personal correspondence and not my preferred home-business account. How can I specify that my business account should be the default sender address?A. You can manually switch accounts on a new Mail message by selecting an address from the drop-down menu in the Sender field, but if you have a preferred address, you can designate it as your default outgoing address for new messages. To do so, open the program and, under the Mail menu in the top-left corner, choose Preferences. (If you are already in the Mail program, press the Command and comma keys to open the app’s Preferences box.)In the Mail Preferences box, click the Composing tab and go to the Addressing section in the middle of the box. In the “Send new messages from” setting, click the drop-down menu and select your preferred account, then close the Preferences box. The messages you create from this point should have your chosen address set in the sender.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 12, 2018
Q. Some of us in the boonies must rely entirely on cellular Wi-Fi hot spots. As a result, data usage is a very important consideration, as each gigabyte must be paid for. Fortunately, we have 4G speed, but how much data do services like Instagram or Spotify use? How can one tell how much a YouTube video will consume? Obviously, one can go to a free Wi-Fi locale to see some content, but there are the security issues.A. The amount of data consumed by sharing and streaming photos, audio and video varies with the quality and size of the files, but quick estimates from a data calculator (like the ones on the AT&T or Verizon Wireless sites) offer a rough idea. Your cellular provider may have its own measures. Nationally, both AT&T and Verizon Wireless estimate uploading a good-quality photo to a social media site like Instagram uses 5 megabytes of data. In comparison, streaming video can chew up 500 to 700 megabytes of data an hour — and that is for files in the lowest “standard definition” picture quality.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Data usage for streaming music depends on the audio fidelity and service, but plan to use at least 51 megabytes an hour. Spotify, the popular streaming music service, can consume a lot of data at the default settings for its mobile and desktop apps, but you can save megabytes by lowering the audio quality of the stream. For instance, switching to “normal” from the “high” quality setting in the mobile app can save you around 30 megabytes per hour of listening time.Spotify’s help guide has some suggestions for reducing your data consumption when using the service. If you have a paid Premium account, downloading the files for listening offline saves bandwidth because you are not streaming them repeatedly to replay the music. Closing other internet-connected applications or switching from the dedicated app to the browser-based Spotify player can also reduce data needs.Using web browsers that compress images and mobile devices with data-saver settings (like Google Chrome or Opera) are among the other ways you can minimize your monthly megabyte consumption.Being wary of security on public Wi-Fi networks is wise. If you use one, connecting through a virtual private network (V.P.N.) can help keep your personal data more secure, although it is still generally safer to keep financial and personal-identification information on your home connection.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Measuring Your Use of Cellular Data.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 9, 2018
Q. There appears to be a problem with Windows 10. At start-up, the drive use is at 100 percent. It can be impossible to open email or a browser or anything else for 15 to 30 minutes, sometimes even longer. What’s going on? A. Microsoft addresses the problem in its Windows 10 Support database, pointing to a firmware bug in some computers with solid-state drives as the culprit. If the Windows Task Manager shows the disk use at 100 percent, your computer is unresponsive and your Windows system event log shows multiple entries of Event ID 129, the company suggests carefully following these steps to turn off Message Signal Interrupt mode.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.However, depending on your hardware, other software and services could be jamming things up and dragging your disk to a crawl. It might take some time and experimentation to zero in on the problematic programs. Disabling Windows Desktop Search is often suggested, as is turning off the SuperFetch function that stores information for applications.Third-party programs like Google Chrome and Skype have also caused disk slowdowns for some users. Certain browser extensions, file-syncing services or busy antivirus software scanning Windows as it starts up can also affect system responsiveness. If you are not running a security program, malware or spyware might be hogging resources.Updating your device drivers may help, according to Microsoft, which hosts a page of tips for improving your PC’s performance. MiniTool, the company that makes the Partition Wizard disk utility software, also has its own lengthy guide to troubleshooting the 100 percent disk utilization issue.An earlier version of this article misidentified the disk-utility software made by MiniTool. It is Partition Wizard, not Partition Magic.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 8, 2018
Q. How do you delete Kindle books you have finished on an iPad?A. When you have completed an e-book and are ready to remove it from your iPad, open the iOS Kindle app and go to your library screen that displays your collection. Tap the Downloaded button at the top of the screen to see only the books stored on the tablet.When you find the book you want to delete, swipe to the left and tap the red Archive button. For more options, you can instead press your finger on the cover image for a second until a menu appears. Choose Remove From Device to delete the book from the iPad. (You can dump old sample chapters and other free content from the Kindle app by selecting the Delete Permanently option from the menu instead.)Amazon keeps a record of all your content purchases in your online account with the company, which allows you to download and sync the same book across multiple devices running Kindle apps. Removing a book from the iPad does not delete it from your library of purchased books from Amazon’s cloud servers, and you can download it to the iPad again if you ever want to reread it.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To do that, tap the All button on your Kindle library screen to see all your purchases (not just the downloaded items). Tap the book cover to download it again.If you want to permanently delete a book from your Kindle collection stored in the Amazon cloud, log into your account on the company’s site and go to the Manage Your Content and Devices page. You can get to it by clicking the triangle next to Your Account & Lists on the left side of the Amazon page and selecting Your Content and Devices.Next, click the Your Content tab. In the list, find the book you want to remove for good and click the Actions button next to the title. In the pop-up menu, click Delete. You should see a warning box asking you to confirm your decision, as deleting the book here permanently erases it from your cloud library and you will have to buy it again if you want to read it again.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 7, 2018
Q. My Android tablet recently got the Google Assistant update, but I find I miss pressing the Home button to get the little box that used to pop up with the search icons for more information about people and places on the Chrome page I was reading. Now I just get the Google Assistant asking if I want help. Is there a way to get the old feature back?A. The Google Now on Tap feature, introduced for Android devices in 2015, was designed to save time by quickly getting you more information about a topic already on your screen — like the name of an actor in a movie review or details about a restaurant mentioned in an email message. Pressing the Home button brought up a box of icons for Google Search, Google Maps, YouTube and other places to learn more about the names and places on the screen. When you finished your research, you just needed to tap the Back button to return to what you were doing before.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even if you have downloaded and installed the Google Assistant on your tablet or Android phone, you can still get a version of the screen search shortcut with the Google Assistant. A shortcut for taking a screenshot is also available.So when you press and hold the Home button on a Chrome page (or other text screen) and the Google Assistant panel pops up with its “How can I help?” offer, tap the “What’s on my screen?” button right below. When you do, the software displays a list of names and other searchable subjects on the screen that you can tap to visit.If you want to capture an image of the screen you were originally viewing, tap the “Share screenshot” under the Assistant’s greeting instead. On some Pixel phones, you just need to press the Assistant button and swipe up on the screen to see search options.If you are not seeing any search options, make sure Google Assistant has permission to scan the page for searchable content. Press and hold the home button to summon the Assistant and tap the blue-and-white icon on the right side of the screen that pops up. On the next screen, tap the three-dot More menu in the upper-right corner, select Settings and then Tablet (or Phone), and scroll down to the General area. Make sure “Use screen context” is enabled.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAVID STREITFELD and CHAD BRAYFEB. 8, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Twitter often feels like the digital equivalent of a swamp.The Russians used the platform to disrupt the 2016 election. Famous people buy fake followers to make themselves seem more famous. Prominent members of the chattering class have been signing off for good. Sometimes it seems as if no one loves the service except for the president of the United States.As a business, however, Twitter might finally be starting to work.On Thursday, it reported a profit in the fourth quarter, the first black ink since going public in 2013. The news pushed its shares up 12 percent to $30.18 — their highest level in more than two years.“We did what we said we were going to do,” an exultant Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, said on Twitter. “Our focus and self-discipline continues to improve.”
            I’m so proud of the @Twitter team. We did what we said we were going to do. Our focus and self-discipline continues to improve. Thank you team! And thanks to all of our shareholders for the patience and support. 2018 is going to be a great year.        It’s a measure of the undisciplined — O.K., brutal — nature of Twitter that most of the replies to Mr. Dorsey’s tweet were not congratulations but insults and criticism. Others were incomprehensible.AdvertisementWhat counts, however, is that those cranks and critics are there in the first place. The number of people who use the service monthly rose 4 percent to 330 million, which — while not a big increase — is something. Those who use the social media service every day grew 12 percent from the fourth quarter of 2016, the fifth consecutive quarter of double-digit gains.Advertisement“The user growth is kind of astounding,” said Rich Greenfield, a media and tech analyst at the research firm BTIG, who has been recommending the stock for a year. “They were barely growing two years ago.”Twitter originally showed tweets in reverse chronological order — the latest posts, however mundane, were on top. Now it is using algorithms to try to show the most important tweets first, making the site more engaging.“If you show the right tweets to the right person at the right time, it creates user happiness,” Mr. Greenfield said. “That means more time spent on the site, which means more opportunities for advertising.”This has been a good week for social media companies that are not Facebook. On Tuesday, Snap reported much better revenue than expected, and a slightly narrower loss. Its shares also soared on the news. In contrast, Facebook said last week that it had made changes that reduced the hours its two billion users were spending on its pages.Over all, Twitter reported a profit of $91 million in the final three months of 2017, compared with a loss of $167 million a year earlier. Margins were much better, expenses were lower and stock-based compensation decreased sharply.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other numbers were not as impressive. Revenue rose 2 percent to $732 million in the quarter. Revenue from advertising, which makes up the bulk of its revenue, increased 1 percent. In general, Twitter exceeded low expectations.“A solid result across the board and builds upon the momentum” from the third quarter, analysts at UBS wrote in a research note.One quarter is not much of a streak, and Twitter has often been unable to keep it up. Jim Cridlin, the global head of innovation at Mindshare, a unit of the advertising giant WPP, said that while Twitter’s momentum continued into the fourth quarter, the company still faced “significant headwinds.”AdvertisementLeadership is one issue. Mr. Dorsey splits his time between Twitter and his other company, the digital payments firm Square. Last month, Anthony Noto, Twitter’s chief operating officer and one of Mr. Dorsey’s most trusted deputies, left the company to become chief executive of the embattled online lender Social Finance.Twitter also faces criticism as federal and state authorities scrutinize companies that sold millions of fake followers on social media platforms. More than one million followers of entertainers, athletes and others have disappeared after an article by The New York Times detailed the business practices of a company called Devumi. Twitter previously said it would take action against Devumi’s practices.For the current quarter, UBS calculated that Twitter would generate $583 million of revenue, $11 million more than analysts were predicting. That might keep the party going.What really is helping Twitter is that there are only three American social media companies that count. Facebook is by far the largest, but is under pressure from all quarters precisely because of its size and influence. It is trying to moderate the latter without hurting the former, which is going to be tricky. Snap is a singular effort forging its own direction as a communications platform.That leaves Twitter, troubled as it might be.“Advertisers have a huge desire to be on mobile devices more, but there are not a lot of ways to reach people on applications worthy of your home screen,” said Mr. Greenfield. “Twitter is on your home screen.”Follow David Streitfeld and Chad Bray on Twitter: @DavidStreitfeld and @Chadbray.David Streitfeld reported from San Francisco and Chad Bray from London.A version of this article appears in print on February 9, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Positive News for Twitter: Its First Quarterly Profit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAVID STREITFELDFEB. 6, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Snap finally snapped its losing streak.As the messaging and media company prepares to celebrate its first anniversary as a publicly traded stock, it handily reversed a slide that consumed much of the past year. After it released fourth quarter results on Tuesday, Snap’s beleaguered shares rose more than 20 percent in after-hours trading.“Our business really came together towards the end of last year,” Evan Spiegel, Snap’s chief executive, said in a conference call with analysts.Revenue was $286 million, up 72 percent from a year earlier and about $30 million more than analysts had expected. Daily users rose nine million to 187 million, the best growth in over a year. The retention rate of new Android users, a special focus for Snap, jumped nearly 20 percent over the previous year.The company lost $350 million in the quarter, or 13 cents a share, which was narrower than the loss of 16 cents that was expected by analysts. And it also contrasted with the carnage of the prior quarter, when Snap recorded a net loss that was twice the forecast.AdvertisementAnalysts were excited enough to mix their metaphors.“Over all, this quarter was a major step in the right direction for the company and will be a tough pill to swallow for all the naysayers that threw in the white towel over the last few months,” wrote Daniel Ives of GBH Insights in a note to investors.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What went right? Snap, which makes nearly all of its money from advertising, made it much easier to buy ads through an automated system. That also expanded the list of potential ad buyers to medium-sized firms.Advertisement“For the first time, revenue in Q4 from advertisers outside of Ad Age’s Top 100 exceeded revenue from the Top 100 Advertisers,” Imran Khan, Snap’s chief strategy officer, said during the conference call.However fast Snap is growing, it still has the world to conquer. EMarketer, a research firm, estimated that the company will generate $1.47 billion in net worldwide ad revenue this year, up 90 percent over 2017. That will give Snap less than 1 percent of the worldwide digital ad market.Snap, based in Venice, Calif., may be benefiting from troubles at its much larger rival, Facebook. Under pressure from multiple sides, Facebook said last week it had made changes that reduced the hours its two billion users were spending on its pages.Snap shares closed Tuesday during regular trading at $14.06. Even with the spike from the earnings, shares are about $17, which was the initial offering price last March. In its early days, the Snap platform was dismissed as a fad for teens. That criticism has been tempered, but there are still many doubters.“The good news is that people continue to use Snapchat as voraciously as they have in the past,” said Rich Greenfield, media and tech analyst at the research firm BTIG. “The question remains, how big a business is it?”Mr. Greenfield said Snap was a communications company that was trying to develop an advertising business. “They’re trying to do something that hasn’t been done,” he said.Follow David Streitfeld on Twitter: @DavidStreitfeldA version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Snap Reverses Slide as User Growth and Revenue Jump.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATHANIEL POPPERFEB. 7, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The creators of the famous Forbes rich list have made their first attempt to identify the wealthiest people in the virtual currency industry. Yet the list that was published on Wednesday, right after major drops in virtual currency prices, inadvertently also served as a reminder of the fleeting nature of that wealth.While the list in Forbes magazine, which was assembled in recent weeks, identifies about 10 virtual currency billionaires, most of them were not billionaires by the time the feature went online on Wednesday morning. On Monday alone, the prices of many virtual currencies plummeted over 20 percent, before stabilizing on Tuesday.At the top of the list is Chris Larsen, a founder of the Ripple virtual currency. Mr. Larsen was briefly estimated to be wealthier than Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg last month when Ripple’s price peaked, taking his net wealth to nearly $60 billion.Since then, the price of Ripple’s digital token, XRP, has fallen more than 80 percent. Forbes put Mr. Larsen’s wealth at around $8 billion, but the same holdings were worth less than $6 billion by Wednesday.AdvertisementMr. Larsen is followed on the Forbes list by Joseph Lubin, an early investor in the Ethereum virtual currency network; Changpeng Zhao, founder of the virtual currency exchange Binance; the brothers Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss, longtime Bitcoin investors who are famous from their legal battles with Mr. Zuckerberg over Facebook; and Matthew Mellon, the banking heir who is now a major holder of XRP.AdvertisementThe list is a reminder of how the biggest gains in virtual currencies have been reaped by a small number of early adopters — despite the early promises that virtual currencies could democratize the financial system and spread wealth more evenly.Nearly all of the people on the list either helped found virtual currencies or have been involved with them for years. Recent efforts to quantify the inequality among Bitcoin holders have found that it is significantly higher than in even the most stratified countries, which may sting many people who recently rushed into virtual currencies and are now sitting on losses.For early virtual currency adopters like the people on the Forbes list, the recent price declines are not catastrophic. The price of Bitcoin is still up 600 percent from a year ago, and up 70,000 percent from when the Winklevoss twins began buying in 2012.Identifying the richest people in the secretive and paranoid virtual currency realm is far from easy; some of it is guesswork. Mr. Lubin, whom Forbes pegged as the second-wealthiest person in the virtual currency universe, illustrates the difficulties. He told the magazine that he had begun selling his Ethereum tokens, known as Ether, last year to fund his business, ConsenSys. Because Forbes could not verify his holdings, the magazine put his wealth at between $1 billion and $5 billion before the most recent price declines.The normal Forbes billionaires list is easier to compile because the richest people in the world generally have most of their wealth tied up in stock holdings, which usually have to be disclosed for big public companies. With virtual currencies, it is not necessary to disclose your identity, and the system was created by people who were interested in protecting financial privacy.Many large holders of virtual currencies are loath to acknowledge their holdings for privacy and security reasons, and many people who are rumored to have giant Bitcoin stockpiles are not on the Forbes list.Perhaps the most notable omission is Satoshi Nakamoto, the mysterious creator of Bitcoin, whose identity has been guessed at many times but never confirmed. Researchers have guessed that Satoshi, as the creator is known, most likely amassed about one million Bitcoins during the network’s first year, when few other people were mining new tokens. Those Bitcoins would now be worth around $7 billion.Others have publicly claimed to have large holdings without verifying those holdings. Brock Pierce, a former child actor and the leader of a virtual currency community in Puerto Rico, has said he would donate $1 billion of his virtual currency fortune to charity, but Forbes said, “He refuses to provide documentation that proves he has anywhere near that much money.” The magazine estimated Mr. Pierce’s wealth at between $700 million and $1 billion.The list suggests that inventing virtual currencies can end up being less lucrative than investing in them. The magazine estimated that the inventor of Ethereum, Vitalik Buterin, is less wealthy than two early investors, Mr. Lubin and Anthony Di Iorio, who had previously managed his family’s patio-door business in Canada.And while three big holders of Ripple’s token, XRP, are on the list, the inventor of the digital token, Jed McCaleb, is not.Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopper.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Top Virtual Billionaires (on Tuesday Night).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 6, 2018
Q. I have one app on my fourth-generation Apple TV that freezes every once in a while, and the only way I can get out of it is to unplug the whole Apple TV box. Is there an easier way to get back to the home screen?A. As with apps on Apple’s Mac computers and iOS devices, you can force-quit a misbehaving tvOS program without having to unplug anything. The next time an app freezes, quickly press the TV button twice on the Apple TV remote. When you do, the Apple TV goes into the app-switching mode used by iOS devices, where you see a series of application preview windows on the screen.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If the misbehaving app is not already selected, use the touch pad on the Apple TV remote to swipe left or right until you land on the app you want to close. With the app’s preview window selected, swipe up on the remote’s touch pad to forcibly close the program.Restarting the Apple TV may help stop the forcibly closed app from freezing again. You can restart it from the remote by holding down the TV and Menu buttons until you see the light on the front of the box flash. Alternatively, use the remote to navigate to the Settings app to System and select Restart. (While you are in the System settings, you can also check for updates to the Apple TV’s software or turn on automatic updates.)The remote can be used to rearrange apps or delete them as well. To move an app, select its icon and press down on the remote’s touch pad. When the icon begins to wiggle, swipe across the touch pad until you get to the spot you want. Press the touch pad again to release the icon. To delete a wiggling app, press the Play/Pause button and choose Delete.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: How to Unstick A Frozen Apple TV.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
FEB. 6, 2018
On my second day with Apple’s new HomePod, I asked the artificially intelligent speaker to play some music. Siri, the virtual assistant that powers HomePod, enthusiastically replied, “O.K., let’s get going with some Dashboard Confessional.”I cringed. “Hey, Siri,” I said. “Nobody likes Dashboard Confessional.”Siri replied, “Sorry, I couldn’t find the song ‘Nobody Likes Dashboard Confessional.’” Then to my horror, HomePod continued playing a track by the emo rock band.At the time, I gave Siri a pass. After all, Apple’s HomePod, a rival to smart speakers from Amazon and Google, is supposed to study your music preferences over time to create special playlists just for you. I had had only one day with HomePod.But after a week — during which I asked HomePod to play my favorite tunes from artists like Beck, Talking Heads and David Bowie — the smart speaker still did not learn. Instead, like a stubborn D.J., Siri kept playing music by artists outside my music palette: Taylor Swift and Leroy Francis, to name just two.AdvertisementThat leads to my conclusion: The $349 HomePod, which costs roughly three times as much as its competitors and arrives in stores on Friday, is tough to recommend to you, dear reader.AdvertisementApple’s speaker is certainly an impressive piece of hardware. Audiophiles will appreciate that it has a woofer with a custom amplifier and seven tweeters. The result is a speaker with a deep bass and rich treble that is loud enough to fill a large room with superb sound. HomePod makes the Amazon Echo and Google’s Home sound muffled and tinny in comparison.But Siri on HomePod is embarrassingly inadequate, even though that is the primary way you interact with it. Siri is sorely lacking in capabilities compared with Amazon’s Alexa and Google’s Assistant. Siri doesn’t even work as well on HomePod as it does on the iPhone.For Apple, that’s unfortunate. The company was the first to bring virtual assistants to the mainstream with Siri on the iPhone in 2011, but it has since fallen behind Amazon and Google with smart speakers. Apple announced HomePod last June — but then delayed its release until this year.Even now, Apple is shipping the HomePod unfinished. On Day 1, the device will lack some cool features, like the ability to link several HomePods to create a multiroom sound system that Apple says will fill an entire home with music. That feature will come in a software update later this year.And there are other limitations: The HomePod requires an iOS device, like an iPhone, an iPad or an iPod Touch, to set it up. To use your voice commands to play music, you will also need to subscribe to Apple’s streaming music service, Apple Music.So how exactly did I reach my conclusion on HomePod? I tested it side by side with Echo and Home smart speakers, grading them on their ability to accomplish 14 tasks across several categories, including music, productivity, commuting, home automation and cooking. Let me walk you through the process and results.I started picking the 14 tasks by reading up on research studies that looked at how people use virtual assistants in the home. Activate, a management consulting firm, found the majority of people turned to virtual assistants to play music, get the weather and set a timer.AdvertisementApple also provided statistics on smart speaker usage from the research firm Parks Associates. That report also found that playing music and getting the weather were the top uses of smart speakers, while roughly 20 percent of people enjoyed using them for tasks like accessing a calendar and searching for recipes.Amazon says most of its Echo customers use at least one “skill,” or third-party app. So I added the ability to use Uber, the most popular ride-hailing service, as a test.Now onward to the tests themselves.I set up a HomePod, an Echo and a Home in my house and began with a battery of question-and-answer sessions. First up: traffic.All the speakers gave a similar traffic estimate for a drive to San Jose, Calif. — roughly a one-hour drive on the freeway. But when I asked HomePod to summon a car from Uber, Siri responded, “I wish I could, but I can’t help with rides here.”The other speakers were happy to help — so I followed up with: “Hey, Siri, what gives?” HomePod’s colorful touch screen lit up to show it had heard my question, but Siri remained silent.FEB. 6, 2018
Next, it was time for some cooking questions. All the speakers were able to flawlessly set a kitchen timer. But when I asked HomePod how to make pasta, Siri blanked and said, “I can’t get the answer to that on HomePod.”Google Home was more responsive — it gave me the steps for making pasta from the recipe site Genius Kitchen. Amazon Echo was even more accommodating. Alexa listed the ingredients for a pasta dish, including noodles, milk and heavy cream, and offered to send the steps to my phone or play them aloud.Then it was time to move on to some work-related tasks. I asked Siri to schedule a meeting for Tuesday. Siri responded: “I cannot access your calendar from here. Sorry about that.” It couldn’t look at my calendar for the day, either. Google Home and Amazon Echo, in contrast, managed to schedule new events and read my calendar for the day: a meeting in the morning, followed by a photo shoot and a business dinner in the evening.FEB. 6, 2018
When I asked Apple about Siri’s hiccups, the company said that for the first version of HomePod, it focused on including tasks that people use smart speakers for the most, like playing music and asking about the weather, and that it would continue to evaluate what other features to add over time.AdvertisementI wondered whether HomePod would do better with home tasks and decided to ask all the smart speakers to turn on a Wi-Fi-connected light bulb from the smart light company Lifx. In this test, HomePod got a higher score because setting up the smart light, which involved using the iPhone camera to scan a code on the instruction manual, was seamless and much easier than it was with Google Home and Amazon Echo, which required installing a third-party app.Bonus: The light turned on when I asked.FEB. 6, 2018
One of the most crucial tests for HomePod had to do with audio. That’s because Apple has long emphasized that the smart speaker is first and foremost a music player.Phil Schiller, Apple’s head of marketing, said at a gathering at the company’s audio lab last week that Apple started developing HomePod six years ago with the intention of making a speaker that specialized in playing music in a unique way. The project started well before Apple introduced other services like Apple Music, which was released in 2015, and HomeKit, the home automation platform that was unveiled in 2014, he added.Mr. Schiller said Apple wanted to stay true to the original goal of the project “without ever compromising that it’s a speaker first.”All three speakers did great playing music. Echo, Google’s Home and HomePod were each able to play specific songs by artists, generate playlists for specific artists or music genres, and play podcasts. HomePod got a higher score in audio with its superior sound quality factored in.Yet that’s also where Dashboard Confessional came in and where HomePod’s biggest shortcomings became apparent. Whenever I asked HomePod to “play some music,” it never played music that was relevant to my preferences or listening history.That wasn’t the case with the Google and Amazon speakers. When I asked those speakers to play music, the gadgets simply resumed what I was last playing on Spotify, which was satisfying.AdvertisementSiri also had laughably awkward pronunciations of some artist names. When I once asked HomePod to play songs by Tupac, Siri replied: “Sure, here’s Tu,” and after a short pause said: “Pac.” (I’m not sure Dr. Dre or Jimmy Iovine, whose streaming service was acquired by Apple to develop Apple Music, would approve.)In response to my concerns, Apple said HomePod studies a customer’s music preferences over time. I figured a week should have been enough.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.From the tests, I graded the speakers on their ability to accomplish each task on a scale from 0 to 4. (I gave a 0 for tasks that could not be done at all, a 2 for tasks that could be done with some issues, and a 4 for tasks that could be completed flawlessly.)So how did they all stack up in terms of grade-point averages out of 4.0? The final results:■ Amazon’s Echo — 3.4■ Google’s Home — 3.1■ Apple’s HomePod — 2.9An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of a musical artist whose music was played by Apple’s HomePod speaker without being requested. He is Leroy Francis, not Frances.Email: brian.chen@nytimes.com; Twitter: @bxchenBrian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes Tech Fix, a column about solving tech-related problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What confuses you or makes you angry about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2018, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: It Can’t Cook, Pick Songs or Get a Car, but It Sounds Nice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By PUI-WING TAMFEB. 5, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Emily Chang caused a mini earthquake in Silicon Valley last month when Vanity Fair published an excerpt from her new book, “Brotopia.”With a headline that promised to bring us inside Silicon Valley’s “secretive, orgiastic dark side,” Ms. Chang laid out how drug-fueled sex parties were happening behind the scenes at the homes of wealthy tech executives and investors. One party she described was later tied to the home of Steve Jurvetson, a venture capitalist who left his firm last year amid an investigation into his behavior with women.In “Brotopia,” which hits book stores on Feb. 6, the secret sex parties are just a symptom of a much deeper problem that Silicon Valley’s tech industry has with its treatment of women. Ms. Chang’s examination of that issue coincides with the #MeToo moment and the broader debate about gender equality that it has sparked.Ms. Chang, 37, who anchors a Bloomberg TV tech show, recently discussed the roots of Silicon Valley’s gender imbalance and the predominance of tech industry bros — you know, those cocky young men who swagger about. Edited excerpts follow.AdvertisementPui-Wing Tam How did Silicon Valley become the land of the bros?Emily Chang It didn’t have to be this way and it wasn’t always this way, importantly. Women played vital roles in the computing industry from the very beginning. Just think “Hidden Figures,” but industrywide.What happened in the 1960s and 1970s was that the industry was exploding and was starved for talent. There just weren’t enough people to do the jobs in computing. So they hired these two psychologists, William Cannon and Dallis Perry, to come up with a personality test to screen for good programmers.AdvertisementThose men decided, in screening about 1,200 men and 200 women, that good programmers don’t like people — that they have a complete disinterest in people. These tests were widely influential and used at various companies for decades.What happens with that is that if you search for antisocial people, you will hire far more men than women. There’s no evidence to suggest that antisocial men are better at computers than women. But that stereotype has perpetuated to this day.PWT How intractable is the tech industry’s exclusion of women?EC It is systemic. Bad behavior has been tolerated and normalized for far too long. And people simply have a narrow idea of who can do these tech jobs. If you’re a woman in the tech industry, you’re the only woman in the room over and over again.PWT What did you find were some of the most egregious examples of how women in tech were treated?EC The party and social culture was really shocking. For two years, I interviewed dozens of people familiar with the sex party scene or who were shut out because of it. I was shocked. It was a lot less about sex than it was about power, and the power dynamic is completely lopsided.PWT What surprised you the most of the tales that women in tech shared with you?EC One of the most surprising things to me was that they weren’t surprised by what Susan Fowler (the former Uber engineer who last year publicly described sexual harassment at the ride-hailing company) wrote. This is their life, day in and day out. The women talk about performing this emotional labor all the time that men simply don’t have to do, and it’s exhausting. At the end of the day, they’re tired because they feel like they’re doing two jobs, not one.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PWT After the Vanity Fair excerpt, you were criticized by some in the tech industry for describing the secret sex parties.AdvertisementEC I understand that this is new territory and that it might make people uncomfortable, but no good change comes without people feeling uncomfortable. These stories have to be told; otherwise, it perpetuates a culture of keeping women down.PWT You have been trolled on Twitter, as many women in tech have been. Did you experience other forms of harassment?EC As a journalist, I’ve definitely found myself in situations that have made me feel uncomfortable. But I’m sure it doesn’t compare to what the women in tech face every single day because they’re simply so outnumbered. I talked to women engineers at Uber who were getting invited to strip clubs and bondage clubs in the middle of the day. The middle of the day! And often they would go because that’s just what everyone was doing. It’s what you needed to do to fit in and be cool.PWT What are the chances that Silicon Valley really changes how it treats women?EC I’m encouraged because I see great examples. The same people who want to change the world — who are exploring the limits of outer space and building floating ocean communities and building self-driving cars — can do this. Change needs to come from the top and C.E.O.s need to make inclusion an explicit focus and priority and communicate that to people in the organization so that they, too, make it a priorityPWT You have three young sons, who you dedicate the book to. What are the implications for them?EC When things got hard — because it’s not easy to report on sexism — I’d look at the boys and think “I’m doing this for them.” I really do think their lives will be better in a more equal world.More importantly, Silicon Valley is controlling what we see, what we read, how we shop, how we communicate, how we relate to each other. This is not just tech’s problem. This is society’s problem. This is the industry that is having a greater influence on humanity than perhaps any other. And the same industry that changed the world can change this behavior.Follow Pui-Wing Tam on Twitter: @puiwingtamA version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2018, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: How Silicon Valley Came to Be a Land of ‘Bros’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By EMILY COCHRANEFEB. 4, 2018
WASHINGTON — As part of a monthlong challenge to declutter her digital life, Kristi Kremers vowed she would cut off her online addictions: Instagram, Facebook and the news websites she checks hourly.Her resolve dissolved within days. She checked the Drudge Report, “a one-stop shop,” she admitted, for all of her news updates. She caved with Facebook, using the network to coordinate birthday plans (“When it’s your birthday, it’s like the best Facebook day ever,” she said). And then she gave in to the allure of her social media feed to keep tabs on the Minnesota Vikings through the N.F.L. playoffs.“I was basically set up for failure from the beginning,” Ms. Kremers, an employee at the University of Minnesota, said with a laugh. “Going completely cold turkey in all of these different realms at once was too much.”The challenge through January was issued by Cal Newport, an associate professor of computer science at Georgetown University. Mr. Newport, who runs a blog about managing digital productivity, encouraged his thousands of readers to remove every piece of digital interaction that wasn’t critical to their work and lives. At the month’s end, he instructed, slowly add everything back in.Advertisement“It’s like cleaning out your whole house and deciding, ‘O.K., what do I want to put back into the house?’” Mr. Newport said. His own online weakness, he said, is baseball trading rumors.AdvertisementHe assured his followers that there was no reason to eliminate anything essential: email for work, checking finances, staying in touch with family. Don’t get rid of anything that would jeopardize work or family.With Silicon Valley under pressure to address the addictive quality of its innovations, Mr. Newport described his informal experiment as a way for people to control their digital intake, particularly since the 2016 presidential election. It sought to address what he described as a widespread complaint: There’s too much news. I need a break.That is a particularly dominant complaint in Washington, he said, where President Trump’s proclivity for one  certain online medium — Twitter — can dictate at least a day of news and reaction.“There’s a lot of complexity and uncertainty in the role that these technologies should play in personal and professional life,” Mr. Newport said. “We’re past the stage where they’re novel, but not to the point where they’re stable.”He estimated that nearly 2,000 people worldwide said they would participate in his challenge, tailoring their restrictions to match their work demands but hoping to at least limit their daily diet of news and social media.At her university in Boras, Sweden, Elin Hedin, 23, stopped using Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter, Messenger and Instagram. She also tried to limit the amount of time she browsed websites.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the first week, it felt like a vacation and she slept better. But then, she said, the loneliness kicked in.“I‘ve often felt isolated, and kind of lonely,” she wrote in an email. “I miss reading about people’s days, seeing what they’re up to on Instagram, reading about their opinions on the latest news, and so on.”Advertisement“I guess I’m just used to getting that extra bit of socializing,” she added.For Anya Mushakevich, a 20-year-old Belarusian studying at the University of Pennsylvania, the lack of online socializing made clear which of her friends abroad would make the effort to stay in touch outside the convenience of Facebook. Who among her circle in Belarus or in Singapore, where she attended high school, would take the time to find her email or phone number?“I feel more invested in the time I spend with people. And because we interact less frequently, we have this idea that we want to make the most of the experience,” said Ms. Mushakevich, who says she is unlikely to reinstall the Facebook app on her phone. “That makes it seem more meaningful than if we had all of the time in the world, like we do on Facebook.”Mr. Newport continues to send messages of daily encouragement to readers who participated in his challenge. It made most realize, he said, how dependent they had become on websites and mobile phone apps.“Their role in your life has grown without your permission,” he said. “No one had that in mind when they signed up for Facebook to stay in touch with their college roommate.”A majority of the people who reported back to Mr. Newport with their results in unplugging noted that they had picked up new hobbies: painting, exercise, the opportunity to write a book. They said they also imposed strict guidelines to keep themselves from slipping: Keep the phone charger in another room. Ask the people texting to instead please call. Stop the reflex click to a favorite sports website instead of focusing on work.Ms. Kremers, who gave up early in the challenge, says she plans to try again later in the year, with a better understanding of how easy it is to slip into old habits.“I think it’s a beautiful idea, really,” she said. “It demands a new form of resilience from us.”A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Answering Call to Limit Daily Digital Diet in a World That Gorges on Social Media.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. On Android, how do I add caption information to individual pictures I have stored online in a Google Photos album? The text edit tool in the Google Photos Help guide seems to just add a caption on the whole album.A. You can add a personal caption to individual images in the Google Photos album by tapping the thumbnail of each picture to open it to the full-screen view. When the picture expands, tap the Info button at the bottom; the icon looks like an “i” in a small circle.When you are on the picture’s Info screen, you should see an “Add a description” line at the top. Tap it to type in your caption information. Tap the Back button when you’re done.You — and others looking at the album online — can see the caption by going to the Info screen, but the information is not embedded in the image file and does not travel along if you share a copy of the picture by email. But you will not see the “Add a description” field on photos that are stored locally on your Android device and have not been uploaded to a Google Photos album.A photo’s Info screen also displays other details about the file, like the time and place it was taken, where it is stored locally and the exposure, lens and camera type used to take it. If you have the location services feature enabled on your device, you’ll see the geographic coordinates and a map showing where the picture was taken.You can add descriptions to pictures in an online album the same way using a web browser — just select an image and hit the Info button. The captions you add will appear in small type at the bottom of the photo as you click through a desktop slide show.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIFEB. 1, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Quarter after quarter, investors have become accustomed to Alphabet’s revenue and profit growing at a pace that seems to defy gravity for a company well past its start-up years.But when people get used to near perfection, then “pretty good” becomes a disappointment.Alphabet, Google’s parent company, fell short of Wall Street expectations for its fourth-quarter profit, sending the stock down in after-hours trading. Its profits were weighed down by an increase in traffic acquisition costs — the fees Google pays companies like Apple to ensure that its search engine is the default option when people open a browser on the iPhone.On Thursday, Alphabet attributed the increase in costs to a rising number of people doing searches on smartphones. Those queries require the company to pay more to reserve screen real estate compared to searches on desktop computers.Ruth Porat, Alphabet’s chief financial officer, said the company expects those traffic acquisition costs will continue to climb. She framed the increased expense as a positive, a sign that Alphabet was establishing an important beachhead on smartphones.Advertisement“We’re very pleased to have a strong position in a rapidly growing market,” said Ms. Porat. Shares of Alphabet initially fell as much as 5 percent in after-hours trading before settling in at about a 2 percent decline.AdvertisementAlphabet said Google’s traffic acquisition costs in the quarter increased 33 percent from a year earlier, to $6.45 billion. Last year, Bernstein Research estimated that Google would pay about $3 billion to Apple in 2017 to remain the default search option on Apple’s mobile devices.Alphabet said it also incurred a $9.9 billion charge for the repatriation of foreign earnings following the recent changes in the tax code. As of September, Google held about 60 percent of its $100 billion in cash abroad. Many companies are paying a hefty tax bill as a result of bringing foreign earnings back to the United States.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Excluding the tax charge, Alphabet said its earnings per share was $9.70, compared with Wall Street’s expectations for $9.98. Revenue grew 24 percent to $32.32 billion.The results underscored the strength of Google’s position in digital advertising, a market it dominates with Facebook. In the fourth quarter, users clicked on 48 percent more ads on Google sites — including search and YouTube — than a year earlier.In 2017, two-thirds of every ad dollar spent on the internet went through Facebook’s and Google’s advertising systems, according to research from Goldman Sachs. What’s more, Goldman Sachs estimated that 87 percent of the additional spending in digital advertising this year will funnel through these two companies.Even as Facebook made changes to what it shows users inside its News Feed, which it expected would reduce the amount of time users spend on the social network, the company reported on Wednesday a 47 percent increase in revenue in the fourth quarter from a year earlier.Google is particularly well positioned with YouTube, despite concerns from marketers about their advertisements possibly appearing next to inappropriate or extremist content. Young people are spending more time on YouTube and shunning traditional television broadcasts. Google said more than 1.5 billion people come to YouTube every month to watch videos.Alphabet also announced that John Hennessy, the former Stanford University president and a board member since 2004, had been appointed the company’s new chairman. Eric Schmidt stepped down as executive chairman in December. At the time, Alphabet had said it planned to appoint a nonexecutive chairman.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twittter: @daiwakaA version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Alphabet Posts Disappointing Earnings. Blame the iPhone’s Success.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
FEB. 1, 2018
Q. How do I take 4K videos on an iPhone? A. Apple introduced official support for 4K video on its mobile devices in 2015 with the release of its iPhone 6s and iPhone 6s Plus models, so first make sure you are using hardware that can handle the ultra high-definition format. The 4K video option is typically off by default so once you have confirmed your iPhone model is 4K-capable, open the Settings app on the home screen.On the main Settings screen, scroll down and select Camera. On the Camera settings screen, tap Record Video.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The next screen displays all the resolutions and frames-per-second rates you can use for recording video. Higher frame rates capture more of the motion in the scene and make the action look smoother. The 24 frames-per-second rate is fairly standard for recording on film and used by movie theaters, while the 30 f.p.s. and 60 f.p.s. rates are often used for high-definition video formats. The most recent iPhone models released last year (the iPhone 8, the iPhone 8 Plus and the iPhone X) can capture 4K video at 60 frames per second.Because higher resolutions and frame rates mean more video data, they produce larger file sizes. The Record Video setting screen also gives you an idea of how much storage space will be taken up by one minute of video in each format.The lowest option for 4K, 24 f.p.s., will take up an estimated 135 megabytes of space for each minute recorded, while the 30 f.p.s. setting takes up 170 megabytes of storage for every 60 seconds of captured video. On iPhones that can record 4K video at 60 f.p.s., plan to fill up about 400 megabytes of storage space for every minute of video.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick WingfieldSEATTLE — Microsoft has spent years adjusting its business to reflect a shift from traditional software sales to cloud computing services delivered over the internet.It is a bet that continues to pay off for the company — as was evident in its quarterly earnings released Wednesday.The report was blemished by a charge of $13.8 billion related to recent changes in tax law in the United States, which caused Microsoft to report a net loss. But putting aside the tax-related charge, which was widely expected and will probably impact other tech companies, Microsoft’s business showed the kind of growth that has attracted investors in recent years.The portion of Microsoft’s cloud business that involves selling to companies — called commercial cloud — grew 56 percent, to $5.3 billion, in the quarter that ended on Dec. 31. Like many legacy software companies that cater to the huge corporate computing market, Microsoft was caught off guard by the emergence of cloud computing in the form of online storage and computing services offered by the internet retailer Amazon.After Satya Nadella took over as chief executive in 2014, the company redoubled its efforts. Microsoft is now widely considered the No. 2 cloud provider after Amazon.Microsoft’s overall revenue last quarter rose to $28.92 billion, up 12 percent from the same period a year earlier, as everything from its Office applications business and Xbox gaming console — both buoyed by cloud computing services — showed growth.The company reported a net loss, including the tax charge, of $6.3 billion, or 82 cents a share, down from net income of $6.27 billion, or 80 cents a share, a year earlier. Without the tax charge though, Microsoft said it earned 96 cents a share.Microsoft’s shares dropped about 1 percent in after-hours trading following the release of the results, though both revenue and the adjusted earnings figure were significantly better than Wall Street forecasts.One of the company’s oldest businesses, Office, saw its commercial revenue grow 10 percent in the quarter. Even the number of consumers who subscribe to a cloud version of the application suite, called Office 365, rose to 29.2 million from 24.9 million during the same period a year earlier.The company’s gaming revenue jumped 8 percent, primarily as a result of hardware sales resulting from the introduction of a new console, Xbox One X.Microsoft and other big tech companies like Intel and Apple have been struggling over the past several months to mitigate a critical security flaw — known as “Spectre” — which exists at the chip level and has no simple patch.Microsoft has attempted to mitigate the flaw without dinging performance, but security experts like Paul Kocher, one of the researchers who discovered the flaw last year, say Microsoft’s solutions still do not sufficiently address all the ways it could be used by an attacker.In a phone interview, Microsoft chief financial officer, Amy Hood, said Microsoft has not yet seen a financial impact from the recent critical security flaws.Nicole Perlroth contributed reporting from Boulder, Colo.AdvertisementBy SHEERA FRENKELJAN. 31, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, has embarked on an overhaul of what people see and consume on the social network. The changes have left investors wondering whether people will still spend as much time on the site and whether brands will continue placing as many digital ads there.On Wednesday, Facebook sought to soothe Wall Street’s worries over those questions. No, people will not spend as much time on the site, the company said as it reported quarterly financial results. But don’t worry, Facebook added, because the changes will ultimately benefit its business.With the adjustments to what it shows on its site, “I believe that the time spent on Facebook will be more valuable,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in a conference call with analysts. “If people interact more, it should lead to stronger community. When you care about something, you’re willing to see ads to experience it.”The scrutiny followed changes that Facebook announced in January to its News Feed, the scrolling screen of content that the social network’s more than two billion members see when they log in to the site. After months of criticism over the harmful effects of the social network, Mr. Zuckerberg said Facebook wanted to emphasize more “meaningful” content, such as photos and posts that friends and family have interacted with, and would play down articles from publishers. At the time, Mr. Zuckerberg acknowledged that the shift might cause people to spend less time on Facebook, at least in the short run.AdvertisementThat has already proven to be true in some instances, Facebook revealed on Wednesday. The shift to more meaningful content has just started rolling out, but the company made other changes last year as a precursor to the latest moves, including cutting down on viral videos. In response, Facebook users over all reduced the time they spent on the platform by roughly 50 million hours a day, Mr. Zuckerberg said, which translates to about two minutes a day for each of the company’s 1.4 billion daily users.AdvertisementOther measures of engagement also fell. The company said the number of people in the United States and Canada who use Facebook on a daily basis fell for the first time ever in last year’s fourth quarter, dropping to 184 million from 185 million a year earlier.Mr. Zuckerberg said these declines were just fluctuations as Facebook made changes to its platform. Over all, the total number of people who use Facebook monthly jumped 14 percent in the fourth quarter to 2.13 billion users, which is a rate of growth that is far higher than that of many other social media companies.“We have a responsibility to fully understand how our services are used and amplify the good,” Mr. Zuckerberg said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His comments came as Facebook reported another set of blockbuster financial results. The company said its revenue surged by 47 percent to nearly $13 billion in the fourth quarter from a year earlier, while profit rose 56 percent to $4.3 billion. The social network also said it had taken a $2.3 billion charge to cover the repatriation of foreign earnings under the new tax code that was signed into law last month.Facebook also continued to spend ferociously over the fourth quarter, with capital expenditures reaching $2.3 billion. The company said its number of employees increased 47 percent from a year ago to 25,105 people.Facebook spent much of last year grappling with questions about whether it had become a force for ill. The company disclosed that it been manipulated by Russian agents who were trying to sway the result of the 2016 elections; Facebook faced a grilling by lawmakers on Capitol Hill over the situation.Other social media companies were also exploited for the same purpose, including Twitter, which said on Wednesday that it had informed 1.4 million people in the United States that they had interacted with Russian propaganda on the service, up from a previous number of 677,775 people.“Facebook has taken a conciliatory tone in terms of coming to terms with its power over advertising and how people interact and engage with each other,” said Debra Williamson, an analyst with research firm eMarketer. She said that the changes to the News Feed showed that Facebook was not afraid to experiment with their core products.Even with the changes to the News Feed, Facebook’s robust revenue is a salve for investors, said Brian Wieser, an analyst at Pivotal Research.Advertisement“Those concerns haven’t shown up in the numbers, at least not yet,” he said, adding that most investors were focusing on how Facebook was raising revenue “at a remarkable pace.”Follow Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @sheerafA version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2018, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook Chief Tries to Soothe Wall Street Over Changes to Site’s News Feed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By NATHANIEL POPPERJAN. 31, 2018
A growing number of virtual currency investors are worried that the prices of Bitcoin and other digital tokens have been artificially propped up by a widely used exchange called Bitfinex, which has a checkered history of hacks and opaque business practices.In December, Bitfinex was subpoenaed by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, a United States regulatory agency. The news, first reported by Bloomberg on Tuesday and confirmed by a source familiar with the subpoena but not allowed to publicly discuss an ongoing investigation, led to a sell-off in most virtual currencies.The people behind Bitfinex issue a virtual currency called Tether. Unlike most digitals tokens, every Tether is supposed to be backed by traditional money — the United States dollar. New Tether tokens are issued when investors give them dollars. One dollar is worth one token.Because of the credibility that comes with that tie to the dollar, Tether are often used to buy other virtual currencies like Bitcoin.AdvertisementIn recent months, however, many investors have been raising alarm bells about Tether. Hundreds of millions of dollars worth of new Tether were created; almost always when the prices of other virtual currencies were heading down. The Tether were used on the Bitfinex exchange to make big purchases of Bitcoin and other tokens, helping push their prices back up, according to multiple analyses of data from Bitfinex.Advertisement“This became more and more concerning, because every time the markets went down, you have seen the same thing happen,” said Joey Krug, the co-chief investment officer at Pantera Capital, which runs several virtual currency hedge funds. “It could mean that a lot of the rally over December and January might not have been real.”Long before news of the subpoena, Bitfinex, which is believed to host more trading than any other Bitcoin exchange in the world, had gained a reputation for a lack of transparency and a confusing structure, with European executives, offices in Asia and registration in the Caribbean.It is not yet clear what information the regulators are seeking. Technically, the Tether tokens are issued by a separate company (called Tether) that is owned and operated by the same people who run Bitfinex. The C.F.T.C. subpoenaed that company at the same time that it subpoenaed Bitfinex, according to a person familiar with the matter.Bitfinex has not commented on the subpoena or recent reports about Tether, and company officials did not respond to repeated requests for comment. In the past, the exchange’s executives and spokesman have said that its customers are simply using Tether to buy virtual currencies as they might otherwise use United States dollars.Bitfinex had contracted with an American firm, Friedman, to audit its records and prove that its operation of Tether is above board. But last week, Bitfinex said it was cutting ties with Friedman, after waiting months for it to finish the audit. That news generated more suspicion.“It’s a signal to the market of what those who have scrutinized the situation already believe: There is a problem here,” said Jill Carlson, a former trader at Goldman Sachs who now consults with a variety of virtual currency companies. “The dissolution of a relationship between an auditor and a company is very rarely a good sign that the company is behaving in accordance with market best practices.”The concern about Bitfinex is one of several issues that have helped depress the value of virtual currencies over the last month, after a roaring, yearlong rally. Regulators in several countries, like South Korea and the United States, have expressed concerns about manipulation and fraud, and hinted at a crackdown.AdvertisementIn Japan, a large virtual currency exchange, Coincheck, was hacked in late January and lost nearly $500 million worth of a virtual currency known as NEM, raising questions about the relatively untested security practices of virtual currency exchanges.Still, Japan is one of the few places where virtual currency exchanges are overseen by regulators. Many of the largest virtual currency exchanges, including Bitfinex, operate with essentially no regulatory oversight.Bitfinex was hacked in 2015 and again in 2016, and Tether was hacked at the end of last year — with the combined losses totaling more than $100 million.The company shared few details about these hacks. But after the biggest theft, in 2016, it was cut off by Wells Fargo and its banks in Taiwan.The banking problems have made it hard for customers to get money in and out of Bitfinex, but traders have continued to use the exchange, in part because of Tether.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tether offered a preliminary report last year from Friedman, the accounting firm, suggesting that it had bank accounts with dollars corresponding to all the Tether that had been issued. But the report was far from conclusive and Tether has never produced a real audit, leading to suspicions that Bitfinex may be printing virtual money backed by nothing.The Tether currency has been valuable to traders because it allows them to hold a stable token, tied to the value of the dollar, and move it quickly between virtual currency exchanges.But there is a downside. Because the identity of Tether holders is not always clear, the movement of the virtual token between exchanges — and across national borders — has raised concerns among lawyers about money laundering. The spread of Tether beyond Bitfinex has also spread the risk of its failure to other exchanges.Market analysts have grown particularly concerned with the rapid pace at which new Tether have been issued and their timing. In a single week in mid-January, $450 million new Tether were created, bringing the total amount of Tether to more than $2 billion.AdvertisementSeveral anonymous reports circulating among traders, including one posted to a website last week, have pointed to data from Bitfinex itself, showing that the price of Bitcoin has frequently gone up soon after new Tether were created, generally as a result of big trades on Bitfinex.“This absolutely reeks of price manipulation,” a security researcher and market analyst, Tony Arcieri, wrote on his blog in mid-January.Many investors and traders have pushed back against that criticism, noting that smart traders simply may be looking to buy when the markets are down.“My personal biases make me inclined to believe that Bitfinex is not using Tether to manipulate the price of Bitcoin,” said Jeremy Gardner, a managing partner at the investment firm Ausum Ventures. “If they have attempted to do so, which would be deeply concerning, it’s hard to imagine that such fraudulent issuance at its current volume could single-handedly buoy the price of Bitcoin.”But Mr. Krug, at Pantera Capital, said that if Tether were really being used by investors, they would probably also want to buy new Tether when the markets were going up, which has not been the case. Also, they would not always want it in exact increments of $100 million, as has been the case.“After you see this enough times, you just start to wonder what’s really going on here,” Mr. Krug said.The Bitcoin community is sensitive to the possibility of price manipulation because a team of academics published an article in early January suggesting that the price of Bitcoin was artificially inflated in 2013 by a single player operating on the largest exchange at the time, Mt. Gox.One of the authors of that paper, Tyler Moore, said it could be hard to tell if similar price manipulation were going on today, though he noted that a lack of transparency made it hard for anyone to be certain of anything.“Greater assurances are needed that the trades taking place are in fact legitimate and reflect buying and selling by independent actors,” said Mr. Moore, an assistant professor at the University of Tulsa. “Unless and until such oversight is implemented, we cannot trust the exchange rate to reflect only legitimate sources of supply and demand.”Follow Nathaniel Popper on Twitter: @nathanielpopperA version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Currency Investors Fear Bitcoin Is Being Propped Up by a Shadowy Exchange.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
JAN. 31, 2018
When Kathryn Schipper discovered in December that her iPhone had slowed down because it needed a new battery, she unknowingly walked into the middle of a growing Apple controversy — and is now mired in the continuing fallout.Late last year, Apple said a software feature was slowing down iPhones that had aged batteries, immediately drawing accusations that the company was trying to force people to upgrade to its newest iPhones. In response, Apple said customers could get their iPhone batteries replaced at its stores for a discounted price of $29, down from $79.Yet when Ms. Schipper, who lives in Seattle, took her iPhone 6 Plus, purchased in 2014, to an Apple store in early January, she was told that the store was out of replacement batteries for at least two weeks. An Apple representative later left her a voice mail message with a new estimated wait time: up to four months.“I feel like I’m waiting outside of a club and the bouncer won’t let me in because I’m not fashionably enough dressed,” Ms. Schipper said in a phone interview. “I’m at the back of the line because I don’t have a fancy phone.”AdvertisementFor iPhone owners, Ms. Schipper’s experience does not have to be the way forward. Even as Apple appears to be struggling to keep up with customers asking for new batteries, there are other ways to make sure your smartphone is still running. The workarounds include finding a reputable third-party repair shop, using a battery pack or replacing the battery on your own.AdvertisementApple may be dealing with the fallout for a while. The company published a lengthy memo in December saying that smartphone batteries became less effective over time and that its software was intended to prevent iPhones with older batteries from unexpected shutdowns. Apple also apologized to customers for the slowdowns, offered discounts for its battery-replacement program and said it would introduce software to gain visibility into the health of an iPhone battery.Yet since then, consumer advocacy groups have filed lawsuits against the company for failing to disclose that the software would throttle old iPhones. The Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission have also started an inquiry into the matter, according to a person with knowledge of the situation, who asked not to be named because the details were confidential. Bloomberg earlier reported the inquiry.Early Wednesday, Apple said in a statement that it had received questions from some government agencies and that it was responding to them; the company did not specify the agencies it had heard from. The Justice Department declined to comment.As for the wait times that Ms. Schipper and others are experiencing for a battery replacement, a spokeswoman referred to Apple’s support webpage, which states that battery supplies at its stores may be limited.Let’s not wait around. Here’s a guide to other solutions to keep an iPhone running in the absence of an Apple battery replacement.Plenty of irate Apple customers are turning to local third-party repair shops to get their iPhone batteries replaced. At Mega Mobile Boston, twice as many customers are coming in for iPhone battery replacements than in years past, said Adam Fullerton, the store’s operations manager.Third-party repairs are a decent — but imperfect — solution. One drawback is that they vary in quality; some repair shops buy lower-quality batteries that don’t last. So to find a good shop, rely on word of mouth and reviews on the web, similar to how you might seek out a good car mechanic.AdvertisementAnother issue is that if you service your phone with a third-party battery and later take your device in to Apple for repair, the company could refuse to service your phone. So if you go the third-party route, chances are you will have to stick with third-party repair shops through the end of your phone’s life.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There’s a less risky route here. On Apple’s support webpage, you can look up third-party repair shops that are authorized by Apple as service providers. These are fixers who have been trained by Apple and carry original parts. But the list is short.If you find a good local fixer, there are plenty of benefits to sticking with one long term. For one, third-party shops tend to have shorter waits. Mr. Fullerton said his shop could typically get an iPhone battery replacement done in about 30 minutes. The process involves opening the device, cleaning away the old waterproofing adhesive, replacing the battery and applying a new waterproofing adhesive.For another, local repair shops make their prices competitive with the manufacturer’s. In the case of batteries, many shops are discounting their battery replacements to match Apple’s $29 pricing.“We’re probably losing money on it with the cost of a half-hour time from a technician,” Mr. Fullerton said. “But it’s like a loss leader in any other industry. If you’re Best Buy and you get them to buy one item at cost, maybe you can teach them something about your business.”Finding a good repair shop can feel daunting, but if you ask around, your peers will probably have recommendations. For a sample, here’s a list of highly recommended repair shops in the United States that I compiled from talking to repair experts I trust:■ In Chicago: uBreakiFix Chicago■ In San Francisco: MacRepair■ In New York: Simple Mac■ In Boston:  Mega Mobile Boston■ In Washington: Computer Geeks■ In Austin, Tex.: Austin Mac RepairYou can always replace an iPhone battery by yourself. The pros: You can choose the best components for repairs and minimize costs. The cons: Learning repairs can be time consuming, and if you mess up, you have no one to blame but yourself. And again, Apple stores could refuse to service your phone if it sees you have repaired it with third-party parts.A good place to start for D.I.Y. repairs is iFixit, a company that provides instruction manuals and components for repairing devices. It is offering discounts on battery replacement kits for older iPhones, which cost $17 to $29. Each kit includes a new battery and the tools for disassembling iPhones.Installing a phone battery can be intimidating. Replacing an iPhone 7 battery, for example, requires eight tools and 28 steps. Kyle Wiens, the chief executive of iFixit, said some customers also opted to buy a battery from iFixit and then take it to a local repair shop for installation.AdvertisementIf you don’t feel confident hiring a third-party fixer or installing your own battery, you can always wait for Apple to replace your battery. But since that could take weeks or months, don’t suffer with a sapped phone battery in the meantime.A better temporary solution is to invest in a battery pack that you can carry around until replacement batteries arrive at an Apple store. Wirecutter, a New York Times company that reviews products, has tested hundreds of battery packs to recommend a few. My favorite is the Anker PowerCore 20100, which can charge a smartphone every day for a week.Ms. Schipper, the Seattle resident, is considering buying a battery pack. In the meantime, she is constantly plugging her iPhone into a power outlet because her battery lasts only two hours a day.Yet she has resisted what she thinks Apple wants: for her to buy a new phone.“I was tempted to just chuck this phone and suck it up and spend $1,000-plus and get the iPhone X,” she said. “I said, ‘No, darn it, I have a budget I’m saving up.’ I’m not going to let Apple push me around.”Brian X. Chen, our lead consumer technology reporter, writes Tech Fix, a column about solving tech-related problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What confuses you or makes you angry about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Getting Up to Speed on Solutions for Your Pokey iPhone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 31, 2018
Q. How do you do a clean installation of Windows 10 these days with no DVDs to reload the program?A. Microsoft added a new “Fresh Start” utility to the system last year with its Windows 10 Creators Update. The tool is designed to preserve all your personal data and settings before downloading a clean, uncluttered copy of Windows 10, installing it on your computer and restoring your files and settings.However, the Fresh Start operation removes any apps you may have installed yourself that are not part of the standard Windows system. If you added new programs from the Windows App Store or elsewhere — including security software, games and even Microsoft’s own Office suite — they will get wiped out with Fresh Start.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before you begin, make sure you have copies of your third-party software available, including the product registration keys and licenses for apps you need to download or install again from their original sources. You should also back up all your personal files and folders to an external drive or disc, just in case. Make sure you have several gigabytes of free space available on your PC for Fresh Start to maneuver.The Fresh Start tool lives within the Windows Defender Security Center. Instructing the Cortana assistant to “open the Windows Defender Security Center” is probably the fastest way to get there. If you prefer to leave Microsoft’s virtual helper out of it, open the Windows 10 Settings from the gear-shaped icon in the Start menu, select the Update & Security icon, choose Windows Defender on the left side of the box and then click or tap the Open Windows Defender Security Center button in the center.Once you are there, select the Device Performance & Health icon. Below the various diagnostic reports on your computer’s current state, you can find the Fresh Start utility. Select “Additional Info” to get started.While the Fresh Start option is one of Microsoft’s newer solutions for reinstalling the Windows 10 operating system, older methods like downloading a copy of the software from Microsoft’s site and creating a DVD or USB drive to use for installation can still work if you are leery of the automated approach. The company’s site has a list of other recovery options if you are having trouble with your Windows 10 system.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIJAN. 31, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — It’s Uber, but for bicycles.For the first time in Uber’s history, the company is offering rides on roads in the United States using something other than cars. Starting next week, it will let certain users in San Francisco reserve pedal-assist electric bicycles through its app. The idea is that people will see the bicycles as a cheaper and faster alternative — not a huge stretch of the imagination for anyone who has been stuck in Friday evening gridlock traffic in San Francisco.Uber is not supplying its own bicycles. It is working with Jump Bikes, a bike-sharing service that secured a permit in January to put 250 motorized bicycles — making it easier to tackle San Francisco’s steep hills — in locations throughout the city.“We’re excited about the future of bike sharing in the Uber app, and this is the first step,” said Andrew Salzberg, Uber’s head of transportation policy and research.The pilot program is the latest indication of Uber’s ambitions to move beyond its ride-hailing origins. It is also working on autonomous trucking services, while aggressively expanding into the food delivery market with Uber Eats.AdvertisementUber said it saw the bicycles as yet another option for riders — alongside car-pooling and rides on the less expensive Uber X or the pricier Uber Black. The company declined to detail whether the San Francisco test was a prelude to a bike-sharing service in other locations.AdvertisementUnlike the rows of Ford GoBikes available around the Bay Area or Citi Bikes in New York City, which have designated pickup and drop-off locations, Jump bikes are left on the sidewalk — attached to a public bike rack or (hopefully) out of the way of pedestrians — once riders reach their destination. That’s convenient, but cities like Dallas are grappling with how to deal with bikes left wherever riders feel like abandoning them.Uber said its app would present selected users with a “bike” option in a drop-down menu. From there, the customer could reserve a bicycle and be charged $2 for 30 minutes and then a per-minute fee after that.Uber will target people who often travel within the areas of the city where the bikes are available, while allowing other customers to join a wait list for the service, the company said. With 250 bikes, Uber said, it expects to serve “thousands” of people, but it declined to get more specific.An earlier version of this article mischaracterized the bicycle-share program Uber is planning in San Francisco. It will the first time the company has offered rides on roads in the United States using something other than cars, not the first time it has offered rides in anything other than cars.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber Is Testing A New Option: Bicycle Sharing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By SHEERA FRENKELJAN. 30, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Want to get rich quick through Bitcoins or other virtual currencies? You’ll have to do it without Facebook.The social network said Tuesday that it would ban all ads for Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, in order to stop promotions that it sees as “frequently associated with misleading or deceptive promotional practices.”Under Facebook’s new policy, no ads from well-known digital currency exchanges or for initial coin offerings will be allowed. Among those who will be affected is James Altucher, a self-described “crypto genius” whose viral ads have become a talking point in how the cryptocurrency boom has led to scams and wild price fluctuations.Facebook’s move followed questions about whether it has done enough to protect its site from bad actors. The company has been trying to clamp down on misinformation and false news after admitting last year that Russian agents had used it to spread divisive and polarizing messages.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The world of cryptocurrencies, which people have flooded into as prices soared in recent months, has also increasingly raised fears that parts of the market are dogged by scams. The Securities and Exchange Commission said Tuesday that it had halted what may have been a fraudulent initial coin offering that asked people to fund what was supposed to be the world’s first “decentralized bank.”Rob Leathern, a Facebook product management director, announced the ban on cryptocurrency ads in a blog post. He said the ban was intentionally broad, as Facebook seeks to “better detect deceptive and misleading advertising practices.”Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, has recently expressed an interest in digital currencies. In a Facebook post this month, he wrote that he was studying how to introduce cryptocurrency to his company, adding that he thought it would “take power from centralized systems and put it back into people’s hands.”Follow Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @sheeraf.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook, Citing Deception,  Bans Cryptocurrency Ads.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 30, 2018
Q. I’m new to Instagram. Aside from the service suggesting Facebook friends who also have Instagram accounts, how do I find new people to follow?A. Like Twitter, LinkedIn and other networks, Instagram has a search function you can use to look for acquaintances other than those you already have on Facebook (which owns Instagram, hence the social synergy). Tap the magnifying glass in the Instagram tool bar to go to the search page, where you can seek out specific people, hashtags or places that match your keywords. The search page also lists so-called top accounts in the results.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hashtags are labels prefaced with a “#” character (as in #FlyEaglesFly, for example). Users add them to captions as a simple way to whittle down broader categories into narrower subjects. An Instagram hashtag page lists all the posts using the same tag.Just as you can add certain people and businesses to the list of accounts you follow, you can now follow particular hashtags, a feature Instagram introduced late last year. When you are browsing your feed and see a hashtag that piques your interest, tap it. Instagram takes you to a page showing posts using that hashtag and if you like what you see, tap the blue Follow button at the top. New posts that contain that hashtag will then appear in your feed.Later, if you lose interest in the topic, you can remove it from your feed. Tap the hashtag to return to its page and tap the Following button at the top to stop tracking the tag.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Following Along on Instagram.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CECILIA KANGJAN. 30, 2018
WASHINGTON — At the age of 6, a child is full of imagination and may not distinguish reality from fantasy. She is beginning to read and can’t grasp nuances in written communication. She also doesn’t understand privacy.Citing those reasons and more, dozens of pediatric and mental health experts are calling on Facebook to kill a messaging service the company introduced last month for children as young as 6.In a letter to the company, they said the service, Messenger Kids, which pushes the company’s user base well below its previous minimum age of 13, preys on a vulnerable group developmentally unprepared to be on the social network.The letter was organized by the Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood, an advocacy group that has successfully pushed companies to abandon marketing like a Pokemon Go app that sent children to fast food and other stores, and McDonald’s advertising on the envelopes of report cards in Florida.AdvertisementFacebook’s new app for young children opens greater concerns, the group said.“Younger children are simply not ready to have social media accounts,” the experts said in the letter. “A growing body of research demonstrates that excessive use of digital devices and social media is harmful to children and teens, making it very likely this new app will undermine children’s healthy development.”AdvertisementThe opposition to Facebook’s app adds to growing societal concerns over digital media and devices. Some big Apple investors called on the company this month to work harder to make the iPhone less addictive, and some former Facebook employees have warned about how effectively the service hooks users.And academic research, including a study released last week, shows that the rise in smartphone and social media use tracked with greater unhappiness among teenagers.Messenger Kids is a texting-type service that a parent sets up for a child. The parent uses his or her own Facebook account for the child, but the app is otherwise not a part of the main Facebook service. The app doesn’t have News Feed or a “like” button, which some mental health experts have linked to anxiety among teenagers on social media.But many elements of the social network are there, including emojis, selfies, video chat and group texting.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Facebook says Messenger Kids provides a safer environment for children than many online experiences. The app has no advertising, for example.The company said it had consulted with the National PTA and several academics and families before introducing the app.“Messenger Kids is a messaging app that helps parents and children to chat in a safer way, with parents always in control of their child’s contacts and interactions,” Facebook said in a statement.But many health advocates say the app is still engineered to hook users, and that it is giving Facebook early access to its next generation of users.“Facebook is making children into a market, and the youngest children will be more likely to get hooked even earlier,” said Michael Brody, a former chairman of the media committee of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2018, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Turn Off Messenger Kids, Health Experts Plead in a Letter to Facebook.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

JAN. 29, 2018

Tens of millions of fake accounts infest the world's social media platforms. Is one of those fake accounts impersonating you?In a recent article, The New York Times detailed a global black market in stolen social identities. These stolen identities — names, pictures, hometowns, and other personal information ripped from real peoples' social media profiles — are the raw material for many "bots," automated accounts bought and sold in bulk, sometimes by celebrities and entrepreneurs eager to bulk up their apparent influence on social media platforms.We'd like to know if you have ever come across your personal information being used on a fake account on Twitter, Facebook or any other platform. Our goal is to understand how well these social media companies police their own platforms for social identify theft and impersonation.If you've ever reported stolen personal information or an impersonation attempt on social media, please let us know using the form below. Your name and comments may be published, but your contact information will not. A Times reporter or editor may contact you to hear more about your story.First and last preferred, please.City and state, or city and country, please.We will not share your email address. A reporter or editor might call you to hear more about your story. By submitting to us, you are promising that the content is original, does not plagiarize from anyone or infringe a copyright or trademark, does not violate anyone’s rights and is not libelous or otherwise unlawful or misleading. You are agreeing that we can use your submission in all manner and media of The New York Times and that we shall have the right to authorize third parties to do so. And you agree to our Terms of Service.Thank you for your submission.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 29, 2018
Q. On my Amazon Echo at home, I can ask “What’s new?” and get a briefing from sources I’ve selected for news, business, sports and so on. Is there anything similar to that for an iPhone so I can get this type of information read to me while I’m in the car?A. Along the lines of Amazon’s Alexa flash briefing feature, Apple’s Siri virtual assistant has a new skill to help users keep up with current events. (Apple’s own Echo competitor, the HomePod speaker, arrives next month.) In response to the command, “Hey, Siri, give me the news,” the software plays the latest newscast from National Public Radio. If you prefer another news source you can tell Siri to switch to Fox News, CNN or an audio update from The Washington Post.If you have news shows in your iPhone’s Podcasts app, you can also order the software to start playing a show by name, as in “Hey, Siri, play ‘The Daily.’” If the program does not respond to the sound of your voice saying “Hey, Siri,” check your settings to make sure the hands-free control is enabled. Tap the Settings icon on the home screen, select Siri & Search and turn on the button next to the “Listen for ‘Hey Siri’” option.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The iPhone 6s or later (or at least an iPad Pro) does not need to be connected to power to use the “Hey, Siri” command, but older models must be plugged in to a charger or USB jack. Alternative ways of summoning Siri include pressing the Home or side buttons, depending on your model — but are not the safest way of interacting with the phone while driving.The Google Assistant app for Android and iOS can also handle the request when you say something like, “O.K. Google, I want to listen to the news.” Other third-party apps that stream news shows are available in the App Store.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Asking Siri to Play aNewscast.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicholas ConfessoreThe New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, on Saturday opened an investigation into a company that sold millions of fake followers on social media platforms, some of them copying real users’ personal information.The company, Devumi, and its sale of automated followers to a swath of celebrities, sports stars, journalists and politicians, was detailed in a New York Times  article published earlier on Saturday. While based in Florida, Devumi claims on its website to be based in New York City.At least 55,000 of its “bot” accounts used names, pictures, hometowns and other details taken from people on Twitter. The real users hailed from every U.S. state, including New York, and dozens of countries, a Times analysis found.“Impersonation and deception are illegal under New York law,” Mr. Schneiderman wrote on Twitter. “We’re opening an investigation into Devumi and its apparent sale of bots using stolen identities.”The investigation is the latest in a series of federal and state inquiries into the commercial and political abuse of fake accounts on social media. Tens of millions of fake accounts have been deployed to defraud businesses, influence political debates online and attract customers.Social media companies, including Twitter and Facebook, have drawn intense scrutiny for not taking greater steps to weed them out. Many of the accounts identified by The Times appear to violate Twitter’s own policies, but remained active on the social media platform for years, each retweeting and promoting Devumi customers.“The tactics used by Devumi on our platform and others as described by today’s NYT article violate our policies and are unacceptable to us,” Twitter said in a message posted on its media relations account on Saturday.Mr. Schneiderman, who was first elected in 2010, has brought a series of cases focused on the emerging world of online fraud, impersonation and abuse. In December, he began an investigation into how the Federal Communications Commission was flooded with millions of fake comments on a proposal to scrap so-called net neutrality rules. Many of the comments used names and addresses borrowed from real people, almost always without their knowledge.“The internet should be one of the greatest tools for democracy — but it’s increasingly being turned into an opaque, pay-to-play playground,” Mr. Schneiderman said.Advertisement

      Por NICHOLAS CONFESSORE, 
    
GABRIEL J.X. DANCE, 
    
RICH HARRIS and 
    
MARK HANSEN

JAN. 27, 2018

Todos quieren ser populares en internet. Algunos incluso pagan por ello. Descubre el mercado negro de las redes sociales.


              Todos quieren ser populares en internet.Algunos incluso pagan por ello.Descubre el mercado negro de las redes sociales.
            


                Por NICHOLAS CONFESSORE, GABRIEL J.X. DANCE, RICHARD HARRIS and MARK HANSEN



  
    Ilustración fotográfica por Adam Ferriss
  


      Por NICHOLAS CONFESSORE, GABRIEL J.X. DANCE, RICHARD HARRIS and MARK HANSEN


La verdadera Jessica Rychly es una adolescente de Minnesota que tiene una amplia sonrisa y el cabello ondulado. Le gusta leer y escuchar las canciones del rapero Post Malone. Cuando usa Facebook o Twitter, a veces comenta sobre las cosas que la aburren o hace bromas con sus amigos. Ocasionalmente, como muchos adolescentes y jóvenes, publica una selfi.Pero en Twitter existe una versión de Jessica que ninguno de sus amigos o familiares podría reconocer. Aunque las dos cuentas comparten su nombre, retrato y la misma biografía de una sola línea (“Tengo problemas”), la otra Jessica ha promocionado cuentas de inversiones inmobiliarias canadienses, criptomonedas y una estación de radio en Ghana. La cuenta falsa siguió o retuiteó cuentas en árabe e indonesio, idiomas que Jessica no habla. Mientras ella tenía 17 años y estaba en el último año del colegio, su contraparte falsa frecuentemente promovía pornografía gráfica, al retuitear cuentas como Squirtamania y Porno Dan.Todas esas cuentas pertenecen a clientes de una oscura empresa estadounidense llamada Devumi que ha recaudado millones de dólares en el mercado global del fraude en las redes sociales. Devumi vende seguidores de Twitter y retuits a celebridades, negocios y cualquier persona que quiera ser más popular o ejercer influencia en internet. Usando un conjunto de al menos 3,5 millones de cuentas automatizadas —cada una de ellas ha sido vendida muchas veces— la compañía le ha proporcionado a sus clientes más de 200 millones de seguidores en Twitter, según reveló una investigación de The New York Times.Las cuentas que más se parecen a las personas reales, como la de Rychly, muestran el patrón de una especie de robo de identidad social a gran escala. Al menos 55.000 cuentas de Devumi usan los nombres, fotos de perfil, lugares de origen y otros detalles personales de usuarios reales de Twitter, incluidos menores de edad, según un análisis de datos realizado por el Times.“No quiero que mi foto esté relacionada a esa cuenta, ni mi nombre”, dijo Rychly, quien ahora tiene 19 años. “No puedo creer que alguien pague por eso. Es simplemente horrible”.Estas cuentas son monedas falsas en la floreciente economía de la influencia en internet, que toca prácticamente cualquier industria en la que una audiencia masiva —o la ilusión de que la hay— pueda ser monetizada. En la actualidad las cuentas falsas que han sido creadas por gobiernos, delincuentes y empresarios infestan las redes sociales. Según algunos cálculos, hasta 48 millones de los usuarios activos de Twitter, casi el 15 por ciento, son cuentas automatizadas diseñadas para simular ser personas reales, aunque la compañía afirma que ese número es mucho menor.En noviembre, Facebook reveló a sus inversores que tenía al menos el doble de usuarios falsos que los estimados anteriormente, lo que indica que existen unas 60 millones de cuentas automatizadas en la plataforma de medios sociales más grande del mundo. Estas cuentas falsas, conocidas como bots, pueden ayudar a influenciar a las audiencias publicitarias y replantear los debates políticos. Pueden afectar negocios y arruinar reputaciones. Sin embargo, desde el punto de vista legal, su creación y venta están en una zona gris.“La continua viabilidad de cuentas fraudulentas e interacciones en las plataformas de redes sociales, y la profesionalización de estos servicios fraudulentos, es muestra de que todavía hay mucho trabajo por hacer”, dijo el senador demócrata de Virginia Mark Warner, quien también es miembro del Comité de Inteligencia del Senado de Estados Unidos, que ha estado investigando la propagación de cuentas falsas en Facebook, Twitter y otras plataformas.A pesar de las crecientes críticas a las compañías de medios sociales y el mayor escrutinio de los funcionarios electos, el comercio de seguidores falsos sigue siendo opaco en gran medida. Si bien Twitter y otras plataformas prohíben comprar seguidores, Devumi y docenas de otros sitios los venden abiertamente. Y las compañías de redes sociales, cuyo valor de mercado está estrechamente vinculado al número de personas que usan sus servicios, establecen sus propias reglas para detectar y eliminar cuentas falsas.El fundador de Devumi, German Calas, negó que su compañía vendiera seguidores falsos y dijo que no sabía nada sobre las identidades sociales robadas a los usuarios reales. “Las acusaciones son falsas y no tenemos conocimiento de ninguna de esas actividades”, afirmó Calas en un intercambio de correos electrónicos en noviembre.The New York Times revisó los registros comerciales y judiciales que evidencian que Devumi tiene más de 200.000 clientes, incluyendo estrellas de reality shows, atletas profesionales, comediantes, oradores de TED, pastores y modelos. En la mayoría de los casos, según muestran los registros, esos clientes compraron sus propios seguidores. En otros, sus empleados, agentes, compañías de relaciones públicas, familiares o amigos hicieron la compra. Por solo unos centavos de dólar por cada uno, a veces incluso por menos, Devumi ofrece seguidores de Twitter, visitas en YouTube, reproducciones en SoundCloud y recomendaciones en LinkedIn.El actor John Leguizamo tiene seguidores de Devumi. También los tienen Michael Dell, el multimillonario de la informática, y Ray Lewis, el comentarista de fútbol americano y antiguo jugador de los Ravens de Baltimore. Kathy Ireland, quien inició su carrera como modelo y hoy preside un imperio de licencias de 500 millones de dólares, tiene cientos de miles de seguidores falsos de Devumi, al igual que Akbar Gbajabiamila, el presentador del programa American Ninja Warrior. Incluso una integrante de la junta de Twitter, Martha Lane Fox, tiene algunos de esos seguidores.En momentos en que Facebook, Twitter y Google se enfrentan a una epidemia de manipulación política y noticias falsas, los seguidores falsos de Devumi fungen como la infantería de las batallas políticas en línea. Los clientes de esa empresa incluyen tanto a partidarios acérrimos de Donald Trump como a comentaristas liberales y conservadores de la televisión estadounidense.Los productos de Devumi también atienden las necesidades de políticos y gobiernos del resto del mundo. Un editor de Xinhua, la agencia noticiosa china, le pagó a la compañía estadounidense para conseguir cientos de miles de seguidores y retuits en Twitter, una plataforma que está prohibida por el gobierno chino pero que es vista como un foro para la propaganda al exterior. El año pasado, un asesor del presidente ecuatoriano Lenín Moreno adquirió decenas de miles de seguidores y de retuits para las cuentas de la campaña electoral de Moreno.Kristin Binns, una portavoz de Twitter, dijo que la empresa no suele suspender a usuarios bajo sospecha de adquirir bots, en parte porque es difícil saber quién es el responsable de una compra determinada. Twitter no quiso revelar si un muestreo de cuentas falsas proporcionado por el Times —cuentas hechas a partir de la información de usuarios reales— violaban las políticas de la empresa en contra de la suplantación de identidad.“Seguimos luchando para responder a cualquier automatización maliciosa en nuestra plataforma, así como cuentas falsas o de spam”, dijo Binns.A diferencia de algunas empresas de redes sociales, Twitter no exige que sus cuentas estén vinculadas a una persona real. También permite un mayor acceso automatizado a su plataforma que otras compañías, lo que facilita la creación y el control de grandes cantidades de cuentas.Por Richard Harris y Danny DeBelius“Las redes sociales son un mundo virtual en el que la mitad son bots y el resto es gente real”, dijo Rami Essaid, fundador de Distil Networks, una empresa de ciberseguridad que se especializa en erradicar redes de bots. “No puedes aceptar sin más lo que dice un tuit. Y no todo es lo que parece”.Resulta que eso incluye a Devumi.El año pasado, tres mil millones de personas iniciaron sesión en redes como Facebook, WhatsApp o la china Sina Weibo. El anhelo colectivo del mundo por establecer una conexión no solo ha cambiado la composición de la lista de las 500 empresas con mayor valuación de Fortune y reformulado el mundo de la publicidad, sino que ha creado un nuevo indicador de estatus: la cantidad de personas que te siguen, te dan me gusta o te agregan como “amigo”. Para algunos artistas o empresarios, ese estatus virtual es un factor de influencia en el mundo real. Los conteos de seguidores en redes sociales pueden determinar quiénes los contratan, cuánto les pagan por patrocinios o compromisos e, incluso, cómo los clientes potenciales evalúan sus productos o negocios.Una cantidad alta de seguidores también es clave para los influenciadores que aspiran a marcar tendencia o para las estrellas de YouTube a quienes las empresas les dan miles de millones de dólares al año para patrocinar sus productos. Mientras más alcance tengan esas personalidades, más dinero ganan. De acuerdo con datos de Captiv8, una empresa que vincula a los influenciadores con las marcas, alguien con 100.000 seguidores puede ganar hasta 2000 dólares por un solo tuit promocionado, mientras que alguien con un millón de seguidores podría cobrar hasta 20.000 dólares.La fama genuina a veces conlleva una influencia real en redes sociales, con los fanáticos que siguen a sus estrellas de cine favoritas, a cocineros célebres y modelos. Pero también hay atajos disponibles: en sitios como Social Envy y DIYLikes.com tan solo se requiere dar un número de tarjeta para comprar un ejército de seguidores en cualquier plataforma social en línea.“Ves a un número de seguidores más alto o una mayor cantidad de retuits y supones que esa persona es importante o que a ese tuit le fue bien”, dijo Rand Fishkin, fundador de Moz, compañía que desarrolla software de optimización y posicionamiento en motores de búsquedas. “Como resultado, es más probable que tú también lo amplifiques, lo compartas o que sigas a esa persona”.Twitter y Facebook pueden ser influenciadas de manera similar. “Las plataformas sociales quieren recomendarte cosas y dicen: ‘¿Lo que estamos recomendando es popular?’”, dijo Julian Tempelsman, cofundador de Smyte, firma de ciberseguridad que ayuda a empresas a combatir el fraude y abuso en línea y a los bots. “La cantidad de seguidores es uno de los factores que toman en cuenta”.Si haces una búsqueda en Google sobre cómo conseguir más seguidores, Devumi estará entre los principales resultados. Su sitio se nota pulido y destaca sus oficinas en Manhattan, testimonios de clientes y una garantía de reembolso. Lo mejor de todo, según promete Devumi, es que los productos de la empresa tienen el visto bueno de la plataforma para la cual venden seguidores. “Solo utilizamos técnicas de promoción que han sido aprobadas por Twitter para que nunca corras el riesgo de que suspendan o penalicen tu cuenta”, asegura.Para entender mejor el negocio de Devumi, contratamos sus servicios. En abril, el Times creó una cuenta de prueba en Twitter y le pagó a Devumi 225 dólares por 25.000 seguidores; alrededor de un centavo de dólar por cada uno. Como se promete, los primeros 10.000 parecían ser personas reales. Tenían fotografías y nombres completos, la ciudad en la que se encontraban y biografías que parecían ser auténticas. Una cuenta se asemejaba a la de Rychly, la joven de Minnesota.Pero vistas más de cerca había detalles extraños. Los nombres de las cuentas tenían letras de más o usaban guion bajo o sustituían letras tan similares que el cambio era casi imperceptible, como una ele minúscula en vez de una i mayúscula.Por Richard Harris y Danny DeBeliusLos siguientes 15.000 seguidores de Devumi eran más claramente sospechosos: no tenían imágenes de perfil y en vez de nombres tenían una mezcla de letras, números y fragmentos de palabras.En agosto, un reportero del Times le envió un correo a Calas para pedirle que contestara algunas preguntas sobre Devumi; Calas no respondió al correo. Twitter prohíbe vender o comprar seguidores o retuits mientras que Devumi le promete a su clientela discreción absoluta. “Tu información siempre se mantiene confidencial” dice el sitio web de la empresa. “Nuestros seguidores se ven igual que otros seguidores y siempre llegan de manera natural. La única manera en la que alguien va a saber es si le dices”.Pero los registros de la empresa revisados por el Times revelan mucho de lo que Devumi y sus clientes prefieren ocultar.La mayoría de los compradores mejor conocidos de Devumi venden productos, servicios o a sí mismos en las redes. En entrevistas dieron explicaciones variadas: compraron a los seguidores porque tenían curiosidad sobre cómo funcionaba o se sintieron presionados para tener un número de seguidores más altos para ellos mismos o para sus clientes. “Todos lo hacen”, dijo la actriz Deirdre Lovejoy, clienta de Devumi.Aunque algunos dijeron que creían que Devumi les daba fanáticos potenciales o clientes reales, otros admitieron que sabían o sospechaban que las cuentas eran falsas. Varios dijeron arrepentirse de haber hecho la compra.“Es un fraude”, dijo James Cracknell, remador británico y medallista de oro olímpico que le compró 50.000 seguidores a Devumi. “La gente que juzga según cuántos me gusta o cuántos seguidores… no es algo saludable”.Kathy Ireland tiene más de un millón de seguidores en Twitter, que usa frecuentemente para promocionar empresas con las que tiene acuerdos de patrocinio. Pero en enero del año pasado Ireland solo tenía unos 160.000 seguidores. El mes siguiente, un empleado de su agencia de licencias de marca, Sterling/Winters, gastó unos 2000 dólares para conseguir 300.000 seguidores más, de acuerdo con los registros de Devumi. El empleado después hizo más adquisiciones, según reconoció en una entrevista. Un análisis del Times halló que la mayoría de los seguidores de Ireland parecen ser bots.Una portavoz dijo que ese empleado actuó sin la autorización de Ireland y que había sido suspendido después de que el Times preguntó al respecto. “Estoy segura de que pensó que estaba cumpliendo con sus responsabilidades, pero no es algo que debería haber hecho”, dijo la vocera, Rona Menashe.De manera similar, Lane Fox, pionera en el comercio electrónico, integrante del parlamento británico y de la junta de Twitter, culpó a un empleado que habría actuado por cuenta propia por una serie de compras a Devumi hechas a lo largo de un año. Se negó a decir qué empleado lo habría hecho.Varios clientes de Devumi o sus representantes contactados por el Times se negaron a hacer comentarios. Muchos otros no respondieron a intentos reiterados para contactarlos.Algunos negaron haber hecho compras a Devumi. Entre ellos está Ashley Knight, la asistente personal de Ray Lewis, el futbolista, cuyo correo electrónico era el listado en una orden para 250.000 seguidores. La cuenta personal de Twitter de Paul Hollywood, panadero célebre y juez de The Great British Bake-off, fue eliminada después de que el Times le envió preguntas por correo. Hollywood respondió así: “La cuenta no existe”.Muchas de las celebridades, líderes empresariales, astros deportivos y otros usuarios de Twitter compraron a sus seguidores directamente, de acuerdo con registros. En otros casos, la compra fue hecha por agentes, familiares, empleados y otros asociados.Por Richard Harris y Danny DeBeliusHillary Rosen, consultora en relaciones públicas y colaboradora de CNN, compró más de medio millón de seguidores falsos a Devumi en dos años. En una entrevista, dijo que esas compras fueron hechas “como experimento” para ver “cómo funcionaba”. Hizo más de una decena de adquisiciones entre 2015 y 2017, de acuerdo con los registros de Devumi.Otros clientes dijeron que se habían sentido presionados por sus empleadores para tener más seguidores. Marcus Holmlund era el encargado de redes sociales de la agencia de modelaje Wilhemina. Poco después de haber llegado al puesto, un supervisor le dijo que no estaba consiguiendo suficientes seguidores y que debía o comprarlos o encontrar otro empleo. Holmlund terminó pagando él mismo por las cuentas a Devumi antes de dejar la empresa en 2015 (una portavoz de Wilhemina se negó a hacer comentarios).“Me sentí pasmado por la amenaza de ser despedido o, lo que es peor, nunca poder volver a trabajar en la industria de la moda”, dijo Holmlund. “Desde entonces le digo a quienes me preguntan que es un engaño”.Varios clientes de Devumi reconocieron que habían comprado bots porque sus carreras dependían, en parte, de aparentar tener influencia en redes sociales. “Nadie te toma en serio si no tienes una presencia notoria”, dijo Jason Schenker, economista que se especializa en pronósticos económicos y que ha comprado unos 260.000 seguidores.No es de sorprenderse que Devumi también ha vendido millones de seguidores y retuits a personas en el mundo del entretenimiento que son apenas medianamente conocidos, como el actor Ryan Hurst, de la serie Sons of Anarchy. En 2016 y 2017, compró un total de 750.000 seguidores, aproximadamente tres cuartos de los que tiene ahora. El costo fue menor a 4000 dólares, de acuerdo con los registros de Devumi. (Hurst no respondió a solicitudes de comentario).La empresa también le vende bots a estrellas de reality shows, que utilizan esa fama para cobrar por hacer actos de aparición o patrocinios. Sonja Morgan, del programa The Real Housewives of New York City, usa su cuenta de Twitter impulsada por Devumi para promover su línea de moda, una aplicación para compras y un sitio web en el que vende saludos personalizados en video.Un antiguo concursante de American Idol, Clay Aiken, incluso le pagó a Devumi para hacerle eco a una queja contra Volvo. Los bots de Devumi le dieron retuit más de cinco mil veces. Ni Aiken ni Morgan respondieron a solicitudes de comentario.Más de cien personas que se describen a sí mismas como influenciadores –cuya valía en términos monetarios está aun más vinculada a la cantidad de seguidores– han comprado las cuentas falsas de Devumi. Justin Blau, un popular DJ cuyo nombre artístico es 3LAU, adquirió 50.000 seguidores y miles de retuits. En un correo electrónico, Blau dijo que un exmiembro de su equipo de administración los compró sin su aprobación.Al menos cinco personas que le han comprado seguidores a Devumi también son contratistas de HelloSociety, una agencia para influencers de la que es dueña The New York Times (una portavoz del Times dijo que la compañía intentó verificar que la audiencia de cada contratista fuera legítima y que no hicieran negocios con nadie que violara ese estándar). Lucas Peterson, periodista independiente que colabora con la sección de viajes del Times, también ha comprado seguidores de Devumi.Los influenciadores no necesitan ser ampliamente conocidos para hacerse con dinero de patrocinios. De acuerdo con un reportaje reciente en el tabloide británico The Sun, los hermanos adolescentes Arabella y Jaadn Daho ganaron 100.000 dólares trabajando con marcas como Amazon, Disney, Louis Vuitton y Nintendo. Arabella, quien tiene 14 años, tuitea con el nombre de Amazing Arabella.Las cuentas de los hermanos, según los registros de Devumi, son potenciadas por miles de retuits que compró su madre y mánager, Shadia Daho. (Quien no respondió a varios intentos de contactarla por correo y vía una empresa de relaciones públicas).Mientras Devumi vende millones de seguidores de manera directa a celebridades e influenciadores, cuenta también entre sus clientes a agencias de publicidad y relaciones públicas que compran los bots para sus propios clientes. Phil Pallen, estratega para marcas en Los Ángeles, le ofrece a sus clientes “campañas de crecimiento y publicidad” en redes sociales. De acuerdo con los registros de Devumi, Pallen le ha pagado varias veces a la empresa para cumplir con esas promesas. A inicios de 2014, por ejemplo, adquirió decenas de miles de seguidores para Lori Greiner, coconductora del programa Shark Tank.Al principio, Pallen negó haber adquirido esos seguidores. Después de que el Times contactó a Greiner, Pallen afirmó que había “experimentado” con la empresa pero que “dejó de hacerlo hace mucho tiempo”. Un abogado de Greiner dijo que ella le pidió que dejara de hacerlo cuando se enteró de las primeras compras. Sin embargo, los registros muestran que Pallen le compró más seguidores a Greiner en 2016.Los consultores de mercadotecnia también compran a seguidores para sí mismos, como si compraran la evidencia para respaldar su supuesta pericia. En el 2015, Jeetendr Sehdev, exprofesor de la Universidad de California del Sur que se autodenomina “la autoridad líder del mundo en marcas de celebridades”, comenzó a comprar cientos de miles de seguidores falsos a Devumi.No respondió a solicitudes de comentario, pero en su reciente libro éxito en ventas, The Kim Kardashian Principle: Why Shameless Sells (el principio de Kim Kardashian: por qué vende ser descarado), explicó de otra manera el alza en sus seguidores. Dijo que su “seguimiento en cuenta de redes sociales se disparó” porque descubrió el verdadero secreto de la influencia de las celebridades: “La clave es la autenticidad”.Entre los seguidores de Sehdev estaba Rychly… o, al menos, la copia de la cuenta de la joven. La cuenta falsa de Rychly, creada en 2014, fue incluida en las órdenes de compra de cientos de clientes de Devumi. Ha retuiteado a Schenker, el econimista, y a Arabella Daho, la influenciadora adolescente. La Rychly falsa terminó entre los seguidores de Hollywood, el panadero, del disc-jockey francés DJ Snake y de Ireland. (Los seguidores comprados de DJ Snake fueron adquiridos por un antiguo mánager y Standen no respondió a solicitudes de comentario).La Rychly falsa también retuiteó por lo menos cinco cuentas vinculadas al pornógrafo estadounidense Dan Leal, quien vive en Hungría y usa la cuenta @PornoDan. Leal ha comprado unos 150.000 seguidores a Devumi en los últimos años y es uno de al menos doce clientes de esa empresa que son parte de la industria del entretenimiento adulto.En un correo, Leal dijo que la compra de seguidores para su negocio le ha generado más que suficientes ganancias para compensar el gasto. Añadió que no le preocupa ser penalizado por Twitter. “Un sinfín de figuras públicas, empresas, bandas musicales, etc., compran seguidores”, escribió. “Si Twitter tuviera que sacar a todos los que lo hacen no quedaría prácticamente ninguno de ellos”.Devumi ha vendido decenas de miles de bots de alta calidad que son similares, de acuerdo con un análisis del Times. En algunos casos un solo usuario real de Twitter fue transformado en cientos de diferentes bots; cada uno una variante con cambios mínimos respecto al original.Por Richard Harris y Mark HansenLas cuentas falsas utilizaron identidades sociales de usuarios de Twitter registrados en los cincuenta estados que componen Estados Unidos y en decenas de países que eran tanto adultos como menores de edad; replicaron la información de usuarios muy activos y de quienes no habían iniciado sesión en meses o hasta en años.Sam Dodd, ahora estudiante de universidad y quien aspira a ser cineasta, creó su cuenta en su segundo año del colegio preparatorio en Maryland. Antes de graduarse ya habían sido copiados sus detalles de Twitter a una cuenta bot.Esta no tuvo actividad sino hasta el año pasado, cuando comenzó a retuitear de manera continua a clientes de Devumi.“No sé por qué replicaron mi identidad; soy un estudiante universitario de 20 años”, dijo Dodd. “No soy alguien conocido”. Pero incluso así la identidad social de Dodd tiene valor en la economía de la influencia. De acuerdo con los precios publicados en diciembre, Duvemi vendía a seguidores de alta calidad por menos de dos centavos. Si la identidad social de Dodd es vendida a unos dos mil clientes –el número promedio que siguen las cuentas bots de Devumi– esta empresa se haría con unos 30 dólares.Esas identidades sociales robadas son claves para la marca Devumi. Los bots de alta calidad son los que usualmente llegan primero a los clientes, seguidos por unos de baja calidad; como si entregaran queso parmesano rallado junto con aserrín.Algunos de los bots de alta calidad de Devumi de hecho remplazan a una cuenta inactiva –alguien que dejó de usar el servicio– con una falsa. Whitney Wolfe, asistente ejecutiva que vive en Florida, abrió una cuenta de Twitter en 2008, cuando ayudaba en la planeación de bodas. Para cuando dejó de usarla en 2014 ya había sido creada una cuenta falsa con su información personal, que ha retuiteado las publicaciones de actrices de la industria pornográfica y a varios influenciadores.“Ese contenido –de mujeres en tanga y fotografías de los pechos de mujeres– no es para nada lo que quiero que se asocie a mi fe, a mi nombre o a donde vivo”, dijo Wolfe, quien es parte de una congregación baptista.Otras víctimas seguían siendo activas en Twitter cuando los bots de Devumi empezaron a suplantar su identidad. Salle Ingle, ingeniera de 40 años que vive en Colorado, dijo que le preocupaba que un posible empleador se topara con la versión falsa si revisaba su actividad en redes sociales como parte del proceso de contratación. Cuando el Times le avisó sobre la cuenta, ella contactó a Twitter y logró que fuera desactivada.Después de enviarle el correo a Calas el año pasado, un reportero del Times visitó la dirección en Manhattan que lista el sitio web de Devumi. En el edificio rentan decenas de oficinas, pero Devumi y su empresa matriz, Bytion, no parecen estar entre los arrendatarios. Un portavoz del dueño del edificio dijo que ni Devumi ni Bytion han rentado espacios ahí.Como los seguidores que vende, la oficina de Devumi es una ilusión.En la vida real, Devumi tiene su sede en un edificio de oficinas arriba de un restaurante de comida mexicana en West Palm Beach, Florida, y frente a un callejón repleto de basureros. Calas vive cerca en un penthouse.En su perfil de LinkedIn, Calas se describe como un “empresario serial” con antecedentes en la industria de la tecnología y un posgrado del Instituto Tecnológico de Massachusetts (MIT). Pero la imagen pública de Calas también es una mezcla de fantasía y realidad.Calas, quien tiene 27 años, creció en el sur de Florida. Cuando era adolescente aprendió diseño web y construyó los sitios de varias compañías locales, de acuerdo con versiones anteriores de su página web personal que están guardadas en el Internet Archive.Con el tiempo se autoenseñó técnicas de optimización de búsquedas: el arte de lograr que una página web termine más arriba al usar Google u otro motor de búsqueda. En el colegio comenzó a tomar clases en la universidad Palm Beach State, donde consiguió un título técnico en 2012, según una portavoz de la escuela. Pocos años después, Calas afirmaba haber construido decenas de empresas web con más de diez millones de clientes como parte de Bytion.“Inicié esta compañía con mil dólares en el banco, sin inversores, y solo con una ardiente pasión por el éxito”, escribió Calas en el sitio de listados laborales Glassdoor.Conforme crecieron sus ambiciones también lo hizo su supuesto historial. Una copia de su CV publicada en línea en 2014 dice que consiguió una licenciatura en Física de la Universidad de Princeton en el 2000, cuando habría tenido unos 10 años, y un doctorado en ciencias computacionales del MIT. Representantes de ambas escuelas dijeron que no tienen registro alguno de que Calas haya estado inscrito. Su página actual de LinkedIn dice que tiene una maestría en “negocios internacionales” por MIT, pese a que no es un posgrado que exista en esa institución.De acuerdo con exempleados de Devumi entrevistados por el Times, había una rotación constante del personal y Calais fragmentaba mucho las operaciones. Los empleados a veces no tenían idea de qué estaban haciendo sus colegas, hasta con los que compartían proyectos. Aunque estos empleados pidieron mantenerse anónimos por temor a demandas o porque firmaron acuerdos de confidencialidad, en el sitio Glassdoor hay comentarios muy similares de otros antiguos trabajadores, que dicen que Calas era poco comunicativo y exigió que instalaran software de monitoreo en sus dispositivos personales.Buena parte del personal de atención al cliente de Devumi está basado en Filipinas, lo que quizá le haya ayudado a Calas a reducir costos, pero también lo expuso a él mismo ser víctima del robo de su identidad social.En agosto, Calas presentó una demanda contra Ronwaldo Boado, contratista filipino que había trabajado como asistente de soporte en atención al cliente. Después de ser despedido por pelearse con otros integrantes del equipo, Boado tomó el control de un correo de Devumi en el que había más de 170.000 solicitudes de órdenes de clientes, según dice Calas en los documentos legales. Luego Boado creó un Devumi falso. (Algunos detalles de la demanda y de Devumi fueron reportados anteriormente por el Bureau of Investigative Journalism).Calas acusó que Boado usó un nombre muy similar, DevumiBoost, y el mismo diseño del sitio web, con todo y la dirección en Manhattan. Durante julio pasado, Boado –haciéndose pasar por un empleado de Devumi– le escribió a cientos de clientes de esta empresa para decirles que sus órdenes iban a ser procesadas por DevumiBoost. Luego también se hizo pasar por los clientes enviando correos a Devumi con diversos alias para pedir cancelar órdenes. (Boado no respondió a correos solicitándole respuesta a las acusaciones de Calas).La demanda de Calas también reveló algo más: parece que Devumi no hace sus propios bots. En cambio, los compra al mayoreo como parte de un mercado global de cuentas falsas en redes sociales.Esparcidos por todo el internet hay diversos sitios web con los que fabricantes anónimos de bots se conectan con minoristas como Devumi. Mientras que los clientes individuales llegan a comprar directo de estos sitios –Peakerr, CheapPanel o YTbot, entre otros– son menos amigables para un usuario directo. Algunas, por ejemplo, no aceptan pagos con tarjeta, solo Bitcoin.Cada sitio vende seguidores, me gusta y compartir al por mayor para diversas redes sociales en diferentes idiomas. Las cuentas que venden llegan a cambiar de manos en varias ocasiones y a ser comercializadas por más de un vendedor.Devumi, según un exempleado, utilizaba bots de diferentes fabricantes según el precio, la calidad y la confiabilidad. En Peakerr, por ejemplo, mil bots en inglés de alta calidad con fotografías de perfil cuestan poco más de un dólar. Devumi cobra 17 dólares por la misma cantidad.Ese margen de ganancia le ha permitido a Calas construir una pequeña fortuna, de acuerdo con los registros de la empresa. En tan solo unos años, Devumi vendió alrededor de 200 millones de seguidores de Twitter a por lo menos 39.000 clientes, lo que representa un tercio o más de los 6 millones de dólares en ventas durante ese periodo.En diciembre, Calas pidió que el Times le diera ejemplos de bots que habían copiado información de usuarios reales. Después de recibir los nombres de diez cuentas, Calas, quien había aceptado dar una entrevista, pidió más tiempo para analizarlas y después dejó de responder a los correos.Binns, la portavoz de Twitter, dijo que la empresa no revisa de manera proactiva las cuentas para ver si son suplantación de otros usuarios. En vez, añadió, los esfuerzos de la compañía se enfocan en identificar y suspender cuentas que violan las políticas de correo basura de Twitter. Binns dijo que en diciembre, por ejemplo, la compañía identificó en promedio unas 6,4 millones de cuentas sospechosas por semana.Todas las cuentas falsas que le mostró el Times está en violación de las políticas antispam de Twitter y fueron eliminadas, dijo Binns. “Nos tomamos muy en serio la acción de suspender una cuenta en la plataforma”, dijo. “Al mismo tiempo, queremos combatir el spam de manera agresiva en la plataforma”.Sin embargo, Twitter no ha impuesto salvaguardias aparentemente sencillas que ayudarían a coartar a los fabricantes de bots, como requerir que quien se registre para una cuenta nueva haga una prueba contra spam, como la que hacen muchos sitios comerciales. Como tal, Twitter ahora alberga una cantidad enorme de cuentas inactivas que incluyen cuentas probablemente controladas por fabricantes de bots.Antiguos empleados de la red social dijeron que el equipo de seguridad se enfocó por muchos años más bien en posibles casos de abuso contra usuarios, como el contenido racista y misógino, y en campañas antiacoso. Dijeron que fue hasta hace poco, entre revelaciones como el uso de bots por parte de hackers vinculados al gobierno ruso para promover noticias basura, que Twitter se enfocó más en deshacerse de las cuentas falsas.Leslie Miley, ingeniera que trabajó en la unidad de seguridad de la empresa y de sus usuarios hasta finales de 2015, dijo: “Twitter, como red social, fue desarrollada prácticamente sin prever rendición de cuentas”.Algunos críticos creen que hay un incentivo de negocios para Twitter en contra de reprimir más agresivamente a los bots. Durante los últimos dos años, la empresa ha batallado para generar el crecimiento de usuarios que han tenido rivales como Facebook o Snapchat e investigadores externos han puesto en tela de duda los estimados de la compañía sobre cuántos de sus usuarios activos son en realidad bots.Por Richard Harris y Danny DeBelius“Trabajamos con ecosistemas no regulados y cerrados por completo que no reportan estas cosas. Tienen un incentivo perverso para dejar que pase esto”, dijo Essaid, el experto en ciberseguridad. “Quieren controlar esto hasta el punto en el que no sea tan obvio que existe pero que [Twitter] siga sacando dinero de ello”.En enero, después de unos dos años de promover cientos de cuentas de clientes de Devumi, la Jessica Rychly falsa por fin fue identificada por los algoritmos de seguridad de Twitter y la cuenta fue suspendida.Sin embargo, la verdadera Rychly ya planea salirse para siempre de esa red social.“Probablemente voy a borrar mi cuenta de Twitter”, dijo.Contribuyeron al reportaje Manuela Andreoni, Jeremy Ashkenas, Laurent Bastien Corbeil, Nic Dias, Elise Hansen, Michael Keller, Manuel Villa y Felipe Villamor. Colaboraron con investigación Susan C. Beachy, Doris Burke y Alain Delaquérière.Diseño y desarrollo por Danny DeBelius y Richard Harris. Dirección artística por Antonio De Luca y Jason Fujikuni. Fotos usadas en la ilustración: Ireland, Rodin Eckenroth/Getty Images; Lewis, D Dipasupil/FilmMagic; Leguizamo, Amanda Edwards/WireImage, vía Getty Images; Ingle, Morgan Rachel Levy para The New York TimesSept. 27, 2017Sept. 7, 2017Diseño y desarrollo por Danny DeBelius y Richard Harris. Dirección artística por Antonio De Luca y Jason Fujikuni. Fotos usadas en la ilustración: Ireland, Rodin Eckenroth/Getty Images; Lewis, D Dipasupil/FilmMagic; Leguizamo, Amanda Edwards/WireImage, vía Getty Images; Ingle, Morgan Rachel Levy para The New York TimesAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I work for a school that uses Google apps, including Gmail. Although the mail address is @myschool.com, it is a Google account, and I use the Google Calendar almost exclusively. I also have a personal Gmail account, but I almost never use the calendar. I’m retiring in June, and I’d like to get all the old and upcoming appointments, events, birthdays — everything — moved to my personal Google calendar before my school access ends. Is this possible? A. Copying all the events from the school’s Google calendar may be possible, but check with the technical administrator or person in charge of the school calendar to see if your account has permission to do so, or if you can sync the school calendar to your personal calendar. As Google notes in its Calendar help guide, “If you use Google Calendar through your work, school or other organizations, you may not have the ability to export events.”If you are allowed to export events, log into your school account on the web browser on your work computer and open Google Calendar. If you are using the “classic” view, go the left side of the page to the My Calendars area and find the name of the calendar you want to export. Click the menu area to the right of the calendar’s name to open Calendar settings, and then choose “Export this calendar.”For those using Google’s “new” design for the calendar, go to the My Calendars section on the left side of the screen, click the three-dot Options menu next to the calendar name and select “Settings and Sharing.” On the Calendar Settings box on the next screen, click Export Calendar.When you export the calendar, Google downloads a file to your computer. This file is in the .ics format, but may be delivered in a .zip archive that you must double-click to open first.When you are ready to import the file, log into your personal Gmail account and open the Calendar from the Apps icon on the right side of the window. In the classic view, click the gear-shaped Settings icon on the top-right side of the window and select Settings. On the next screen, click the Calendars tab, then the Import Calendar link part of the way down the page. Click the Choose File button, navigate to the .ics file of events from the other calendar and select Import.If you are using the new calendar view, click the Settings icon on the main calendar window, choose Settings and select Import & Export on the next page. In the Import area, click the “Select file from your computer” option, find the .ics file and click Import.Exporting events grabs all the calendar entries in place at the time, but does not update with any new entries after you export the file. If you want to keep updated, ask the school calendar administrator if there is a public version of the calendar that you can subscribe to or share.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 25, 2018
Q. We took a six-minute video of the total solar eclipse last August on an iPhone 6s. How do I send it to other phones and devices, or is it simply too large a file? And what’s the best way to get it off the phone so it can be preserved in perpetuity?A. Many email systems limit file attachments to 25 megabytes or less, which is a much smaller size than six minutes of video recorded on an iPhone. Even at the phone’s lower 720p HD setting, Apple estimates one minute of video requires 40 megabytes of space. One minute recorded at the highest 4K setting can result in a 400-megabyte file.Still, there are several ways to free the eclipse clip from the confines of the phone, even without buying a third-party program to transfer files to the computer. For example, you can use Apple’s free iTunes software and the USB cable that came with the phone to connect the device to a Windows PC or Mac and import the full video to the computer — where it can be archived, posted online, backed up, burned to disc or preserved in other ways. Depending on your system, you may also be able to connect the phone with the USB cable and import the video with utilities like Microsoft’s Photos app for Windows 10 or Image Capture (or Photos) for the Mac.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you prefer to stay wireless, you have other avenues, like uploading the video to iCloud Photo Library or a social media site; some sites may compress the clip, though. Mac users can beam files from their iOS devices to their Macs using Apple’s AirDrop feature. AirDrop can also be used to send files directly to other iOS devices.If AirDrop is not an option, online file-sharing services can help move the movie. The iOS Mail Drop feature for sending large attachments allows you to store a file up to five gigabytes in size if you use Apple’s Mail app and iCloud service.While videos can also be stored on iCloud and streamed by other users, Apple limits the clip length to five minutes. Uploading the file to another online sharing service like Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive or Dropbox can both store a copy of the video online and allow you to share it with others who can stream it on their own devices from a sharing link you provide.Video-editing apps like iMovie, which Apple includes free with new iOS devices, can be used to export clips at lower resolutions for easier sharing among devices or uploaded to social media sites. And although last year’s solar eclipse took place in August (about a month before Apple released its iOS 11), keep in mind that photos and videos captured with iOS 11 might be in newer formats that are not yet compatible with every device or file-sharing service out there. You might need to convert the clip to an older file type to share it.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Fix By                     
 BRIAN X. CHEN
 
JAN. 24, 2018
There’s a smartphone that the United States does not want you to buy. It’s called the Mate 10 Pro, and it’s made by Huawei, a Chinese manufacturer that the American government has long suspected of committing espionage for China.The device, priced at $800, was supposed to make a big splash this year as the first high-end smartphone from Huawei in the United States. But AT&T, which intended to promote the Mate 10 Pro as a rival to premium devices from Apple and Samsung, abruptly pulled out of the deal this month, appearing to bend to pressure from Washington over security concerns. Verizon Wireless, the country’s biggest carrier, may have also canceled a similar deal because of political pressure, according to some reports. (Verizon declined to comment.)The snub by AT&T, the country’s No. 2 carrier, aroused a candid diatribe from Richard Yu, Huawei’s chief executive, this month at CES, the giant tech convention in Las Vegas.“It’s a big loss for us, and also for carriers,” he said. “But the more big loss is for consumers, because consumers don’t have the best choice.”AdvertisementSecurity issues aside, Mr. Yu may have a point. Based on a week of testing, the Mate 10 Pro is a solid all-around Android smartphone. It has an excellent camera that takes advantage of artificial intelligence to shoot clear, rich photos of pets, plants, food and, of course, people. The device has longer battery life than phones from Apple and Samsung, and, with durability in mind, it comes with a protective case and a screen protector.Yet without the backing of a big American carrier, the risks of buying the smartphone are high. While the Mate 10 Pro will still be available online next month and on sale at Best Buy stores by the end of the quarter, the lack of carrier buy-in means it will be tougher to get device support if your screen shatters or if something goes wrong.AdvertisementHere’s what you need to know about the device.The signature feature of the Mate 10 Pro is the processor, which has a dedicated part of its silicon specifically designed for artificial intelligence.This allows the phone to crunch algorithms and do things like automatically recognize an object so that the camera can be adjusted to focus quickly and let in the right amount of light. Huawei also says A.I. allows the phone to maximize its performance: Periodically, it will automatically do maintenance, like clearing out old system files that might otherwise slow down the phone.The camera is notable as well. Huawei teamed up with Leica, a popular camera maker, to develop the phone’s dual-lens setup. Like phones from Apple and Samsung, the Mate 10 Pro’s camera can create a so-called bokeh effect, where the two cameras work together to show the picture’s main subject in sharp focus while gently blurring the background.Like other modern smartphones, the Mate 10 Pro is water and dust resistant. But it also has an extra-large battery that Huawei says will last longer than that in many other phones. That’s partly because of its A.I. processor, which examines how the battery is being used and changes resource allocation to prolong its life.The Mate 10 Pro also ships with a screen protector applied to its display, and inside the box there is a plastic protective case. These are thoughtful additions. The case absorbs the impact of drops, and the screen protector helps prevent scratches, which weaken the structural integrity of a display.In my tests, the two best features of the Mate 10 Pro were the camera and battery. The least impressive was the display.AdvertisementBut let’s start with the good stuff. In side-by-side comparisons with an iPhone X and Samsung’s Galaxy S8+, the Mate 10 Pro came in second to Apple’s offering in photo quality. All took nice photos, but the colors in the Galaxy S8+’s pictures looked oversaturated, and while the Mate 10 Pro’s photos appeared rich and clear, the shadow details looked better on the iPhone X.As for the bokeh effect, also known as portrait mode, the Mate 10 Pro excelled at separating the subject from the background compared with the Galaxy S8+, but I still preferred the iPhone X because it did a better job at lighting up a person’s face.There was one area where the Mate 10 Pro was the clear winner: the battery. In my tests browsing the web over a cellular connection, Huawei’s phone had roughly two hours more juice than Samsung’s Galaxy Note 8 and the iPhone X.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The display — the biggest downside of the Mate 10 Pro — had a lower resolution than the Note 8, the Galaxy S8+ and the iPhone X, meaning some graphics and text looked more pixelated. Over all, text appeared crisper and websites more vibrant on the iPhone X and Samsung Galaxy screens than they did on the Mate 10 Pro’s display.The Mate 10 Pro is an impressive smartphone, but you probably aren’t going to buy it even if you get your hands on it. The lower-resolution display is a major negative, as is the lack of carrier support.Huawei said that to get technical support for the Mate 10 Pro, you can call its hotline, and for repairs, you can ship your device to a center in Texas. That’s still not ideal compared with the ease of strolling into an Apple store or your carrier’s nearest location.Privacy and trust are also important. In 2012, the House Intelligence Committee concluded that Huawei and ZTE, another Chinese telecommunications company, were a national security threat because of their attempts to extract sensitive data from American companies. And in 2016, security researchers discovered preinstalled software on some Huawei and ZTE phones that included a back door that sent all of a device’s text messages to China every 72 hours. That feature was not intended for American phones, according to the company that made the software. But American lawmakers have been wary of Huawei.Most important, you will have to decide whether you trust Huawei. The onus is on you to carefully read Huawei’s privacy policy and determine if you feel confident using this phone. In a statement, Huawei said that privacy and security were top priorities and that it complied with stringent privacy frameworks and regulations.At CES, Huawei’s Mr. Yu described how the company had previously overcome trust hurdles — including at home in China, where Huawei’s smartphones were initially distrusted by Chinese carriers because the company was a newcomer.Advertisement“It was very hard,” he said. “But we won the trust of the Chinese carriers, we won the trust of the developing market and we also won the global carriers, all the European and Japanese carriers. Over the last 30 years, we’ve proven our quality.”Brian X. Chen writes Tech Fix, a column about solving tech-related problems like sluggish Wi-Fi, poor smartphone battery life and the complexity of taking your smartphone abroad. What confuses you about your tech? Send your suggestions for future Tech Fix columns to brian.chen@nytimes.com or via Twitter to @bxchen.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Trust Issues Cloud Future of $800 Smartphone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 24, 2018
Q. Can I make Microsoft Edge automatically fill in my address on shopping sites?A. Microsoft Edge, the default browser for Windows 10, has an AutoComplete function you can turn on in the program’s settings. The AutoComplete tool remembers how you filled in a form on a previous web form and automatically replicates the information as you begin to enter your address again so you do not have to type it all over again.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To turn on Edge’s automatic completion feature, open the browser and click or tap the More Actions menu (shown as an icon with three dots) in the top-right corner of the window. When the menu opens, select Settings and then Advanced Settings farther down the screen. On the Advanced Setting screen, flip the button on next to “Save form entries.” After you fill out an address form once, the browser should remember it for the next one and offer to finish entering the information for you.AutoComplete is not quite the same thing as the “autofill” function available with some other browsers like Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox (or, for Mac users, Apple’s Safari browser). Instead of offering suggestions to complete web forms, the autofill tool stores address information — and, in some browsers, credit-card numbers as well — and then automatically fills in all the form fields with a click or a keystroke. Third-party programs like Fillr’s AutoFill for Microsoft Edge, Dashlane and RoboForm can supply an autofill function for Microsoft’s browser.Keep in mind that the personal autofill data stored in a web browser can also be a target for hackers and malicious phishing scripts that can do things like quietly collect the information in web pages with invisible form fields. If you are concerned about online security, you may want to forgo convenience for safety.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
JAN. 24, 2018
The streets of San Francisco have always smelled of marijuana. Yet it’s worth noting that the city doesn’t seem to have gotten much smellier in the new year, after the recreational use of marijuana became legal in California under a law approved by voters in 2016.Well, obviously: because nobody smokes marijuana anymore. Everyone’s vaping it. Or eating, drinking, sipping, dabbing, sucking on lozenges, chewing on gum, applying unguents or administering a drop or two of a cannabis-infused tincture under one’s tongue, where it is absorbed into the sublingual artery, within minutes producing an invisible, odorless, private high.These are a few of the inventions of an increasingly sophisticated set of marijuana start-ups, which argue that by pushing the industry past smoke, they can make cannabis convenient and ubiquitous — the drug of the future, and the next great American bonanza.Eight states and the District of Columbia have legalized marijuana for recreational use, and it is legal for medicinal use in 29 states. The drug remains illegal under federal law, and the Justice Department has signaled a crackdown on the business. Yet growth of the legal marijuana industry keeps beating even its biggest boosters’ expectations; customers in North America will spend more than $10 billion on legal marijuana in 2018 and nearly $23 billion by 2021, projects the ArcView Group, a cannabis-focused research and investment firm.AdvertisementThat growth is driven, start-ups in the industry say, by a simple idea: The humble hand-rolled joint was holding marijuana back.AdvertisementBy breaking marijuana free from smoking and its paraphernalia, new delivery methods — especially portable vapes — are transforming the image and utility of cannabis, and helping it grab a mainstream audience. In the booming new market, the drug of lazy stoners is being rebranded by start-ups as the “wellness” drug of tomorrow. It’s a cure-all for an anxious, tech-addled society — a salve for every ailment, a balm for every mood, ibuprofen meets a glass of red wine cut with Prozac and a hint of Deepak Chopra, all delivered to your door.“This can be the challenge of cannabis, but also the opportunity — there’s thousands of possible combinations,” said Troy Dayton, the chief executive of ArcView. He pointed to the many different problems that cannabis companies are aiming to treat, from anxiety, insomnia and pain to problems with libido and creativity. “It’s just a merchandiser’s dream.”The growth of Eaze, a cannabis delivery start-up operating in the Bay Area and San Diego, underlines the trends shaping the burgeoning industry. When Eaze started in 2014, marijuana “flower” — that is, the green bud you put in your pipe and smoke — made up 85 percent of sales.Now flower is down to less than a third of sales. In 2017, flower was usurped by vape cartridges — kind of like e-cigarettes, they use an electronic element to heat a cannabis-infused oil. Because it does not burn organic material, vaping cannabis is considered safer than smoking, just as vaping nicotine is safer than smoking cigarettes.“For a lot of new users, the concept of smoking just feels unhealthy to them,” said Jim Patterson, Eaze’s chief executive.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But vaping has other advantages over smoking. It produces a fraction of the odor, it doesn’t need any real gear, and it’s portable, easily hidden and very easy to use — press a button and inhale. And because cartridges can include flavors and mixes of different cannabis compounds to produce stronger or weaker effects, vapes can be branded and marketed at dozens of customer niches.Eaze — which had been offering only medicinal sales until this year, and now sells cannabis for both recreational and medical uses — said that thanks in part to vapes, its sales grew 300 percent in 2017. (It declined to disclose a dollar figure.) By the end of last year, it was doing more than 120,000 deliveries per month. Women made up 35 percent of its customer base last year, compared with 25 percent in 2015. And its fastest-growing age group was baby boomers.Advertisement“The story here is that the average cannabis consumer is becoming the average American,” Mr. Patterson said.In anticipation of full legalization, Eaze plastered the Bay Area in marketing, with billboards introducing cannabis as a therapy for several specific ailments: “Hello Marijuana, Goodbye Anxiety” and “Hello Marijuana, Goodbye Insomnia.” Mr. Patterson said the marketing had been paying off; orders have increased threefold since the start of the year. The company, which has raised nearly $52 million from investors, declined to disclose its valuation.Another start-up, Cura Cannabis Solutions, an Oregon company that makes vape cartridges, reported similarly robust growth. In December 2016, Cura’s sales were $2 million; a year later, revenue had grown to $7 million a month.Cannabis-related start-ups have previously reported trouble finding investors to touch their industry, but Nitin Khanna, Cura’s co-founder and chief executive, suggested that investors’ appetites had turned. “We are currently raising money at a $400 million valuation,” he said.Vivien Azer, an analyst who studies the alcohol and cannabis markets at the financial services firm Cowen, said the rising appeal of cannabis was part of a long-term cultural trend. During the last decade, the social perception of marijuana has rapidly improved, to the point that its rise now poses a plausible threat even to the alcohol business.“I view alcohol and cannabis as substitutes in the market,” Ms. Azer said. She pointed out that since 2008, there had been a steep decline in the number of 18- to 25-year-olds who reported consuming alcohol in the past year but a steep increase in the number who said they had consumed cannabis.The trend is driven by a shift in risk perception. Young people used to think of smoking pot as riskier than alcohol, but in the last decade that idea has flipped.“Increasingly young people view alcohol as more risky, and they view cannabis as much less risky,” Ms. Azer said. In a note to investors last year, she pointed out that cannabis use was gaining acceptance among all ages, ethnicities and income groups. Legalization also tends to slash the price of cannabis, further increasing its attractiveness.The upshot in her report: Today’s young people are on the vanguard. Cannabis could be on the way to becoming the drug of choice for tomorrow’s America — a future in which lots of us get high, but no one smokes.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: I’m Good: Pot Start-Ups Pass Up the Joint.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have a Netflix account for streaming only. Is there a list of all the movies and shows available with French-dubbed audio?A. Netflix supports alternate audio and subtitles in multiple languages for much of its content, but not every show or movie is available in every supported language. One way to see what items are available in French (or another language) in your region is to log into your Netflix account and point your browser to netflix.com/subtitles.On the Audio & Subtitles page, use the drop-down menus to select Audio or onscreen Subtitles, and then choose a language. In the United States, 18 languages (including French, German, Hindi, Spanish, Tagalog and more) are currently listed. Once you have made your menu selections, Netflix shows you the available content.When you have chosen a show you know has French audio available, you need to enable the alternate dialogue track. For smartphones and tablets, start the show, then tap the screen and then tap the word-balloon icon that appears at the top. In the menu that opens, select French from the list to hear the audio track in that language.Getting to the language setting on a set-top streaming box varies by model, so check your help guide. On the Netflix app on a Roku box, for example, choose a video, select Audio & Subtitles on the description page and pick your language before going back to the description page and pressing the Play button.You can change your preferred default language, style of subtitle text, auto-play preference and more in your Netflix account settings. To get there, log in to Netflix.com, select your profile icon on the right side of the screen and choose Account.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement

 Kevin Roose
 

THE SHIFT
JAN. 22, 2018
For the past several years, Facebook has been conducting what amounts to an A/B test on human society, using two different social media apps.The first app in Facebook’s test has a maximalist design: It allows users to post lengthy status updates, with links to news articles, photos, videos and more. The app is designed as a giant megaphone, with an emphasis on public sharing and an algorithmic feed capable of sending posts rocketing around the world in seconds.The second app in the test is more minimalist, designed for intimate sharing rather than viral broadcasting. Users of this app, many of whom have private accounts with modest followings, can post photos or videos, but external links do not work and there is no re-share button, making it harder for users to amplify one another’s posts.The results of this test have been stark. The first app, Facebook, turned into a huge and unmanageable behemoth that swallowed the media industry, was exploited by hostile foreign actors, empowered autocrats, created the conditions for a global fake news epidemic and ultimately became a giant headache for its creators.AdvertisementThe second app, Instagram, has fared much better. It hasn’t been overrun with bogus news, it hasn’t been exploited to the same degree, and most users seem happy with it — especially young users, who vastly prefer it to Facebook.AdvertisementMark Zuckerberg has pledged to spend 2018 cleaning up Facebook, and ensuring that “our services aren’t just fun to use, but also good for people’s well-being.” He’s also pledged to deal with the scourge of fake news on Facebook, and do a better job of keeping bad actors at bay.Good for him. But there may be a simpler fix here. Why doesn’t he make his beleaguered blue app more like Instagram, the Facebook-owned app that isn’t destabilizing society?Last week, Facebook unveiled its latest attempt to rein in its flagship product. In an effort to curb false news, it announced it would be allowing Facebook users to rank news outlets by trustworthiness, and consider those scores when deciding which news stories to display in users’ feeds.But this kind of minor algorithmic knob-fiddling may not be enough. Instead, Facebook should consider using what it’s learned with Instagram, which it acquired in 2012, to embark on a gut renovation.If I were Mr. Zuckerberg, here are some Instagram lessons I’d be thinking about.Lesson No. 1: Emphasize visuals. De-emphasize text.First, and most obviously, Instagram is a visual medium. Photos and videos are the main event, and text, while present, is mostly confined to captions and comments. As a result, Instagram feels more intimate than Facebook, where photos and videos often sit alongside lengthy diatribes, restaurant check-ins and mundane status updates.Research has shown that, in some cases, visual platforms can be good for us. One study, published by researchers at the University of Oregon in 2016, found that the use of image-based platforms like Instagram and Snapchat was associated with lower levels of loneliness among users, and higher levels of happiness and satisfaction, while text-based platforms had no correlation with improved mental health.AdvertisementA heavily visual platform also makes a relatively poor conduit for breaking news and in-the-moment commentary, which might explain why Instagram often feels less exhausting than other social networks. (It also explains why last month, before I went on vacation, I deleted every social media app from my phone except Instagram — the only app I trusted not to ruin my beachside calm.)Lesson No. 2: Rethink the share button.One of Instagram’s most underrated virtues is that it has imposed structural limits on virality — the ability of a given post to spread beyond its intended audience. Unlike Twitter and Facebook, on Instagram there is no native sharing function, meaning that the reach of most Instagram posts is capped at the number of people who follow the user’s account. (There are ways to “regram” someone else’s photo using a third-party app, but they’re clunky, and relatively few people use them. Instagram also recently began showing users posts from people they don’t follow, a Facebook-inspired change that I’d argue is a mistake.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A native share button has been tremendously useful for Facebook’s and Twitter’s growth. It has also allowed upstart media organizations like BuzzFeed and Upworthy to build enormous audiences by specializing in highly shareable stories. But ease of sharing has also allowed the loudest and most emotional voices to be rewarded with clicks — and attention. It’s this incentive structure that has allowed partisans and profiteers to hijack Facebook’s algorithms and spread divisive messages and false news to millions of people.The easy virality of Facebook also seems to have made individual users more hesitant about opening up. That makes sense — it’s easier to share a selfie if you know it won’t accidentally find its way into the feeds of a million strangers.Lesson No. 3: Ban links.Instagram’s greatest structural advantage, though, may be a result of its decision to go mostly link-free. Links in Instagram captions and comments aren’t clickable, and while some users have found workarounds, the vast majority of Instagram posts aren’t meant to send users to outside websites. (The exceptions are ads, which can contain clickable links and are, not coincidentally, the most troubled part of Instagram’s platform.)The walled-garden nature of Instagram has frustrated publishers, who want to send followers out to their websites, where the publishers can earn advertising money and “control the reader experience.” (It’s really just about the money.) But Instagram has wisely refused to give in, perhaps realizing that allowing links might turn the platform into a screeching bazaar, with publishers and pages all doing circus acts for clicks.Removing links from Facebook would wreak havoc on the digital media industry, which has built an economic model around referral traffic from Facebook. It would also risk alienating some users, who enjoy promoting and discussing stories from other parts of the internet. But it would also solve some of the platform’s most vexing challenges. And ultimately, it would be better for the world.After all, malicious actors don’t post fabricated news, wildly exaggerated headlines or partisan outrage-bait on Facebook only for fun. They do it, in many cases, because it’s profitable. Take away bad actors’ incentives and they’ll go elsewhere.Banning most links doesn’t seem to have hurt Instagram as a business. It had more than 800 million monthly active users as of September, and it gained a million new advertisers last year. Facebook doesn’t break out Instagram’s revenue, but some analysts expect the app could one day generate as much as $10 billion in annual revenue. That’s still nowhere near Facebook, which earned $10 billion in revenue last quarter alone, but it’s a meaningful number, and it shows that insularity isn’t always a bad thing.AdvertisementLesson No. 4: Bad actors are unavoidable, but their influence can be contained.Instagram is far from a perfect social network, and copying it wouldn’t fix all of Facebook’s problems overnight. Among other issues, some research has shown that use of Instagram can breed insecurity and bullying, and exacerbate body image issues, especially among young women.Instagram also hosts its own sketchy microeconomy — just witness the scourge of Insta-celebrities endorsing dubious health products, or the uptick in fly-by-night consumer brands that market themselves using Instagram ads.And Russian propagandists did use Instagram to try to influence American voters before the 2016 presidential election, with posts that reached as many as 20 million users. (Far less than the estimated 126 million people who were reached by Russian posts on Facebook, but a hefty number nonetheless.)But even these flaws are preferable to the structural problems that have plagued Facebook.Given the choice between a version of Facebook that made some of its users feel ugly and unpopular, and one that could be used to undermine democracies and promote misinformation around the world, I know which one I’d pick. A few billion Facebook users might agree.Email Kevin Roose at kevin.roose@nytimes.com, or follow him on Facebook at facebook.com/kevinroose and on Twitter: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: The App Facebook Aims to Be, It Already Owns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 22, 2018
Q. Is Apple also slowing down older iPads? If so, will it replace batteries at a reduced rate?A. In response to accusations that it intentionally hindered older products, Apple’s public explanation and apology says that only certain iPhone models were affected by the software updates designed to prevent the battery from conking out unexpectedly. In fact, Apple’s mea culpa states, “This power management feature is specific to iPhone and does not apply to any other Apple products.”Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The “power management” tool was first introduced in early 2017 with iOS 10.2.1 for iPhones. Longer times for apps to start up, lowered audio volume and screen brightness, a disabled camera flash and jerkier frame rates are signs of the performance reduction in action. Apple said only the iPhone 6, iPhone 6 Plus, iPhone 6s, iPhone 6s Plus, and iPhone SE models were included at first, but it added the iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus with the iOS 11.2 update in December.To make amends, Apple is replacing batteries in older iPhones for $29 (instead of the usual $79) until the end of the year; new batteries typically let the phone avoid the power-management throttle kicking in. However, Apple’s price for an out-of-warranty iPad battery replacement is still $99; third-party repair services can cost less but it’s worth researching the provider’s reputation first.Older iPads might be running slower because the latest software is more demanding and is optimized for the processors in newer models. You may be able to boost the performance of older hardware with the standard tricks, like optimizing your settings — including lowering screen brightness, turning off push alerts and disabling location services when not in use. Dumping unused apps and avoiding extreme hot and cold external temperatures when using the iPad can help, too.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Managing an iPad’s Battery Use.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CECILIA KANGJAN. 22, 2018
WASHINGTON — Most efforts underway to restore so-called net neutrality face big obstacles and would take many months, if not years, to succeed.But in Montana, the governor has used the stroke of a pen to bring the rules to broad parts of his state.Through an executive order, Gov. Steve Bullock declared on Monday that any internet service provider with a state government contract cannot block or charge more for faster delivery of websites, two core aspects of net neutrality, to any customer in the state.Many major landline and mobile broadband providers, including Charter, CenturyLink, AT&T and Verizon, hold government contracts in the state. The new requirements apply to new and renewed contracts signed after July 1, 2018.AdvertisementThe action, the first of its kind by a governor, could face legal challenges.In December, the Federal Communications Commission rolled back rules meant to protect a free and open internet. The new rules say states cannot create net neutrality laws. The agency did not respond to a request for comment about the Montana action.AdvertisementBut Mr. Bullock and some public interest advocates who have advised him argue that the state has wide latitude to set conditions to any contracts with the government — one of the biggest customers in most cities and states — to get around the F.C.C.’s restrictions.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If you want to do business with Montana, there are standards on net neutrality you will have to follow,” Mr. Bullock said.The idea is similar to bills in New York and Rhode Island that are also trying to use government contracts to regulate the practices of internet service providers. Those efforts are proceeding slowly, along with multiple lawsuits filed last week by more than 20 state attorneys general and public interest groups.Broadband providers say they will have difficulty following different state laws related to net neutrality. Various trade groups said they were watching Montana’s action and other state bills and were considering lawsuits.“Following patchwork of legislation or regulation is costly and makes it even harder to invest in networks,” said Matt Polka, president of the American Cable Association, a lobbying group for small- and midsize broadband providers.Mr. Bullock, a Democrat, said the executive order was the fastest and surest way to bring back net neutrality rules and to head off any decisions by internet service providers to begin throttling or charging websites more to reach consumers.“There is a long history of government using its procurement power to get companies to adopt requirements, and this is no different,” said Travis LeBlanc, an enforcement chief for the F.C.C. during the Obama administration. “This action by Governor Bullock will provide immediate relief.”Though the order applies only to Montana, it could have a spillover effect, as seen with auto emissions rules and cybersecurity notification laws that began in a few states but eventually became national standards.Advertisement“This is simple plug and play for other states to do as well,” Mr. Bullock said.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Montana Governor Signs  Order to Force Net Neutrality.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAVID STREITFELD and NELLIE BOWLESJAN. 19, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — There were 218 communities whose proposals did not reach the second round in Amazon’s well-publicized search for its second headquarters. For those ambitious but unlucky folks, there were no “thanks for entering” gift baskets or any consolation prizes.Tom Hall, town manager of Scarborough, Me., had just returned from a meeting about the clam harvest when he heard the bad news from a reporter. He took it philosophically. The town’s proposal to convert a 500-acre harness racing track in the center of Scarborough was, he knew, “the longest of long shots.”In Oklahoma, there were more regrets.“I’m certainly disappointed,” said Scott Phillips, who ran a development team called Day 1 that promoted a proposal to build an entirely new 50-square-mile city for Amazon between Oklahoma City and Tulsa, equidistant from each.“Amazon missed an opportunity to include more out-of-the-box thinking in their list of finalists from proposals like ours,” he added.For the cities that were not one of Amazon’s 20 finalists, that D-word kept coming up.Jim Watson, the mayor of Ottawa, said he was “disappointed” twice in a brief interview, adding that the whole process was “great publicity” for Amazon.Advertisement“This news is certainly disappointing,” the team that promoted Buffalo and Rochester said in a statement.Advertisement“Very disappointed,” said the Bay Area Council, which had submitted a bid on behalf of San Francisco and four neighboring cities.Amazon’s obsessive desire to please its customers has created a fearsome retail juggernaut and made its founder, Jeff Bezos, the richest man in the world. This sense of disappointment in the company, however transient it may prove, is something new.In seeking a home for its second headquarters, Amazon winnowed a list of 238 candidates to 20 finalists, including Atlanta, Nashville and Miami.Yet it was perhaps inevitable after the way Amazon turned its search for a second headquarters, which it announced in a blaze of publicity in September, into such a beauty contest. Even with unemployment low, the stock market booming and the economy chugging along, the prospect of landing as many as 50,000 high-paying jobs from Amazon aroused the excitement of politicians everywhere.“When they rolled this idea out, the narrow description they used really only defined about 30 cities,” said Mr. Phillips of Day 1, referring to how Amazon had said it was looking for a metropolitan area in North America with at least a million people, among other criteria. “Maybe they truly thought only 30 cities would apply. The fact that 238 did probably caught them off-guard.”Scarborough, for instance, was probably not on Amazon’s radar. It is on the Northeast coast, just south of Portland, and has a population of about 20,000. The simplicity of the application process, which involved answering nine questions, providing data and touting the city, “encouraged us and several hundred others who did not have a viable chance to make the strongest possible argument why it should be us,” said Mr. Hall, the town manager. “There’s value in thinking and articulating that.”Another factor at play: the sense that Amazon was determined to achieve dominance, so why not join up?“This new headquarters is merely a stop on their road to global conquest,” Mr. Hall said. He noted that so many people in Scarborough received goodies from Amazon during the holidays that even now, in the third week of January, the local recycling center was overwhelmed with cardboard packaging.AdvertisementMr. Hall said he had received “no word whatsoever” from Amazon about the fate of his application. An Amazon spokesman said, “All the cities received direct communication from Amazon, including many personal phone calls.” (Late Thursday, the Scarborough team finally received an email from the company.)Many of the other also-rans did not want to talk.Jason Lary, the mayor of Stonecrest, Ga., who had offered to create a town named Amazon and make Mr. Bezos “the mayor, C.E.O., king, whatever they want to call it,” did not return calls. A spokeswoman for Tucson, which had also applied, said, “We are in an all-day off-site meeting,” adding that she could not be interviewed.The letdown followed a rush of antics by  cities across North America to entice the retailer with tax breaks and publicity stunts.Business leaders in Tucson had tried to mail Amazon a 21-foot cactus, which the company declined. The mayor of Washington posted a video of herself asking her Amazon Alexa where the headquarters should go. (The answer was of course Washington.) Business school students in Philadelphia had a new homework assignment: Write to Amazon asking it to come. Mayors flew out to Seattle to wander the corporate campus.The biggest winner in all this, of course, was Amazon. The search has led to feel-good stories in local papers around the country, a coup for Amazon’s public relations machine when many are wary of Mr. Bezos’ growing wealth and power.For Art Rolnick, an economist at the University of Minnesota, the selection process — which will continue for months — is “reality show” theatrics and should not be celebrated, he said.Amazon, he said, “wants to get the highest bid and highest subsidy possible, so now the 20 finalist cities will go revise their bids.”“From a local point of view, it looks like job creation in your community,” Mr. Rolnick added. “From a national perspective, it makes no sense.”AdvertisementSome elected officials said the reality-show spectacle was an improvement on the way business is usually done.“It was like ‘The Apprentice,’” the show about hiring and firing that President Trump starred in, said Tulsa’s mayor, G. T. Bynum. “I loved the process. Amazon, to their credit, made it a public and transparent one. Nine out of 10 times, when we have corporate relocation interest, we have to sign so many nondisclosure agreements we don’t even know what company is interested.”Not all the applicants felt the process was transparent. Amazon released the total number of proposals but not where they were from, which caused some latter-day confusion. Mr. Phillips of Day 1 said he had gotten a receipt from Federal Express for delivering his proposal in October and never heard from Amazon after that.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One possibility: the company did not take some applications particularly seriously. An Amazon spokesman declined to clarify this point.However clumsy the process, Amazon might have unleashed something.Apple, which has been criticized for doing most of its production in China, announced this week that it would open a new domestic campus. (Apple did not mention a location.) Taking advantage of the new Republican tax plan, which allows a one-time repatriation of cash, Apple signaled it would bring back most of the $252 billion in cash that it held abroad and add 20,000 new jobs in the United States.“Second headquarters are the thing of the future — the companies are getting too big for a single market,” said Jeff Cheney, the mayor of Frisco, Tex., a city near Dallas that had a losing bid for Amazon’s second headquarters.Beyond any sense of disappointment among the losers, then, was a feeling of expectation.“If Amazon is not willing to swing for the fences in Oklahoma and build a city, maybe Alibaba” — the Chinese internet retailer — “is willing,” said Mr. Phillips. His efforts to build a corporate city, he said, will continue.There is, however, the problem of the name. “Day 1” is a pet expression of Mr. Bezos, symbolizing how his company’s opportunities are always right in front of it.“We’ll probably look for a better brand,” Mr. Phillips said, and then reconsidered. “If someone wants to take on Amazon, maybe keeping it ‘Day 1’ will offer the added ability to mess with Bezos’ head a little.”Follow David Streitfeld and Nellie Bowles on Twitter: @DavidStreitfeld and @NellieBowles.Nick Wingfield contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: For 218 Places (So Far), Amazon Is the One That Got Away.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Sheera Frenkel and Sapna MaheshwariSAN FRANCISCO — Facebook said on Friday that it planned to prioritize high-quality news on the social network by allowing its users to rank news sources that they see as the most credible and trustworthy.The initiative, which follows an overhaul that Facebook announced last week to emphasize posts, videos and photos shared by friends and family, will not increase the amount of news on the social network. But the move has implications for what news will be consumed on Facebook, potentially favoring the most familiar names in media that are seen as the most credible, while tilting away from lesser-known and less-trusted outlets without solving the issue of whether news could still be distorted.“There’s too much sensationalism, misinformation and polarization in the world today,” Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, wrote in a post on Friday. “We decided that having the community determine which sources are broadly trusted would be most objective.”The shift is another signal of Facebook’s ability — this time using the collective power of its more than two billion members worldwide — to play kingmaker with publishers. Many publishers have long relied on Facebook to reach audiences, and they largely reacted with disappointment last week when the company said it would play down news over all.The move is also the most recent by Facebook to counter charges that not enough was being done to stamp out fake news and disinformation on its platform. The company was dogged by criticism in late 2016 after the presidential election that too many false stories attacking Hillary Clinton had spread on its site, that way affecting the election’s outcome. Last year, Facebook also acknowledged that Russian agents had used the site to spread divisive and polarizing ads and posts.The same criticism has also engulfed other social media companies such as Twitter, which on Friday said it was emailing notifications to 677,775 people in the United States that they had interacted with Russian propaganda accounts around the time of the 2016 election.For publishers, Facebook’s new ranking system raised immediate concerns, including whether crowdsourcing users’ opinions on trustworthiness might be open to manipulation.“It is absolutely a positive move to start to try to separate the wheat from the chaff in terms of reputation and use brands as proxies for trust,” said Jason Kint, the chief executive of Digital Content Next, a trade group that represents entertainment and news organizations, including The New York Times. “But the devil’s in the details on how they’re going to actually execute on that.”He continued, “How does that get hacked or gamed? How do we trust the ranking system? There’s a slew of questions at this point.”The new system could also potentially favor publishers who are partisan. Facebook users, asked to rank which news they most trust, could choose sites that speak most clearly to their personal beliefs, in effect reducing the prominence of publishers who try to maintain an objective tone.David Kaye, the United Nations’ Special Rapporteur on freedom of expression, said that Facebook would probably face more difficult questions as it rolled out the new ranking program globally.“What will happen in situations where a community determines that a news source is trustworthy, but that news source is censored, or illegal, in that country?” asked Mr. Kaye, noting that in many parts of the world, governments controlled all official news channels while independent news sources were outlawed or forced to publish pseudo-anonymously.In the past, he added, Facebook has abided by local rules where it operates abroad.“What will Mark Zuckerberg do when the needs of the community, in what it determines is trusted news, are different from what the government determines. Who will Facebook side with?” said Mr. Kaye.Raju Narisetti, the chief executive of the Gizmodo Media Group, the unit of Univision that operates Jezebel and other sites, said there was a “great irony” that Facebook, which has traditionally left decision up to an algorithm that incorporates the behaviors of its members, would open the decision-making to its users on such a matter. He added that the user-generated ranking system “is a massive abdication of its social responsibility, as a vital platform, to be a good custodian of the Fourth Estate globally.”Other experiments that Facebook has tried with news in the past have sometimes gone awry or had unintended consequences. For example, a recent test to remove all news publishers from the News Feed and to place them under a separate tab in six countries, including Bolivia and Slovakia, yielded an unexpected result of magnifying the amount of fake news on the platform.In his post on Friday, Mr. Zuckerberg said the newest change “will only shift the balance of news you see towards sources that are determined to be trusted by the community.”Facebook said news would be prioritized according to the new ranking system starting Monday, before expanding globally. Some Facebook users have already been asked to rank the trustworthiness of news sites which appear on the social network. In one survey, people were asked if they recognized a number of websites and then asked, ““How much do you trust each of these domains?” They were able to choose from a range of answers, including entirely, a lot, somewhat, barely and not at all.The Silicon Valley company said it would continue polling users to refine and select which news outlets garnered the most trust. It declined to say how many people were polled or which news outlets they were asked about.“As part of our ongoing quality surveys, we asked a diverse and representative sample of Facebook users across the U.S. to gauge their familiarity with, and trust in, sources of news,” said Todd Breasseale, a Facebook spokesman. “We boost links from sources with high trust scores and demote links from sources with low trust scores.”Mr. Zuckerberg has been moving Facebook toward taking more responsibility for what shows up on the social network, especially after the criticism over the 2016 election and the interference by Russian agents. Earlier this month, he described his 2018 goals as including “making sure that time spent on Facebook is time well spent.”In Friday’s post, he hinted that ranking the credibility of news sources was just one step, with more potential changes to come.”I’ve asked our product teams to make sure we prioritize news that is trustworthy, informative, and local,” he wrote. “And we’re starting next week with trusted sources.”Sheera Frenkel reported from San Francisco and Sapna Maheshwari from New York.Follow Sheera Frenkel and Sapna Maheshwari on Twitter: @sheeraf and @sapnaAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I was trying to install a new version of a program I’ve used for years and Windows 10 gave me a warning box about it not being a “verified” app. What exactly is a verified app, and should I be worried about installing this “unverified” program?A. In an effort to keep unsuspecting people from inadvertently installing malicious software, Microsoft encourages users to get their Windows 10 software directly from its own online Windows App Store. While shareware sites and developers have traditionally offered software for sale or as free downloads on their own sites, some have bundled in spyware or malware with the goods. Programs purchased from the Windows App Store and downloaded directly from Microsoft have been approved and verified by the company as being safe, compatible and up to the company’s guidelines for Windows software.An up-to-date antivirus program can catch many kinds of rogue software, but if you do not want to worry as much (or have children who may download software indiscriminately) you can set Windows 10 to do more than warn about apps coming from other sources beyond the Windows App Store. You can block apps from anywhere but the Windows App Store — or go the other way and allow apps from anywhere.Go to the Start menu to the Settings icon; you can also press the Windows and I keys on the keyboard as a shortcut. In the Settings box, select Apps and then Apps & Features. In the Installing Apps section, use the drop-down menu to choose the sources the computer can use for software shopping.Apple has a similar approach to third-party software security for its online storefronts, including those for desktop Mac programs, iTunes Store digital media purchases, iBooks, and iOS apps and games. Google has also stepped up screening of harmful apps in its Google Play store. As with all the online software stores (Apple’s included), creative malware may find new ways to sneak in, even for a short time, so keep your guard up.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy JONAH ENGEL BROMWICHJAN. 18, 2018
It was Michelle’s birthday.So what was former President Barack Obama doing there, smiling out from phone screens as one of the 91 winners of the Wednesday night game of HQ Trivia, the live show that more than a million people play twice a day?Had he really passed up celebrating his wife’s 54th birthday to compete for a chance to win a tiny share of a $2,000 jackpot, after both of them reportedly received an advance of more than $60 million for a pair of books?Was the $21.98 he ended up winning really worth it to miss celebrating with his partner of 25 years? Was this Instagram tribute to her posted earlier in the day with the knowledge that he would have to excuse himself for about 15 minutes at 9 p.m.?It was the only thing that the HQties of Twitter wanted to know.
            I really want to believe that the "Obama" who won HQ is the actual President Obama.        Even Scott Rogowksy, the game’s cult hero host, acknowledged Mr. Obama’s image, though he seemed to take the president’s presence in stride.Advertisement“We salute you, sir,” he said. “Thank you for your service.”Of course, the 44th president is famously competitive, whether it be over the tastiness of his chili recipe or the number of push-ups he can pump out. For his birthday each year, he competes in a round-robin of athletic competitions with some of his closest friends.AdvertisementIn 2009, his first year in the White House, Michelle gathered a group to play basketball with him at Camp David.“He has a general philosophy that whatever he does, he’s going to do the very best he can do,” his friend Marty Nesbitt told The Times in 2012.One would assume that drive would extend to a trivia game that other celebrities have proved capable of winning. With the help of his family, the 86-year-old newsman Dan Rather was able to pull off a win at Christmas.HQ played it coy in a statement: “The Secret Service will be pleased to hear that we don’t share details on the identities of our players.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The game has grown prodigiously since its introduction in August, attracting tens of thousands of people to its December games and peaking (for now) at 1.3 million players in a game on Sunday.And Mr. Obama certainly seems as if he would have known the steps involved in a wine tasting (swirl before smelling), and be familiar with the songwriting career of Alan Thicke, knowledge that was integral to winning Wednesday’s second game.But a spokeswoman said that Mr. Obama, to the disappointment of all who have known the delight of surviving what the game calls a savage question, was not the account that had shared the jackpot Wednesday night.“President Obama is as competitive a trivia player as anybody,” said Katie Hill, a spokeswoman for Mr. Obama. “But he was celebrating his wife’s birthday last night with dinner and a play. In other words, not exactly the most conducive environment for gaming on a phone.”Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. How long does Dropbox keep previous versions of Word files around? A. For those with free basic or Plus accounts, Dropbox keeps a complete version history of each file you have stored and edited online for 30 days. If you pay extra for a Dropbox Business or Dropbox Professional account, you get 120 days of version history for your files. (The company no longer sells an “extended version history” option for Dropbox Plus accounts that kept a year’s worth of editing changes to a file.) With any plan, changes made to a file downloaded for offline editing are not included in the version history records.When you are working on a document and realize you want to go back to an earlier draft, you can time travel by logging into your account on the Dropbox site, clicking the three-dot Menu icon next to the name of the file and selecting Version History. The next screen shows a list of all the variations of a file within the version-history window. Click the file name to preview it or check the date. Click the Restore button when you find the one you want.If you use the Dropbox badge — a pop-up icon that appears on the edge of Microsoft Office files — you have a shortcut. Click the Dropbox badge icon and select Version History from the menu to jump to the Dropbox website.Dropbox is not the only company that provides such file-history features. Google Docs, Microsoft OneDrive and Apple’s iWork files with its iCloud Drive service (or the document-restoration tools that arrived with macOS Sierra) are among those with version-history options. Newer versions of Microsoft Office include file-history and recovery tools. Standard system backup utilities, like Apple’s Time Machine or Microsoft’s backup and restore software for Windows, can also help you recover past file variations.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy NICK WINGFIELDJAN. 18, 2018
SEATTLE — Like a college applicant waiting for that special message in the mail, officials in Boston got what they wanted on Thursday: a cryptic four-sentence note informing them that the city made the finals in its bid to host Amazon’s second headquarters.“We would like to move Boston forward in the process so we can continue to learn more about your community, your talent, and potential real estate options,” Holly Sullivan, an Amazon executive, wrote in the note. “Please email me back with available times for a call so we can discuss next steps.”Boston was one of 20 places in the United States and Canada that made Amazon’s list, joining cities that had been widely expected to make the cut, like Denver and Dallas, and surprises like Nashville and Columbus, Ohio.The winner could get up to 50,000 high-paying jobs and $5 billion in investment, figures that Amazon has dangled in front of local officials, setting off an unprecedented competition to be the second home for one of the internet’s mightiest companies. In all, 238 cities and regions applied to bring the company to town, many using promises of tax breaks and public charm offensives to gain favor with the e-commerce giant.AdvertisementThe finalists include places like Newark, where the local economy has struggled for decades, and hip centers like Miami and Austin, Tex. For other cities, like Los Angeles and New York, luring Amazon would cement their place as centers of the tech industry.In seeking a home for its second headquarters, Amazon winnowed a list of 238 candidates to 20 finalists, including Atlanta, Nashville and Miami.The other finalists are Atlanta; Chicago; Indianapolis; Montgomery County, Md.; Northern Virginia; Philadelphia; Pittsburgh; Raleigh, N.C.; Washington and Toronto — the only one outside the United States.AdvertisementOfficials from the 20 locations celebrated their selections and, in most cases, reiterated their pitches for why Amazon should ultimately pick them. Ras Baraka, mayor of Newark, said Amazon would have “a tremendous social and economic impact on this city, state and region by coming to Newark.”Kathleen Wynne, the premier of Ontario, the province where Toronto is located, reacted with what could be perceived as a dig at her American competitors. Toronto was the “obvious choice” for Amazon, in part because of Canada’s universal health care system and its openness to immigrants, she said.“We are already welcoming the best and brightest talent from around the world — no matter where you come from, you are welcome and you will feel at home in Ontario,” Ms. Wynne said.Many of the cities selected had been considered shoo-ins from the moment Amazon announced the search in September, largely because they closely matched the attributes that the company said it wanted in a second home, which it is calling HQ2. Those criteria included a metropolitan area with a population greater than one million and the ability to attract and keep strong technical talent.But there were several surprise snubs, too. Amazon rejected applications from Detroit, Phoenix and San Diego, plus all the bids from Mexico. The list leaned east, away from the tech-saturated hubs of the West Coast.“Getting from 238 to 20 was very tough — all the proposals showed tremendous enthusiasm and creativity,” Ms. Sullivan, Amazon’s head of economic development, said in a statement. “Through this process we learned about many new communities across North America that we will consider as locations for future infrastructure investment and job creation.”AdvertisementAmazon shrouded its selection process in secrecy. On Thursday, the company said little about how it had pared down the list, other than to say it based its choices on the criteria it laid out for the search earlier.The process was conducted by a team of about a dozen people within Amazon, including economists, human resources managers and executives who oversee real estate, according to people briefed on the process who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the deliberations were private. Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive who was the mastermind behind turning the search into a public process and coined the term “HQ2,” was also involved, the people said.The veil of secrecy kept even the finalist cities in the dark until Thursday’s announcement.Muriel Bowser, the mayor of Washington, was on her way into the office when a deputy mayor called and said that the city had made the Top 20. “I was, of course, pleased, but not that surprised because we know that Washington, D.C., matches what Amazon is looking for,” Ms. Bowser said.Hans Riemer, president of the Montgomery County Council, found out from a friend via text message.“My heart skipped a beat,” he said.The process will now shift into a new phase, with Amazon representatives communicating more directly with the finalist cities as they prepare to select a winner later this year — and perhaps with cities being even more outspoken about why they should be chosen. Emissaries from Amazon are expected to visit the finalist locations in person.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some of the finalists are neighbors, setting up what are likely to be intense regional rivalries. Ms. Bowser said Amazon’s selection of Montgomery County and Northern Virginia — both near Washington — spoke to the appeal of the region’s work force.“Of course,” she added, “we believe that Washington, D.C. — with our top talent and world-class amenities — is the right place for Amazon HQ2.”Mayor Baraka said that Newark has a “friendly rivalry” with its bigger neighbor, New York, while adding that his city enjoys the advantages of cheaper real estate, space for development in its downtown and lots of fiber optic network capacity.Amazon needs a second headquarters because it’s bursting at the seams in its hometown, Seattle. Mr. Bezos founded the company there in 1994, and it has since transformed the city, employing more than 40,000 there. That expansion has also contributed to Seattle’s soaring cost of living and its traffic woes.AdvertisementTo lure applicants, Amazon showered local politicians with its own data about the effect the company has had on the Seattle economy, and some of the immediate economic benefits its second home would experience — including $5 billion in construction spending.It asked candidates to include in their bids a variety of detailed information, including potential building sites, crime and traffic stats and nearby recreational opportunities. Amazon also asked cities and states to describe the tax incentives available to offset its costs for building and operating its second headquarters. The most eye-popping of those offers was New Jersey’s promise of up to $7 billion in tax incentives to bring Amazon to Newark.Another tech giant, Apple, this week said it, too, was hunting for a location to build a major new campus. But the company’s chief executive, Tim Cook, said it would not conduct a public bidding process akin to Amazon’s. He said California and Texas were unlikely locations for the new campus because Apple already has significant operations there.Amazon’s search process has also attracted critics. Stacy Mitchell, co-director of the Institute for Local Self-Reliance, a nonprofit organization that serves as an advocate for local businesses, said that politicians were enhancing Amazon’s image just as the company’s market power was under growing scrutiny from groups like her own.“As these cities woo and grovel, they are basically communicating this idea that we should want Amazon to be bigger and more powerful in our economy,” Ms. Mitchell said.Ed Glaeser, a professor of economics at Harvard who studies cities, predicted that the winner of the contest would have in place the kind of positive economic attributes that mean it wouldn’t necessarily need Amazon to thrive.“At its best, the competition for Amazon has spurred cities to think about how to improve their quality of life more generally,” he said. “At its worst, the competition has become a distraction and a contest for throwing cash at the giant.”Tiffany Hsu, Patricia Mazzei, Conor Dougherty, Mitch Smith, Kirk Johnson and Zach Wichter contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Amazon Chooses 20 Finalists for Second Headquarters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have a few programs in my Windows 7 Startup folder, but my PC is slow. I think there’s a lot more happening when the computer boots up. Is there one place to look to see everything that’s running instead of poking around in a bunch of different windows?A. If you want a detailed overview of all the programs, services, drivers, tool bars and other bits of code that start up along with Windows, Microsoft has a free utility for you. The program is called Autoruns. It has been around for several years and works on several recent versions of Windows. A page on Microsoft’s site calls it “the most comprehensive knowledge of auto-starting locations of any start-up monitor.”Microsoft’s site has a link to download Autoruns and brief instructions for using it after you install it. With Autoruns, you can see and manage everything that starts up with Windows. Click any of the various tabs at the top of the window, like Scheduled Tasks, Office or Internet Explorer, to see what is running in those categories. Right-click on an entry to get more information and a menu of actions.For the less technically inclined, Autoruns may seem like a bewildering eyeful, but the Microsoft Press site has a longer, illustrated guide to the software. Windows-themed sites like the Windows Club or the How-To Geek also have helpful tips for using the utility.In addition to several programs in the Startup folder, PCs can take their time booting up as antivirus programs run their scans or online file-sharing services update their files, or if the hard drive is overstuffed and in need of defragmentation. Microsoft’s support site has its own page of suggestions and an automated Fixit tool designed to help improve system performance.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and BRIAN X. CHENJAN. 17, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Apple, which had long deferred paying taxes on its foreign earnings and had become synonymous with hoarding money overseas, unveiled plans on Wednesday that would bring back the vast majority of the $252 billion in cash that it held abroad and said it would make a sizable investment in the United States.With the moves, Apple took advantage of the new tax code that President Trump signed into law last month. A provision allows for a one-time repatriation of corporate cash held abroad at a lower tax rate than what would have been paid under the previous tax plan. Apple, which has 94 percent of its total cash of $269 billion outside the United States, said it would make a one-time tax payment of $38 billion on the repatriated cash.For years, Apple had said it would not bring its foreign earnings back to the United States until the corporate tax code changed, because such a move would be too costly. Now Apple’s bet to hold back on paying such taxes is reaping rewards under the Trump administration.In return, Mr. Trump and other Republicans can point to Apple as having come around because of their legislative action. The $38 billion tax payment from the Silicon Valley giant is set to be among the biggest payouts from the tax bill, and Apple said it would put some of the money it brought back toward 20,000 new jobs, a new domestic campus and other spending.Advertisement“I promised that my policies would allow companies like Apple to bring massive amounts of money back to the United States,”  Mr. Trump tweeted on Wednesday. “Great to see Apple follow through as a result of TAX CUTS.”
            I promised that my policies would allow companies like Apple to bring massive amounts of money back to the United States. Great to see Apple follow through as a result of TAX CUTS. Huge win for American workers and the USA! https://t.co/OwXVUyLOb1 Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said in a statement, “We have a deep sense of responsibility to give back to our country and the people who help make our success possible.”AdvertisementApple estimated that its direct impact on the American economy would total more than $350 billion over the next five years, but how much that goes beyond what the company would have spent anyway is unclear. Apple’s current pace of spending in the United States is $55 billion for 2018, so it was already on track to spend $275 billion over the next five years. After the $38 billion tax payment is subtracted, that leaves its new investment at roughly $37 billion over the next five years.A. M. Sacconaghi, a financial analyst for Sanford C. Bernstein, said Apple had consistently spent tens of billions of dollars on areas like staffing and capital expenditures in recent years. Bringing back the overseas cash, he said, does little to aid its expansion. But it makes the company appear to answer Mr. Trump’s call for more jobs to be created in the United States.“This is Apple putting its best foot forward consistent with objectives of the administration,” Mr. Sacconaghi said.Apple is one of several multinational giants that have kept a total of roughly $3 trillion in global profits off their domestic books to sidestep the previous 35 percent federal corporate tax rate. Under the new tax law, companies that make a one-time repatriation of cash will be taxed at a rate of 15.5 percent on cash holdings and 8 percent on nonliquid assets. That is lower than the new 21 percent corporate rate. And under the new tax code, Apple would also have been taxed whether it brought the money back or not.By shifting the money under the new terms, Apple has saved $43 billion in taxes, more than any other American company, according to the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, a research group in Washington.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other tech giants are set to follow suit in the coming months. Companies like Microsoft, Alphabet and Cisco also shifted their profits into offshore shell companies, avoiding billions of dollars in taxes, and are now in a better position to bring the money back.AdvertisementAlthough Republican supporters of the tax law argued that the influx of international profits would create jobs and increase wages, many economists disagreed that a one-time repatriation would have any substantial impact on real investment.Apple’s announcement, couched as a major investment in the United States instead of a massive financial windfall, followed years of criticism that the company did not do enough for the American economy because it makes most of its products in China and parked its profits  abroad.During the 2016 presidential campaign, Apple was a frequent target of Mr. Trump, who pledged that as president he would force the company to start making iPhones and Macs in the United States. While that hasn’t happened and is unlikely to, Apple has since gone on a charm offensive to demonstrate its value to the American economy.The company has highlighted the number of jobs created by the so-called app economy, an ecosystem of software and services that run on the iPhone and other Apple products. Last year, Apple also said it was creating a $1 billion fund to invest in advanced manufacturing in the United States. On Wednesday, Apple said it was increasing the size of that fund to $5 billion and noted that it was already backing projects from manufacturers in Kentucky and Texas.Apple, which is based in Cupertino, Calif., also took a page out of Amazon’s public relations strategy on Wednesday by saying it will open a new domestic campus in a location where it currently has no operations. Amazon garnered good will throughout the country last year when it announced plans to open a second corporate headquarters outside its home base of Seattle.Apple currently has about 84,000 employees in the United States, so 20,000 new jobs would be a 24 percent increase. The company added that it would invest more than $30 billion in capital expenditures, or spending on parts and the equipment required to produce them, over the next five years in the United States.For a comparison, Apple spent $14.9 billion in capital expenditures in the last fiscal year, though it did not specify how much it spends in the United States alone.For Apple, repatriating the cash creates opportunities that could include acquisitions and higher dividends for shareholders. The company had previously chosen to borrow money to fund its stock buybacks and dividends, instead of bringing its cash back from abroad. Over the last five years, Apple has returned $233 billion in cash to shareholders through buybacks and dividends.AdvertisementPaying $38 billion in taxes now is unlikely to strain Apple’s checkbook because the company had already earmarked $36.4 billion in anticipation that it would eventually have to pay taxes on its foreign earnings.“From a financial statement perspective, it’s going to be a nonevent,” said J. Richard Harvey, a Villanova University law professor and former Internal Revenue Service official. Other companies are not as prepared, he said, and would likely have to take a significant loss should they make a one-time cash repatriation.Apple employees will see benefits as well. Mr. Cook said in an email to staff on Wednesday that Apple was increasing investment in its employees by rewarding them with bonuses of $2,500 in restricted stock units, according to people familiar with the matter, who asked not to be identified because the plans were not public. Apple joins other companies, such as AT&T, that have issued employee bonuses since the tax law was signed.Patricia Cohen contributed reporting from New York.Follow Brian X. Chen and Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @bxchen and @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Apple, After Tax Cut Windfall, Will Bring Billions Back to U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Cecilia KangWASHINGTON — Senate Democrats announced on Tuesday that they were one supporter away from winning a vote to restore the so-called net neutrality rules that the Federal Communications Commission rolled back in December.But even if Democrats win that vote, Democrats have a long ways to go before they are able to reinstate rules that prevent internet service providers from creating fast and slow lanes for online users. Here is a look at their difficult road ahead, and some of the motivations:What are the Senate Democrats doing?Senate Democrats said on Tuesday that all 49 members of their caucus had agreed to sign on to a resolution that would overturn the F.C.C. repeal of net neutrality rules. They are using a tool of the Senate, the Congressional Review Act, which requires a simple majority to overturn a recent order by a federal agency.The Democrats also have the support of at least one Republican, Senator Susan Collins of Maine. So that leaves them searching for one more Republican to join their effort to get the necessary 51 votes.“Given how quickly we have gotten 50, we have a real chance of succeeding,” Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, said in a statement.If this passes, are the rules automatically reinstated?No. The House would have to pass a similar resolution, also using the Congressional Review Act, and the chances there are slim. Representative Mike Doyle, a Democrat from Pennsylvania, is leading the effort there and has 80 Democrats on board so far. But Speaker Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, could refuse to bring it to a vote. And 218 signatures would be needed to send it to the floor through a petition.Finally, the president would have to sign the legislation. That, too, seems unlikely, since the White House has said it supported the F.C.C.’s vote.When will the Senate introduce its bill?It could be months. Lawmakers have 60 days after the F.C.C. puts its December order in the federal registry to introduce their resolution. The agency hasn’t done that yet and could delay the process for several days and even weeks.If this is such a long shot, why are Democrats putting so much effort into it?Many Democrats would like to turn net neutrality into a bigger political issue ahead of the 2018 midterms. The efforts to overturn the F.C.C. order are aimed to raise awareness about an issue that has broad interest, particularly among younger voters, Democratic lawmakers have said. Consumer advocacy groups like Free Press, Demand Progress and Fight for the Future, have been singling out lawmakers who have either supported the F.C.C. order or have not spoken up in favor of restoring rules.“There will be a political price to pay for those on the wrong side of history. Momentum is on our side,” Mr. Markey has said.What are the other efforts going on around net neutrality?There are a few major fights underway to bring back net neutrality. On Tuesday, 22 attorneys general sued to block the F.C.C.’s repeal. The nonprofit Mozilla Foundation, the group behind Firefox web browsers, also sued the commission. More public interest groups and tech companies are also expected to take legal action.In addition, a few lawmakers have introduced bills to bring back rules.AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIJAN. 16, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The decade-plus evolution of YouTube from repository of cat videos and pirated content to potential TV replacement hit a road bump last year when marketers discovered their advertisements were showing up next to extremist videos and other unsavory content.Ever since, YouTube has been scrambling to come up with new policies that give advertisers more control over where their ads go and provide additional assurance that the videos on the online service are better screened.On Tuesday in a blog post, YouTube said it had altered the threshold for which videos can accept advertisements and pledged more human oversight of its top-tier videos. If that sounds familiar, that’s because YouTube has made similar promises in the past.“There’s no denying 2017 was a difficult year, with several issues affecting our community and our advertising partners,” Paul Muret, a Google vice president, wrote in the blog post. “We are passionate about protecting our users, advertisers and creators and making sure YouTube is not a place that can be co-opted by bad actors.”AdvertisementThe recent uproar over a video of a dead body hanging from a tree in a Japanese forest, posted by the YouTube star Logan Paul, demonstrated that policing the platform remains as challenging as ever.AdvertisementThe company said the YouTube Partner Program would now accept advertisements only for video creators whose videos have garnered 4,000 “watch hours” over the last 12 months and have at least 1,000 subscribers. YouTube said a four-minute video watched by more than 60,000 people would most likely surpass that watch hours threshold.The new standard is an update to a rule, announced in April, that said only creators with more than 10,000 lifetime views on their videos would be able to collect advertising money. YouTube said a standard based solely on views did not filter out enough “bad actors” and that coupling the watch hours with subscribers would make it harder to game the system.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The challenge for YouTube is to make sure advertisements don’t show up next to troublesome content without cutting off the revenue stream of smaller video makers whose niche content helps make YouTube different from mainstream television.YouTube also pledged that humans would screen all videos from creators who are part of Google Preferred, which the company says is limited to the top 5 percent of all content on YouTube when measured by popularity and engagement. YouTube created the Google Preferred tier as a way to assure advertisers that they could place advertisements on the best YouTube content, while allowing creators to generate guaranteed revenue from videos.However, the content on Google Preferred has not always been very palatable to advertisers. Over the last year, Mr. Paul and another one of YouTube’s biggest stars, PewDiePie, were dropped from Google Preferred for posting inappropriate videos.In the blog post, YouTube said all of the Google Preferred videos in the United States would be vetted by humans by mid-February. The new monitoring system will extend globally by the end of March.While Google has long argued that the volume of video content on YouTube makes it hard to rely solely on human screeners, computers have not mastered the nuances required to distinguish between appropriate and inappropriate content.In December, YouTube said it planned to hire thousands of reviewers to screen content on the site and remove inappropriate content.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: YouTube Updates Rule For Ads as It Promises More Scrutiny of Videos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 16, 2018
Q. How do I make sure I am sending a photo at the highest possible resolution when I attach it to an email message on my phone? A. Before you send the photo, check the image-size settings when you attach the image to the message so you know you have selected a high-resolution picture. If you pick a low-resolution photo from the start, that is what your recipient will get.To help those with slow connections, limited-data plans or internet provider limits on attachment size, some mobile email apps can reduce the size of a photo attached to a message that’s going out. Choosing the “small” or “medium” size scales the image down, but also reduces the resolution when it arrives at its destination. Smartphone apps vary, but some can automatically resize photos, so check your default settings.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The “large,” “original” or “actual” sizes you may see on the menu create a larger file attachment and take longer to send. However, the recipient gets the photo at a higher resolution. Once the photo is attached to the message, you should see the file size displayed.As for images attached to text messages, some wireless carriers might compress photos sent by SMS or with certain messaging apps. Some software, like iOS 11 for the iPhone, have an optional setting to automatically reduce the size of images sent with the iMessage service to lower bandwidth consumption.Desktop email programs like Microsoft Outlook and Apple Mail can also resize photos attached to messages you send. For images that exceed your mail server’s size limits, you can also share links to the high-resolution files with tools like Apple’s MailDrop, Gmail using Google Drive or Microsoft OneDrive — services that are often integrated into your mail program to do the heavy lifting anyway. Third-party file-sharing services like Box, Dropbox and iDrive have a similar function.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Sending Photographs At High Resolution.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 15, 2018
Q. Is it safe to install the Windows patch for these new Spectre and Meltdown bugs? Do they affect Linux? (And who names these security flaws, anyway?)A. Meltdown and Spectre, the two recently announced security flaws that can expose personal data to hackers, could potentially affect Linux systems, along with computers and devices running Windows, Mac and other operating-system software. These new bugs are actually in the computer’s hardware — specifically, in the central processing unit.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Check Microsoft’s support site for the absolute latest news, but the company previously warned that its updates for Windows 7 and Windows 10 can conflict with certain antivirus programs; users should contact those software makers about updates. Early reports that the Windows patches were causing severe problems on computers with AMD processors prompted Microsoft to temporarily halt updates to many of those systems for a few days. The software fixes are expected to make the computer run more slowly, but Microsoft has noted that newer processors running Windows 10 should feel the least impact.The Meltdown vulnerability exists in laptops, desktops and cloud-based computers running most types of Intel processors made since 1995. The Spectre flaw can affect those same systems as well, but also smartphones, tablets and other gadgets running on processors made by other companies, including AMD and ARM.To find out details for your particular system, Graz University of Technology’s “Meltdown and Spectre” site at https://meltdownattack.com has an extensive collection of links to information about patches from most major hardware and software makers, including several Linux companies. Intel also has a page on its site with links and information about updates.As for the origin of the names assigned to these bugs, the “Meltdown and Spectre” site has an explanation. Meltdown gets is name because it “basically melts security boundaries which are normally enforced by the hardware.” Spectre’s moniker is “based on the root cause, speculative execution,” and as the researchers note, “As it is not easy to fix, it will haunt us for quite some time.”Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Details on Addressing Security Flaws.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By SHEERA FRENKEL, NICHOLAS CASEY and PAUL MOZURJAN. 14, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — One morning in October, the editors of Página Siete, Bolivia’s third-largest news site, noticed that traffic to their outlet coming from Facebook was plummeting.The publication had recently been hit by cyberattacks, and editors feared it was being targeted by hackers loyal to the government of President Evo Morales.But it wasn’t the government’s fault. It was Facebook’s. The Silicon Valley company was testing a new version of its hugely popular News Feed, peeling off professional news sites from what people normally see and relegating them to a new section of Facebook called Explore. Like it or not, Bolivia had become a guinea pig in the company’s continual quest to reinvent itself.As Facebook updates and tweaks its service in order to keep users glued to their screens, countries like Bolivia are ideal testing grounds thanks to their growing, internet-savvy populations. But these changes can have significant consequences, like limiting the audience for nongovernmental news sources and — surprisingly — amplifying the impact of fabricated and sensational stories.AdvertisementOn Thursday, Facebook announced plans to make similar changes to its News Feed around the world. The company said it was trying to increase “meaningful interaction” on its site by drawing attention to content from family and friends while de-emphasizing content from brands and publishers, including The New York Times.AdvertisementThe changes are being made as the company finds itself embroiled in a larger debate over its role in spreading fake news and misinformation aimed at influencing elections in the United States and other nations.Facebook said these News Feed modifications were not identical to those introduced last fall in six countries through its Explore program, but both alterations favor posts from friends and family over professional news sites. And what happened in those countries illustrates the unintended consequences of such a change in an online service that now has a global reach of more than two billion people every month.In Slovakia, where right-wing nationalists took nearly 10 percent of Parliament in 2016, publishers said the changes had actually helped promote fake news. With official news organizations forced to spend money to place themselves in the News Feed, it is now up to users to share information.“People usually don’t share boring news with boring facts,” said Filip Struharik, the social media editor of Denník N, a Slovakian subscription news site that saw a 30 percent drop in Facebook engagement after the changes. Mr. Struharik, who has been cataloging the effects of Facebook Explore through a monthly tally, has noted a steady rise in engagement on sites that publish fake or sensationalist news.A bogus news story that spread in December illustrates the problem, Mr. Struharik said. The story claimed that a Muslim man had thanked a good Samaritan for returning his lost wallet, and had warned the Samaritan of a terrorist attack that was planned at a Christmas market.The fabricated story circulated so widely that the local police issued a statement saying it wasn’t true. But when the police went to issue the warning on Facebook, they found that the message — unlike the fake news story they meant to combat — could no longer appear on News Feed because it came from an official account.Facebook explained its goals for the Explore program in Slovakia, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Bolivia, Guatemala and Serbia in a blog post in October. “The goal of this test is to understand if people prefer to have separate places for personal and public content,” wrote Adam Mosseri, head of Facebook’s News Feed. “There is no current plan to roll this out beyond these test countries.”AdvertisementThe company did not respond to a list of questions about the Explore program, but Mr. Mosseri said in a statement on Friday that the company took its role as a “global platform for information” seriously.“We have a responsibility to the people who read, watch and share news on Facebook, and every test is done with that responsibility in mind,” he said.The impact of the changes to the News Feed were also felt in Cambodia. Months into the experiment (Facebook hasn’t said when it will end), Cambodians still don’t know where to find trusted, established news on Facebook, said Stuart White, editor of The Phnom Penh Post, an English-language newspaper.Nongovernmental organizations working on issues like education and health care also complained that the changes broke down lines of communication to Cambodians in need.Facebook has become particularly important in Cambodia. The country’s leader, Hun Sen, has cracked down on political opponents, activists and media, effectively transforming the struggling democracy into a one-party state. Journalists have been arrested, newspapers have been shut down, and Facebook has emerged as an important, more independent channel for information.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That is, if you can find that information. Mr. White recalled a conversation this month with a friend who casually observed the lack of political conversation on Facebook.“He said he thought the government had banned politics on Facebook,” Mr. White said. “He had no idea that Facebook had created Explore or was placing news there. He’s a young, urbanite, English-speaking Cambodian. If he didn’t know about it, what do you think the effects are on other parts of the country?”In Bolivia, the alterations to the News Feed also occurred in a country where the government and the press have found themselves at odds, with news sites like Página Siete frequently criticizing Mr. Morales, a left-wing populist who has accumulated enormous power since being elected president in 2006.“We became the only media to take on the government,” said Rodolfo Huallpa, the web editor of Página Siete. Half of the site’s traffic came from social media, with the lion’s share of that from Facebook, he said. Since Explore was introduced, overall web traffic to the site has dropped 20 percent.The loss of visitors from Facebook was readily apparent in October, and Mr. Huallpa could communicate with Facebook only through a customer service form letter. He received an automatic reply in return.AdvertisementAfter complaints from other outlets, Facebook eventually released a statement on a blog in Spanish explaining the Explore feature and the testing being done in Bolivia and other countries. But Facebook offered no means to contact it, Mr. Huallpa said.“We can’t talk to Zuckerberg, we can’t even talk to a customer service representative,” said Isabel Mercado, the editor of Página Siete, referring to Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg.The Explore experiment has reduced traffic by 30 to 60 percent at the website of Los Tiempos, the main newspaper of Cochabamba, the country’s fourth-largest city, said Fabiola Chambi, the publication’s web editor.Ms. Chambi, however, fears the main consequence of the Explore function will be deepening polarization in a country already divided by ideology. “It’s good to see things from your friends and your family, but there needs to be diversity of information,” she said. “The miscellany is good.”Bolivia has also seen an increase in fake news as the established news sites are tucked behind the Explore function.During nationwide judicial elections in December, one post widely shared on Facebook claimed to be from an election official saying votes would be valid only if an X was marked next to the candidate’s name. Another post that day said government officials had put pens with erasable ink in the voting booths.Vladimir Tirado, a social media expert in Bolivia, said the government might simply begin paying for posts to appear on users’ News Feeds, an option that he said most newsrooms could not afford.Advertisement“Whoever has more money will appear more,” Mr. Tirado said. “In this sense, the government will certainly win.”Ms. Chambi of Los Tiempos said her newsroom hardly had enough money to pay its journalists to report stories, let alone to distribute them as paid posts on Facebook. The situation has left her uneasy about the role that the tech giant may play in her country.“It’s a private company — they have the right to do as they please, of course,” she said. “But the first question we asked is ‘Why Bolivia?’ And we don’t even have the possibility of asking why. Why us?”Sheera Frenkel reported from San Francisco; Nicholas Casey from La Paz, Bolivia; and Paul Mozur from Shanghai. Monica Machicao contributed reporting from La Paz.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Test Countries For Facebook Illustrate Risk.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 12, 2018
Q. I used Google Hangouts for the first time in Berlin. Now, if I enter a new contact into Google Contacts, it assumes the phone number is German and I have to manually change it each time. Is there a way to change the default country?Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A. If your Google account seems to think you are still in Germany, one place to check for a “default country” designation is in the settings for the Gmail account that is associated with your Google Hangouts calls. In a web browser, log into that Gmail account and click the gear-shaped Settings icon in the upper-right corner of the Gmail window.On the Gmail Settings screen, click the General tab if it is not already selected. In the Phone Numbers section of the page, a “default country code” pop-up menu allows you to set the United States as your home base. Click the Save Changes button when you are finished. If you use Google Hangouts or Google Voice on any mobile devices, restart them after you have saved the changes on the computer. Google’s Hangouts Help page might have answers to other issues with the service.For those unfamiliar with the software, Google Hangouts can be used to make video calls, as well as telephone calls from the computer’s web browser; you need to have a Google Account and compatible hardware. A Google Hangouts app is available for Android and iOS devices, as is a Chrome browser extension. Google Hangouts can also send and receive text messages between users and groups.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NICOLE PERLROTH and MIKE ISAACJAN. 12, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — “Hello Joe,” read the November 2016 email from someone identifying himself as “John Doughs.” “I have found a major vulnerability in Uber.”The email appeared to be no different from other messages that Joe Sullivan, Uber’s chief security officer, and his team routinely received through the company’s “bug bounty” program, which pays hackers for reporting holes in the ride-hailing service’s systems, according to current and former Uber security employees.Yet the note and Uber’s eventual $100,000 payment to the hacker, which was initially celebrated internally as a rare win in corporate security, have since turned into a public relations debacle for the company. In November, when Uber disclosed the 2016 incident and how the information of 57 million driver and rider accounts had been at risk, the company’s chief executive since August, Dara Khosrowshahi, called it a “failure” that it had not notified people earlier. Mr. Sullivan and a security lawyer, Craig Clark, were fired.In the weeks since, Uber’s handling of the hacking has come under major scrutiny. Not only did Uber pay an outsize amount to the hacker, but it also did not disclose that it had briefly lost control of so much consumer and driver data until a year later. The behavior raised questions of a cover-up and a lack of transparency, as well as whether the payment really was just a ransom paid by a security operation that had acted on its own for too long.AdvertisementThe hacking is now the subject of at least four lawsuits, with attorneys general in five states investigating whether Uber broke laws on data-breach notifications. In addition, the United States attorney for Northern California has begun a criminal investigation into the matter.AdvertisementMost of all, the hacking and Uber’s response have fueled a debate about whether companies that have crusaded to lock up their systems can scrupulously work with hackers without putting themselves on the wrong side of the law.Uber is illustrative of a breed of company that aimed to bulletproof its security. While many corporations were for years blissfully unaware of hackers penetrating their systems, Uber and others recruited former law enforcement and intelligence analysts and installed layers of technical defenses and password security. They joined other companies in embracing the same hackers they once treated as criminals, shelling out bug bounties as high as $200,000 to report flaws.Yet since the fallout from Uber’s disclosure, Silicon Valley companies have taken a harder look at their bounty programs. At least three have put their programs under review, according to two consultants who have confidential relationships with those companies, which they declined to name. Others said criminal prosecutions for not reporting John Doughs would deter ethical hackers who would otherwise come forward, causing even more security breaches.“Anything that causes organizations to take a step backwards and not welcome contributions from the security community will have a negative impact on all of us,” said Alex Rice, a co-founder of HackerOne, a security company whose business is to work with customers, including Uber, to manage interactions with and payments to hackers.The situation is complicated by Uber’s track record for pushing boundaries, which put it under scrutiny last year and helped spur the resignation of Travis Kalanick, its longtime chief executive, in June. Mr. Khosrowshahi has since vowed to change the way the company conducts itself.This account of Uber’s hacking and the company’s response was based on more than a dozen interviews with people who dealt with the incident, many of whom declined to be identified because of the confidentiality of their exchanges. Many are current or former members of Uber’s security team, who defended their actions as a prime example of how executives should respond to security problems. The New York Times also obtained more than two dozen internal Uber emails and documents related to the incident.In a statement, Mr. Sullivan disputed the notion that the 2016 episode was a breach and said Uber had treated it as an authorized vulnerability disclosure.Advertisement“I was surprised and disappointed when those who wanted to portray Uber in a negative light quickly suggested this was a cover-up,” he said, adding that he was proud its engineers had been able to fix the issue before it could be abused. He declined to discuss disclosure because of the active state investigations.Matt Kallman, an Uber spokesman, said, “We stand by our decision to very publicly disclose the 2016 data breach — not because it was easy, but because it was the right thing to do.”Through a spokesman, Mr. Kalanick declined to comment.Uber started its bounty program in March 2016, challenging hackers to find bugs that could specifically lead to the exposure of sensitive user data. The higher risk the bug was, the more Uber would pay. In Uber’s calculus, the payouts were better than learning about a vulnerability only after attackers had abused it.By the time Mr. Sullivan got John Doughs email, Uber had paid rewards to hundreds of hackers. Mr. Sullivan forwarded the John Doughs note to his team for vetting and, if all checked out, patching and payment.Uber’s security team used nicknames for hackers, particularly the colorful, anonymous ones who engaged with the company. John Doughs was called “Preacher” for his admonitions that Uber should be better at security.“It’s very disappointing to be finding this vulnerability in such way,” the hacker wrote in an email to Rob Fletcher, Uber’s product security engineering manager. “Especially coming from a company like Uber.”Other emails obtained by The Times show Mr. Fletcher treated the incident as a bounty and encouraged Preacher to provide proof of the vulnerability, including sending a few lines of data from the database he had breached.According to the emails obtained by The Times, Uber soon discovered that some of its employees had left certain computer code known as keys on a programming site called Github. Those keys had allowed Preacher to gain access to Uber’s Amazon web servers, where it stored source code as well as 57 million customer and driver accounts, including driver’s license numbers for some 600,000 Uber drivers. It was a major oversight. To fix it, Uber had to inform everyone at the company that it was temporarily shutting down access to Github.“Yes we expect at least 100,000$ I am sure you understand what this could’ve turned out to be if it was to get in the wrong hands, I mean you guys had private keys, private data stored, backups of everything, config files etc... This would’ve heart the company a lot more than you think.”Emails between the hacker and Mr. Fletcher continued. In some, Mr. Fletcher thanked the hacker for helping the company fix the oversight. In two emails, Preacher’s motivations appeared to veer closer toward blackmail. In one, he demanded “high compensation” for his findings. After Mr. Fletcher said the company’s maximum bounty was $10,000, Preacher said he and his team would only accept “six digits.”AdvertisementMr. Fletcher said he would need to seek authorization for a $100,000 payment, and would need Preacher’s reassurances that he would delete the data he had downloaded. Mr. Fletcher also pushed the hacker to take payment through HackerOne, which requires bounty recipients to disclose their real identities for tax requirements.Mr. Fletcher drew further details about the hacker out through emails, including tidbits about his identity, his internet hosting provider, the location of his computer and proof that he deleted his copy of Uber’s downloaded data by looking at a virtual copy of his system provided by his host.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to the emails, Uber at one point extended Preacher an all-expenses paid trip to San Francisco, where the company is based. Uber asked the hacker to discuss his security techniques and offered to introduce him to companies that might be interested in his skills. Preacher declined.By then, Uber’s executives had decided what to do. Mr. Kalanick signed off on the $100,000 payment, so long as the hacker signed an agreement to destroy any data exposed in his discovery, according to the emails.Preacher’s trail of digital bread crumbs eventually led to a 20-year-old whose first name was Brandon and who was living in a Florida trailer park with his family, according to the emails. In one email, Uber offered to send someone to meet Brandon at a local coffee shop. Brandon declined to leave his home and suggested that the employee meet him there. It was there that Brandon signed agreements assuring Uber that he had deleted the data he had downloaded.The Times was unable to learn Brandon’s full name. An email to the John Doughs account bounced back.Uber’s security team was soon celebrating its response to what could have been a major security breach. Mr. Sullivan and his colleagues were praised in year-end performance reviews, including by Mr. Kalanick, according to current and former employees.What is now at issue is whether Uber executives broke the law with the $100,000 payment and should have quickly notified customers or officials of the discovery. The issue is not legally clear cut.AdvertisementLaws concerning bug bounties are ambiguous. The Justice Department weighed into bug disclosure programs for the first time in July and largely left it to organizations to decide what access they will authorize for hackers and what they can do with the data. In Uber’s case, its bounty guidelines authorized and encouraged hackers to look for vulnerabilities that exposed its most sensitive user data.Breach disclosure laws also differ state to state. The state laws most relevant to Uber’s case require disclosure if names are exposed in combination with driver’s license numbers in a “breach of security.”Brandon received two payments of $50,000 each from Uber on Dec. 8, 2016, according to the emails. Uber continued trading emails with Brandon during 2017, until the conversation dwindled.Last fall, when two outside law firms for Uber learned about the payment to the hacker, they advised the company that the incident should have been disclosed, according to an Uber employee familiar with the matter. Mr. Sullivan and Mr. Clark, the lawyer who directly oversaw the bounty payment, were fired for not seeking outside counsel on the issue of whether to disclose, this person said.That prompted a call to Mr. Sullivan while he was preparing Thanksgiving dinner, according to two people familiar with the matter. He was fired, effective immediately.Follow Nicole Perlroth and Mike Isaac on Twitter: @nicoleperlroth and @MikeIsaac.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber’s $100,000 ‘Bug Bounty’:  Inside a Secret Fee to a Hacker.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH and MATTHEW HAAGJAN. 12, 2018
Facebook has overhauled how it ranks the posts, videos and photos that appear in its users’ News Feeds, introducing major changes on Thursday designed to put what friends and family have to say first.In short, you’ll see more posts from friends that have spurred lively debates in the comments. And you’ll see fewer cooking videos from brands and publications. Prioritizing what your friends and family share is part of an effort by Facebook to help people spend time on the site in what it thinks is a more meaningful way.Facebook is making the changes by tinkering under the hood, reconfiguring its algorithms that guess what you may be most interested in. Here’s what it means for you.Facebook is not being coy about this: Those third-party organizations that took over large swaths of your News Feed years ago — sites that post funny pictures and memes, sell you clothing, or deliver articles about the world — will have the visibility of their posts scaled back under the new arrangement.AdvertisementIn a post on the company’s blog Thursday, the head of its News Feed team, Adam Mosseri, wrote that showing more posts from friends and family “means we’ll show less public content, including videos and other posts from publishers or businesses.”AdvertisementFor many people, that news will come as a relief. In December, Facebook itself acknowledged that passive consumption of information — surfing shopping websites or reading news articles like this one — is often bad for your mood. (Sorry!)It gestured toward a 2015 paper in the Journal of Experimental Psychology that showed that passive usage of the website, even for just 10 minutes a day, had a negative effect on students’ sense of well-being.Those who still want to see posts from their favorite brands and trusted, wonderful publishers, one of whose articles you may be reading at this very moment, will be able to. The options under the News Feed tab on Facebook will allow users to prioritize the pages (and friends) whose posts they are most interested in.And Mr. Mosseri explained that other posts that your Facebook connections find engaging will also rise to the top. Conversations stemming from live videos, celebrities’ posts, private groups and other highly interactive post types will be among those highlighted on the new News Feed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Without that kind of explicit direction, though, Facebook’s top priority will remain posts from your friends and family.“To do this, we will predict which posts you might want to interact with your friends about, and show these posts higher in feed,” Mr. Mosseri wrote. A video attached to his post said that indicators the algorithm takes into account are likes, comments and shares.Facebook will remain customizable, with the options that allow you to limit your exposure to certain people — even if those people are your pesky siblings or that one over-the-top uncle. One option is to quietly “snooze” a Facebook friend, which will cause their posts to disappear from your feed for 30 days.Facebook says that it has long been its policy that “friends and family come first,” language that appeared in the site’s “News Feed Values,” which were posted in 2016.AdvertisementImplicit in the changes that Facebook introduced this week is that for many users, the News Feed had become mindless scrolling, moving from one autoplaying video to the next, without offering people much of substance. It was serving up junk food.In an interview with The New York Times, Mark Zuckerberg said that it was the company’s expectation that many users would be gravitating to other sites to get their viral fix. But with more than two billion monthly users, Facebook has gained a foothold that allows it to play a longer game. And Mr. Zuckerberg said that if people begin to feel better while on the site, that Facebook’s business, and its users, will benefit.“I expect the time people spend on Facebook and some measures of engagement will go down,” he said in his post about the changes. “But I also expect the time you do spend on Facebook will be more valuable.”Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman. Follow Matthew Haag on Twitter: @MatthewHaag.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: What Facebook’s Changes  Mean for Your News Feed,  And the Company’s Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
JAN. 12, 2018
Imagine you’re a cookie mogul. You figured out a way to make lots of money by giving away delicious cookies for free, and in less than a decade, you created a global cookie behemoth.But recently your cookie kingdom has begun to crumble. Scientists are worried that people are eating so many of your cookies that they’re making themselves sick — yet they keep eating more, because who can say no to free cookies? There are concerns that your cookies are crowding out the market for normal food; after your success, fruit and vegetable companies have pivoted to free cookies, and now much of the global food supply is just cookies. Rising cookie addiction might even have helped a foreign government influence your country’s election.So you decide to do something. You convene your best bakers, and you tell them, look, from now on, we don’t just care about how many free cookies we can shove into people’s gullets. We want to take a holistic look at the overall cookie experience. We want people to eat some cookies, sure, but we don’t want them to eat too many, so we will have to make our free cookies less addictive and more “meaningful.” Let’s maybe put carrots and kale and broccoli in the cookies.What sort of cookie company wants people to eat fewer cookies?One named Facebook, apparently.On Thursday, Mark Zuckerberg announced that as part of his effort to turn the social network into a force for good, the company would make a significant change to its News Feed. The feed — the list of status updates the app displays on its primary screen — will prioritize posts that elicit what Facebook calls “meaningful” interactions with friends and family, and will downgrade things like links to articles and videos, which it says encourages you to passively scroll through the News Feed.AdvertisementThe effort sounds helpful, even noble, given that Mr. Zuckerberg acknowledged the change could be bad for business in the short run. But if you think about Facebook’s primary service as free cookies rather than social networking, the underlying difficulties with the plan become obvious, and even existential.Do people really want a more “meaningful” Facebook any more than they want healthy cookies? Didn’t we get hooked on Facebook for its easy outrages in the first place — for the sugar, not for the broccoli? And if Facebook’s underlying business model is based on how much time we all spend eating there, can the company ever truly resist the pressure to keep plying us with more cookies?AdvertisementThese questions don’t mean that Mr. Zuckerberg’s new plan will fail. But if he really does want to make the time we spend on Facebook count as “time well spent,” I suspect Facebook will have to change much more radically than it is now letting on. It can’t just become a slightly healthier cookie company; it may have to get out of the sugar business altogether. And what, then, happens to all those billions in future profits? (On Friday, the stock market seemed to harbor the same worry; Facebook’s stock fell 4.5 percent.)Mr. Zuckerberg says his concerns are raised by research showing that some uses of social networking make people feel bad about themselves. As two of Facebook’s researchers described in a recent blog post, mindlessly reading the News Feed without interacting much — just scrolling and pressing Like occasionally — was associated with lower mental well-being.But a study that Facebook’s scientists conducted with outside researchers found that deeper sharing on the network — “sharing messages, posts and comments with close friends and reminiscing about past interactions,” per the blog post — improves a person’s well-being. It’s this sort of activity that Facebook is trying to encourage with the new design. Think of it as the kale cookie of Facebook.Facebook is conceding that when the good kind of social networking is given priority over the bad kind, people are likely to spend less time on the service. What’s unclear is how much less time. According to data collected by Nielsen and crunched by Brian Wieser, an analyst at Pivotal Research Group, American adults spent about 37 minutes a day on Facebook in September. What if it turns out that if we’re going to spend only worthwhile time on Facebook, we need only 10 or 15 minutes there a day?It’s likely that Facebook has a very good idea of how its changes will affect engagement; the company is obsessive about running experiments and modeling its changes using data, and it probably would not have pushed this change if the numbers were catastrophic.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But its modeling is most likely only a guide to the short term. What Facebook can’t predict is how the outside world might react — how users, advertisers, investors and competitors will alter their behavior in the face of a less immediately engaging News Feed.AdvertisementMr. Zuckerberg is a famously fierce and ruthless competitor. If it looks like Facebook’s business is starting to suffer because of the healthier News Feed, and if some competitor comes along to offer us all the free cookies that Facebook is denying us, I doubt Mr. Zuckerberg will be able to stick to his guns.There is a story that veterans at Facebook like to tell to illustrate the power of the News Feed. When Facebook first unveiled the feed back in 2006, many users hated it. They thought a running list of people’s status updates was a kind of invasion of privacy — before, updates were hidden on people’s walls — and lots of people mobilized against it.People started creating Facebook groups promising to boycott Facebook, and within days those groups quickly grew to hundreds of thousands of members — the biggest groups that had ever formed on Facebook. Which, oddly, backfired. To the News Feed’s creators, the protests only served to prove the News Feed’s utility; it was only thanks to the viral power of the News Feed that people were able to mobilize against News Feed.All these years later, the story also suggests how hard it will be to alter the purpose of the feed. The News Feed’s killer app has always been easy, viral outrage. It’s always been just clicking Like on something you’re kinda, sorta passionate about, then forgetting about it.It’s always been cookies, not broccoli. It’s hard to see how that changes now.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A ‘Meaningful’ News Feed ….  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By MIKE ISAACJAN. 11, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Facebook has introduced sweeping changes to the kinds of posts, videos and photos that its more than two billion members will see most often, saying on Thursday that it would prioritize what their friends and family share and comment on while de-emphasizing content from publishers and brands.The shift is the most significant overhaul in years to Facebook’s News Feed, the cascading screen of content that people see when they log into the social network. Over the next few weeks, users will begin seeing fewer viral videos and news articles shared by media companies. Instead, Facebook will highlight posts that friends have interacted with — for example, a photo of your dog or a status update that many of them have commented on or liked.The changes are intended to maximize the amount of content with “meaningful interaction” that people consume on Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, the company’s chief executive, said in an interview. Facebook, he said, had closely studied what kinds of posts had stressed or harmed users. The social network wants to reduce what Mr. Zuckerberg called “passive content” — videos and articles that ask little more of the viewer than to sit back and watch or read — so that users’ time on the site was well spent.“We want to make sure that our products are not just fun, but are good for people,” Mr. Zuckerberg said. “We need to refocus the system.”AdvertisementThursday’s changes raise questions of whether people may end up seeing more content that reinforces their own ideologies if they end up frequently interacting with posts and videos that reflect the similar views of their friends or family. And bogus news may still spread — if a relative or friend posts a link with an inaccurate news article that is widely commented on, that post will be prominently displayed.The goal of the overhaul, ultimately, is for something less quantifiable that may be difficult to achieve: Facebook wants people to feel positive, rather than negative, after visiting.Advertisement“When people are engaging with people they’re close to, it’s more meaningful, more fulfilling,” said David Ginsberg, director of research at Facebook. “It’s good for your well-being.”Facebook has been under fire for months over what it shows people and whether its site has negatively influenced millions of its users. The company has been dogged by questions about how its algorithms may have prioritized misleading news and misinformation in News Feeds, influencing the 2016 American presidential election as well as political discourse in many countries. Last year, Facebook disclosed that Russian agents had used the social network to spread divisive and inflammatory posts and ads to polarize the American electorate.Those issues have landed Facebook in front of lawmakers, who have grilled the company about its influence last year. Next Wednesday, Facebook is set to appear at another hearing on Capitol Hill, along with Twitter and YouTube, about the online spread of extremist propaganda.The repercussions from Facebook’s new News Feed changes will almost certainly be far-reaching. Publishers, nonprofits, small business and many other groups rely on the social network to reach people, so de-emphasizing their posts will most likely hurt them. Adam Mosseri, vice president of product management at Facebook, who is responsible for running the News Feed, acknowledged that “there will be anxiety” from partners and publishers who often complain about the constant changes in what will be shown across the network.The change may also work against Facebook’s immediate business interests. The company has long pushed users to spend more time on the social network. With different, less viral types of content surfacing more often, people could end up spending their time elsewhere. Mr. Zuckerberg said that was in fact Facebook’s expectation, but that if people end up feeling better about using the social network, the business will ultimately benefit.Changes to Facebook’s News Feed are not new. The Silicon Valley company constantly experiments with what shows up in the News Feed, and in the past it has also said it would prioritize posts from users’ friends and family. But Thursday’s shift goes beyond previous changes by prioritizing posts that have generated substantive interactions. A long comment on a family member’s photo, for instance, might be highlighted in the News Feed above a video that has fewer comments or interactions between people.AdvertisementFacebook has conducted research and worked with outside academics for months to examine the effects that its service has on people. The work was spurred by criticism from politicians, academics, the media and others that Facebook had not adequately considered its responsibility for what it shows its users.After the 2016 election, for instance, Mr. Zuckerberg initially shrugged off qualms about Facebook’s effect on the outcome, even as outsiders pointed to the proliferation of fake news stories on the site that had attacked Hillary Clinton. Mr. Zuckerberg later said he had been too hasty and dismissive of the concerns. More recently, he began signaling that Facebook was rethinking what it shows people on the site.Last week, he posted on Facebook about his goals for 2018, including “making sure that time spent on Facebook is time well spent” and adding that “this will be a serious year of self-improvement and I’m looking forward to learning from working to fix our issues together.”The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Thursday, he said many of the discussions about Facebook’s responsibilities had prompted the company “to get a better handle on some of the negative things that could happen in the system.”“Just because a tool can be used for good and bad, that doesn’t make the tool bad — it just means you need to understand what the negative is so that you can mitigate it,” he said.Facebook and other researchers have particularly homed in on passive content. In surveys of Facebook users, people said they felt the site had shifted too far away from friends and family-related content, especially amid a swell of outside posts from brands, publishers and media companies.“This big wave of public content has really made us reflect: What are we really here to do?” Mr. Zuckerberg said. “If what we’re here to do is help people build relationships, then we need to adjust.”Mr. Zuckerberg said he was now focusing his company around the new approach. Product managers are being asked to “facilitate the most meaningful interactions between people,” rather than the previous mandate of helping people find the most meaningful content, he said.Mr. Zuckerberg added that his way of running Facebook has shifted since the birth of his two daughters, Maxima and August, in recent years. He said he had rethought the way he views his and Facebook’s legacy, even if it will cost the company in the short term.Advertisement“It’s important to me that when Max and August grow up that they feel like what their father built was good for the world,” Mr. Zuckerberg said.Follow Mike Isaac on Twitter: @MikeIsaacA version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Facebook Feed Shifting Focus To Genial Ties.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIJAN. 10, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — YouTube said on Wednesday that it had dropped Logan Paul, one of its most popular stars, from its top advertising ranks and had suspended production of a YouTube movie that he was supposed to appear in.Late last month, Mr. Paul faced a deluge of criticism after posting a video that appeared to show a dead body hanging from a tree in a Japanese forest known as a destination for suicides. Mr. Paul took the video down and apologized for what he called a “misguided” decision.The move to punish Mr. Paul a week after the video surfaced highlights how YouTube, which is owned by Google, is slowly coming to grips with controversial content. The issue is becoming more apparent as the online service replaces television as the main entertainment platform for younger audiences.Top YouTube stars like Mr. Paul, known for pushing the envelope with outlandish behavior that would not be acceptable on mainstream television, present a particular problem. Their antics build an online audience, but can create a cycle of boundary testing as they look for ways to keep their viewers entertained.Advertisement”In light of recent events,” said a YouTube spokeswoman, Jessica Mason, Mr. Paul was dropped from Google Preferred, which grants content creators access to guaranteed revenue from premium advertisers. She also said YouTube was delaying any projects that it had in the works with Mr. Paul, including a sequel to a YouTube movie called “The Thinning.”AdvertisementYouTube had been criticized for not taking stronger action against Mr. Paul. The company had issued a statement saying it prohibited gory or violent videos on the platform and it offered condolences to the family of the young man seen in the video.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Few YouTube stars have built a following more successfully than Mr. Paul. With floppy blond hair, a muscular physique and an easygoing personality, Mr. Paul has 15.7 million followers for his vlog — a daily video that is a cross between a diary and a reality show.Mr. Paul’s popularity has moved beyond YouTube. He is expected to star in a romantic comedy musical movie called “Valley Girl” later this year, has created songs that have jumped to the top of iTunes charts, and is selling his own Maverick branded merchandise.Mr. Paul has not posted a vlog in a week since he posted an apology video. A spokeswoman for him did not respond immediately to a request for comment.Last year, YouTube dropped another one of its stars, Felix Kjellberg, better known by his YouTube alias PewDiePie, from its top-tier advertising after reports surfaced about anti-Semitic comments he made on video.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: YouTube Drops Star From Top Advertising Tier After Disturbing Video.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By VINDU GOEL and SUHASINI RAJJAN. 10, 2018
MUMBAI, India — India’s central government moved on Wednesday to reinvigorate its sluggish economy by relaxing rules governing foreign investment in industries including retailing and air travel.The changes could lead Apple and other companies based outside this country of 1.2 billion to significantly expand their retail presence here. In addition to the changes in the retail sector, the government also said it would allow up to 49 percent of Air India, the troubled national air carrier that is now up for sale, to be bought by foreign airlines.The moves are the latest steps taken by the government to open India’s economy up to outside companies. Foreign investment in the country reached $60 billion in the fiscal year that ended March 31, up 8 percent from the previous year. In a statement, the government said the changes would contribute to “growth of investment, income and employment.”Among the potential beneficiaries of the changes is Apple, which has long sought to open stores in India. The company’s iPhones account for only about 1 in 20 smartphones in active use in the country, according to the research firm Forrester, and Apple phones are now sold only by third-party vendors.AdvertisementApple and other multinational retailers had lobbied the government for several years to ease a requirement that foreign-owned, single-brand retailers obtain 30 percent of the value of products sold in India from suppliers in the country.AdvertisementApple executives argued that the 30-percent figure was impossible to meet, at least in the short term, because the company assembles almost all of its products in China and buys many of the necessary components there. Although the company’s supply chain stretches across the world, Apple told the Indian government that the country’s electronics industry could not produce the quality and quantity of parts needed. (Even Indian cellphone makers assemble their phones from imported parts.) Apple’s position rankled many officials.The new rules could break the stalemate. They allow single-brand retailers that are entirely foreign-owned to temporarily meet the 30 percent requirement by buying goods made in India and then selling them overseas. If, for instance, Apple sold $100 million of its products in India, it could meet the target by buying $30 million of India-made leather cases and selling them outside the country. After five years, the existing local-sourcing requirement for sales in India would apply.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition, foreign-owned single-line retailers would no longer have to seek government approval before opening.“These rules are a very dramatic relief,” said Sudhir Kapadia, a partner at EY India, an affiliate of the accounting and consulting firm formerly known as Ernst & Young.Apple declined to comment on the change. The company has scouted out potential locations for its first stores in India, and its chief executive, Timothy D. Cook, reiterated to investors in November that opening stores in the country was an important piece of its strategy here, where inexpensive Android handsets now dominate.Single-brand shoe or clothing companies like Uniqlo could also find India a more appealing place to operate stores, perhaps buying some products here to sell overseas and others to sell locally, said Ankur Bisen, senior vice president of retail at Technopak, a consulting firm based in New Delhi.Ikea, the Swedish furniture retailer, has spent five and half years trying to open in India. Part of the challenge has been finding the right Indian suppliers of furniture and other household items to meet the 30-percent requirement for local goods. The new rules give the company more flexibility toward meeting the goal.AdvertisementForeign brands like Kenneth Cole, Marks & Spencer and Tesco that already operate in India through joint ventures with local companies may now find wholly owned units to be a better option, Mr. Bisen said.Opening the Indian economy up to foreign companies remains a politically delicate proposition, particularly since employment is a major issue among voters.The Confederation of All India Traders said that relaxing the restrictions on single-brand retailers would make it too easy for multinationals to enter India.“What will happen to my people who will be losing their jobs?” said Bal Krishna Bhartia, national president of the group, which represents 70 million traders. “These corporates will not hire them.”Vindu Goel reported from Mumbai and Suhasini Raj from New Delhi.Follow Vindu Goel and Suhasini Raj on Twitter: @vindugoel and @suhasinirajA version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: India Eases Investment Rules, Aiding Apple and Other Foreign Retailers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I have my account set up in the Mail app, but how do I find my Gmail contacts list on my iPad?A. If you cannot find the address book you use with your Gmail on the web, it may be because your Gmail contacts are not set to sync with your iPad. Once you configure the settings, you should see your Gmail connections listed when you open the iPad’s standard Contacts app.To sync Gmail contacts to an iOS device running iOS 11, go to the iPad’s home screen and tap open the Settings icon. Select Accounts & Passwords. On the next screen, under Accounts, tap Gmail, Google or whatever you nicknamed the mail account when you first set it up on the iPad.On the Gmail settings screen, go to the Contacts line and tap the button to the On position. In addition to mail and contacts, you can sync your Google Calendar and Notes to your iPad; the information then appears in the iPad’s default Calendar and Notes apps. Press the Home button when you are finished. Because the contacts list is now set to synchronize, changes you make — like updating an address or phone number for someone on your list — should update across all your devices.For those using Android devices, Google Contacts are added automatically when you first set up your Google Account on the new phone or tablet. The address book also stays in sync when you make changes to contacts cards on the computer or mobile device.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.Advertisement

 Farhad Manjoo
 

STATE OF THE ART
JAN. 9, 2018
The home fitness start-up Peloton might sound faddish, like another in the parade of bougie tech-lifestyle brands selling dubious-sounding “disruption!” at millionaire prices. Its first product — an internet-connected, brushed-steel spin bicycle equipped with a 22-inch touch-screen — sells for $2,000, and you still have to pay $39 a month to get any content to fill the screen.Peloton’s next act ladles on extra extravagance at an even higher price. At the International CES trade show in Las Vegas on Tuesday, the company unveiled a treadmill.Called Peloton Tread, it has been in development for nearly two years and will begin shipping in the fall. Its design boasts exotic materials, enveloping surround sound, a running board that fairly glides under your feet, and a den-size 32-inch screen. Its price: $3,995 — a princely premium over a no-frills home treadmill that might set you back about $500.Any company that wants to sell a $4,000 treadmill is obviously aiming for a high-flying audience. But before you click away in proletarian disgust, there is something deeper worth studying about Peloton, its fanatical fan base and what its unusual path to success might portend for the future of the gadget business.AdvertisementIn an industry dominated by smartphone apps, cloud services and cheap knockoffs, hardware companies have had a hard time getting traction. But Peloton said it did nearly $400 million in sales last year, up from about $170 million in 2016, and said it planned to reach profitability this year. It’s done all this on the strength of a singular insight: The gadget itself isn’t as important as the service.AdvertisementPeloton does not sell just a simple piece of hardware. Instead, the company spent tens of millions of dollars creating an inviting experience, complete with brand-ambassador celebrities and high-end retail locations. At the core of its business is a beguiling online service: Get on the bike, turn on the screen, and you are instantly connected with live fitness classes tailored to your preferences and athletic abilities. It’s like having a personal trainer who comes to your house whenever you like.“We’ve created an experience that people just love so deeply,” said John Foley, Peloton’s co-founder and chief executive.With its treadmill, Peloton is aiming for the fat middle of the global fitness industry. The path is fraught; lots of hardware start-ups have hit trouble translating early success into mainstream permanence. On Monday, GoPro, the camera maker of choice among outdoor sports enthusiasts, cut its revenue forecast, announced a layoff, and said it would consider a sale.Peloton — which has raised nearly $450 million from several investors, including Wellington Management and Fidelity, at a valuation of $1.25 billion — surely faces hurdles in selling the Tread. The company plans to sell the treadmill on an installment plan, with a monthly price of $149, which makes it comparable to a high-end gym membership — and still pretty rich for many people. Peloton’s treadmill is also bigger and louder than the bike, which might make it less palatable to apartment dwellers.And marketing the device could be tough. The company says the Tread is best suited for offering full-body “boot camp”-style exercises that you might do at a gym. That is, it’s not just for running — which is an odd line to push about a treadmill.Yet consider how Peloton revolutionized the spin bike. People have been trying to reinvent home fitness machines forever. But from the NordicTrack to the Bowflex, most of these devices suffered the same fatal flaw — the novelty wore off, the guilt piled up, and soon you ended up with a very expensive laundry rack.Peloton solves the novelty problem in the same way Netflix does: It creates can’t-miss programming. Its classes, which are streamed from a studio in Manhattan, faithfully recreate the moody, devotional atmospherics of a boutique spin class. The experience is communal and interactive — as you ride, you can see how you stack up against others in the class.But it’s also more intimate and personalized than a spin class. The company produces more than a dozen classes every day in a variety of lengths, tailored to every workout style. The instructors are shot close up, and they often shout out the names and accomplishments of home riders, as if they are cheering you on directly. The bond between rider and instructor runs so deep that Peloton’s instructors have become the sort of social media celebrities who are instantly mobbed on the street.Advertisement“When you have the endorphins flowing and you’re in people’s homes three to seven times a week, there’s a real familiarity that builds up — and so, yeah, it’s a little interesting when people stop me at the supermarket to say hi,” said Robin Arzon, Peloton’s vice president for fitness programming and its chief instructor.If this sounds over-the-top, you’re right: The Peloton cult is real.That annoying friend who can’t shut up about how SoulCycle is her church? Peloton groupies are kind of like that, only more insistent, because they also point out how convenient it is — you can Peloton at any time without prebooking, without commuting, in any clothes you want. They are also likely to argue they are saving money, too: If you ride three times a week for a year, you’ll pay about $16 per Peloton workout in your first year, cheaper than classes at many fitness studios.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Over 95 percent of the bikes we’ve ever sold are still paying subscriptions,” Mr. Foley said.And here’s a confession: I’m one of them. After hearing three different people in the tech industry sing the bike’s praises last summer, I asked Peloton to send me a bike to review to see what the fuss was about. After three weeks, I couldn’t give it up. I called up the company and handed over my credit card number. I’ve been a committed rider ever since.The one problem with the spin bike is that it does not offer a complete workout. Spinning is by nature a lower-body, cardio-heavy exercise, but there is a far larger audience of people who want a full-body workout that combines weight training and cardio.This is the animating idea behind Peloton Tread.“We think only about half the workout will happen on the treadmill,” Mr. Foley said. “You’ll start with some jogging, perhaps sprints, then get off the treadmill, do curls, push-ups, planks, then get on the treadmill and start the cycle again. When you’re done, you’ll have spent 40 minutes there and burned 700 calories, and every part of your body will feel energized.”I stopped by Peloton’s New York offices several times last fall to check on the development of the treadmill, which departs from tradition in several ways.Most treadmills are controlled with small buttons that are difficult to press while running at high speed. Peloton’s uses two big knobs that look like the resistance knob on its bike — a control mechanism that doesn’t require any close fiddling. The company also spent many months engineering the treadmill’s running deck. Unlike most other treadmills, whose track effectively pauses each time you step on it, Peloton’s uses a series of slats that sit on ball bearings — a mechanism that creates a springy, “frictionless” track that it says offers a more comfortable run.I can’t tell you if this amounts to a significantly better treadmill. The device is still only a near-final prototype, and it will be months before the company begins creating workouts.AdvertisementBut remember, in the Peloton story, the gadget itself isn’t as important as the service. Peloton’s treadmill will be powered by the same irresistible content-machine that powers its bike. For many who are already in the growing club, that alone might be enough of a reason to commit to it.An earlier version of this article misstated the size of the touch-screen on Peloton’s spin bicycle. It is 22 inches, not 20.Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Heart-Pounding Experience.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 9, 2018
Q. I have a lot of documents to scan, and with so many mobile phone apps that can make digital copies, is there any advantage to buying a scanner anymore? Is the quality that much better?A. If you just have an occasional bill, receipt or other document to digitize, mobile apps that use your smartphone’s camera to capture the image are a convenient and portable solution. Many apps give you a choice of file formats for saving your documents (JPG and PDF are common) and you can instantly email the digital copies to others or upload them to an online file-storage site for safekeeping. Some mobile-scanning apps like Microsoft Word Lens can even convert a picture of a text page into a file you can edit, thanks to optical-character recognition software.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.However, a traditional scanner does have advantages. For one, the scanner can help flatten the paper and make unwrinkled reproductions of the original document. Many inkjet printers include scan and copy functions, along with desktop software for cropping, rotating and enhancing the scans on a bigger screen. Optical character recognition and text search are also options with some programs.If you have a large amount of paper to scan on a regular basis, a dedicated scanner with an automatic document feeder can help simplify the chore. Brother and Epson are among the companies that make models for less than $250.Lightweight portable document scanners, which often cost between $200 and $300, are another option if you need relative mobility but do not want to use a smartphone app to capture images. Wirecutter, a product recommendation site owned by The New York Times, favors the Epson WorkForce ES-300W (which has a 20-page feeder) as its pick for best portable document scanner.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2018, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: For Really Big Jobs, A Real Scanner.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 8, 2018
Q. How can I retrieve a still photo from the 1.5 seconds of an iPhone Live Photo before or after the official picture?A. Live Photos — Apple’s format that captures a bit of the subject’s movement right before and after the “official” picture — can be edited. In addition to adjusting the light, color and contrast of the shot, you can select a new “key photo,” which is the image you see in your picture library.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Open the Photos app on the iPhone and find the image you want to edit; Live Photos are also collected in their own Live Photos album on the app’s Albums tab. After you open the file, tap the Edit button in the upper-right corner of the screen. The picture opens in the Edit mode, where the familiar tools for cropping and enhancing the photo are available.On a Live Photo in Edit mode, a strip of tiny thumbnail images also appears at the bottom of the screen. These images are the individual frames of the Live Photo, and you can scroll across until you find the right picture. When you see the frame you want to use displayed in the center of the screen, tap the Make Key Photo button, then tap the Done button.After making that change, you should see the new still in your camera library. Live Photos do not work with many non-Apple apps, so sharing the picture with others online or with other devices means the image you edited will be the one seen by your friends.Tapping off the Live Photos button on an image also turns it into a still photo. Apple’s own tools for editing Live Photos are included in its iOS 11 software, but for those using earlier versions of iOS, third-party apps like Motion Stills are an alternative.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2018, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Capturing a Still From a Moving Photo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By NATASHA SINGERJAN. 7, 2018
On a recent evening with a windchill of 11 degrees, I made myself put down a book I had been enjoying and go out on the streets of New York instead.I wasn’t heading out to meet friends or do my errands. I was braving the cold for a less virtuous purpose: amassing credit on Sweatcoin, a free fitness app that awards points — “sweatcoins” — for walking or running outside.Accumulate 550 sweatcoins, the app beckoned, and I could snag a Fitbit Flex wearable fitness tracker. So there I was on an Arctic evening, deliberately taking a circuitous route to inflate my step count.Sweatcoin’s popularity began to spike last summer. By early September, it had become the most downloaded health and fitness application in the United States on the iOS and Google Play stores combined, according to data from App Annie, an analytics firm. It has retained that top ranking nearly every week since.AdvertisementThe app, developed by a start-up in London called Sweatco, has raised about $1.6 million in financing and expects to close another round soon. It taps into the boom for health-tracking apps and devices, joining products from Apple, Fitbit, Garmin and Samsung that monitor stats like heart rate and physical activity. Nearly 350 million wearable tech devices are expected to be sold globally this year, according to forecasts from Gartner, a market research company.Where Sweatcoin’s approach differs from others, however, is in taking its ideas from behavioral economics, the study of how psychology and emotions influence our decision-making, to motivate people to exercise more. Its rise comes as insurers and corporate wellness programs are likewise furiously trying incentives — including passing out fitness monitors — to nudge people to improve their behavior.AdvertisementSweatcoin’s “first premise is that physical movement has economic value,” Anton Derlyatka, a Sweatcoin co-founder, told me.Mr. Derlyatka said the app aims to overcome our human tendency to choose immediate gratification — like doughnuts or binge-watching videos — over activities like daily exercise that offer long-term benefits. By giving consumers points that can buy goodies, Sweatcoin hopes to incentivize couch potatoes to become more active.“It’s a tool, a hack, to help all of us, not just the select few, to remain fit,” said Oleg Fomenko, another Sweatcoin co-founder.Could the app change me, a book nerd who innately favors reading over running? Cautiously optimistic, I downloaded Sweatcoin on an iPhone over the holidays.In theory, the app awards one sweatcoin for every 1,000 outdoor steps. But I quickly learned that users often get credit for fewer steps than they expected.For one thing, Sweatcoin immediately shaves your sweatcoin earnings by 5 percent — in the fine print, the app calls it a commission “to keep our lights on.”AdvertisementFor another thing, the app counts only the steps it thinks you took outside. Bummer. I would get no credit for Zumba, spinning — or listening to music playlists and dancing around my kitchen while cooking.To help it distinguish outdoor steps, Sweatcoin collects and analyzes GPS signals and motion data from your phone. To improve accuracy, it instructs users to turn off the app’s battery-saver mode and keep the app running in the background.And Sweatcoin gets bossy about it. The first time I swiped the app off, a notice popped up on my phone: “You killed me! Do not force quit me if you want to generate sweatcoins.” I complied, and my battery paid the price.Frictionless this app was not.But then I noticed that Sweatcoin seemed to frequently skimp on points, too. On a recent day I went for a walk with my sister in the snowy Massachusetts countryside, the app counted less than half my steps as outdoor activity.Frustrated, I turned to reviews on Reddit, Twitter, and app stores where missing points are a common theme.“ Where are my missing 3000 steps!” Ian Wynne, a sports performance consultant in Britain, wrote on Twitter. “This is happening a little too often.”
            Come on @Sweatcoin I’ve been outside walking all morning. Where are my missing 3000 steps! This is happening a little too often. pic.twitter.com/QtICfMqPjV To commiserate, I called Mr. Wynne, who won a bronze medal in kayaking at the Athens Olympics in 2004.“It’s a little frustrating when you are outside and you are sure that you have taken 1,000 more steps than it claims,” Mr. Wynne said. Nevertheless, he planned to continue using Sweatcoin. He regularly exercised, he said, and liked the idea of getting extra credit for the outdoor activities he was already doing.AdvertisementMr. Fomenko, the Sweatcoin co-founder, told me that the app’s “draconian algorithm” is meant to deter cheating techniques like, say, strapping a phone to a pet dog. And that fraud-deterrence system may verify fewer steps than users expect, he said.In practice, according to the app’s help section, that means the Sweatcoin algorithm typically verifies 65 percent of a user’s total steps. It also means that some frequent consumer behaviors — using a protective smartphone cover, walking while connected to public Wi-Fi, walking slowly with small children — could reduce your step count.In a follow-up email, Sweatcoin’s co-founders said that they would soon hire a data science team “to help us improve the speed and accuracy of this algorithm.” They also said they were working on a verification algorithm to count indoor activity.The current system seemed preposterous to me. What’s the point of an unpredictable fitness app?Nevertheless, after about two weeks of intermittent use, I had earned 47.52 sweatcoins. I was feeling pretty good — a Fitbit could soon be mine.Then I learned that the rewards could also be fickle.Sweatcoin generates revenue by marketing other companies’ products to its users. When a user redeems reward points for a product through Sweatcoin, the maker of that product pays Sweatcoin a fee.But the Fitbit and some other fitness devices on offer when I signed up had disappeared from the app before I could earn one. Now the reward choices included a workout app for 30 sweatcoins that didn’t interest me — or the iPhone X for a whopping 20,000 sweatcoins. I calculated that, if I took 13,000 total steps every day, it would take me more than five years to get that iPhone.I felt like Sweatcoin, by offering rewards that seemed near impossible to obtain, could end up demotivating the very people it was trying to nudge to walk more.As a reporter who regularly covers data privacy, I also couldn’t help being troubled by the possibility that the app could share or sell the trove of location and motion data it collects from users.AdvertisementSweatcoin’s founders said they would never do such a thing. “Let me make it very, very clear,” Mr. Derlyatka said, “we never, ever sell anybody’s user data to any outside parties.” If the fitness start-up were ever acquired by another company, however, the app’s privacy policy states that “personal data held by it about its customers will be one of the transferred assets.”But the biggest downside for me was feeling like Sweatcoin’s behavioral engineering cheapened important experiences. When I used the app, instead of concentrating on the friends I was walking with, I kept checking to see how close I was to being able to redeem my sweatcoins for that Fitbit.No trinket or gift card is worth that distraction.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fitness App Doesn’t Sweat The Details.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By MIKE ISAACJAN. 5, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — For more than a year, Twitter has faced censure for allowing President Trump to use its service to say whatever he wants. And for more than a year, the company has not addressed the criticism definitively.On Friday, the company tackled the matter head on. Without ever mentioning Mr. Trump by name, Twitter said in a statement that he would remain on the social media service.“Elected world leaders play a critical role in that conversation because of their outsized impact on our society,” Twitter said in the statement, which was posted to its site. “Blocking a world leader from Twitter or removing their controversial tweets would hide important information people should be able to see and debate.”
            Twitter is here to serve and help advance the global, public conversation. Elected world leaders play a critical role in that conversation because of their outsized impact on our society.        Twitter made the statement after a swell of outrage over Mr. Trump’s tweets this week, in which he boasted that he had a “nuclear button” that was “much bigger” and “more powerful” than North Korea’s, denounced his former strategist Stephen K. Bannon and derided the mainstream media.AdvertisementMany critics said they believed Mr. Trump’s recent posts violated Twitter’s terms of service, which prohibit messages that threaten violence, death or physical harm. The indignation over the president’s latest tweets was so deep that some protesters projected signs onto Twitter’s headquarters building in San Francisco this week calling the service “Trump’s dog whistle.”AdvertisementThe company initially responded to the criticism this week by saying that Mr. Trump had not violated its terms of service, before making its broader comments about world leaders on Friday.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Controversy over Mr. Trump’s tweets, and over Twitter’s role in helping him spread his message, has been building all year. Mr. Trump has regularly used the service to criticize and attack other public figures and private citizens, which has sometimes led to online mobs hounding his targets.The issue has been complicated for Twitter. The company has positioned its service as the world’s town square, where people can largely say whatever they want. And having prominent figures post contentious remarks can help Twitter’s business by attracting new users. At the same time, the company’s approach to banning users has been scattershot.In recent months, Twitter has moved to address what will and will not allow. It has been revamping its terms of service to clarify what actions are permitted on its platform, something the company has admitted it has fallen short of articulating before.In the wake of these changes, Twitter has cracked down on groups affiliated with Nazis and white supremacists, and has threatened to ban those who are affiliated with “hate groups” on and off the service.Ultimately, Twitter said on Friday, prohibiting a world leader from using its service would be ineffective, because it would “not silence” them but “certainly hamper necessary discussion around their words and actions.”The company also sought to counter assertions that controversial figures like Mr. Trump were kept on the platform largely because they helped Twitter’s bottom line.“No one person’s account drives Twitter’s growth, or influences these decisions,” Twitter said.Follow Mike Isaac on Twitter: @MikeIsaacA version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Under Fire, Twitter Says It Won’t Block World Leaders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.

      By NYANI QUARMYNE and 
    
KEVIN GRANVILLE

JAN. 5, 2018

Several months ago, a team of men ascended the Greater Caucasus Mountains in Georgia. They led horses loaded with electrical wire, solar panels, batteries, toolboxes and drills powerful enough to grind through rock.With jagged ridgelines above and shadowed valleys below, the men were on a quest to bring the internet to one of the world’s most remote places: Tusheti, a rural province on the Russian border.Tusheti’s clean air, crisp blue skies and mountain-studded landscape already attract some tourists, but government officials think there is potential for many more. Access to the internet will make it easier for travelers to book reservations online, but it will also stir e-commerce and local business development, and give a lift to health care and education services in the area.For now, though, Tusheti has little electricity, and maybe more sheep than people.For centuries, Tusheti’s rugged terrain has encouraged a nomadic lifestyle that continues to this day. Shepherds roam the mountainsides with their flocks in the summer, and then move down to more temperate pastures for the rest of the year.Many people who aren’t shepherds do the same. For much of the year, they live in lowland communities near Tusheti that have schools, hospitals and, yes, internet service. Come summer, they return to the rocky slopes.Tusheti spans about 370 square miles – an area a bit larger than Berlin – but only about 50 people stay through the winter. Temperatures can drop to near zero Fahrenheit, and snow covers the main roads for up to six months.In Shenako, one of several dozen villages in the region, only one couple stays through the winter. As the weeks pass, other people arrive by helicopter, hitching a ride on the Georgian Border Police’s monthly trips to change crews at border outposts.For the workers on the internet mission, time could feel short.Dusk was coming on fast when the crew reached Bochorna, a tiny hamlet whose 7,700-foot elevation makes it the highest continuously inhabited village in Europe, according to the Georgian government. The workers’ chief focus: establishing an internet connection for the lone year-round resident, Irakli Khvedaguridze, a 76-year-old doctor.When winter arrives, the government pays Dr. Khvedaguridze to buy medical supplies; if he runs out of anything, a border police helicopter delivers what he needs.He spends the winter treating the sick in nearby communities, reading medical journals and listening to the radio. When he needs company, he goes into Omalo, one of Tusheti’s larger villages, on his homemade skis.Although he had no computer or smartphone, he was curious about how it all worked.  His first thought: people without cell coverage would now be able to call him in the winter if they were sick or injured.“It will be easier to get in touch now,” he said.Financed largely through a $40,000 grant from the Internet Society, a global nonprofit, the workers came from local organizations: the Tusheti Development Fund, the Small and Medium Telecommunications Operators’ Association and Freenet, a local internet service provider. They offered materials or services for free, or at little cost. They all felt a connection of some kind to the Tusheti mountains.“I am originally from the mountains,” said Ucha Seturi, a lawyer and engineer who is coordinating the project.  “The mountain people are a little bit separate from the rest of society. They are not developing. So for me it’s really important to create real points of connection with the rest of society so they can develop.”Many people in nearby communities are quite familiar with the allure of the internet. Temuri Babulaidze, whose father helped start the Tusheti Development Fund, enjoys playing online video games at the family’s home in Kvemo Alvani, a town where many Tushetians live in the winter.In addition to the residents of 26 villages in Tusheti who will now be able to log on to the internet, dozens of hostels and small hotels will benefit from the service.“Tourism is a beacon of hope for us,” said Ia Buchaidze, who owns a local bakery, “and the internet is very important for that.”Not everyone is happy with the change.“It's not good,” said Yochanan Herman, an Israeli traveler who was hiking the mountains, “because there are not many places in the world without Internet.”The long days in the mountains can be hazardous for the entire crew, including the horses. The men watched helplessly one day as a packhorse stumbled and plunged off the trail, rolling down like a barrel and scattering its load as it tumbled.The horse eventually righted itself, but it was bleeding beneath its saddle blanket. It would be O.K., the workers learned. They combed the hillside for its load. Two toolboxes were smashed; among the other casualties was a power inverter. That was a major problem: Without it, the heavy drill wouldn’t work.The masts holding internet antennas were not the only towers visible on the mountainsides. There were also skeletal memorials to the Communist era: pylons that carried electricity across the border from the Soviet Union into Tusheti and the rest of Georgia.The towers remain, but the power lines are gone, pulled down after the end of the Soviet Union in 1991.There were other reminders of that era: villages abandoned after, some residents say, the Soviets forced people off the mountains.The internet network is helping stir a turnaround for Tusheti. In the past year, a new, 100-bed hotel was proposed for Omalo. There is talk of a major ski resort and a new roadway.The internet will undoubtedly bring the world closer to Tusheti. The question is whether its rustic otherworldliness will disappear.Nyani Quarmyne is a freelance photographer (represented by Panos Pictures) whose work has focused on environmental issues and social justice.An earlier version of this article misstated the given name of a boy who enjoys playing online video games in his home in the town of Kvemo Alvani. He is Temuri Babulaidze, not Termui. AdvertisementBy MIKE ISAACJAN. 5, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Several of Uber’s early investors and company leaders are beginning to loosen their grip on the ride-hailing company — and are set to reap big riches in the process.Travis Kalanick, Uber’s former chief executive, has sold nearly one-third of his shares in the privately held company for about $1.4 billion, according to three people with knowledge of the transaction, who asked to remain anonymous because the details are confidential.Benchmark, a venture capital firm that invested when Uber was very young, plans to sell about $900 million of stock, or close to 15 percent of its holdings in the company, these people added.The buyer of all these shares is an investment consortium led by SoftBank, the Japanese conglomerate, which recently agreed to acquire $10 billion of Uber stock from shareholders. SoftBank, which has a $100 billion investment fund called the Vision Fund, has been on a spending spree since last year and has invested in ride-hailing companies and other tech companies around the world.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That Mr. Kalanick and some of Uber’s earliest investors are selling their shares is notable because they have long held an iron grip on the ownership structure. That led to bitter fights last year over control of Uber, with Benchmark at one point suing Mr. Kalanick to reduce his say over the company.AdvertisementRepresentatives for Mr. Kalanick and Benchmark declined to comment. News of the sale amounts were previously reported by Bloomberg and Recode.AdvertisementWith Mr. Kalanick and some of the venture capital firms selling down their stakes, Uber’s chief executive, Dara Khosrowshahi, may have a freer hand to put his imprint on the service. Since Mr. Khosrowshahi was chosen to lead Uber in August, he has tried to clean up the scandal-ridden company, while trying to appease employees whose faith has been shaken by a year of executive changes and questions over its workplace culture.Mr. Kalanick and Benchmark still hold board seats at Uber.Uber previously restricted employees and insiders from selling their company stock. Now early employees, investors and Mr. Kalanick will finally be able to realize some of their enormous financial gains from Uber.Uber’s true value is something of a mystery. SoftBank and the consortium of investors are purchasing some shares at a price that puts the value at roughly $48 billion. But SoftBank is also putting $1.25 billion of new capital in Uber at a $67.5 billion valuation — the amount at the company’s previous round of financing in late 2016 — as a way to prop up its perceived value.As part of the deal, Uber will add several new directors to its board. Uber will also eliminate its “super voting shares,” a class of stock that gave outsize power to Mr. Kalanick and other holders of those shares.Follow Mike Isaac on Twitter: @MikeIsaac.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Uber Shareholders Loosen  Grip With Sales of Stock.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 5, 2018
Q. A previous column explained how to download specific files from Google Photos, but I need to know how to upload a specific album to share with a family group. How do I do this?A. Google Photos can be set to automatically back up all the pictures you take on your smartphone or copy to your computer, so if you have this setting enabled, the pictures have already been uploaded to the online storage space that comes with your Google Account. You just need to select and sort the photos into the album you want to share before sending out a link to the family.Even if you are not using the automatic backup feature, you can manually upload selected photos you want to share online. If you have a folder of images on your computer that you want to upload to Google Photos through your web browser, log in at https://photos.google.com and drag pictures onto the browser window to transfer them. (As an alternative, you can click the Upload button at the top of the screen and navigate to the folder on your computer to add them.)On a smartphone or tablet without the automatic backup feature enabled, open the Google Photos app and tap the images you want to share. To place the uploaded photos into an album, select Sharing, and in the menu icon at the top, choose “Create new share.” In the desktop web browser, click on “Start a new share.”Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When the thumbnails of your uploaded images appear, choose the ones you want to add to the album. After you are finished, select the Next button and add the email addresses of the people you want to get a sharing link, and hit the Send button.If you would like a more guided approach instead, click the Assistant icon in the Google Photos app or browser window. Click Shared Album, choose the photos you want to use and click the Create button. On the next screen, give the album a name, click the Share button and add the email addresses of your recipients.If you have already set up a Google Family Group — a unit of up to six people managed by one member to share Google-based photos, calendars, Google Play purchases — you can select the Family Group option in the Google Photos Sharing menu to alert the others. If you want to change your sharing options, Google’s help guide has further instructions.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ. I hear desktop Linux has gotten to look more like Windows, but can you do everything on Linux that you can do on Windows?A. Linux, the open-source operating system project first developed by Linus Torvalds in 1991, is now used by millions of people on desktop computers, mobile devices and servers; Google’s Android and Chrome OS even have Linux roots. Because the software has been free and open for developers to enhance and improve for years, Linux is now available in many versions (typically called “distributions”) that vary in complexity and user interface.In terms of being able to do everything a Windows desktop can do, a Linux system is certainly capable of most common tasks, like browsing the web, sending and receiving email, creating documents and spreadsheets, streaming music and editing photos. Many Linux distributions include all the basic programs you need, and you can install others from Linux software repositories online, but make a list of everything you need to do on the computer and make sure you have a Linux solution for it.Most Linux variations are freely available to download from their developers, but if you are new to the system, a more mainstream distribution like Ubuntu, Linux Mint, Elementary OS or Zorin OS might provide the easiest introduction. In most cases, you download the system files from the site, burn them to a DVD (or copy them to a USB external drive) and install the Linux system on the computer as you would a Windows or Mac operating system.Perhaps the best way to quickly decide if Linux will work for you is to test-drive the system without installing it on your computer. The Ubuntu site has a tutorial for running Linux directly from a DVD or USB drive. While it may not be considered the sleekest of the Linux distributions, Ubuntu has been around since 2004, has a large library of support documentation and offers new users easy instructions for creating a Linux installation DVD or running Linux from a USB flash drive.Linux has come a long way, but keep in mind that you may not be able to use Windows-only programs and games without assistance, like the Wine compatability software, or play media files that have copy restrictions. Depending on the distribution you use and where you get it, free technical support might consist simply of online forums and help guides. Some major manufacturers like Dell and Lenovo sell Linux preinstalled on new computers and may provide more customer service, and paid support packages are available.If you do not buy a computer with Linux already installed, you can install it either as your main operating system or in a separate hard-drive partition so you can switch back and forth with Windows. Installing Linux on an older desktop or laptop you do not use as regularly can also give the hardware a new life and let you experiment with the software. You should find specific installation instructions on the site for the distribution you have chosen. Before you install anything, however, back up your personal files.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy SHEERA FRENKELJAN. 4, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Between breaking into the email accounts of United States government officials, political dissidents and international human rights organizations, Iranian hackers liked to joke about their slow internet service, poor pay and lack of skilled colleagues.In conversations obtained by security researchers, the hackers groused like any other start-up employees, often frustrated by their lack of progress and inability to carry out more grandiose schemes.But the work being discussed had global ramifications, and painted a picture of how Iranian hackers have matured over the last decade from defacing websites with crude photos and slogans. Now, they appear to be an organized work force, starting systematic cyberespionage campaigns aimed at promoting Iran’s interests around the world and on curbing dissent within the Islamic Republic.In a report published on Thursday by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Collin Anderson, an independent cybersecurity researcher, and Karim Sadjadpour, a Carnegie senior fellow, followed nearly a decade of the day-to-day activities of Iranian hackers.AdvertisementTheir report on Iran’s improving capabilities arrives as anti-government protests in the country enter their second week, prompting the regime to shut down access to the internet under the claim that it is being used to spread “violence and fear” among protesters.AdvertisementIran has long spied on the online activities of dissidents, but it has recently turned to cyberespionage campaigns aimed at the United States, according to recent reports by security firms. Those campaigns have left a trail of digital crumbs, allowing researchers to paint a vivid picture of whom Iranian hackers target — and when.“Through their carelessness, we were able to get a real picture of who these individuals are and what their goals are,” said Mr. Anderson, who has been researching Iranian hackers for more than five years.The hackers appeared to be testing malicious software on themselves or accidentally clicked on malware they were developing. Either way, they exposed activity on their own computers, inadvertently giving researchers a glimpse into their lives through chat logs, emails and the targeting of their victims.One six-month chat log between two Iranian hackers gave particular insight into how they ran their day-to-day operation. By tracing where and how web domains were registered, as well as other data found online, Mr. Anderson concluded that the aliases “mb_1986” and “ArYaIeIrAN” represented two Iranian men whose real names were Mojtaba Borhani and Behrouz Keshvari.Neither replied to a request for comment sent to email addresses referred to in their chat logs.Both had roots in the Iranian defacement community, which would attack and take over websites and Twitter accounts, replacing them with pro-Iranian slogans and images.Over time, the two become more sophisticated, developing malware as they moved between Iranian hacking groups. Recently, the men have been tied to a group known as “Charming Kitten” by security companies. The group is believed to be responsible for a range of attacks, including targeting aviation companies in the United States.The chat logs showed two men frustrated with the pace of their work.“We need someone for Mac in Tehran,” Mr. Keshvari wrote on June 15, 2014, bringing up a topic the two men had discussed nearly a month earlier. The best hackers, he complained, were making “good money” elsewhere, and were not tempted by the idea of moving to Tehran to work in a cramped office for roughly $780 a month. There should be some other benefit, Mr. Keshvari joked, at one point suggesting they offer to send prospective hires on vacation to Turkey and Thailand.AdvertisementMr. Keshvari appeared focused on bringing in prospective new hires, but he was often stymied by Mr. Borhani. On May 30, 2014, he complained that Mr. Borhani had scared off prospective new hires.“Listen, if during the interview you ask them about working with SCADA, I will kill you,” Mr. Keshvari wrote, referring to the operating system used to control industrial facilities, such as power plants or oil and gas refineries.Mr. Keshvari responded that he “does not do the interview in this way.” And after several profanities were exchanged, the two agreed to meet with a new recruit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We need them … send them here,” Mr. Borhani wrote. He repeatedly pressed for programmers with expertise in Mac operating systems.Their focus on hiring people with an expertise in Apple products, specifically the Mac operating system, was unsurprising, Mr. Anderson said, given that many of Iran’s dissidents and human rights workers had transitioned to Apple products in the hopes that they would prove more secure than Microsoft’s Windows software.Last year, the first reports surfaced that Iranian hackers had developed malware targeting Macs. The malware stole victim’s passwords, and it has been used to target Iranian dissidents as well as the defense contractors in the United States, according to Mr. Anderson’s report.“Imagine them like start-ups who are contracted to the government,” Mr. Anderson said. “They are chasing demographics that the government has an interest in targeting.”The two men often discussed names and shared phone numbers of people they were working with, and one individual appeared to warrant deference. A figure named only as “Hajji,” a title widely used in the Muslim world to denote someone who carries out the hajj, a sacred pilgrimage to Mecca, appeared to frequently visit the men and make final decisions on whom they could hire to help with various projects.“It seems likely that Hajji is an Iranian government handler,” Mr. Anderson said. Iran’s government, he added, is careful to not directly tie itself to hackers involved in offensive operations. Iran’s government also probably operates a separate cyberwarfare department, though the people it employs there appear more skilled and better at covering their tracks, he said.Advertisement“The vast majority of their most recent operations focuses on cyberespionage,” Mr. Anderson said, a statement echoed by John Hultquist, director of intelligence analysis at the FireEye cybersecurity firm, which recently published its own report about one of Iran’s more active hacking groups.In the year since President Trump took office, Iran has focused its efforts on infiltrating the computers of anyone associated with the president, Mr. Anderson said.“They are clearly trying to gain any insight they can as to what this administration is going to do vis-à-vis Iran,” he said. “They are very persistent, but we don’t know their level of success.”There are few who know Iranian hackers persistence better than Thamar E. Gindin, an Iran specialist from Shalem College of Liberal Arts in Israel.In May 2015, Ms. Gindin was the “patient zero” in an attack by Iranian hackers, who infiltrated her computer through a malicious email and used it to try to gain access to other academics studying Iran, according to a report published by the Israeli cybersecurity firm ClearSky.With the help of ClearSky, the hackers were booted from her system. But in the two years since, they have tried almost monthly to get back in through a number of ploys playing to her personal interests — including posing as reporters from the BBC who hoped to interview her, and sharing a file on “unique chocolates” after she wrote a post on Facebook promoting her cousin’s chocolate business.Among the groups targeting her are Charming Kitten, the group Mr. Borhani and Mr. Keshvari had been linked to.“I feel like we are playing a game. I have to admit, I kind of like them,” Ms. Gindin said. “They are persistent and stubborn, but they aren’t very smart all the time. It’s really like a game.“Follow Sheera Frenkel on Twitter: @sheeraf.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Inside Peek Shows Iranian Hackers’ Maturing Threat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By CADE METZ and BRIAN X. CHENJAN. 4, 2018
Cade Metz, The New York Times's emerging technologies reporter, answered reader questions on Facebook Live, about two newly discovered security flaws that are almost universal.On Wednesday, a group of security experts revealed two security flaws that affect nearly all microprocessors, the digital brains of the world’s computers. These flaws, called Meltdown and Spectre, could allow hackers to lift passwords, photos, documents and other data from smartphones, PCs and the cloud computing services that many businesses rely on.Some of the world’s largest tech companies have been working on fixes for these problems. But the researchers who discovered the flaws said one of them, Spectre, is not completely fixable. “It is a fundamental flaw in the way processors have been built over the last decades,” said Paul Kocher, one of the researchers who discovered these flaws.Here is a guide to what you need to know and what you should do.Both are issues with the way computer chips are designed.Meltdown affects most processors made by Intel, the company that supplies the chips for a majority of PCs and more than 90 percent of computer servers.AdvertisementSpectre is far more difficult for hackers to exploit. But it is even more pervasive, affecting Intel chips, microprocessors from the longtime Intel rival AMD and the many chips that use designs from the British company ARM. Your smartphone most likely contains an ARM chip.AdvertisementBoth flaws provide hackers with a way of stealing data, including passwords and other sensitive information. If hackers manage to get software running on one of these chips, they can grab data from other software running on the same machine.This is a particular issue on cloud computing services.Operated by companies like Amazon, Microsoft and Google, these are services where any business or individual can rent access to computing power over the internet. On a cloud service, each server is typically shared by many different customers. By exploiting the Meltdown flaw, a hacker can just load some software onto a cloud service and then grab data from anyone else who has loaded software onto the same server.Phones and PCs are more difficult targets. Before they can exploit the chip flaws, hackers must find a way of getting their software onto your device. They could fool you into downloading an app from a smartphone app store. Or they could trick you into visiting a website that moves code onto your machine.They are trying. Meltdown can be fixed by installing a software “patch” on the machine. Microsoft has released a patch for PCs that use its Windows operating system. Apple said it had released software patches for iOS, Macs and the Apple TV that help mitigate the issue. Intel is also working on updates to help fix the problem.The onus is now on consumers and businesses to install the fix on their machines.Keep your software up-to-date. That includes your operating system and apps like your web browser and antivirus software. Microsoft, Mozilla and Google have already released patches for Internet Explorer, Firefox and Chrome to help address the problem.Installing an ad blocker on your web browser is also a safeguard, according to security experts. Even the largest websites do not have tight control over the ads that appear on their sites — sometimes malicious code can appear inside their ad networks. A popular ad blocker among security researchers is uBlock Origin.“The real problem is ads are dangerous,” said Jeremiah Grossman, the head of security strategy for SentinelOne, a computer security company. “They’re fully functioning programs, and they carry malware.”Your operating system and apps typically have a button you can click to check for software updates. For example, in Google’s Chrome browser on a computer, you can click on the three dots in the upper-right corner and click Update Google Chrome. To update Windows, click the Start button and click through these buttons: Settings, Update & security, Windows Update and Check for updates. To update the Mac system, open the App Store app and check the Updates tab for the latest software.AdvertisementDon’t procrastinate. Last year, a piece of malware called WannaCry infected hundreds of thousands of Windows machines worldwide. Microsoft had released an update before the attack, but many machines were behind on downloading the latest security updates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Amazon, Google and Microsoft said that they had already patched most of the of servers that underpin their cloud computing services, and that largely addresses the problem. But Amazon and Google also said customers might need to make additional changes.To share computing power with customers, cloud services offer “virtual machines.” These are computers that exist only in digital form. Customers use these virtual machines to run their own software. After Amazon, Google and Microsoft update their machines, customers may have to update the operating systems running on their own virtual machines to guard against some exploits.No. The researchers who discovered Meltdown said that patching systems would slow them down by as much as 30 percent in certain situations. That could be a problem for big cloud systems.Independent software developers also ran tests on a patched version of Linux, the open-source operating system that now drives more than 30 percent of the world’s servers, and saw similar slowdowns.“There are many cases where the performance impact is zero,” said Andres Frome, a software developer who has tested the new code. “But if you are running something like a payment system, where a lot of small changes are made to data, it looks like there will be a significant performance impact.”Consumers are less likely to be affected, and Mr. Kocher said slowdowns could dissipate over time as companies refined their patches.According to the researchers who discovered these flaws, including security experts at Google, the memory chip maker Rambus and various academic institutions, Spectre can’t be completely fixed. But patches can solve the problems in some situations. Intel and Microsoft and others said the same.AdvertisementNo, according to the researchers. But Spectre is much more difficult than Meltdown for hackers to exploit.Similar to Meltdown, Spectre can steal information from one application and share it with another. For example, an app you download from the web could steal information like passwords from other software on a computer.On Wednesday, the Department of Homeland Security issued an alert that said the only solution to the threats posed by Meltdown and Spectre would be a full replacement of the chips. But that does not seem feasible, given how many machines are involved. “Spectre is going to be with us a lot longer,” Mr. Kocher said.An Intel vice president, Donald Parker, is adamant that the company’s chips will not need to be replaced. He said that with software patches and “firmware updates” — a way of updating code on the chip itself — Intel and other companies could “mitigate the issues.”Follow Cade Metz and Brian X. Chen on Twitter: @CadeMetz and @bxchen.Nicole Perlroth contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2018, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Lowdown on the Flaws in Computer Chips.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH and JOHANNA BARRJAN. 3, 2018
President Trump boasted Tuesday evening that he had a “nuclear button” that is “much bigger” and “more powerful” than North Korea’s, again prompting fears that an errant tweet could lead to a nuclear conflict. (It is worth noting that there is no nuclear button.)
            North Korean Leader Kim Jong Un just stated that the “Nuclear Button is on his desk at all times.” Will someone from his depleted and food starved regime please inform him that I too have a Nuclear Button, but it is a much bigger & more powerful one than his, and my Button works!        The remark led to an immediate debate over whether Mr. Trump had broken Twitter’s rules and whether the platform should bar him from posting.A company spokeswoman said in an interview on Wednesday that the tweet had not violated its terms of service.The platform’s policy says that only “specific threats of violence or wishing for serious physical harm, death, or disease to an individual or group of people” constitute violations.AdvertisementThen, on Friday, Twitter released a new rule pertaining solely to world leaders.“Blocking a world leader from Twitter or removing their controversial Tweets, would hide important information people should be able to see and debate,” it said in its announcement.AdvertisementGiven Friday’s announcement, it seems highly unlikely that President Trump will ever lose access to his account while he still holds office.In the past, Twitter has insisted that there are no exceptions to its rules and that all individuals using the platform must adhere to them, or risk disciplinary action or permanent suspension.But the company refused to entertain hypothetical scenarios about suspending high-profile accounts, including that of Mr. Trump.Friday’s announcement explained:“Blocking a world leader from Twitter or removing their controversial Tweets would hide important information people should be able to see and debate. It would also not silence that leader, but it would certainly hamper necessary discussion around their words and actions.”Questioned about the president in a Wired interview last year, Jack Dorsey, the company’s chief executive, said that all users would be held to the same standard. But he pointed out that Twitter’s policies made an exception for newsworthiness, a factor that must be considered in regard to any and all of the president’s tweets.“I think it’s really important that we maintain open channels to our leaders, whether we like what they’re saying or not,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yes, including on Sept. 23, when another threat toward North Korea led to a similar outcry.“Just heard Foreign Minister of North Korea speak at U.N.,” Mr. Trump tweeted. “If he echoes thoughts of Little Rocket Man, they won’t be around much longer!”Twitter declined to take the tweet down.“We hold all accounts to the same Rules, and consider a number of factors when assessing whether Tweets violate our Rules. Among the considerations is ‘newsworthiness’ and whether a Tweet is of public interest,” the company said. “This has long been internal policy and we’ll soon update our public-facing rules to reflect it. We need to do better on this, and will.”AdvertisementTwitter bans what it calls abusive behavior, or “behavior that harasses, intimidates or uses fear to silence another user’s voice.” For example, the writer Milo Yiannopoulos was barred in 2016 amid coordinated harassment of the comedian Leslie Jones.But there are caveats, including the above passage, in the rules about tweets that are deemed in the legitimate public interest.That language suggests that in some if not many cases, a user whose tweets fit that definition — like the president — would have more leeway than others when engaging in abusive behavior. And with Friday’s rule change, that difference became explicit.“We review Tweets by leaders within the political context that defines them, and enforce our rules accordingly,” the statement said. “No one person’s account drives Twitter’s growth, or influences these decisions.”Twitter has acknowledged that decisions about policing newsworthy accounts can be difficult.It’s unclear. Twitter will not comment on its internal deliberations over complaints about any individual tweet or account.Twitter has made several changes to its guidelines in recent months involving sexual content and abusive language, though many users have called for more.In December, the company began enforcing new rules on violence. “Specific threats of violence or wishing for serious physical harm, death, or disease to an individual or group of people is in violation of our policies,” it said in a blog post. It also banned hateful imagery and symbols in profile images and headers.Twitter pulled some white supremacist organizations and other extremists from the platform soon after, citing the new policies. Others, including David Duke and Richard B. Spencer, remain.Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman. Follow Johanna Barr on Twitter: @JohannaBarr.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 3, 2018
Q. Your recent tip on managing iOS apps without the old capability in the new iTunes update did not address seeing apps beyond pages available on a device (I have hundreds more not visible) and organizing them on a computer, as was so easy before iTunes 12.7. Help!A. By confining apps management to the iPhone, iPad or iPod Touch, Apple has made the process more challenging for those who preferred to organize their collections in the desktop iTunes program — but there are a few tricks that may help make more of your apps visible and easier to move around. For example, sorting your apps into folders on your home screen (a feature that was introduced for the iPhone in 2010) allows you to keep at least 12 tiny app icons in the same amount of space as a single standard icon.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Depending on the screen size of your hardware and the version of the iOS software you are using, you can have anywhere from 2,160 to 49,140 apps displayed on your device’s home screens. Whether or not your phone or tablet has the storage capacity for a potential 49,140 apps is another matter, but the icon visibility is possible based on the number of home screens, space for folders and number of apps that can be stored in those folders.To group apps into folders (like “Games” or “Photo Editors”), lightly press and hold your finger on an app icon until all the apps on the screen begin to jiggle. Drag the app on top of another app you want in the same folder; while the apps are wiggling in “edit” mode, you can also drag them around into a new order on the screen or tap the “x” in the corner to delete the app from the device.Dragging one app at a time can be tedious, but if you are using iOS 11, you can move multiple apps at once while in edit mode‚ although it typically takes multiple fingers to do so. While you have selected one app and are dragging it into a folder or new screen location, use another finger to tap other apps and add them to a stack behind the first app; you may have to double-tap to get the additional apps to pile on. An encircled number on the first app’s icon shows you how many are grouped together, and you can drag the whole batch at once.If you forget where you stashed an app on your phone, you can find it by asking the Siri assistant to open it for you. If you prefer to find your apps more quietly, swipe down from the middle of the home screen to open the iOS search box and type in the name of the app you seek. The app’s icon should appear in your search results.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTech TipBy J. D. BiersdorferQ.  I see posts in my Twitter feed that have “sensitive content” labels in place of the message. What counts as sensitive content, and how can I unblock it?A. Twitter’s media policy generally does not allow images or videos depicting graphic violence, pornography or hate-group imagery to be attached to posts. Twitter users can report material they find objectionable by selecting the menu icon on the message and using the Report option.However, the company makes exceptions when the posted material is deemed to be “artistic, medical, health or educational” content. To shield users who do not wish to see such things popping up in their feeds, Twitter blocks those posts from view with the “sensitive content” label.If you prefer to judge the posts yourself, you can adjust your settings. Log into your account at twitter.com, click your profile icon on the right and select “Privacy and safety settings” on the left. In the Safety area of the page, turn on the check box next to “Display media that may contain sensitive content.” (Those using the Twitter for Android app can also do this in the app’s settings.)Likewise, you can make potentially sensitive content visible in Twitter searches by turning off the “Hide sensitive content” check box in the Search area. Click Save Changes when you are finished.After years of a rather hands-off approach to policing its users, Twitter announced last month that it will enforce its new restrictions against abusive behavior and other hateful conduct. The company’s full list of Twitter Rules can be found in the site’s Help Center.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.AdvertisementBy NICOLE PERLROTHJAN. 1, 2018
It has been a secret, long known to intelligence agencies but rarely to consumers, that security software can be a powerful spy tool.Security software runs closest to the bare metal of a computer, with privileged access to nearly every program, application, web browser, email and file. There’s good reason for this: Security products are intended to evaluate everything that touches your machine in search of anything malicious, or even vaguely suspicious.By downloading security software, consumers also run the risk that an untrustworthy antivirus maker — or hacker or spy with a foothold in its systems — could abuse that deep access to track customers’ every digital movement.“In the battle against malicious code, antivirus products are a staple,” said Patrick Wardle, chief research officer at Digita Security, a security company. “Ironically, though, these products share many characteristics with the advanced cyberespionage collection implants they seek to detect.”AdvertisementMr. Wardle would know. A former hacker at the National Security Agency, Mr. Wardle recently succeeded in subverting antivirus software sold by Kaspersky Lab, turning it into a powerful search tool for classified documents.AdvertisementMr. Wardle’s curiosity was piqued by recent news that Russian spies had used Kaspersky antivirus products to siphon classified documents off the home computer of an N.S.A. developer, and may have played a critical role in broader Russian intelligence gathering.“I wanted to know if this was a feasible attack mechanism,” Mr. Wardle said. “I didn’t want to get into the complex accusations. But from a technical point of view, if an antivirus maker wanted to, was coerced to, or was hacked or somehow subverted, could it create a signature to flag classified documents?”That question has taken on renewed importance over the last three months in the wake of United States officials’ accusations that Kaspersky’s antivirus software was used for Russian intelligence gathering, an accusation that Kaspersky has rigorously denied.Last month, Kaspersky Lab sued the Trump administration after a Department of Homeland Security directive banning its software from federal computer networks. Kaspersky claimed in an open letter that “D.H.S. has harmed Kaspersky Lab’s reputation and its commercial operations without any evidence of wrongdoing by the company.”For years, intelligence agencies suspected that Kaspersky Lab’s security products provided a back door for Russian intelligence. A draft of a top-secret report leaked by Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor, described a top-secret, N.S.A. effort in 2008 that concluded that Kaspersky’s software collected sensitive information off customers’ machines.The documents showed Kaspersky was not the N.S.A.’s only target. Future targets included nearly two dozen other foreign antivirus makers, including Checkpoint in Israel and Avast in the Czech Republic.At the N.S.A., analysts were barred from using Kaspersky antivirus software because of the risk it would give the Kremlin broad access to their machines and data. But excluding N.S.A. headquarters at Fort Meade, Kaspersky still managed to secure contracts with nearly two dozen American government agencies over the last few years.AdvertisementLast September, the Department of Homeland Security ordered all federal agencies to cease using Kaspersky products because of the threat that Kaspersky’s products could “provide access to files.”A month later, The New York Times reported that the Homeland Security directive was based, in large part, on intelligence shared by Israeli intelligence officials who successfully hacked Kaspersky Lab in 2014. They looked on for months as Russian government hackers scanned computers belonging to Kaspersky customers around the world for top secret American government classified programs.In at least one case, United States officials claimed Russian intelligence officials were successful in using Kaspersky’s software to pull classified documents off a home computer belonging to Nghia H. Pho, an N.S.A. developer who had installed Kaspersky’s antivirus software on his home computer. Mr. Pho pleaded guilty last year to bringing home classified documents and writings, and has said he brought the files home only in an attempt to expand his résumé.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kaspersky Lab initially denied any knowledge or involvement with the document theft. But the company has since acknowledged finding N.S.A. hacking software on Mr. Pho’s computer and removing it, though the company said it had immediately destroyed the documents once it realized they were classified.The company also said in November that in the course of investigating a surveillance operation known as TeamSpy in 2015, it had tweaked its antivirus program to scan files containing the word “secret.” The company said it had done this because the TeamSpy attackers were known to automatically scan for files that included the words “secret,” “pass” and “saidumlo,” the Georgian translation for the word secret.Kaspersky continues to deny that it knew about the scanning for classified United States programs or allowed its antivirus products to be used by Russian intelligence. Eugene Kaspersky, the company’s chief executive, has said he would allow the United States government to inspect his company’s source code to allay distrust of its antivirus and cybersecurity products.But Mr. Wardle discovered, in reverse-engineering Kaspersky antivirus software, that a simple review of its source code would do nothing to prove its products had not been used as a Russian intelligence-gathering tool. (Watch how he reverse-engineered the software.)Mr. Wardle found that Kaspersky’s antivirus software is incredibly complex. Unlike traditional antivirus software, which uses digital “signatures” to look for malicious code and patterns of activity, Kaspersky’s signatures are easily updated, can be automatically pushed out to certain clients, and contain code that can be tweaked to do things like automatically scanning for and siphoning off classified documents.AdvertisementIn short, Mr. Wardle found, “antivirus could be the ultimate cyberespionage spying tool.”Patrick Wardle, a security researcher, demonstrates how he was able to use a vulnerability in Microsoft’s Windows software to manipulate Kaspersky antivirus software.Mr. Wardle said it was relatively easy to use a vulnerability in Microsoft’s Windows software to manipulate the Kaspersky software. Because officials routinely classify top secret documents with the marking “TS/SCI,” which stands for “Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information,” Mr. Wardle added a rule to Kaspersky’s antivirus program to flag any documents that contained the “TS/SCI” marker.He then edited a document on his computer containing text from the Winnie the Pooh children’s book series to include the marking “TS/SCI” and waited to see whether Kaspersky’s tweaked antivirus product would catch it.Sure enough, as soon as the Winnie the Pooh text was saved to his machine, Kaspersky’s antivirus software flagged and quarantined the document. When he added the same TS/SCI marker to another document containing the text “The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog,” it, too, was flagged and quarantined by Kaspersky’s tweaked antivirus program.“Not a whole lot of surprise that this worked,” Mr. Wardle said, “but still neat to confirm that an antivirus product can be trivially, yet surreptitiously, used to detect classified documents.”The next question was: What happens to these files once they are flagged? Mr. Wardle stopped short of hacking into Kaspersky’s cloud servers, where suspicious files are routinely uploaded.However, he noted that antivirus customers, including Kaspersky’s, agreed by default to allow security vendors to send anything from their machine back to vendors’ servers for further investigation.There are legitimate reasons for this: By uploading these items to Kaspersky’s cloud, security analysts can evaluate whether they pose a threat, and update their signatures as a result.Kaspersky Lab said Mr. Wardle’s research did not reflect how the company’s software works.“It is impossible for Kaspersky Lab to deliver a specific signature or update to only one user in a secret, targeted way because all signatures are always openly available to all our users; and updates are digitally signed, further making it impossible to fake an update,” the company said in a statement.AdvertisementThe company added that it applied the same security standards and maintained the same levels of access as other security vendors, and reiterated that it was willing to make its source code, threat detection rules and software updates available for audit by independent experts.But, as Mr. Wardle’s research demonstrated, an untrustworthy vendor, or hacker or spy with access to that vendor’s systems, can abuse its deep access to turn antivirus software into a dynamic search tool, not unlike Google, to scan customers’ computers for documents that contain certain keywords.“And no one would ever know,” he added. “It’s the perfect cybercrime.”Follow Nicole Perlroth on Twitter: @nicoleperlrothA version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Spies Exploit The Software That Protects.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
JAN. 1, 2018
Q. I have a long series of text messages on my iPhone between my son and me. Is there a way to copy these from my phone to my computer and save the files in a Microsoft Word document?A. Extracting a text conversation from your iPhone and saving it as a word-processing document is certainly possible, and there are a few ways to go about it. Many methods involve backing up the iPhone’s contents to the Mac with Apple’s free iTunes software, so if you have not already done so (or have not recently backed up your phone), consider this the first step and you get the bonus of having a fresh backup file as well.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If you do not care for a lot of technical fiddling, get one of the several programs designed to copy files from an iPhone to a computer with a few clicks. For example, the $40 iExplorer program, for the Windows and Mac operating systems, can grab a specific text conversation from the iTunes backup file and save it in a more common format like a plain-text file (which can be opened and saved in Microsoft Word), a comma-separated values file or as a PDF file. Photos and other attachments can also be retrieved. Similar apps include the $40 iMazing program for Windows and Mac, $20 CopyTrans Contacts for Windows and the $30 PhoneView for the Mac.More labor-intensive approaches to extracting the messages from the phone can be found around the web if you are up for an adventure. However, a relatively inexpensive program that can also harvest music files, videos, voice mail and other content from your phone can be very useful.If you use the Messages app on a Mac with the same account you use on your iPhone and can see the conversation you want to keep in the desktop Messages app, you can also select, copy and paste the text from there into a Word document. (Photos will probably need to be downloaded separately, and some emoji characters may not translate properly when pasted into a document.)Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2018, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Copying Text Files From an iPhone.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CEYLAN YEGINSUFEB. 1, 2018
LONDON — What if your employer made you wear a wristband that tracked your every move, and that even nudged you via vibrations when it judged that you were doing something wrong?What if your supervisor could identify every time you paused to scratch or fidget, and for how long you took a bathroom break?What may sound like dystopian fiction could become a reality for Amazon warehouse workers around the world. The company has won two patents for such a wristband, though it was unclear if Amazon planned to actually manufacture the tracking device and have employees wear it.The online retail giant, which plans to build a second headquarters and recently shortlisted 20 potential host cities for it, has also been known to experiment in-house with new technology before selling it worldwide.AdvertisementAmazon, which rarely discloses information on its patents, could not immediately be reached for comment on Thursday.AdvertisementBut the patent disclosure goes to the heart about a global debate about privacy and security. Amazon already has a reputation for a  workplace culture that thrives on a hard-hitting management style, and has experimented with how far it can push white-collar workers in order to reach its delivery targets.Privacy advocates, however, note that a lot can go wrong even with everyday tracking technology. On Monday, the tech industry was jolted by the discovery that Strava, a fitness app that allows users to track their activities and compare their performance with other people running or cycling in the same places, had unwittingly highlighted the locations of United States military bases and the movements of their personnel in Iraq and Syria.The patent applications, filed in 2016, were published in September, and Amazon won them this week, according to GeekWire, which  reported the patents’ publication on Tuesday.In theory, Amazon’s proposed technology would emit ultrasonic sound pulses and radio transmissions to track where an employee’s hands were in relation to inventory bins, and provide “haptic feedback” to steer the worker toward the correct bin.The aim, Amazon says in the patent, is to streamline “time consuming” tasks, like responding to orders and packaging them for speedy delivery. With guidance from a wristband, workers could fill orders faster.Critics say such wristbands raise concerns about privacy and would add a new layer of surveillance to the workplace, and that the use of the devices could result in employees being treated more like robots than human beings.Current and former Amazon employees said the company already used similar tracking technology in its warehouses and said they would not be surprised if it put the patents into practice.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Max Crawford, a former Amazon warehouse worker in Britain, said in a phone interview, “After a year working on the floor, I felt like I had become a version of the robots I was working with.”AdvertisementHe described having to process hundreds of items in an hour — a pace so extreme that one day, he said, he fell over from dizziness.“There was no time to go to the loo,” he said, using the British slang for toilet. “You had to process the items in seconds and then move on. If you didn’t meet targets, you were fired.”He worked back and forth at two Amazon warehouses for more than two years and then quit in 2015 because of health concerns, he said: “I got burned out.”Mr. Crawford agreed that the wristbands might save some time and labor, but he said the tracking was “stalkerish” and feared that workers might be unfairly scrutinized if their hands were found to be “in the wrong place at the wrong time.”“They want to turn people into machines,” he said. “The robotic technology isn’t up to scratch yet, so until it is, they will use human robots.”Many companies file patents for products that never see the light of day. And Amazon would not be the first employer to push boundaries in the search for a more efficient, speedy work force. Companies are increasingly introducing artificial intelligence into the workplace to help with productivity, and technology is often used to monitor employee whereabouts.One company in London is developing artificial intelligence systems to flag unusual workplace behavior, while another used a messaging application to track its employees.In Wisconsin, a technology company called Three Square Market offered employees an opportunity to have microchips implanted under their skin in order, it said, to be able to use its services seamlessly.Initially, more than 50 out of 80 staff members at its headquarters in River Falls, Wis., volunteered.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Track Hands Of Workers? Amazon Has Patents for It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Tech Tip By                     
 J. D. BIERSDORFER
 
MARCH 20, 2018
Q. Is it possible to use external devices with an iPad Pro, particularly for file storage?A. The iPad Pro has a Lightning port for connecting a charger, syncing data over a USB cable or attaching peripherals. Any external devices (aside from headphones) must be compatible with that jack or wirelessly pair up with the iPad by Bluetooth.Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several companies make Lightning-tipped USB flash drives that also have a standard USB connector on the other end that plugs into a computer to transfer files. Leef, Omars, Picture Keeper and SanDisk are among the companies that make these types of drives, and prices generally start around $45.(The iPad Pro can also store and download photos, videos, documents and other files on a cloud server or drive over a wireless-network connection. Apple’s own iCloud Drive is one example, but as with other services, you have to pay for more server space if your files exceed your free storage limit.)File-storage options aside, Apple makes several adapters that connect the Lightning port on its iOS devices to other kinds of hardware, including digital cameras, USB microphones and video projectors. For example, the $39 Lightning to USB 3 Camera Adapter can import photos and videos to the iPad Pro from a digital camera connected with a USB cable; the adapter’s USB jack can be used to connect USB keyboards to the tablet. Belkin has a selection of Lightning-connector products, including the $60 Secure Wired Keyboard, and other companies make Lightning gear as well.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CECILIA KANGAPRIL 20, 2018
WASHINGTON — The Justice Department has opened an antitrust investigation into potential coordination by AT&T, Verizon and a telecommunications standards organization to hinder consumers from easily switching wireless carriers, according to six people with knowledge of the inquiry.In February, the Justice Department issued demands to AT&T, Verizon and the G.S.M.A., a mobile industry standards-setting group, for information on potential collusion to thwart a technology known as eSIM, said two of the people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the details are confidential.The technology lets people remotely switch wireless providers without having to insert a new SIM card into a device. AT&T and Verizon face accusations that they colluded with the G.S.M.A. to try to establish standards that would allow them to lock a device to their network even if it had eSIM technology.The investigation was opened about five months ago after at least one device maker and one wireless carrier filed formal complaints with the Justice Department, two of the people said. The device maker was Apple, one of them said.AdvertisementRepresentatives for the Justice Department, and Apple declined to comment.In a statement, a Verizon spokesman confirmed that the carrier had been working with the Justice Department for several months on the inquiry because of “a difference of opinion with a couple of phone equipment manufacturers regarding the development of eSIM standards.” He said the issue was “much ado about nothing.”AdvertisementAn AT&T spokesman said the company was “aware of the investigation,” had provided information to the government and was working “to move this issue forward.”G.S.M.A. confirmed that it had developed an eSIM standard that would allow a carrier to lock a device to its network but put the standard on hold pending the Justice Department’s investigation. Under the pending standard, the G.S.M.A. said, a wireless carrier would need permission from a consumer to lock a device.“The G.S.M.A. is cooperating fully with the Department of Justice in this matter,” the organization said in a statement.At the heart of the investigation is whether the nation’s biggest wireless carriers, working with the G.S.M.A., secretly tried to influence mobile technology to unfairly maintain their dominance, in a way that hurt competition and consumers and hindered innovation in the wider mobile industry.AT&T and Verizon together control about 70 percent of all wireless subscriptions in the United States. A technology that made it easy to switch carriers could lead to more turnover and fewer subscribers for them.The investigation highlights a push by the Justice Department’s antitrust chief, Makan Delrahim, to crack down on the opaque world of intellectual property, or I.P., standards. He has said the Justice Department will scrutinize potential coordination in standards-setting organizations that can hurt competition.“In the context of antitrust and I.P., we will be inclined to investigate and enforce when we see evidence of collusive conduct undertaken for the purpose of fixing prices, or excluding particular competitors or products,” Mr. Delrahim said in a speech this month at a conference in Washington. He previously warned of the potential for “cartel-like behavior” by competitors that got together with standards-setting organizations.AdvertisementAt the same time, the Justice Department is suing AT&T to block its $85.4 billion merger with Time Warner. Mr. Delrahim has said the deal will hurt competition and lead to higher prices for cable customers. AT&T and Time Warner have strongly disputed the claims in a federal trial that is expected to end this month.Currently, most mobile phones use SIM cards, which contain unique identifying information about a user and are inserted into the devices so the phones can function. People typically have to buy a new SIM card when changing carriers.The eSIM technology, which was introduced in early 2016, is embedded in mobile phones and other devices so that people do not need SIM cards anymore.The eSIM technology is supported by gadget makers including Apple, Google and Microsoft, as well as several wireless carriers globally and in the United States. The Apple Watch 3, Google Pixel 2 smartphone and Microsoft Surface all have eSIM abilities, for example. For companies like Apple, eSIM technology would free up storage space in devices to use for other technologies like bigger processors and batteries. It would also make it easier for people to use their devices while traveling for business.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The push by the major carriers to restrict the flexibility of eSIM runs counter to a movement in which consumers were gaining more flexibility to move from carrier to carrier. In late 2013, under pressure by the Federal Communications Commission, the wireless industry agreed to let people take devices off any particular network without penalty once the devices were fully paid for.After the formal complaints against AT&T and Verizon were filed, several device makers and other wireless companies voiced similar concerns to the agency about the carriers’ actions around eSIM, four people familiar with the investigation said. The investigation may also include other major American carriers, another person said.“The actions would limit choice for consumers and harm competition,” said Ferras Vinh, a policy expert at the Center for Democracy and Technology.In a private meeting of a task force called G.S.M.A. North America this year, AT&T and Verizon pushed for the ability to lock phones to their networks, bypassing the purpose of eSIM technology, said Harold Feld, a senior vice president of Public Knowledge, a nonprofit consumer group, who was briefed on the meeting. Verizon has said it needed to be able to lock down phones to prevent theft and fraud.“There is a constant problem with industry standards-setting organizations that on the one hand allow the industry to come together for the purpose of efficiency but can be very anticompetitive and operate in secrecy,” Mr. Feld said.Follow Cecilia Kang on Twitter: @ceciliakang.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Is Said  To Investigate  Wireless Collusion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 21, 2018, 6:55 A.M. E.D.T.
SHANGHAI —  China must strengthen its grip on the internet to ensure broader social and economic goals are met, state news agency Xinhua reported on Saturday citing comments from President Xi Jinping, underlining a hardening attitude towards online content.Under Xi's rule China has increasingly tightened its grip on the internet, concerned about losing influence and control over a younger generation who are driving a diverse and vibrant online culture from livestreaming to blogs."Without web security there's no national security, there's no economic and social stability, and it's difficult to ensure the interests of the broader masses," Xinhua cited Xi as saying."We cannot let the internet become a platform for disseminating harmful information and stirring up trouble with rumors," he added in comments made at a cyber security conference in Beijing, Xinhua said.AdvertisementChinese regulators have been driving a sweeping crackdown on media content, which has been gaining force since last year, spreading a chill among content makers and distributors.AdvertisementChina is also looking to take a leading role globally in internet regulation and technology more broadly, which has come into sharp focus amid a trade standoff with the United States and an arms race over technology.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The United States banned sales of parts and software to Chinese telecoms equipment maker ZTE earlier this week, which the Chinese firm said on Friday threatened its survival. ZTE uses U.S. chips in many of its smartphones.The ZTE case had "triggered a heated debate" in China about advanced technology, Xinhua said in a separate report on Saturday, adding mastering high-end technologies such as chips was "key" to becoming a strong nation.Luo Wen, China's deputy industry minister, said while China had made progress in advance manufacturing in areas like electric vehicles and aviation, it was still facing challenges due to a lack of top talent and global scale, Xinhua said."Our advanced manufacturing development faces the risk of being boxed in at the low-end," Xinhua reported, citing Luo.(Reporting by Adam Jourdan; Editing by Ros Russell)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 1:58 P.M. E.D.T.
BOSTON —  Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc said on Friday that Dicerna Pharmaceuticals Inc will pay it $25 million in cash and stock to resolve a lawsuit claiming it stole trade secrets about gene-silencing technology used to develop drug treatments.The settlement between the two biotech companies resolves a lawsuit that Alnylam filed against Dicerna in 2015. The accord came ahead of a jury trial that was set to begin on Monday in state court in Woburn, Massachusetts.Under the agreement, Dicerna said it will pay Alnylam $2 million up-front plus 983,208 shares of its common stock.Cambridge, Massachusetts-based Dicerna said it will also pay Alnylam another $13 million over the next four years, the timing of which is dependent on revenue Dicerna receives pursuant to future RNAi technology-based partnerships under its GalXC brand.AdvertisementAlnylam, also Cambridge-based, in a statement said the deal would also place certain restrictions on Dicerna. Neither company admitted wrongdoing.AdvertisementDicerna's stock was trading at $13.20 midday on Friday, up 29.12 percent. Shares in Alnylam were trading at $97.59, up 1.46 percent.Alnylam's lawsuit accused Dicerna of misappropriating confidential information related to RNAi technology Alnylam acquired when in 2014 when it bought a Merck & Co Inc subsidiary in a deal it valued in court papers at $325 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.RNAi, or RNA interference, prevents a defective gene from making disease-causing proteins.The lawsuit said Dicerna, which unsuccessfully tried to acquire RNAi assets from Merck, used confidential information it reviewed while considering the potential transaction in violation of a confidentiality agreement.Alnylam contended Dicerna also hired several Merck scientists who had been involved in developing the technologies its rival acquired as part of an intentional scheme to gain access to trade secrets and confidential information.Alnylam in court papers filed in Middlesex County Superior Court said the scheme allowed Dicerna to develop "strikingly similar" technologies within a year and unjustly enriched the company by up to $325 million.Dicerna denied the allegations. It filed a counterclaim alleging Alnylam was pursuing a frivolous lawsuit that improperly interfered with its funding sources and partnership opportunities in order to crush its smaller competitor.Dicerna sought $42.2 million in damages. It also filed a related federal antitrust case against Alnylam, which is also being settled.(Reporting by Nate Raymond in Boston; Editing by Tom Brown)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPDevious code is sending people to fraudulent quiz and contest pages, so ignore that “lucky winner” notice and run a security scan.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. I keep getting these “Congratulations!” messages about winning prizes from Amazon.com, even when I’m not using the site. Why is this?A. Those persistent pop-up messages are not from Amazon, but are part of a wave of malicious display advertisements — also known as “malvertising” — invading desktop, Android and iPhone browsers. The intrusive ads can also appear when browsing links that are posted on Facebook. Malvertising has been a problem for years, but lately has become more pervasive on mobile devices. Symantec, a security company, noted this year that the “congratulations” malware has been making a strong push onto Android devices with a Trojan horse called Android.Fakeyouwon.In January, the cybersecurity company Confiant also outlined how the recent malware was spread across the web by fraudulent advertising agencies, which placed tainted ads on legitimate sites. If you select the pop-up’s O.K. button or try to dismiss the box, the browser is typically redirected to a page that promises prizes for participation in a quiz. Interacting with the quiz may infect your system with malware or give the scammers access to your Facebook friends list. If you get a “congratulations” box on your screen with no way out, forcibly quit the browser to escape.If scam messages are regularly popping up on your screen, your computer or device may be infected. To disinfect your system, run an anti-malware utility like Malwarebytes AdwCleaner for Windows; Malwarebytes for the Mac scans for adware, too. Microsoft has a Malicious Software Tool for Windows. Apple’s support site has guides for blocking pop-ups in the Safari browser and clearing the history and website data from an iOS device. The Facebook Help Center has instructions for dealing with malicious software. Google recently added new security features to its Chrome browser for desktop systems and Android to help remove pop-ups and malware, and Mozilla’s site has a malware-troubleshooting guide for Firefox.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 16, 2018, 12:04 A.M. E.D.T.
BERLIN —  The German automotive industry must invest heavily in electric car technology and develop battery production facilities in Europe to keep up with global competitors, Economy Minister Peter Altmaier said in a newspaper interview published on Monday.Altmaier told Germany's mass-circulation Bild newspaper that the carmakers needed to invest high "two-digit billion amounts" in electric car technology, saying he did not understand why the firms had hesitated for so long.Investments were also needed in battery production, given expected demand for many millions of electric batteries that could help firms earn good money, he said."Otherwise we'll have to accept that a large part of the added value will be produced in Asia or the United States, instead of here with us," he said.AdvertisementThe German car industry, which accounts for some 800,000 jobs in Europe's biggest economy, is struggling with a global backlash against diesel cars after Volkswagen admitted in 2015 that it had cheated U.S. exhaust tests.AdvertisementTo help reduce pollution levels and avoid a total ban on diesel vehicles, VW, Daimler and others have stepped up development of electric cars.The new German coalition government plans to ease the tax burden on drivers of electric vehicles, provide at least an additional 100,000 charge points across the country and subsidize car-sharing to push a shift to greener transportation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are also plans to provide funding for research into autonomous driving technology and support the establishment of battery cell production in Germany.Altmaier said German carmakers needed to develop a model that had at least the range of a Tesla but costs less, and should work on developing an information technology platform for self-driving cars that was the best in the world."The first safe self-driving cars must operate with German technology," he said.German companies should also work with other European firms to develop a European battery cell production.The conservative minister said it was imperative to secure the hundreds of thousands of jobs now supporting the car and supplier industries.(Reporting by Andrea Shalal; Editing by Sandra Maler)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersJAKARTA — Hundreds of Indonesian motorcycle taxi drivers working for start-ups Grab and Go-Jek called on Monday for an end to low online fares and demanded tighter regulation of ride-hailing companies.Around 1,500 drivers - wearing the green jackets and helmets associated with Singapore-based Grab and Indonesia's Go-Jek - briefly disrupted traffic outside parliament in the capital Jakarta."There must be legal and social protection for online 'ojek' drivers as part of the national workforce," a group of drivers for both companies said in a statement that used the Indonesian word for motorcycle taxi. Startups like Grab and Go-Jek have been locked in price wars to capture market share in Indonesia, Southeast Asia's biggest economy. The firms have slashed prices for car rides, motorcycle trips and a raft of other services. The transport ministry moved last month to classify Grab and Go-Jek as transportation instead of technology companies. That means they would be subject to the same regulations as regular taxi and bus companies and could potentially face higher costs and scrutiny.But there were no plans yet to apply the regulations to motorcycle taxis, said Budi Setyadi, director general of land transportation at the transport ministry."With regard to tariffs, it depends on the goodwill of the companies," Setyadi told Reuters on Monday.The drivers said on Monday they want a standard fare of 3,000 to 4,000 rupiah (22 cents to 29 cents) per kilometer.Both Grab and Go-Jek have yet to make significant changes to their tariff structure.Grab has said it preferred to maintain current rates because "Grab has other programs to improve the livelihood of its drivers". (Reporting by Darren Whiteside and Tabita Diela; Writing by Kanupriya Kapoor; editing by Darren Schuettler)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 18, 2018, 11:46 A.M. E.D.T.
HONG KONG —  Technology giants Tencent, JD.com and TCL are among investors in Chinese TV maker New Leshi Zhixin, its controlling shareholder Leshi Internet Information and Technology said on Wednesday.Affiliates of Tencent Holdings, JD.com Inc, TCL Corp and Suning.com Co have agreed to each invest 300 million yuan ($48 million) in the manufacturer of smart TVs among backers investing a combined total of up to 3 billion yuan, Leshi said in a Shenzhen stock exchange filing.The new funds will help with a capital shortage at the company and boost operations, Leshi said.Leshi's holding in New Leshi Zhixin will be diluted to 33.46 percent from 40.31 percent after the transactions, but it will remain as the biggest shareholder.New investors such as Tencent and JD.com will hold 2.56 percent stakes, the filing said.Leshi's parent LeEco was once China's Netflix-to-Tesla contender but ran into a cash crunch in late 2016 after expanding too fast.Leshi has a market capitalization of about 20 billion yuan and had debt of 4.7 billion yuan at the end of September.(Reporting by Meg Shen; Editing by David Goodman)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and ADAM SATARIANOAPRIL 23, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — In Europe and the United States, the conventional wisdom is that regulation is needed to force Silicon Valley’s digital giants to respect people’s online privacy.But new rules may instead serve to strengthen Facebook’s and Google’s hegemony and extend their lead on the internet.That could begin playing out next month, when Europe enacts sweeping new regulations that prioritize people’s data privacy. The new laws, which require tech companies to ask for users’ consent for their data, are likely to hand Google and Facebook an advantage. That’s because wary consumers are more prone to trust recognized names with their information than unfamiliar newcomers. And the laws may deter start-ups that do not have the resources to comply with the rules from competing with the big companies.In recent years, other regulatory attempts at strengthening online privacy rules have also had little effect at chipping away at the power of the largest tech companies, ultimately aiding internet giants rather than hurting them.Advertisement“Regulations help incumbents,” said Avi Goldfarb, a marketing professor at the University of Toronto who has studied the effect of privacy regulations on competition. Mr. Goldfarb was the co-author of a 2013 report that said privacy regulation could be anti-competitive because the cost of getting permission from users for their data was typically much higher for a younger company than for an established firm.AdvertisementThat Facebook and Google may emerge stronger from all of this can seem like a distant prospect. The Silicon Valley companies have been under scrutiny for months for the way they collect and use people’s data, with Facebook reeling from revelations that the political research firm Cambridge Analytica harvested the personal information of up to 87 million of its users. That led Congress to drag Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, to Washington this month for a grilling.Google, too, has grappled with questions about its online video service YouTube as it tries to duck  lawmakers who fear that the search giant’s data-collection machinery is as robust as Facebook’s, if not more so.At the same time, countries like Brazil and Argentina are exploring European-style privacy regulations that will further test the companies’ advertising-based business models. United States lawmakers also showed more openness to regulating Silicon Valley during Mr. Zuckerberg’s testimony this month.Yet past attempts at privacy regulation have done little to mitigate the power of tech firms. Consider what happened in Europe after earlier attempts at checking the power of Facebook, Google and others.In 2014, Europe’s highest court ruled that people had the “right to be forgotten” online, meaning they could ask Google and other digital companies to delete search results about them. Since then, Google has instead become a chief arbiter of what information is kept online in Europe because the company itself is responsible for determining the fate of each deletion request.Another 2011 European law requiring websites to alert visitors to “cookie” trackers that collect data on browsing history has largely turned into a distracting annoyance rather than changing how companies operate. People often accept the tracking to get rid of the pop-up warning without reading details about the tracking.Today, the uproar over data privacy has also done little to diminish the businesses or usage of Facebook and Google. Mr. Zuckerberg said this month that the Cambridge Analytica scandal had no meaningful effect on Facebook’s business, which is expected to show sales growth when the company reports quarterly earnings this week. Alphabet, Google’s parent company, said on Monday that its revenue rose 26 percent for its most recent quarter as its ad business continued to grow.Spokeswomen for Facebook and Google declined to comment.In Europe, the coming data privacy laws are known as the General Data Protection Regulation. These rules will restrict how tech companies collect, store and use personal data from people across the region. The laws, which take effect on May 25, require companies to explain how they plan to use people’s personal information in simple, unambiguous language and detail what other entities will gain access to that data. Companies can no longer hide behind convoluted and often ignored user agreements, but must obtain consent with a full understanding of the user where their data may go.AdvertisementLawyers, consultants and businesses preparing for the privacy laws said that reining in the large technology companies was not the primary goal of the European legislation.Some privacy advocates also bristle at the idea that these new restrictions would help already powerful internet companies, noting that is a well-worn argument employed by tech giants to try to prevent future regulation.But Nicolas Colin, a co-founder and director at the Family, a Paris-based start-up accelerator, argued that “people tend to give that permission to companies they trust.” He said that “stricter rules strengthen companies because they have that key asset that is trust.”The European privacy laws may crimp targeted advertising by limiting the flow of personal data, but firms like Google and Facebook still have an advantage because advertisers are likely to turn to services with reach and enormous audiences — akin to buying an ad during the Super Bowl. Facebook has more than 2.2 billion monthly users, and Google’s YouTube has 1.5 billion monthly users.Giovanni Buttarelli, the European data protection supervisor who was involved in the creation of privacy rules, said much of the impact would be determined by regulators who enact the law and who will be up against well-funded teams of lobbyists and lawyers. Google and Facebook will be overseen by the Irish data authority because their European headquarters are in Ireland. Mr. Buttarelli noted that Europe had staff of about 2,500 across all the countries working on the issue.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That’s peanuts compared to the lobbyists in Brussels and Strasbourg,” he said, referring to the cities where the European Commission and Parliament operate.He said large technology companies had advantages but would also be under a microscope. Enforcement of the law is skewed to companies that handle the most personal data.Advertisement“There are pros and cons to being a tech giant,” he said. “We want to treat small and medium-sized businesses differently.”Yonatan Zunger, a former Google privacy engineer now working at human resources start-up Humu, said Europe was holding Google and Facebook to “a much higher bar” when it came to gaining consent from users. These companies now cannot make data sharing a condition of using their products because consent needs to be freely given, whereas smaller companies are not held to that same standard, he said.Still, there are already signs the big companies are adjusting to the new privacy norms.Facebook last week rolled out a new consent form asking users globally — not just Europeans — to accept its targeted advertising and to allow features like face recognition. It has also limited access to data brokers such as Acxiom, in a concession to privacy advocates.Google, which spent years preparing for the new rules, has stopped scanning Gmail messages for keywords used to target advertising. And it recently introduced a new marketing product for publishers that shows ads based on the context of other articles or content on a website, instead of relying on personal information.In response, privacy critics have challenged Facebook’s new consent forms, saying they are intended to continue encouraging users to share information widely. And Google came under fire for an updated European user consent policy that has open-ended language, which critics said violated a tenet of European privacy rules that requires companies to ask for user consent in specific and explicit ways.“I’m worried that a lot of people have invested a lot of hope in G.D.P.R., and I’m not sure it’s going to deliver,” said Ben Scott, a senior adviser to the Open Technology Institute at New America, a think tank based in Washington. “It will all depend on how it’s going to be enforced.”Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi and Adam Satariano on Twitter: @daiwaka and @satarianoDaisuke Wakabayashi reported from San Francisco, and Adam Satariano from London.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Tech’s Hand Grows Stronger In Privacy Push.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersLONDON — Britain's financial firms need to pull together to fight cyber crime, working with government and law enforcement to attack criminals' infrastructure and put them out of business, a report by KPMG and industry body UK Finance said on Monday. The report argues the growing threat cyber crime poses to the financial sector cannot be countered just by spending more money, and that a revamped approach is needed. This includes working together and with governments and law enforcement to render the markets, tools and systems cyber criminals use ineffective, it said. "(That) imposes cost on them (the criminals), because they then have to reconstruct that botnet, those phishing sites," said David Ferbrache, technical director and head of cyber and space at KPMG."For us it's very much a bit of a call to arms across the community ... There's a lot more we can do," he said. Some groups, such as the Cyber Defence Alliance, whose members include some of the world's biggest banks, are already doing this, but different initiatives need to be linked up, report authors Ferbrache and Dan Crisp, interim director of technology and digital policy at UK Finance, told Reuters. Cyber crime is big business, with the global impact exceeding $450 billion a year, and is now second only to political risk in terms of challenges facing the financial sector, according to the report. The attack on the Bank of Bangladesh in 2016, where hackers made off with $81 million, shows the growing sophistication of attacks on financial firms, it said. Banks' cyber chiefs have also warned that tools previously only available to nation states are now being used by criminals. While UK banks alone spent $360 million on IT in 2016, it continued, approaches are often slow and constrained by regulation relative to the methods used by cyber criminals, who can operate beyond borders and the law and are constantly updating their methods. This requires a quicker and more collaborative response, both within and among affected firms and law enforcement and governments, the report said. "Ultimately, the financial sector as a community needs to organize this themselves," said Ferbrache.  (Reporting by Emma Rumney; Editing by Mark Potter)AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIAPRIL 23, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — Alphabet, Google’s parent company, is spending like it is beginning to prepare for life after advertising.Currently, Alphabet makes nearly 90 percent of its money from selling advertising on the internet, and gobbles up heaps of data about its users to help marketers target those ads more effectively.But a close reading of Alphabet’s financial results for the first quarter of 2018, which were announced on Monday, showed that the Silicon Valley giant is accelerating its efforts to diversify into other businesses.Alphabet has made investments in areas like self-driving cars and online computer services for businesses for years, but spending in those areas was up dramatically in the first quarter. The company’s capital expenditures, which included installing undersea cables and the construction of new data centers, were $7.7 billion — more than triple the same period last year.AdvertisementRuth Porat, Alphabet’s chief financial officer, said that increase reflected a “commitment to growth” because the company had spent heavily on computing infrastructure, for both its own internal use and customer needs like Google Cloud — the unit that provides technology services to other companies.AdvertisementAlphabet’s expenses rose 27 percent in the quarter. Ms. Porat said the heaviest spending came from research and development costs — mainly the hiring of additional technical staff. The company said its total employees had increased to 85,050 from 73,992 in the same period a year ago.Over all, Alphabet said its net income rose 73 percent, to $9.4 billion, from the same period a year earlier, boosted in part by an increase in the value of its outside investments. Revenue rose 26 percent to $31.1 billion.Ms. Porat also pointed out an increase in spending for advertising to promote newer products including Google’s own hardware — a relatively new business manufacturing branded smartphones, laptops and smart speakers — and the company’s artificially intelligent digital assistant.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They are thinking about their future,” said Collin Colburn, an analyst at Forrester Research who focuses on search advertising. “They want to diversify beyond just advertising being such a big part of their business.”That focus on variety comes as the data-collection practices that underpin the entire digital advertising industry are under intense scrutiny after the personal information of up to 87 million Facebook users ended up in the hands of the political research firm Cambridge Analytica. Google’s advertising business is more than twice the size of Facebook’s, and the company’s portfolio of data about its users is as expansive — if not more so — than that of the social network.Still, the search giant’s core business showed no sign of slowing in the first quarter. Revenue from Google’s advertising business, which includes ads shown on Google search and commercials running before YouTube videos, increased 24 percent during the quarter.However, Google’s advertising profits were weighed down by an increase in traffic acquisition costs — the fees that it pays companies like Apple to make sure that its search engine is the default option when people open a browser on the iPhone.Also among the company’s expenditures in the quarter: $2.4 billion to buy the Chelsea Market building in Manhattan, where the company had set up some of its New York offices.On a conference call with investment analysts, Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive, avoided answering questions about the potential effects of new regulations concerning data privacy in Europe. The new law, which goes into effect on May 25, will restrict how companies like Google can collect, store and use personal data from users across Europe.AdvertisementMr. Pichai said the company has been preparing for the law for more than 18 months, but didn’t discuss how the new regulations may affect the company’s bottom line.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwakaA version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Google’s Parent, Flush With Cash, Bets on a Future Beyond Ads.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 23, 2018, 7:07 P.M. E.D.T.
LONDON —  Lilium, a German start-up with Silicon Valley-scale ambitions to put electric "flying taxis" in the air next decade, has hired Frank Stephenson, the designer behind iconic car brands including the modern Mini, Fiat 500 and McLaren P1.Lilium is developing a lightweight aircraft powered by 36 electric jet engines mounted on its wings. It aims to travel at speeds of up to 300 kilometers (186 miles) per hour, with a range of 300 km on a single charge, the firm has said.Founded in 2015 by four Munich Technical University students, the Bavarian firm has set out plans to demonstrate a fully functional vertical take-off electric jet by next year, with plans to begin online booking of commuter flights by 2025.It is one of a number of companies, from Chinese automaker Geely to U.S. ride-sharing firm Uber, looking to tap advances in drone technology, high-performance materials and automated driving to turn aerial driving - long a staple of science fiction movies like "Blade Runner" - into reality.AdvertisementStephenson, 58, who holds American and British citizenship, will join the aviation start-up in May. He lives west of London and will commute weekly to Lilium's offices outside of Munich. His job is to design a plane on the outside and a car inside.AdvertisementFamous for a string of hits at BMW, Mini, Ferrari, Maserati, Fiat, Alfa Romeo and McLaren, Stephenson will lead all aspects of Lilium design, including the interior and exterior of its jets, the service's landing pads and even its departure lounges."With Lilium, we don't have to base the jet on anything that has been done before," Stephenson told Reuters in an interview."What's so incredibly exciting about this is we're not talking about modifying a car to take to the skies, and we are not talking about modifying a helicopter to work in a better way."Stephenson recalled working at Ferrari a dozen years ago and thinking it was the greatest job a grown-up kid could ever want. But the limits of working at such a storied carmaker dawned on him: "I always had to make a car that looked like a Ferrari".His move to McLaren, where he worked from 2008 until 2017, freed him to design a new look and design language from scratch: "That was as good as it gets for a designer," he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lilium is developing a five-seat flying electric vehicle for commuters after tests in 2017 of a two-seat jet capable of a mid-air transition from hover mode, like drones, into wing-borne flight, like conventional aircraft. (https://reut.rs/2JgUowk)Combining these two features is what separates Lilium from rival start-ups working on so-called flying cars or taxis that rely on drone or helicopter-like technologies, such as German rival Volocopter or European aerospace giant Airbus."If the competitors come out there with their hovercraft or drones or whatever type of vehicles, they'll have their own distinctive look," Stephenson said.Advertisement"Let the other guys do whatever they want. The last thing I want to do is anything that has been done before."The jet, with power consumption per kilometer comparable to an electric car, could offer passenger flights at prices taxis now charge but at speeds five times faster, Lilium has said.Nonetheless, flying cars face many hurdles, including convincing regulators and the public that their products can be used safely. Governments are still grappling with regulations for drones and driverless cars.Lilium has raised more than $101 million in early-stage funding from backers including an arm of China's Tencent and Atomico and Obvious Ventures, the venture firms, respectively, of the co-founders of Skype and Twitter. (https://reut.rs/2K8MeaP)(Reporting by Eric Auchard; Editing by Mark Potter)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSINGAPORE — Robots in Singapore have completed a task many humans dread - assembling flat-packed IKEA furniture.Sifting through pages of instructions and a jumble of screws and bolts to build the low-cost Swedish furniture may soon be a thing of the past given advances in technology, say researchers at the city-state's Nanyang Technological University (NTU) The scientists spent three years programming the robot - made of arms, grippers, sensors and 3D cameras - which assembled the frame of an IKEA dining chair in around 20 minutes. They say it may not be long before such robots can fully assemble a piece of furniture from a manual, verbal instruction or by just looking at an image of the finished item."We have achieved the low level capability to teach the robot 'how to do it' and then in the next five to 10 years, high level reasoning - the 'what to do' - could be done too," one of the researchers Quang-Cuong Pham told Reuters.Pham said the team at NTU were looking to work with artificial intelligence experts to try and hone the process. Cindy Andersen, global business area manager of kitchen and dining at IKEA, told Britain's Daily Mail newspaper: "It's interesting to see an example of how robots could potentially contribute to our vision of creating a better everyday life for many people."We are very positive about embracing new technology." Singapore has been pushing businesses to invest in automation and robotics to boost productivity as it keeps a tight leash on cheap foreign labor.Some restaurants and hotels in the city-state use robots to deliver food to customers and collect used plates and cutlery. (https://reut.rs/2qJyH09) (Reporting by John Geddie; Editing by Michael Perry)AdvertisementBy CECILIA KANG, NICK WINGFIELD and DANIELLE IVORYAPRIL 22, 2018
One of Amazon’s antagonists seized the moment last month with an unusual newspaper advertisement addressed to President Trump. The ad, from a nonprofit that advocates less government, attacked a Defense Department technology contract that Amazon intends to bid on, calling it a lucrative handout for the company.A top think tank critic of Amazon’s market power also credited Mr. Trump on Twitter this month for blasting the internet retailer’s relationship with the United States Postal Service. And the head of a leading labor union said more Americans in both parties should speak out, as Mr. Trump has, about Amazon’s harmful effect on jobs.As Mr. Trump has become Amazon’s basher in chief with his frequent Twitter attacks on the company and its chief executive, Jeff Bezos, the president has also become an unlikely ally for an array of Amazon critics. Most of them — from think tanks to advocates for local businesses — have struggled for years to build any momentum for their arguments, since Washington officials mostly held Amazon up as a beacon of innovation and shoppers saw little to dislike in its prices, selection and convenience.Now “what Trump is essentially doing is telling the political ecosystem: Here is how you achieve your business ends,” said Blair Levin, a fellow at the Brookings Institution and a former chief of staff for the Federal Communications Commission. “He is signaling: If you want to go after Amazon, go ahead. Load up your guns.”AdvertisementBut while Amazon’s opponents now have the country’s most powerful bullhorn on their side, they aren’t entirely comfortable with the association.AdvertisementSome are concerned about the president’s motivations for his attacks, which people close to Mr. Trump have said are often triggered by negative coverage of his administration in The Washington Post, a newspaper owned personally by Mr. Bezos. Mr. Trump has mingled his attacks on Amazon and the newspaper in some tweets, including one in early April slamming “the Fake News Washington Post, Amazon’s ‘chief lobbyist.’”Matt Stoller, a fellow at the Open Markets Institute, a think tank that has become a vocal critic of the power of tech companies, said he believed Amazon was worthy of action by regulators in part because of its power in the book market. But he also said he found Mr. Trump’s efforts to “personalize law enforcement” troubling.“What he’s doing is a threat to democracy, but so is Amazon,” Mr. Stoller said. “That’s the dilemma.”Still, early this month, after Mr. Trump launched another Twitter tirade against Amazon’s deal with the Postal Service, Mr. Stoller jumped on board on Twitter.“On the post office shipping charges Trump is correct and oddly aligned with postal employees while Bezos isn’t, so I’m going to stick with the postal employees,” he wrote.
            On the post office shipping charges Trump is correct and oddly aligned with postal employees while Bezos isn’t, so I’m going to stick with the postal employees. https://t.co/K2yipJVVxz The most direct effort to tap Mr. Trump’s hostility toward Amazon was an advertisement last month about the contract to provide cloud computing services to the Defense Department — worth up to $10 billion, by some estimates. The ad, with a picture of Mr. Bezos looking chummy next to Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis, appeared in the president’s favorite hometown tabloid.“President Trump: Your Defense Department is set to award a no-bid, ten-year contract for all its IT infrastructure to Administration-enemy Jeff Bezos’ Amazon,” read the ad in The New York Post.
            Full page ad in the New York Post. Bezos has smart enemies. pic.twitter.com/eilLlnG3Bh “I had never seen that before,” Katell Thielemann, an analyst who follows the government technology contracting market for the research firm Gartner, said of the attack ad.AdvertisementThe ad was placed by Less Government, which calls itself a nonprofit based in Washington, D.C. Seton Motley, who runs the group, did not respond to requests for comment. He has said in interviews that he funded the ad himself. It’s unclear who backs the group, but there are large tech companies, some with connections to Mr. Trump, that have expressed their unhappiness with how the contract is structured.The contract came up in a dinner this month with Mr. Trump and Safra Catz, co-chief executive of Oracle, according to a person briefed on the matter, who asked not to be identified because the details are confidential. Ms. Catz told the president that the way the Defense Department had written the contract, awarding it to just one vendor, was an advantage to Amazon, the person said.So far, Mr. Trump hasn’t publicly expressed concern about Amazon’s bid for the contract. The White House didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.Mr. Trump recently escalated his attacks on Amazon with a presidential order to review the Postal Service’s financial model, which he has denounced on Twitter as money-losing because of favorable deals worked out with Amazon. (The Postal Service denies that deals like its one with Amazon are unprofitable.)The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The playing field has to be leveled,” he told reporters this month, promising to take a serious look at policies that might affect Amazon.Mr. Trump’s Amazon attacks have amplified criticisms that have been building for years among research groups and trade organizations that represent Amazon’s rivals.They have produced studies that say Amazon’s warehouses — which employ more than 125,000 full-time workers in the United States — don’t increase total local employment because of losses in other sectors. They also question the wisdom of subsidies to attract them. The American Booksellers Association, which represents independent bookstores, recently published a similar report on Amazon’s economic impact.AdvertisementThe United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, one of the largest private-sector unions in the country, representing 1.3 million workers in grocery stores and related industries, said Amazon’s investments in automation would hurt workers. Since it bought Whole Foods last year, Amazon has become one of the union’s top concerns.Asked about Mr. Trump’s attacks on Amazon, Marc Perrone, president of the union, said: “Allowing Amazon’s unchecked growth to continue will lead to the destruction of millions of American jobs. Which begs the question: Why aren’t all Democrats and Republicans speaking out?”A spokesman for Amazon declined to comment.When Mr. Trump bashes Amazon for not collecting taxes, he is echoing long-running criticism of the company by the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, a nonpartisan research organization. Amazon collects sales tax in states that have one for items it sells directly to shoppers, but in most states it does not when shoppers buy merchandise from independent merchants on Amazon.Other critics — from technology pundits to a former chief executive of Walmart U.S. — have called for antitrust action against Amazon by the government, including a breakup of the company.Amazon’s defense is that — even as it has swelled into a giant, with over $177 billion in revenue last year — its share of overall retail sales is still small, estimated to be in the mid-single digits in the United States. This, along with Amazon’s emphasis on keeping prices low, has made it challenging for opponents to spark action under current antitrust law, which is primarily focused on consumer harm.It’s unclear if Mr. Trump can do much to get antitrust enforcers at the Federal Trade Commission or Justice Department, which are supposed to keep politics out of competition cases, to act against Amazon. But his executive order asking for a review of the Postal Service, including its relationship with customers like Amazon, could lead to changes unfavorable to the company.Follow Cecilia Kang, Nick Wingfield and Danielle Ivory on Twitter: @ceciliakang @nickwingfield and @danielle_ivory.Doris Burke contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Amazon’s Critics See Trump as Ally With Asterisks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersKUALA LUMPUR — Malaysian regulators will look into the activity of automated accounts on Twitter, known as bots, in the run-up to a general election if they get complaints about them, the communications and multimedia minister said.Reuters reported on Friday that bots were flooding Twitter with tens of thousands of pro-government and anti-opposition messages, just weeks before Malaysia's May 9 election. The information technology bureau of Prime Minister Najib Razak's ruling party, the United Malays National Organisation, said it was not behind the bots and it did not know who was.Communications Minister Salleh Said Keruak said on Twitter that bots could be used anonymously by anybody and his ministry would respond to complaints."As a regulator MCMC will work closely with providers such as Twitter and Facebook upon complaints," Salleh said late on Saturday, referring to the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission.He did not refer to the Reuters report.Twitter and Facebook are under scrutiny in the United States where lawmakers suspect their platforms were used as part of a suspected Russian effort to sway the 2016 U.S. presidential election in favor of Donald Trump. The Kremlin has denied the accusations.Twitter allows bot accounts but with restrictions. In February, Twitter said it would no longer allow people to post identical messages from multiple accounts, cracking down on a tactic that Russian agents and others have allegedly used to make topics go viral. (Reporting by A. Ananthalakshmi; Editing by Robert Birsel)AdvertisementBy DAISUKE WAKABAYASHIAPRIL 23, 2018
SAN FRANCISCO — The vast majority of videos removed from YouTube toward the end of last year for violating the site’s content guidelines had first been detected by machines instead of humans, the Google-owned company said on Monday.YouTube said it took down 8.28 million videos during the fourth quarter of 2017, and about 80 percent of those videos had initially been flagged by artificially intelligent computer systems.The new data highlighted the significant role machines — not just users, government agencies and other organizations — are taking in policing the service as it faces increased scrutiny over the spread of conspiracy videos, fake news and violent content from extremist organizations.Those videos are sometimes promoted by YouTube’s recommendation system and unknowingly financed by advertisers, whose ads are placed next to them through an automated system.AdvertisementThis was the first time that YouTube had publicly disclosed the number of videos it removed in a quarter, making it hard to judge how aggressive the platform has previously been in removing content, or the extent to which computers played a part in making those decisions.AdvertisementFiguring out how to remove unwanted videos — and balancing that with free speech — is a major challenge for the future of YouTube, said Eileen Donahoe, executive director at Stanford University’s Global Digital Policy Incubator.“It’s basically free expression on one side and the quality of discourse that’s beneficial to society on the other side,” Ms. Donahoe said. “It’s a hard problem to solve.”YouTube declined to disclose whether the number of videos it had removed had increased from the previous quarter or what percentage of its total uploads those 8.28 million videos represented. But the company said the takedowns represented “a fraction of a percent” of YouTube’s total views during the quarter.Betting on improvements in artificial intelligence is a common Silicon Valley approach to dealing with problematic content; Facebook has also said it is counting on A.I. tools to detect fake accounts and fake news on its platform. But critics have warned against depending too heavily on computers to replace human judgment.It is not easy for a machine to tell the difference between, for example, a video of a real shooting and a scene from a movie. And some videos slip through the cracks, with embarrassing results. Last year, parents complained that violent or provocative videos were finding their way to YouTube Kids, an app that is supposed to contain only child-friendly content that has automatically been filtered from the main YouTube site.YouTube has contended that the volume of videos uploaded to the site is too big of a challenge to rely only on human monitors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, in December, Google said it was hiring 10,000 people in 2018 to address policy violations across its platforms. In a blog post on Monday, YouTube said it had filled the majority of the jobs that had been allotted to it, including specialists with expertise in violent extremism, counterterrorism and human rights, as well as expanding regional teams. It was not clear what YouTube’s final share of the total would be.Still, YouTube said three-quarters of all videos flagged by computers had been removed before anyone had a chance to watch them.AdvertisementThe company’s machines can detect when a person tries to upload a video that has already been taken down and will prevent that video from reappearing on the site. And in some cases with videos containing nudity or misleading content, YouTube said its computer systems are adept enough to delete the video without requiring a human to review the decision.The company said its machines are also getting better at spotting violent extremist videos, which tend to be harder to identify and have fairly small audiences.At the start of 2017, before YouTube introduced so-called machine-learning technology to help computers identify videos associated with violent extremists, 8 percent of videos flagged and removed for that kind of content had fewer than 10 views. In the first quarter of 2018, the company said, more than half of the videos flagged and removed for violent extremism had fewer than 10 views.Even so, users still play a meaningful role in identifying problematic content. The top three reasons users flagged videos during the quarter involved content they considered sexual, misleading or spam, and hateful or abusive.YouTube said users had raised 30 million flags on roughly 9.3 million videos during the quarter. In total, 1.5 million videos were removed after first being flagged by users.Follow Daisuke Wakabayashi on Twitter: @daiwaka.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2018, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: YouTube Says Computers Are Catching Video Pitfalls.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Cade MetzSAN FRANCISCO — One of the poorest-kept secrets in Silicon Valley has been the huge salaries and bonuses that experts in artificial intelligence can command. Now, a little-noticed tax filing by a research lab called OpenAI has made some of those eye-popping figures public.OpenAI paid its top researcher, Ilya Sutskever, more than $1.9 million in 2016. It paid another leading researcher, Ian Goodfellow, more than $800,000 — even though he was not hired until March of that year. Both were recruited from Google.A third big name in the field, the roboticist Pieter Abbeel, made $425,000, though he did not join until June 2016, after taking a leave from his job as a professor at the University of California, Berkeley. Those figures all include signing bonuses.The figures listed on the tax forms, which OpenAI is required to release publicly because it is a nonprofit, provide new insight into what organizations around the world are paying for A.I. talent. But there is a caveat: The compensation at OpenAI may be underselling what these researchers can make, since as a nonprofit it can’t offer stock options.Salaries for top A.I. researchers have skyrocketed because there are not many people who understand the technology and thousands of companies want to work with it. Element AI, an independent lab in Canada, estimates that 22,000 people worldwide have the skills needed to do serious A.I. research — about double from a year ago.“There is a mountain of demand and a trickle of supply,” said Chris Nicholson, the chief executive and founder of Skymind, a start-up working on A.I.That raises significant issues for universities and governments. They also need A.I. expertise, both to teach the next generation of researchers and to put these technologies into practice in everything from the military to drug discovery. But they could never match the salaries being paid in the private sector.In 2015, Elon Musk, the chief executive of the electric-car maker Tesla, and other well-known figures in the tech industry created OpenAI and moved it into offices just north of Silicon Valley in San Francisco. They recruited several researchers with experience at Google and Facebook, two of the companies leading an industrywide push into artificial intelligence.In addition to salaries and signing bonuses, the internet giants typically compensate employees with sizable stock options — something that OpenAI does not do. But it has a recruiting message that appeals to idealists: It will share much of its work with the outside world, and it will consciously avoid creating technology that could be a danger to people.“I turned down offers for multiple times the dollar amount I accepted at OpenAI,” Mr. Sutskever said. “Others did the same.” He said he expected salaries at OpenAI to increase as the organization pursued its “mission of ensuring powerful A.I. benefits all of humanity.”OpenAI spent about $11 million in its first year, with more than $7 million going to salaries and other employee benefits. It employed 52 people in 2016.People who work at major tech companies or have entertained job offers from them have told The New York Times that A.I. specialists with little or no industry experience can make between $300,000 and $500,000 a year in salary and stock. Top names can receive compensation packages that extend into the millions.“The amount of money was borderline crazy,” Wojciech Zaremba, a researcher who joined OpenAI after internships at Google and Facebook, told Wired. While he would not reveal exact numbers, Mr. Zaremba said big tech companies were offering him two or three times what he believed his real market value was.At DeepMind, a London A.I. lab now owned by Google, costs for 400 employees totaled $138 million in 2016, according to the company’s annual financial filings in Britain. That translates to $345,000 per employee, including researchers and other staff.Researchers like Mr. Sutskever specialize in what are called neural networks, complex algorithms that learn tasks by analyzing vast amounts of data. They are used in everything from digital assistants in smartphones to self-driving cars.Some researchers may command higher pay because their names carry weight across the A.I. community and they can help recruit other researchers.Mr. Sutskever was part of a three-researcher team at the University of Toronto that created key so-called computer vision technology. Mr. Goodfellow invented a technique that allows machines to create fake digital photos that are nearly indistinguishable from the real thing.“When you hire a star, you are not just hiring a star,” Mr. Nicholson of the start-up Skymind said. “You are hiring everyone they attract. And you are paying for all the publicity they will attract.”Other researchers at OpenAI, including Greg Brockman, who leads the lab alongside Mr. Sutskever, did not receive such high salaries during the lab’s first year.In 2016, according to the tax forms, Mr. Brockman, who had served as chief technology officer at the financial technology start-up Stripe, made $175,000. As one of the founders of the organization, however, he most likely took a salary below market value. Two other researchers with more experience in the field — though still very young — made between $275,000 and $300,000 in salary alone in 2016, according to the forms.Though the pool of available A.I. researchers is growing, it is not growing fast enough. “If anything, demand for that talent is growing faster than the supply of new researchers, because A.I. is moving from early adopters to wider use,” Mr. Nicholson said.That means it can be hard for companies to hold on to their talent. Last year, after only 11 months at OpenAI, Mr. Goodfellow returned to Google. Mr. Abbeel and two other researchers left the lab to create a robotics start-up, Embodied Intelligence. (Mr. Abbeel has since signed back on as a part-time adviser to OpenAI.) And another researcher, Andrej Karpathy, left to become the head of A.I. at Tesla, which is also building autonomous driving technology.In essence, Mr. Musk was poaching his own talent. Since then, he has stepped down from the OpenAI board, with the lab saying this would allow him to “eliminate a potential future conflict.”AdvertisementBy STEVE LOHRAPRIL 23, 2018
Four years ago, Jimmy Chen left a lucrative perch as a product manager at Facebook to found Propel, what he calls an “anti-poverty software company.”In 2016, the Brooklyn start-up released a smartphone app that lets food stamp recipients easily look up how much money was left in their accounts, rather than call an 800 number or keep paper receipts. Today, one million food stamp participants use Propel’s app, and the start-up has added features like links to food coupons, healthy recipes, budgeting tools and job opportunities.But in the last few months, the Propel app has been hobbled or become unavailable in many states, sometimes for weeks. Behind the slowdown is a big government contractor, Conduent, which runs the food stamp networks in 25 states, including New York, California and Pennsylvania. In those states, where 60 percent of Propel’s users live, Conduent maintains the database that Propel’s app uses to let people check their accounts.The Propel-Conduent conflict offers a textbook case of a digital newcomer running into resistance from the old order. The twist is that the newcomer said it did not want to destroy the incumbent but instead build atop it to do good for underserved populations, as well as build a business for itself.AdvertisementThe animating idea behind Propel, Mr. Chen said, was to “apply the Silicon Valley playbook to poverty in some way.” He added that “we have to build on top of the old world to be successful.”AdvertisementPropel has had no problems with the other major government contractor that manages state food stamp networks, FIS, Mr. Chen said. Nor did Propel have trouble with the Conduent system until recently. Propel has complained to Conduent managers repeatedly, but, Mr. Chen said, “they’ve never offered us a direct explanation as to why now.”In written replies to questions, Conduent, which spun out from Xerox in January 2017, portrayed Propel less as an innovator than as a freeloader. Propel’s smartphone app, Conduent said, was introduced “without the knowledge, input or consent from Conduent.” It accused Propel of overloading its networks with data requests, causing “a capacity ambush.”Conduent took actions to block the app, and described them as prudent “steps to prevent unauthorized access to data — from Propel or any other unauthorized user.”The fight over the app is now affecting people like Brianna LaBelle, 25, of Augusta, Me., who has two young sons. She has used Propel’s app to create shopping lists, track food purchases and budget. “I love it,” she said. “It’s very handy.”But in February, when Ms. LaBelle tried to check her food stamps balance, she got a message that access to her information was “currently unavailable to the residents of Maine.” That interruption, she said, lasted for nearly a month, in which she also lost the timesaving and meal-planning convenience of the app.Propel, Mr. Chen insisted, has tried to explain its business to state governments and to food stamp contractors. The Propel app is a digital “skin” that works on top of the websites of food stamp contractors, like Conduent. A user taps the app, which is known as FreshEBT, to look up the amount left in the account. On average, users check their balances seven times a month.Conduent, in another twist, has begun competing with the start-up. The business services outsourcer, which has $6 billion in yearly revenue, introduced its own smartphone app last year. Conduent’s entry, ConnectEBT, has significantly fewer reviews and lower ratings on the Google and Apple app stores than Propel’s FreshEBT.AdvertisementConduent’s app is available in Utah, South Carolina and Oklahoma, and offers only basic information on account balances and purchases. But the company said it was beginning a broader rollout this year, and would provide “more features and functions” as it gets states’ approval as a regulated contractor, unlike Propel.Propel’s predicament is magnified because the food-stamp system’s technology, like many government tech services, is outsourced to a relatively small number of companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s an oligopoly game, so there’s often not much choice, competition or innovation,” said Josh Miller, who oversaw the development of digital products in the Obama White House. He added that the volume of data requests from Propel is “tiny” in internet terms.Propel’s early success suggests there is opportunity for innovation in the low-income market, no matter how the start-up’s wrangling with Conduent turns out.Propel is a fledgling company, with only 11 employees, two of them former food-stamp recipients. Mr. Chen, 30, is not one of them. His family emigrated from China when he was 4, and he attended Stanford University on a full scholarship, based on need. Propel has raised $5.2 million from investors like Andreessen Horowitz, a Silicon Valley venture capital firm, and Omidyar Network, which funds start-ups focused on social goals.The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, known as food stamps, helps about 40 million low-income Americans, including one in every four children in the country.Paper food stamps are long gone, replaced beginning nearly two decades ago by debit-style cards, called Electronic Benefit Transfer cards. The program is federally funded and administered by the states, which typically rely on private contractors to provide the service.The account look-up feature in FreshEBT has been its way into the low-income market, but was only a first step. Other features that were added over time, including food coupons, job opportunities and recipes for inexpensive meals, have also become popular.So far this year, FreshEBT users have downloaded coupons advertised on the app worth more than $2 million. In the past six months, they have applied for jobs more than 10,000 times from the app, the company said. Propel typically gets referral fees from its coupon, job-listing and other advertiser partners. It does not store or sell users’ personal information, the company said.AdvertisementKeyana Workman, 25, who has two young children and lives in Brooklyn, has been off and on food stamps for the last three years, as jobs and income fluctuate. She calls FreshEBT’s balance look-up “a real improvement” from making 800-number calls.Lately, Ms. Workman has also tapped into the recipes and health and exercise tips. “I’ve been working out a lot,” she said.Propel estimates that 80 percent of its users in the Conduent states have now had problems accessing their information from its app at some point in the past few months.What Propel is doing in the low-income market is broadly similar to what other companies like Mint and Yodlee have done by offering digital services that let people organize and manage their personal finances. The major banks initially opposed allowing those online services to pull account information, but the Dodd-Frank financial reform law in 2010 included a mandate to allow consumers — and third-party apps on their behalf — to access their data.A comparable principle of data control should apply to the food stamp program, said Stacy Dean, vice president for food assistance policy at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a left-leaning research and advocacy group.“It should be up to the participants in the program to decide how to organize and use their information,” Ms. Dean said.Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohr.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2018, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Food Stamps App Is Handy, And in Many Places Blocked.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersMONTREAL/SINGAPORE — The world's airlines are backing the development of a United Nations-led global registry for drones, as a rise in near collisions by unmanned aircraft and commercial jets fuels safety concerns, an executive of their trade group said on Tuesday.The International Air Transport Association backs efforts by the United Nations' aviation agency to develop such a registry, which could also help track the number of incidents involving drones and jets, said Rob Eagles, IATA's director of air traffic management infrastructure.IATA would consider collaborating with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to use the registry for data analysis to improve safety.ICAO is developing the registry as part of broader efforts to come up with common rules for flying and tracking unmanned aircraft."One of the important things we would like to see on a registry as well is the compilation of data which would include incident and accident reporting," Eagles said in an interview on the sidelines of IATA's Safety and Flight Ops Conference in Montreal. Airlines and airport operators are looking to drone registries, geo-fencing technology and stiffer penalties for operating drones near airports. They hope these steps will ensure flying remains safe as hobbyists and companies like Amazon.com Inc use more drones. In Britain, the number of near misses between drones and aircraft more than tripled between 2015 and 2017, with 92 incidents recorded last year, according to the U.K. Airprox Board. Air New Zealand Ltd said last month a flight from Tokyo with 278 passengers and crew on board encountered a drone estimated to be just five meters away from the Boeing 777-200 jet during its descent into Auckland. A single registry would create a one-stop-shop that would allow law enforcement to remotely identify and track unmanned aircraft, along with their operator and owner. "The intention at present is to merge this activity into the ICAO registry for manned aircraft, so that the sector has a single consolidated registry network," said ICAO spokesman Anthony Philbin by email. Barbara Dalibard, head of Switzerland-based aviation technology group SITA, said her company wanted to build a blockchain-based global drone registry and had been working with Geneva Airport on tests of a geo-fenced zone around the airport where drones listed in the registry would not be able to fly. "The data is connected to the airport system," she said during an interview in Singapore on Tuesday. "The drone is approaching the airport and it says 'No, go back'. If everything is connected you can ask the drone to change its flight plan or to readjust in order to get out of the danger zone," she added.SITA also has a joint venture with the Irish government called Aviareto which operates a registry that tracks financial interests in certain aircraft. (Reporting by Allison Lampert in Montreal and Jamie Freed in Singapore; Editing by Paul Simao, David Gregorio and Himani Sarkar)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 11:13 A.M. E.D.T.
KUALA LUMPUR —  Just weeks before Malaysia goes to the polls, automated accounts known as bots are flooding Twitter with tens of thousands of pro-government and anti-opposition messages, according to a review of the tweets by Reuters and a U.S. digital media research institute.Asked about the matter, San Francisco-based Twitter Inc said it was focused on identifying and suspending accounts that violate its spam policies."We continue to fight hard to tackle any malicious automation on our platform as well as spam accounts," it said, without giving specific details.A source close to the matter said the company had suspended 500 accounts involved in the messages on the Malaysian election since they involved spam or malicious automation.AdvertisementTwitter bots, accounts which can post, like or resend tweets automatically, are not illegal in Malaysia and seem to be having minimal impact on its election campaign. But they have come under global scrutiny amid probes into Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. elections using social media platforms.AdvertisementAhmad Maslan, the information technology bureau chairman of Prime Minister Najib Razak's United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), said he did not know who was behind the bot activity and that it was not his team.The government's communications and multimedia minister Salleh Said Keruak did not respond to calls or text messages seeking comment.A researcher at the Digital Forensic Research (DFR) Lab of the Washington-based Atlantic Council think tank said over 17,000 bots tweeted content related to the Malaysian election over the last week.Nine of the top 10 most active bot accounts containing anti-opposition hashtags and pro-government messages had Russian-sounding names and used the Cyrillic script, said Donara Barojan, a research associate at DFR."The prevalence of bots with Cyrillic screen names does not suggest that Russian social media users are meddling in the Malaysian elections, but does indicate that whoever is behind the campaign purchased some bots created by Russian-speaking bot herders," she said.Reuters was unable to establish where the tweets originated or which firm or individual may be behind the bot accounts.Malaysia will hold a general election on May 9 with Najib's Barisan Nasional (BN) coalition, which is dominated by UMNO, locked in a tough battle with former premier Mahathir Mohamad and his opposition alliance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters."SAY NO"The tweets included visuals illustrating Malaysian government policies and questioning the opposition's promises.   Some tweets had photos of BN supporters carrying party flags and "I love PM" signs.AdvertisementThe tweets also include hashtags: either BN's campaign slogans or anti-opposition phrases or both. The hashtags that express disapproval of the opposition coalition Pakatan Harapan (PH) include '#SayNoToPH' and '#KalahkanPakatan', which means "Defeat Pakatan" in Malay.Two of the anti-opposition hashtags - '#SayNoToPH' and '#KalahkanPakatan' - were used around 44,100 times by 17,600 users during April 12-20 and 98 percent of the users appear to be bots, according to Barojan.Many of the graphics attached to the tweets credited UMNO's information technology department and some provided details of social media pages of BN-linked accounts. There was no evidence that these accounts are behind the automated tweets.Syed Saddiq Syed Abdul Rahman, a youth leader in the opposition alliance, accused the BN coalition of being behind the bot campaign but added that the impact from the bot activity was "miniscule." He did not elaborate.Twitter is not as popular in Malaysia as Facebook, although a lot of political discourse appears on the platform.Automated tweets of this scale are meant to generate traffic around the content they post, and get 'human' users to participate, but that has not happened yet in Malaysia, according to DFR Lab.Twitter and Facebook are under scrutiny in the United States where lawmakers suspect their platforms were used as part of an alleged Russian effort to sway the 2016 U.S. presidential election in favor of Donald Trump. The Kremlin has denied the accusations.The Times reported last year that Russian Twitter accounts posted almost 45,000 messages about Brexit in the 48 hours around the 2016 referendum in Britain, and that many of the messages appear to have come from bots or cyborg accounts. Russia has denied meddling in Brexit.(Reporting by A. Ananthalakshmi; Additional reporting by Joseph Sipalan and Rozanna Latiff; Editing by Raju Gopalakrishnan)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicholas ConfessoreAn auditing firm responsible for monitoring Facebook for federal regulators told them last year that the company had sufficient privacy protections in place, even after the social media giant lost control of a huge trove of user data that was improperly obtained by the political consulting firm Cambridge Analytica.The assertion, by PwC, came in a report submitted to the Federal Trade Commission in early 2017. The report, a redacted copy of which is available on the commission’s website, is one of several periodic reviews of Facebook’s compliance with a 2011 federal consent decree, which required Facebook to take wide-ranging steps to prevent the abuse of users’ information and to inform them how it was being shared with other companies.The accounting firm, formerly known as PricewaterhouseCoopers, effectively gave Facebook a clean bill of health. “Facebook’s privacy controls were operating with sufficient effectiveness to provide reasonable assurance to protect the privacy” of users, said the assessment, which stretched from February 2015 to February 2017.But during that period, Facebook was aware that a researcher based in Britain, Aleksandr Kogan, had provided Cambridge Analytica with private Facebook data from millions of users. Cambridge, which later worked for the Trump campaign, used the information to build psychological profiles of American voters before the 2016 election. Some details of Mr. Kogan’s work — though not the full scope of the data he had obtained — were revealed in an article in The Guardian in late 2015.Facebook’s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, acknowledged to lawmakers this month that the company had not informed users that Cambridge had acquired their data. In testimony before the Senate, he said the company had previously accepted Cambridge’s assurances that it wasn’t using Mr. Kogan’s data and had deleted it.“We considered it a closed case,” Mr. Zuckerberg said. “In retrospect, that was clearly a mistake.”An investigation by The New York Times, The Observer and The Guardian last month found that Cambridge had obtained the private data of more than 50 million users without their consent. Facebook has since estimated that as many as 87 million users were affected.Like its competitors, PwC closely protects the inner workings of its review process. The public versions of the reports it submits to the F.T.C. redact both the names of the employees who performed the work and the tests the firm used to assess Facebook’s privacy measures. It is not clear whether Facebook informed its auditors of the leak, or whether PwC knew about it.In a statement, Facebook’s deputy chief privacy officer, Rob Sherman, said the company remained “strongly committed to protecting people’s information” and appreciated “the opportunity to answer questions the F.T.C. may have.”A spokeswoman for PwC declined to comment.The firm’s vetting of Facebook’s privacy practices revives questions about how diligently federal officials were overseeing Facebook. Last month, The Times reported that the F.T.C. was investigating whether Facebook had violated the consent decree.“Clearly, the F.T.C. needs to be more forthcoming with the contents of those reports,” said Marc Rotenberg, president of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, which advocates more stringent privacy protections. “There is still too much that is not known about Facebook’s business practices during that critical time period.”The 2011 decree — triggered in part by a complaint EPIC and other consumer groups filed — followed a two-year investigation that found Facebook had routinely ignored its users’ privacy preferences and shared their data without their permission. Besides demanding that Facebook give users more control over their data, the decree required the company to assess potential privacy risks. Facebook has acknowledged that it did not sufficiently police how third parties with access to its data, like Mr. Kogan, used the information.F.T.C. officials hailed the consent decree as a new and powerful model for regulating tech giants like Facebook and Google, which in recent years have built immensely lucrative advertising businesses rooted in the vast quantities of data they collect from people who use their free services.But critics of the agreement said it reflected the essential weakness of relying on an outside firm to evaluate Facebook’s compliance with the order. The F.T.C. is a relatively small agency, where even major investigations are handled by teams of just a few people. Instead of retaining a large staff of technology and data experts to monitor businesses, the agency makes companies hire outside accounting and consulting firms. These are paid by companies like Facebook and periodically report back to the F.T.C.According to the assessment documents, Facebook chooses which policies and procedures PwC reviews.“A conversation has to be had about how the F.T.C. handles these assessments,” said Joseph Jerome, policy counsel at the Center for Democracy and Technology, which is funded in part by Facebook and other tech companies. “Facebook decides how they are being assessed. It really stacks the deck in their favor.”Gabriel J.X. Dance contributed reporting.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPIf your screen has become jumbled with too many open files, folders and programs to manage, you can quickly sort the pile.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. When moving back and forth between laptop and external monitors and generally just having a ton of stuff open, I can’t find certain windows quickly in the clutter, or have trouble resizing them because I can’t reach the bottom corner with the mouse. Is there a quick way to snap these windows in line?A. Both the Windows and Mac operating systems include several shortcuts for moving, resizing or organizing open windows that have drifted off the screen — or are buried under other open files, folders and programs. Some windows may get even harder to find if you switch your monitor resolution or use a dual display.On a Windows PC with a bunch of open windows, right-click on the title bar and select the Maximize command. Then click the task bar and choose Cascade Windows from the menu. The open windows on the screen will form a neat, overlapping stack with visible title bars you can browse.In Windows 7 and later, you can use the system’s Snap feature to drag a window to the side of the screen to anchor it. The Windows 10 Snap Assist tool now shows other open windows as thumbnails on the screen after you have snapped the first window.For resizing and moving, you can expand a window by clicking the square Maximize icon on the far-right side of a window’s title bar. When you right-click a Windows title bar, or press the Alt key and the space bar, you also get Move and Size options in the menu. When you select Move and then slide the cursor to the center of the screen, you can use the arrow keys on the keyboard to nudge the window over; press the Enter key when you have it where you want it. Selecting the Size option lets you use the keyboard arrow keys to resize the window.On a Mac, you have a few ways to reel in wandering windows. If you are not sure what you have open, go to the Mac’s Mission Control view to see miniature versions of all the open windows at once — and select the one you need. Just press the Mission Control key (often F3 on an Apple keyboard) or the Control and up-arrow keys; you can also get into Mission Control by clicking its icon in the desktop dock, using the Control Strip on compatible MacBooks or swiping up with three fingers on a trackpad. To move and resize windows even if the desktop Dock is in the way, hold down the Option key and click the green dot in the window’s upper-left corner to resize the window to fit the screen. Clicking the green dot by itself expands the window to the full-screen size. You can drag any of the four sides of a window to change the size, and holding down the Shift and Option keys while you drag an edge resizes the whole window proportionally. If you can click on part of a visible window, you can also go to the Window menu in the Mac’s tool bar and choose Zoom to resize the window to fit the screen. If you eventually get down to just two open windows, Apple’s Split View feature (available in OS X El Capitan and later) allows you to position both of them evenly on each half of the screen. Just hold down the green button in the first window and drag it to one side. Then let go of the green button and repeat the steps with the other window on the other side of the screen.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 17, 2018, 12:25 P.M. E.D.T.
WASHINGTON —  The U.S. Supreme Court on Tuesday dropped Microsoft Corp's privacy fight with the Justice Department over whether prosecutors can force technology companies to hand over data stored overseas after Congress passed legislation that resolved the dispute.The justices heard arguments in the high-profile case on Feb. 27, but President Donald Trump on March 22 signed legislation into law that makes clear that U.S. judges can issue warrants for such data while giving companies an avenue to object if the request conflicts with foreign law."No live dispute remains between the parties over the issue," the court said in an unsigned opinion, declaring the case moot.Microsoft and the Justice Department had been locked in a dispute over how U.S. prosecutors seek access to data held on overseas computer servers owned by U.S. companies. The case involved Microsoft's challenge to a domestic warrant issued by a U.S. judge for emails stored on a Microsoft server in Dublin relating to a drug-trafficking investigation.AdvertisementThe bipartisan new law, known as the Cloud Act, was supported by Microsoft, other major technology companies and the Trump administration but opposed by civil liberties groups that said it lacked sufficient privacy protections.Advertisement"We welcome the Supreme Court's ruling ending our case in light of the Cloud Act being signed into to law. Our goal has always been a new law and international agreements with strong privacy protections that govern how law enforcement gathers digital evidence across borders," said Brad Smith, Microsoft's president.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Justice Department spokeswoman declined to comment.Microsoft, which has 100 data centers in 40 countries, was the first American company to challenge a domestic search warrant seeking data held outside the United States. The Microsoft customer whose emails were sought told the company he was based in Ireland when he signed up for his account.During arguments in the case, which had been one of the most closely watched of the court's current term, some justices urged Congress to pass a law to resolve the matter. Senator Orrin Hatch, a Republican led the efforts to pass the new law, attended the arguments.The Trump administration had appealed a 2016 ruling by the New York-based 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in 2016 that found that the emails in the Microsoft case were beyond the reach of domestic search warrants obtained under a federal law called the 1986 Stored Communications Act.(Reporting by Lawrence Hurley; Editing by Will Dunham)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPIf your Windows 10 lock screen changes daily or slows you down in getting to your desktop, you can change its behavior.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. When I start my Windows 10 computer, there is a background picture I must click on before I can enter my password. The screen then defaults to a Bing page explaining all about the photo. How can I sign in directly to my desktop when I turn on the computer?A. The Windows 10 system settings include several ways to personalize the PC, including changing the image on the lock screen, where you enter your password each time you start Windows. You can see what the lock screen is set to display by pressing the Windows and I keys on the keyboard to open the Settings box. Select the Personalization icon and choose Lock Screen in the left side of the window.One of the options for the background photo is Windows Spotlight, a feature that pulls in new images and tips from Microsoft to show on the lock screen each day. If the PC is set to use Windows Spotlight, use the drop-down menu to switch to Picture and select a photo from your collection to use instead. Restart the PC and log in. By default, Windows 10 requires a password to get by the lock screen. This is designed to keep your computer safer, but you should go right to the desktop without a detour. It is possible to disable the password requirement by tinkering with your Windows settings, but this can be a security risk because anyone could then start the PC and get into your files.If the computer was not set to run Windows Spotlight, it may be running one of the many third-party apps that show off a different photo from Microsoft’s Bing search engine on the lock screen each time you log in. If you or someone else who uses the computer installed one of these programs on the PC, look for it in your apps list and turn it off — or remove it.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersMONTREAL/SINGAPORE — The world's airlines are backing the development of a United Nations-led global registry for drones, as a rise in near collisions by unmanned aircraft and commercial jets fuels safety concerns, an executive of their trade group said on Tuesday. The International Air Transport Association backs efforts by the United Nations' aviation agency to develop such a registry, which could also help track the number of incidents involving drones and jets, said Rob Eagles, IATA's director of air traffic management infrastructure.IATA would consider collaborating with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to use the registry for data analysis to improve safety.ICAO is developing the registry as part of broader efforts to come up with common rules for flying and tracking unmanned aircraft."One of the important things we would like to see on a registry as well is the compilation of data which would include incident and accident reporting," Eagles said in an interview on the sidelines of IATA's Safety and Flight Ops Conference in Montreal. Airlines and airport operators are looking to drone registries, geo-fencing technology and stiffer penalties for operating drones near airports. They hope these steps will ensure flying remains safe as hobbyists and companies like Amazon.com Inc use more drones. In Britain, the number of near misses between drones and aircraft more than tripled between 2015 and 2017, with 92 incidents recorded last year, according to the U.K. Airprox Board. Air New Zealand Ltd said last month a flight from Tokyo with 278 passengers and crew on board encountered a drone estimated to be just five meters away from the Boeing 777-200 jet during its descent into Auckland. A single registry would create a one-stop-shop that would allow law enforcement to remotely identify and track unmanned aircraft, along with their operator and owner. "The intention at present is to merge this activity into the ICAO registry for manned aircraft, so that the sector has a single consolidated registry network," said ICAO spokesman Anthony Philbin by email. The manned aircraft registry is operated by Aviareto, a joint venture between Switzerland-based aviation technology group SITA and the Irish government.SITA CEO Barbara Dalibard said her company wanted to build a blockchain-based global drone registry and had been working with Geneva Airport on tests of a geo-fenced zone around the airport where drones listed in the registry would not be able to fly. "The data is connected to the airport system," she said during an interview in Singapore on Tuesday. "The drone is approaching the airport and it says 'No, go back'. If everything is connected you can ask the drone to change its flight plan or to readjust in order to get out of the danger zone," she added. (Reporting by Allison Lampert in Montreal and Jamie Freed in Singapore; Editing by Paul Simao, David Gregorio and Himani Sarkar)AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPThe incognito and private browsing modes built into most modern browsers shield your online activity at home — but maybe not to the rest of the world.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. If I browse in incognito mode, can anyone still track my movements around the web?A. Incognito mode — also known as InPrivate or Private Browsing mode, depending on the browser — does offer some protection, but is mostly designed to shield your web travels from other people using the same computer. When you have the privacy setting enabled, the browser typically does not save cookies, searches, temporary files or a list of the pages you visited during your session for others to discover. However, as most browsers themselves warn, the incognito or private mode does not make you fully anonymous online. The websites you viewed may have a record of your visit, and your internet service provider, office network administrator or your school might be able to see your activity. Malicious software can also record your web activity and keystrokes regardless of your privacy settings.The Apple Safari, Google Chrome and Microsoft Edge (or Internet Explorer) browsers all include incognito or private modes for their desktop and mobile editions that you can enable in the program settings. Mozilla Firefox Quantum has a private browsing mode as well as a Tracking Protection tool that more aggressively blocks some sites known to stalk visitors.With last year’s repeal of regulations that would have prohibited internet service providers from collecting and selling the browsing-activity data of their customers without permission (not to mention recent concerns regarding the lack of privacy), some people may be in less of a sharing mood when it comes to their personal lives. If you find yourself wanting more discretion as you go about life online, you can step up your defenses. For example, search engines like DuckDuckGo and StartPage do not collect and share information from your web queries with advertisers. Virtual private networks can encrypt your web traffic, hide your location and help protect you on unsecured public wireless networks. Browser add-ons like Disconnect and Privacy Badger can help shield you from companies that try to track you around the web. And you can even find alternate browsers — including Brave and Tor — that offer built-in protections from trackers and sites that want to collect information about you.Keep in mind that some websites use advertising and tracking as a means to financially sustain themselves and support the content they provide. In some cases, you may find yourself blocked from viewing a site if it senses you are using an ad blocker. Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 19, 2018, 6:22 A.M. E.D.T.
BANGKOK —  Alibaba is investing $320 million in Thailand as the e-commerce giant aims to tap Chinese consumers' appetite for the Southeast nation's agricultural goods and for its tourism market amid growing competition from rivals.China's biggest e-commerce company is investing more than 10 billion baht ($320.20 million) in a "digital hub" in the Thai military government's much-touted Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC), government officials said.Deputy Prime Minister Somkid Jatusripitak told reporters on Thursday that Alibaba's digital hub will be a platform that connects Thai agricultural products to the Chinese and global markets.Alibaba-backed Lazada is already present in Thailand and is one of the most popular e-commerce businesses in the nation of 69 million.AdvertisementChinese rivals of Alibaba are also beefing up their presence in Thailand and Southeast Asia.In September, China's second-biggest e-commerce firm JD.com Inc said it will form a $500 million joint venture in e-commerce and financial technology with top Thai retailer Central Group.AdvertisementAnd Kasikornbank Pcl said in 2016 it has formed an alliance with Tencent Holdings' popular mobile messaging app WeChat to provide electronic payment services to Chinese visitors in Thailand."Given Thailand's unique strengths in people and culture, we are confident of its future," Alibaba founder Jack Ma told reporters in Bangkok.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ma, who met with Thai Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha, signed four memorandums of understanding with the Thai government on Thursday, covering trade, investment, support for e-commerce and tourism.Chinese tourists make up the biggest number of visitors to Thailand. Chinese accounted for nearly one-third of last year's record 35 million arrivals which is expected to rise this year to around 10 million from 9.8 million.The $45 billion EEC project, situated near the Gulf of Thailand, is aimed at attracting high-tech investment and is a centerpiece of the Thai junta's policy to boost growth.But it has struggled to attract foreign investment.Kanit Sangsubhan, secretary-general of the EEC committee, said that Thailand hopes Alibaba's investment in the project will result in other investments by its subsidiaries, business affiliates, and other Chinese investors."It builds confidence, especially among Chinese investors," Kanit told reporters.(Reporting by Patpicha Tanakasempipat; Editing by Amy Sawitta Lefevre and Muralikumar Anantharaman)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 19, 2018, 6:22 A.M. E.D.T.
BANGKOK —  Alibaba is investing $320 million in Thailand as the e-commerce giant aims to tap Chinese consumers' appetite for the Southeast nation's agricultural goods and for its tourism market amid growing competition from rivals.China's biggest e-commerce company is investing more than 10 billion baht ($320.20 million) in a "digital hub" in the Thai military government's much-touted Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC), government officials said.Deputy Prime Minister Somkid Jatusripitak told reporters on Thursday that Alibaba's digital hub will be a platform that connects Thai agricultural products to the Chinese and global markets.Alibaba-backed Lazada is already present in Thailand and is one of the most popular e-commerce businesses in the nation of 69 million.AdvertisementChinese rivals of Alibaba are also beefing up their presence in Thailand and Southeast Asia.In September, China's second-biggest e-commerce firm JD.com Inc said it will form a $500 million joint venture in e-commerce and financial technology with top Thai retailer Central Group.AdvertisementAnd Kasikornbank Pcl said in 2016 it has formed an alliance with Tencent Holdings' popular mobile messaging app WeChat to provide electronic payment services to Chinese visitors in Thailand."Given Thailand's unique strengths in people and culture, we are confident of its future," Alibaba founder Jack Ma told reporters in Bangkok.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ma, who met with Thai Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha, signed four memorandums of understanding with the Thai government on Thursday, covering trade, investment, support for e-commerce and tourism.Chinese tourists make up the biggest number of visitors to Thailand. Chinese accounted for nearly one-third of last year's record 35 million arrivals which is expected to rise this year to around 10 million from 9.8 million.The $45 billion EEC project, situated near the Gulf of Thailand, is aimed at attracting high-tech investment and is a centerpiece of the Thai junta's policy to boost growth.But it has struggled to attract foreign investment.Kanit Sangsubhan, secretary-general of the EEC committee, said that Thailand hopes Alibaba's investment in the project will result in other investments by its subsidiaries, business affiliates, and other Chinese investors."It builds confidence, especially among Chinese investors," Kanit told reporters.(Reporting by Patpicha Tanakasempipat; Editing by Amy Sawitta Lefevre and Muralikumar Anantharaman)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 18, 2018, 4:46 P.M. E.D.T.
ATLANTA —  XPO Logistics Inc, the largest provider of last-mile deliveries for heavy and bulky items in North America, unveiled on Wednesday voice-enabled delivery tracking through Amazon.com Inc's Echo or Alphabet Inc's  Google Home speakers.XPO believes it is the first large delivery and warehousing company in the world to offer consumers the ability to get delivery tracking updates, or schedule and reschedule deliveries, using smart speakers, the company said at a conference in Atlanta.The voice-enabled technology, available next month, is part of a digital renaissance underway in the old-school trucking industry. For example, last week, XPO unveiled software that allows merchants to track truck and rail cargo in real-time nationwide."We are responding to where consumers want to go (to manage their deliveries)," XPO Chief Information Officer Mario Harik told Reuters, describing the proliferation of smartphones and speakers, and the desire for greater visibility and control over deliveries.AdvertisementXPO's voice-enabled tracking also comes as XPO works on a major expansion of its last-mile network in the United States, promising to open 85 warehouses by year end.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.XPO makes or manages roughly 35,000 deliveries to homes daily, delivering heavy or unwieldy goods like Home Depot Inc  barbecue grills, Crate and Barrel furniture, and Best Buy Co Inc  televisions from warehouses direct to homes.AdvertisementIt is also the second-largest less-than-truckload operator - truckers that consolidate multiple loads on a single truck.When accessing Amazon's Alexa or Google Assistant, a person's voice command to reschedule his or her delivery would trigger changes in XPO's internal logistics tracking and dispatching software, Harik said. The new delivery time would be reflected on the truck driver's mobile app, he said.(Reporting by Eric M. Johnson; Editing by Lisa Shumaker)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersNEW YORK — A start-up launched by three Princeton University graduates for a new cryptocurrency has raised $133 million from a slew of big investors in a private placement, Intangible Labs Chief Executive Officer and co-founder Nader Al-Naji said on Wednesday.Intangible Labs is the creator of basis, a digital currency that aims to maintain a stable price and be usable around the world. The company's investors included Bain Capital Ventures, Google's venture arm GV, venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, and Lightspeed Foundation Capital, Al-Naji said. Billionaire hedge fund manager Stan Druckenmiller and former Federal Reserve Governor Kevin Warsh also invested in the company.The new token is built on the ethereum blockchain and has a built-in mechanism that controls its own supply to keep the price stable, Al Naji told Reuters in an interview. "Volatility of cryptocurrencies has prevented their widespread adoption," Al-Naji said. "We are trying to build cryptocurrencies that have all the benefits of crypto but is stable."Blockchain, a digital ledger of transactions, underpins cryptocurrencies in general and can be used to track, record, and transfer assets across all industries.The $133 million sale was structured as a private placement to accredited investors, Al-Naji said. The company is still deciding whether to issue tokens through a public crowdsale, as it is assessing the current regulatory environment, he added.A global regulatory crackdown on cryptocurrencies has slowed the pace of virtual currency sales as questions mount about their transparency and the risk of scams for investors.More than 500 digital technology startups around the world have raised funds by selling their own cryptocurrencies, or tokens, that sidestep banks or venture capital firms as intermediaries.Regulators around the world, led by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, have tightened the screws on token sales of initial coin offerings, by instituting rules and guidelines that are giving investors pause and delaying new offerings.In an interview with Reuters in October, Al-Naji said the idea for basis, which was formerly called basecoin, originated in June from his blog, Nader Theory, in which he broached the idea of a stable coin that can shrink and grow its supply on the blockchain. (Reporting by Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss and Anna Irrerz; editing by Jonathan Oatis)AdvertisementBy REUTERSAPRIL 20, 2018, 12:52 A.M. E.D.T.
TOKYO —  A two-armed robot in a Japanese factory carefully stacks rice balls in a box, which a worker carries off for shipment to convenience stores. At another food-packaging plant, a robot shakes pepper and powdered cheese over pasta that a person has just arranged in a container.In a country known for bringing large-scale industrial robots to the factory floor, such relatively dainty machines have until recently been dismissed as niche and low-margin.But as workforces age in Japan and elsewhere, collaborative robots - or "cobots" - are seen as a key way to help keep all types of assembly lines moving without replacing humans.Japan's Fanuc and Yaskawa Electric, two of the world's largest robot manufacturers, didn't see the shift coming. Now they are trying to catch up.Advertisement"We didn't expect large manufacturers would want to use such robots, because those robots can lift only a light weight and have limited capabilities," said Kazuo Hariki, an executive director at Fanuc.AdvertisementAlthough still a small portion of a $40 billion industrial robot market, the cobots segment is set to grow over the next decade to more than $10 billion, by some estimates - several dozen times its current size.The concept of a robot co-worker is relatively new. Danish company Universal Robots, founded in 2005, introduced cobots for industrial applications in late 2008, closely working with major German automakers such as Volkswagen.At first, "a lot of people misunderstood what the cobot is," said Universal Robots' chief executive, Juergen von Hollen. But the machines quickly became popular in Europe because of their safety, simplicity and ability to directly assist human workers, he said.Supported by Berlin's "Industrie 4.0" strategy to promote smart factories, the likes of Kuka and Robert Bosch followed Universal Robots into the market in the early 2010s.Relatively inexpensive and easy to operate, cobots are now used by companies of all sizes for small-batch manufacturing and simple processes.In Japan, food maker Nippon Flour Mills uses a cobot made by Kawasaki Heavy Industries for seasoning packaged food sold at convenience stores."Labor costs are rising, with more intense competition to hire workers," said Atsushi Honda, technology team manager at Nippon Flour's plant engineering group.AdvertisementAutomating some tasks with machines that didn't need to be separated from human employees helped the company solve that labor issue, he said.A SLOW STARTIndustry analysts say Japanese robot makers, in addition to underestimating the appeal of cobots, were held back in their home market by government safety regulations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Heavy industrial robots had to be fenced off from human contact. Robots that worked in closer proximity to people were limited in how powerful they could be.The restrictions on cobots were relaxed in late 2013 to match international standards. Japanese robotmakers remained cautious at first, but are now trying to dash into the market.Fanuc in February bought Life Robotics Inc, whose clients include Toyota Motor Corp and Omron Corp, for an undisclosed amount. It was the first acquisition in 15 years for Fanuc, known among investors for its huge cash pile. Rival Yaskawa Electric released its first cobot last year.Both, however, lag far behind Universal Robots, which still has roughly 60 percent of the global market and is now owned by Teradyne, according to analysis firm BIS Research. Fanuc has 6 to 10 percent market share, and Yaskawa's share is even smaller.Yaskawa's head of robotics, Masahiro Ogawa, said he was confident the company could grow as customers looked for more sophisticated models."As users get used to handling cobots, they will have more advanced and diverse demands. We have the capacity to better meet such demands," Ogawa said.Mitsubishi Electric Corp plans to launch a cobot early next year aimed at users such as electronics makers and logistics companies, said Katsutoshi Urabe, senior manager in charge of the company's robot sales.AdvertisementKawasaki Heavy, another engineering giant that entered the market in 2015, tied up with Swiss rival ABB last year. The two companies plan to standardize cobot programming, said Tomonori Sanada, who is in charge of Kawasaki's robot marketing and sales planning.But Universal Robots' von Hollen was unfazed by the interest of such heavyweights, saying the market would grow to accommodate new competitors.His company, which reported a 72 percent jump in revenue to $170 million last year, expects to grow at least 50 percent in 2018."Probably only 10 percent of our target market really knows about collaborative robots," he said. "So there is 90 percent potential that is gone untapped."(Reporting by Makiko Yamazaki; editing by Gerry Doyle)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Bits By                     
 KEVIN ROOSE
 
APRIL 20, 2018
Each week, Kevin Roose, technology columnist at The New York Times, discusses developments in the tech industry, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two. Want this newsletter in your inbox? Sign up here.Hello again! I’m finally getting back to a somewhat normal existence after last week’s Facebookpalooza. I even filed my taxes with several hours to spare, which is a first for me.This week, as Mark Zuckerberg presumably took a very long nap, we heard from another tech billionaire — Jeff Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon, whose empire (and net worth) makes Mr. Zuckerberg’s look relatively modest.Every year, Mr. Bezos’ shareholder letter is treated by many Amazon fans as a kind of papal encyclical — an update on company news, interspersed with nuggets of management advice and details of Amazon’s inner workings. This year’s letter, which was released on Wednesday, has already drawn glowing reviews. Noting that he reads a lot of shareholder letters, my colleague Andrew Ross Sorkin called it “one of the most engaging I’ve ever seen.” The CNBC host Jim Cramer said it may have been “the best I have ever read by any C.E.O.”AdvertisementWhat was so special about it?Well, for one, it underscored just how unfathomably big Amazon is. Amazon has 560,000 employees, and the company added 130,000 jobs in 2017 alone. For context, that means that Amazon added more than a Facebook’s worth of employees during every quarter last year.AdvertisementThe company also disclosed, for the first time, the number of Prime subscribers it has: more than 100 million. Those members bought five billion items in 2017, making it the company’s biggest year on record.While the median salary at Facebook, a company full of well-fed engineers, is a whopping $240,430, Amazon’s median worker salary is only $28,446, reflecting its reliance on an army of low-paid workers at its fulfillment centers. Amazon has been criticized for grueling labor conditions and creepy employee-tracking practices, but the workers keep showing up. As a result, Amazon has become America’s second-largest private employer, behind only Walmart.As Jason Del Rey at Recode noted, many of Amazon’s fulfillment center employees likely aren’t Prime subscribers, since the service has “skewed way more popular among higher-income households” than among working-class families. Amazon is trying to broaden its appeal beyond the mass affluent by introducing monthly payment plans and discounts for people on government assistance, but there is still room for competition on the lower end of the market. (Personally, I’m fascinated by Wish, the online dollar store that has given American consumers direct access to a flood of cheap goods produced in China.)The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other notable findings from Mr. Bezos’ letter:■ Amazon doesn’t allow PowerPoint slides during meetings. “Instead, we write narratively structured six-page memos,” then silently read them before meetings begin, Mr. Bezos wrote.■ Mr. Bezos spent a lot of time talking about his standards — specifically, high ones. “I believe high standards are domain specific,” he wrote, “and that you have to learn high standards separately in every arena of interest.” He continued: “You can consider yourself a person of high standards in general and still have debilitating blind spots.”■ Mr. Bezos gave updates on Amazon’s acquisition of Whole Foods, and said Amazon was working on ways to “recognize Prime members” at Whole Foods checkout counters, which sounds both exciting and extremely creepy.■ Mr. Bezos took inspiration from an unlikely source — a “handstand coach” who helped a friend of his learn how to do a full handstand. The coach, he wrote, warned his friend that realistically, she would need to spend six months practicing. The story taught him that “to achieve high standards yourself or as part of a team, you need to form and proactively communicate realistic beliefs about how hard something is going to be.”AdvertisementOne thing notably absent from Mr. Bezos’ letter was any mention of HQ2, the company’s much-ballyhooed search for a second headquarters. Amazon officials reportedly visited Newark this month, and have also visited Philadelphia and other finalist cities as they try to make a final decision this year.Amazon’s economic dominance — made clear by the staggering facts and figures in Mr. Bezos’ letter — makes the billions of dollars in tax breaks and incentives that have been offered to Amazon by job-hungry cities look even more ridiculous. If there’s one company that doesn’t need your city’s largess, it’s Amazon.A few other tech stories of note this week:■ Cambridge Analytica, the sketchy political data firm that has been at the center of Facebook’s recent privacy scandal, has sought to develop its own cryptocurrency and conduct an initial coin offering, because of course it has.■ Speaking of Facebook, my colleague Sapna Maheshwari reports that its advertising team has been quietly reaching out to big clients, trying to keep them from jumping ship as the social network struggles with its public image. Carolyn Everson, a Facebook ad executive, has reportedly “received many public messages of support and praise for her leadership on Twitter and on her Facebook page from agency executives and chief marketing officers, including those at General Electric and Toys ‘R’ Us.” Truly, I am touched.■ Marissa Mayer, the former chief executive of Yahoo, emerged from the Witness Protection Program to give an interview to my colleague David Gelles.Kevin Roose writes a column called The Shift and is a writer at large for The New York Times Magazine. You can follow him on Twitter here: @kevinroose.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2018, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Jeff Bezos Reminds Tech Who’s Boss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By REUTERSAPRIL 13, 2018, 3:31 A.M. E.D.T.
SINGAPORE —  In the not too distant future, surveillance cameras sitting atop over 100,000 lampposts in Singapore could help authorities pick out and recognize faces in crowds across the island-state.The plan to install the cameras, which will be linked to facial recognition software, is raising privacy fears among security experts and rights groups. The government said the system would allow it to "perform crowd analytics" and support anti-terror operations.GovTech, the Singapore government agency in charge of a "Lamppost-as-a-Platform" pilot project scheduled to begin next year, has given companies until May to register their interest in providing technology for the network."As part of the LaaP trial, we are testing out various kinds of sensors on the lampposts, including cameras that can support backend facial recognition capabilities," a GovTech spokesman said in an emailed statement to Reuters.Advertisement"These capabilities may be used for performing crowd analytics and supporting follow-up investigation in event of a terror incident."AdvertisementSingapore says the project is part of a broader "Smart Nation" plan to use cutting-edge technology to improve people's lives and has pledged to be sensitive to privacy.Video surveillance networks are common in cities like London or New York. But Ian Wilson, a security lecturer at Australia's Murdoch University said he believed that Singapore's would be different in that it might involve extensive facial recognition technology.Such technology has become commonplace in Chinese cities like Beijing and Shanghai.Some top officials in Singapore played down the privacy concerns.Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said last week that the Smart Nation project was aimed at improving people's lives and that he did not want it done in a way "which is overbearing, which is intrusive, which is unethical".The spokesman for GovTech said: "The need to protect personal data and preserve privacy are key considerations in the technical implementation of the project."The government also hopes to use other sensors on the lamp posts to monitor air quality and water levels, count electric scooters in public places, and collect footfall data to aid urban and transport planning, GovTech said.GovTech did not say how many lampposts would be used in the initial pilot project. But a former head of Singapore's civil service, Peter Ong, said last year that the country aims to bring all of its 110,000 lampposts into the sensor network.AdvertisementAdam Schwartz, senior staff attorney at the U.S.-based rights group Electronic Frontier Foundation, urged Singapore and other governments not to adopt facial recognition surveillance technology, in a response to a request for comment from Reuters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said he was concerned such technology could be turned on political opponents or used to curb free speech by deterring peaceful protest. Facial recognition technology typically allows authorities to match people picked up on cameras with those in databases.Singapore's only opposition party in parliament, The Workers' Party, declined to comment.CHINA TECHYitu Technology, a Chinese company that has recently opened its first international office in Singapore, told Reuters it was weighing a bid with its partners.Yitu opened a sales and marketing operation in Singapore this year and also plans to set up a research and development hub in the country.The company says its facial recognition platform is capable of identifying over 1.8 billion faces in less than 3 seconds. Singapore has a population of 5.6 million people."We see a big potential in this country. They are ready for the AI revolution" said Lance Wang, Yitu's general manager for Southeast Asia, Hong Kong and Macau, adding that the firm was discussing a potential bid with partners.Xjera Labs, a Singapore-based company, said it was putting in a bid with partners."The scope we are bidding includes most video analytics related components, such as facial recognition, crowd monitoring and human attribute detection," Ethan Chu, Xjera's co-founder, told Reuters.A spokeswoman for SenseTime, a facial-recognition software company dual-based in Beijing and Hong Kong, said it was "exploring the situation" and declined further comment. The company includes Singapore's state investor Temasek as one of its backers following a $600 million funding round which closed on Monday.Wilson, the security lecturer at Murdoch University, said that unlike cities like London or New York, Singapore did not have a high crime or terror-threat level that justified such surveillance capabilities.AdvertisementIn its 2018 risk map published this week, AON, a professional services company, ranked the terror threat in Singapore as "low".The government says, however, that the country faces threats from both home-grown militants and foreign terrorists.(Reporting by Aradhana Aravindan and John Geddie; Additional reporting by Fathin Ungku and Sijia Jiang in HONG KONG; Editing by Jack Kim and Philip McClellan)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.By REUTERSAPRIL 18, 2018, 8:25 A.M. E.D.T.
NEW DELHI —  Ride-hailing giant Uber Technologies Inc [UBER.UL] is "doubling down" on its investments in India, one of its biggest markets, after its recent exit from Southeast Asia, its chief operating officer said on Wednesday.India accounts for more than 10 percent of Uber rides globally and the U.S. company has a more than 35 percent share of the taxi market there, according to Counterpoint Research, but it is yet to make money in the country.COO Barney Harford said investments in India are made using funds from profitable markets. However, the sale in March of Uber's business in Southeast Asia to Singapore's Grab Holdings, in exchange for a 27.5 percent stake, has given Uber more firepower to compete with its Indian rival Ola."The recent merger ... has freed up resources which we are going to invest across people, products and partnerships to better serve this country," Harford told reporters in New Delhi.Advertisement"We are doubling down on our investments in this country like never before," he said, adding that India was a core market for the San Francisco-based company.AdvertisementHarford did not say how much Uber is likely to invest in India but said it would "considerably expand" its technology resources to develop products for India and the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Uber's India head Amit Jain said the company has no major plans to expand to more cities in India.Uber operates in about 30 Indian cities while Ola is in 110 cities and has more than a 45 percent total market share, according to Counterpoint Research.Uber and Ola are backed by a common investor, SoftBank Group, which pushed behind the scenes for the merger between Uber and Grab. It is not clear whether the Japanese investor plans to spur consolidation in India as well.Executives from Uber and Ola met at least twice over the past 12 months and, among other things, Uber brought up a potential merger between the two companies with Uber in the driver's seat, sources have told Reuters.Harford said that while Uber was always open to having conversations with potential partners, it had no interest in entering into minority deals in India or other countries in which it operates.(Reporting by Aditi Shah; Editing by Susan Fenton)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byTech We’re UsingBy The New York TimesHow do New York Times journalists use technology in their jobs and in their personal lives? Sapna Maheshwari, a reporter who covers advertising for The Times, discussed the tech she’s using.What tech tools do you use to monitor what advertisers are doing with our data on websites, apps and gadgets?Digital advertising can be tough to track because so much of it is automated and personalized. But I use Ghostery, a browser extension that shows you the data collection tools that companies are using to track your activity on any given site, along with the option to block them. Often, these companies are building robust pictures of your habits, sometimes across devices, which can ultimately be used to sell ads.I’ve also used services like Moat Pro and Pathmatics, which monitor online ads and can give you some insight into what pitches brands are running and where. (That was particularly helpful with some of the advertiser boycotts we saw last year on sites like Breitbart.) I also keep tabs on some Facebook and Reddit groups that talk about marketing and scams.More than anything, though, I do lots of phone interviews — despite what they say about millennials and phones — and meet with brand marketers and people at ad agencies and ad technology companies to hear what they’re thinking about and working on.What do you like about these tools, and what could be better?The online ad tracking services are helpful for the desktop and mobile web, but I haven’t yet found an effective way to sort through the many, many ads that flow through Facebook and Instagram or across various mobile apps.In the wake of the Facebook-Cambridge Analytica controversy, many privacy experts are pointing out that if something is free, you are the product. Do you agree with that?This question makes me think of a headline from The Onion, “Exciting New App Allows Users to Be Pawns in 26-Year-Old C.E.O.’s Little Game.” I generally agree with the privacy experts, but don’t know if there are good ad-free alternatives for a lot of services that people can pay for. Maybe in the future?How has tech changed advertising, and how much is the advertising industry looking to tech these days? Tech has transformed advertising — there are so many more ways to target and reach people now than when the industry was dominated by TV, print, radio and event sponsorships.There’s also so much more data being collected about our habits by an array of companies, from big tech platforms to agencies to the advertisers themselves. Huge portions of advertising dollars in the last few years have gone to the big tech giants that we read about all the time — specifically Google and Facebook and, to a lesser extent, companies like Snap. Lately, advertisers have said they’re spending more money on Amazon. So there are still more major changes afoot.As for how advertisers are looking at tech — it can be a double-edged sword. The ability to follow consumers wherever they go online comes with the risk that brands could end up with their ads appearing on conspiracy and extremist sites or offensive YouTube videos. Platforms like Twitter have made it easy for brands to talk to consumers, but it’s also opened them up to new criticism, demands and potential boycotts.Advertisers are also grappling with how to measure their ads in this new world. That’s a challenge throughout the industry. Think of all the ways that people watch TV shows now. I recently watched — or, more accurately, binged — NBC’s “The Good Place.” I watched the first season on Netflix, where there were no ads, then saw the first eight episodes of the second season through NBC’s Apple TV app, where there were lots of commercials. I watched the final few on Hulu, which might have had different ads. That type of behavior — especially since I was using my parents’ cable login for the NBC app — is a new kind of challenge for the people buying, selling and measuring ads.What do you think of Google’s and Facebook’s power in the online ad industry?It’s an enormous topic within the advertising industry, which generally refers to Google and Facebook as the “duopoly.” It’s pretty remarkable that two of the world’s most valuable companies make virtually all of their money from selling online ads and dominate more than half of the American digital ad market.Their size and influence make it essential for people to really understand how the companies’ business models work and the types of information they’re sharing with them every day — and what makes them such powerful advertising machines.Obviously, advertisers are drawn to Facebook and Google properties because people are spending lots of time there. But they’re also fast and easy to use and rely heavily on automation. Lately, we seem to be getting a crash course in how the tools that advertisers love can be misused, whether it’s in the political realm or through fraudulent or discriminatory ads. I’m interested to see how humans factor into solving some of these issues — for example, YouTube is implementing more human screening of videos to assuage advertisers’ fears about appearing on inappropriate content.Outside work, what tech product do you love using? It’s a tie between two. I recently installed a Chrome extension called HabitLab to help keep me from wasting time when I’m online.And I love the Bose wireless speaker that my boyfriend gave me for Diwali. I use it to listen to podcasts and talk on the phone while cooking or cleaning. I love that the speaker gets me away from my phone, which can charge in the meantime, and that I can use it throughout my apartment. It would be nice if it just did the cooking for me, though.What’s your advice for those who want to prevent their data from being tracked by advertisers?It’s hard to prevent, but you can take some steps to limit it. Explore the privacy settings on your smartphone, including which apps have access to your location and microphone and whether you allow ad tracking. Delete apps that you don’t use anymore.Some people like ad blockers, but they can be operating their own businesses that allow ads through from advertisers that pay them. You could also check the settings for internet-connected devices like your television, and turn off certain “smart” features that could be sharing your viewing habits with third parties. When you check out at a store, you can avoid giving your phone number, email address or ZIP code. Finally, you can see and delete your ad preferences on Facebook and those for Google, too.Follow Sapna Maheshwari on Twitter: @sapna.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTECH TIPGoogle’s smartphone software includes a set of tools to help you type — but if they trip you up, turn them off.By J. D. BiersdorferQ. I saw the recent instructions for disabling autocorrect on an iPhone, but what about those of us who use Android? How do I turn off the automatic-correction feature?A. The exact steps vary based on your device and the particular version of Android you use, but for the typical system, start by opening the Settings app. On the main Settings screen, choose Languages & Input. In later versions of Android, select Virtual Keyboard. When you get to the list of keyboards and input methods, tap Android (or Google) Keyboard. On the next screen, select Text Correction. The Text Correction screen lists several controls, including a button to turn off autocorrect. You can also choose to enable or disable Android’s help when you type, including prompts for contact names and personalized suggestions based on your use of other Google apps, and you can decline suggestions for potentially offensive words. On some Samsung Galaxy phones, you can get to the keyboard software by opening the Apps icon on the home screen, tapping Settings and then General Management. From there, select Language and Input and then On-screen Keyboard. Tap the name of the keyboard you are using — usually Samsung Keyboard or a third-party keyboard app. The Smart Typing section of the Samsung Keyboard settings has all the controls for predictive text, auto replace (automatic correction) and other tools.Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to techtip@nytimes.com. This column will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be answered individually.J.D. Biersdorfer has been answering technology questions — in print, on the web, in audio and in video — since 1998. She also writes the Sunday Book Review’s “Applied Reading” column on ebooks and literary apps, among other things.@jdbiersdorferAdvertisement