AdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsTraveling with a visible or invisible disability doesn’t have to be difficult. A few simple tips can go a long way.By Shivani VoraTimes have changed for travelers who use wheelchairs, are visually or hearing-impaired or have another disability, says Jayne Bliss, a travel adviser with Tzell, who has more than 30 years of experience in planning trips for those with special needs. “No place is off limits, and hotels, museums and cultural institutions offer more accessibility than ever before,” Ms. Bliss said. Here are some of her tips to travel smoothly with a disability:Asking your airline for assistance, either at the time of booking or a few days before your trip, will make your time at the airport much easier. Many airlines will designate an employee to meet you curbside when you arrive or at check-in with a wheelchair (if you need one) and guide you through security. You can also request assistance when you land at your destination. There is usually no charge for this service, but policies vary by airline and may depend on available staff and your disability, so be sure to clarify with your carrier before you fly. Also, many carriers allow guide dogs on board free of charge for passengers who are visually-impaired (as long as you make a reservation for your guide dog at least 48 hours in advance of your flight).Most hotels in all price ranges welcome travelers with disabilities, according to Ms. Bliss. However, it’s key to give them a heads up about what your needs are if there’s anything specific. If you’re in a wheelchair, for example, get measurements for the front, guest and bathroom doors in advance of your stay. Most hotel concierges will be happy to provide you this information, any many list it online. Ms. Bliss said that some her clients’ wheelchairs are too large for many properties, even if they claim to have accessible rooms and facilities. Also, if you’re visually impaired and find buffet breakfasts or continental breakfast bars challenging, ask your hotel’s concierge to fill your in-room fridge with breakfast items, or deliver them to your room instead.An agent who specializes in working with disabled travelers can arrange every aspect of your trip including booking your airline tickets, tours and restaurants. They can make sure to get the measurements you need, verify the hotels, resorts, or restaurants you’re interested in are accessible, and provide other services to make sure you have a smooth trip and a comfortable stay.Some of these agents, including Ms. Bliss, don’t charge trip planning fees, and instead make money by booking you with hotels and resorts that are hungry for your business (and ideally, accessible). To find other specialists, consider agencies that have experts on-staff that specialize in accessible travel, like the ones at Travel Leaders, New Directions Travel or Disabled Travelers, among others.Ms. Bliss said that there are guides all over the world who have experience in working with travelers with disabilities. “These guides can make your time in the destination hassle-free because they know the sights you can and can’t access, the restaurants where you’ll have an enjoyable experience and more,” she said. Some guides can even arrange for wheelchairs, scooters and canes or know sign language to communicate with those are hearing-impaired. Others simply remember to take visible and invisible disabilities into account when planning activities or organizing groups, so you’re not stuck joining a tour group where you can’t participate in half of the activities. You can find guides through some of the previously mentioned agencies, a web search, your travel agent, your hotel’s concierge or on TripAdvisor. Several travel operators offer both private and group trips for those with disabilities. “These preset itineraries take into account exactly what your needs are so you don’t have to arrange anything yourself,” Ms. Bliss said. One example is Flying Wheels Travel, which has several itineraries a year to destinations such as Peru, Japan and Portugal. The company also sells cruises. Other options include Search Beyond Adventures and Easy Access Travel. Also, several companies can arrange African wildlife excursions for travelers with disabilities, including Extraordinary Journeys, Endeavour Safaris and AccesstoAfrica Safaris. Many museums around the globe take care to accommodate visitors with disabilities in a number of different ways. The Guggenheim, in New York, for example, has monthly tours for the visually impaired. These tours are free, but must be reserved in advance. Find out what services a museum offers by calling its visitor information line, or visiting its website before you plan your visit. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsIt’s surprisingly easy to travel light and look good both on the plane and at your destination. Here are some tips from a stylist on how to do it right.By Shivani VoraBetween the hassle of flying, jet lag and hauling your luggage around, traveling is challenging enough without worrying about looking fashionable while you do it. But Kate Young, a New York-based stylist who counts actresses Margot Robbie and Michelle Williams among her clients, says that it doesn’t take a lot of effort to look stylish on the road. “Anyone can look chic while traveling, and there’s no need to spend a lot or pack a lot to do it,” Ms. Young said. She noted that she travels several times a month and rarely checks in a bag. Here are her best tips to traveling light and looking good at the same time.When deciding what clothes to pack, choose pieces in three matching colors so you can mix and match each piece to create multiple outfits for different days, or even different occasions. Pick the colors based on where you’re going. If you’re headed to Paris or another urban destination, for example, any combination of black, white, navy and charcoal is a good bet. For a beach vacation or outdoors excursion, khaki, off-white (or white) and bright hues like orange or yellow always work. Ms. Young likes white linen in particular because it’s cool in warm weather, can be worn during the day and is also nice for evenings out. And when it comes to the actual articles of clothing to take, Ms. Young said that a pair of jeans, a pair of nice pants, a striped button down, a blazer and a comfortable T-shirt are always good options. “Ideally, you should be wearing each piece two or three times on your trip,” she said. “Anything less is a waste of space.”Most women don’t need to bring more than three pairs of shoes on any trip, Ms. Young suggests. Exercise sneakers, a comfortable daytime shoe to walk around in (loafers, for example), low boots or sandals and, for evenings, heeled sandals if you want them. Men on the other hand, can generally get by with two pairs: Sneakers and loafers, which can be worn both during the day and at night. And a tip for everyone when it comes to sneakers: Many sportswear brands make lightweight pairs that fold, to take up less space in your bag.Of course, there’s no reason to pack or choose your shoes strictly based on traditional gender roles. Pack light and choose a few pairs that serve multiple purposes, rather than trying to bring a pair for every occasion or every evening.Exercise clothes are becoming increasingly fashionable, and for flights, especially long-haul journeys, they’re incredibly comfortable to wear. They also fold neatly and fit into virtually any bag. Ms. Young suggested that women consider compression leggings, along with a long-sleeved cotton top and coat while men try a pair of track pants and a track jacket, or a half or full-zip hoodie. A few key accessories can change the look of an entire outfit, Ms. Young said. On her travels, she always packs some costume jewelry, like a statement cocktail ring and a pair of oversized earrings. She also packs her makeup in a sleek pouch that doubles as an evening bag. Men, alternatively, or people who don’t wear jewelry, should consider a few pairs of bright socks in fun patterns, just to add a little personality to otherwise simple, coordinating outfits. If you have a formal evening or event planned during your trip, don’t bother with bulky dresses and heavy full suits and jackets that take up a lot of space. Ms. Young suggested that women opt for a slip dress, high-heeled sandals and a pair of bold earrings, while men should go for a pair of slacks, a flexible, multipurpose blazer, a crisp white shirt and loafers. Ideally, all of these are things you could use for another evening, a different outfit, or can be packed easily without adding bulk to your carry-on. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsTraveling, whether for business or pleasure, is no reason to leave your fitness goals behind. Here’s how to get a good workout, on the go.By Shivani VoraThink you won’t have time to exercise on your next vacation? Not according to Annette Lang, a New York City-based certified personal trainer. “You can actually maintain and even improve your fitness level when you’re on the road,” she said. “And, you don’t have to bother with a gym to do it.”Ms. Lang naturally has plenty of tips on how to get some exercise while you travel. Here are some of the ones she offers her clients when they tell her they’re leaving town. Think about how you can include some activity on each day of your getaway, Ms. Lang said. If you’re in an urban destination that has a bike share program, for example, consider renting a bike for an hour or two, and take a ride along a waterfront or other scenic part of town. When visiting sites with scenic viewpoints at the top, such as on the observation deck of a building or the roof of a cathedral, climb the stairs to the top, if that’s an option. Even a few minutes of stair climbing will boost your heart rate, and you’ll be rewarded by great views at the end of your journey. And, if you’re hiking or exploring a local park, throw in a little exercise by doing 10 step-ups to a bench followed by 10 push-ups, and repeating the set at the next three benches you pass by. “This quick workout burst goes a long way in keeping you fit,” Ms. Lang said. Discovering your destination on foot is the ideal way to get an authentic sense of place and be active at the same time. Ms. Lang loves to design her own walking tours whenever she’s on vacation. “I make a list of the attractions I want to see and look at a map to find the best walking route that will hit them all,” she said. On her recent trip to San Francisco, for example, Ms. Lang started her day at a popular breakfast joint, hit two museums, visited Fisherman’s Wharf and ended the day at several bars. All told, Ms. Lang logged more than 10 miles through the hilly city, and took in plenty of sights at the same time. Take five minutes in the morning on each day of your vacation to do a high-intensity workout. “You’ll burn calories first thing and also feel energized for the rest of the day,” Ms. Lang said. Plenty of high-impact workouts that don’t require equipment are available for you to follow along online. Do a quick web search or visit YouTube for ideas, or drop by your hotel’s gym, if it has one. Alternatively, try the following workout from Ms. Lang: 20 push-ups, 20 squat jumps (where you go into a deep squat and jump up toward the sky as high as you can) and 20 burpees (where you jump up toward the sky, come down into a squat, kick your legs back behind you and then come back up). Repeat three or four times or until you’ve been moving for at least five straight minutes. Whether it’s to buy tickets for a popular attraction or cue up to board a tour bus, waiting in line can be an inevitable. Instead of passively standing and waiting, however, Ms. Lang suggested using your time to do three exercises that your fellow bystanders won’t notice: calf raises, which strengthen the lower legs, glute squeezes, where you tighten your glutes and hold as long as you can before releasing, to tone your backside, and belly breathing, where you exhale as you pull your stomach in and keep inhaling and exhaling while pulling it in more, to boost core strength. You might garner some odd looks, but the result will be worth it. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe Real ID Act requires that driver’s licenses meet standards set by the Department of Homeland Security by October 2020. Many states are already compliant and others have been given extensions.By Shivani VoraIn the past several months, there has been plenty of conversation about the Real ID Act and how it will affect air travelers. Passed by Congress in 2005, the act is intended to prevent identity fraud, and starting on Oct. 1, 2020, all fliers who reside in the United States, even if they’re flying domestically, will need Real ID identification to pass through Transportation Security Administration security checkpoints at airports.Who exactly is affected and what exactly is Real ID identification? Here, answers to questions about what the Real ID Act means for travelers and why having a passport now may be more important than ever.What exactly is the Real ID Act?The act is intended to enhance national security by establishing minimum standards for the secure issuance of driver’s licenses and identification cards, according to Steve Yonkers, the director of the Real ID program for the Department of Homeland Security.“The act is meant to stop the production of fake IDs,” Mr. Yonkers said.Why is the act being implemented?Congress passed the act on the recommendation of the 9/11 Commission, which advised that the federal government set minimum security standards for how states issue identification and for how that identification is used. “The commission recognized that sources of identification are the last opportunity to ensure that people are who they say they are and to check whether they are terrorists,” Mr. Yonkers said.When does it go into effect and for which states?Currently, all 50 states are either compliant or have extensions, meaning none of these residents need alternative identification. There are 28 states that are now Real ID compliant, including Texas, Ohio, Florida, Nevada and Colorado, while 26 states and territories have been granted extensions until Oct. 10, 2018 by the department. Note that travelers from states with extensions will not likely need to have Real ID compliant identification by Oct. 10 — the date is only a deadline for the Department of Homeland Security to receive a state's request for a renewed Real ID extension, if needed. In past years, the agency has provided a grace period for approximately 90 days before enforcement would begin for a state not granted a renewed extension. The department will issue information about the next extension cycle later this year.  For a complete list, visit dhs.gov/real-id. “Every state is working on getting compliant with all Real ID requirements,” Mr. Yonkers said. “The states that aren’t yet compliant are the ones that are requesting extensions to give them additional time necessary to complete implementation of secure identification standards.”How does a state work to get compliant?According to Mr. Yonkers, the Department of Motor Vehicles employees in a compliant state have to undergo background checks. Employees also have to be able to verify an applicant’s identity and lawful status — they can do the latter by checking an applicant’s immigration status with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. Also, the licenses the D.M.V. produces in a compliant state must have anti-counterfeit technology built into them such as a hologram. “They [licenses] have to be very secure documents,” Mr. Yonkers said.But what does the Real ID Act mean for air travelers?Right now, nothing. On Jan. 22, however, residents of two United States territories, American Samoa and Northern Mariana Islands, could be the subject of Real ID enforcement because they are still under review to get extensions. But as of Oct. 1, 2020, the T.S.A. will ask all travelers to have a Real ID-compliant driver’s license or alternate acceptable identification to fly domestically.Travelers won’t be able to pass through security without this acceptable identification.Will I have to apply for a new, compliant license? Or will my state send me a new, compliant one automatically? In order to get a Real ID-compliant license, residents must physically go to a D.M.V. office with their identification documents such as a birth certificate and passport. What exactly qualifies as acceptable identification?The Department of Homeland Security has designated more than a dozen forms of acceptable ID, including a passport; a border ID card; a trusted traveler card, such as Global Entry; a Real ID-compliant driver’s license; and a permanent resident card. For a complete list, visit tsa.gov/travel/security-screening/identification.Is one form of acceptable identification better than another?The department does not recommend any particular form of acceptable identification, but Brenda Sprague, who oversees passport services for the State Department, encourages all United States residents without a passport to apply for one now. The turnaround time to get a new passport during the winter is usually around four weeks. In the summer, when passport applications peak, the wait for a new passport could be up to eight weeks.Around 136 million Americans have passports in circulation, according to the State Department — that’s only around 40 percent of the population in the United States.O.K., you’ve convinced me, and I’m ready to apply for a new passport. What’s the best way?Ms. Sprague said that there are more than 8,000 passport application locations around the country. Around 60 percent are post offices while the rest are courthouses and libraries. Visit the State Department’s Where to Apply link for more details. In addition, there are 27 passport agencies, where travelers can apply for rush passports. “These agencies are for people who are traveling within two weeks,” Ms. Sprague said.This link has a list of these agencies; applicants need an appointment for a visit and can make one online at passportappointment.travel.state.gov.Also, the State Department is collaborating with Hilton Hotels & Resorts on the Hilton Passport Project, an initiative meant to encourage more Americans to apply for passports. Every few weeks, a Hilton location in the United States will have a Passport Concierge booth, where guests and the general public can have their passport pictures taken for free and apply for or renew a passport. Between one and three employees from the State Department will be on hand to answer passport-related questions and help fill out applications. The next Passport Concierge will be at the Travel and Adventure Show, in Washington, D.C., on Jan. 20 and 21. At this event, applicants will actually be able to submit their applications to a State Department employee. For a list of coming locations, visit facebook.com/Hilton.How much does it cost to get a new passport?First-time applicants pay $110 and a $25 application fee. Passport renewals cost $110 and expedited passports are an additional $60. If you’re renewing your passport, you can do it by mail, but if you’re getting a new passport or if your existing one is lost or stolen, you must apply in person.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsTraveling with medication — even prescription drugs — isn’t as simple as packing it. Here’s how to stay on the right side of the law, anywhere you go.By Tanya MohnTravelers often pack medications when they go abroad, but some popular prescription and over-the-counter ones Americans use for things like pain relief, better sleep, allergies and even the common cold are illegal in some countries. The United Arab Emirates and Japan, for example, are among the most restrictive nations, but many ban or restrict importing narcotics, sedatives, amphetamines and other common over-the-counter medications. Most travelers won’t run into problems for carrying small amounts for personal use, said Katherine L. Harmon, who oversees health analysis for iJET International, a travel risk management company. But noncompliance can result in confiscation,(which could, in turn, have severe medical consequences), deportation, jail time, and even the death penalty. “Does it happen a lot? No. Could it? Yes,” Ms. Harmon said. “Consumers need to understand this and how it might adversely impact them before they book that awesome trip to an exotic location.” She shared a few tips to keep you on the right side of the law, whatever you take and wherever you roam. Laws vary by country and there is no central, up-to date repository, so Ms. Harmon suggests consulting your physician, travel medical insurance company, or local pharmacist four to six weeks before traveling. “When you inquire about your shots, ask about medications. Odds are they may not know off the top of their head, but they have the resources to find out.” She also suggests checking with the embassy of your destination country. The State Department website lists foreign embassies in the United States, and their contact information. It also lists insurance providers that offer overseas health coverage. Comparison websites Insure My Trip and SquareMouth can help assess those insurance plans, if they’re necessary.Carry all of your medication — even vitamins and supplements — in their original, clearly marked containers or packaging in a clear plastic bag in carry on luggage. Make sure the name on the prescription, the medicine container and your passport (or one for the recepient of the medication) all match. If you lost the product information insert, ask the pharmacist to print a new one for you.Also, check the Transportation Security Administration’s website for up-to-date rules and regulations on packing and carrying your medication when you depart. The standard rules for liquid carry-ons don’t apply to medications in liquid or gel form, but you need to inform the T.S.A. when you pass through security so they don’t confiscate it.Keep copies of your original prescriptions, if you can. Better yet, obtain a letter on official letterhead from your physician that lists the medicines you need and why they were prescribed. Ideally, you would get this translated to the language of your destination country, so it’s easy to read. For some medication and specialized equipment used to administer them, some countries require documents to be submitted to government officials well in advance of your arrival. Ms. Harmon, for example, was questioned at the Singapore airport once for entering with an EpiPen, but she had prior authorization allowing its transport. The documentation you carry should also indicate the generic and chemical names of the active ingredients, which determines permissibility, not brand names. For example, the active ingredient in Benadryl, diphenhydramine, is banned in Zambia in over-the counter products. In Japan, it is allowed only if the amount in a tablet or injection is limited. However, a typical 25 milligram tablet of Tylenol PM in the United States exceeds the 10 milligram maximum amount in a tablet you can bring into Japan. Some countries restrict the overall total amount of an active ingredient an individual traveler can legally import, which may impact longer stays.In countries where a medication is allowed, but its amount is capped, reducing your dosage or switching to another available medication is the best way to stay compliant. Allow enough time beforehand to ensure the smaller dose or new medicine works effectively, and consider making the switch before your trip to give yourself time to adjust. Some medications can be used for several diagnoses. Hormones used for birth control may also be used to treat excessive menstrual bleeding, Ms. Harmon said. “Doctors need to get creative sometimes. Substitutions can allow authorities to accept the drug as a medical need rather than going against the country’s religious or moral code.”Parents with a child doing well on Adderall for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder who prefer not to make adjustments on the fly, or a student with bipolar disorder may want to consider vacation or study abroad locations where the medications they rely on for mental health are not banned or restricted. “Viewpoints on treatment and diagnoses can vary widely,” Ms. Harmon said. “Western Europe and North America understand that brain chemistry is often at the root of these problems. But some countries, like Russia, do not consider mental health challenges as medical problems and often treat them criminally.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsCruises have a reputation for being all about drinking and luxury, but if you want your next trip to be a cultural experience as well, here’s how.By Shivani VoraCulture lovers don’t always think of cruising when planning a vacation, according to Doug Prothero, the managing director of The Ritz-Carlton Yacht Collection. “Cruises are stereotyped as getaways with lots of eating and drinking and little culture in sight,” he said. While that may be true for some cruises, Mr. Prothero said it’s not the case all-around, and shared some tips to enjoy an enlightening cultural experience by boat.Most cruise ships stop at a port in the morning and depart by late afternoon, but several cruise lines have itineraries where boats spend multiple days at a port, offering cruise-goers the opportunity to spend more time in port and to plan day-trips and other longer activities. They give travelers extra time to explore the destination and seek out its culture, whether it’s the local museums, bars and restaurants or other public spaces. Smaller boats and river cruises can often access ports that bigger cruise ships cannot, which allows them to visit more unusual and off-the-beaten path landmarks, Mr. Prothero said. These intimately sized ships also give guests the opportunity to create bespoke, culture-focused itineraries, and many don’t skimp on sleeping quarters or other onboard luxuries just because they’re smaller. “Generally, the bigger the boat, the less flexibility you have in making your trip all about culture because big ships have to manage the needs of many more passengers,” Mr. Prothero said. Academic and cultural centers often host their own cruises that offer itineraries brimming with cultural activities. Many include onboard lectures and seminars from professors and historians about the destinations you’ll visit, and walking tours at ports when you arrive. Yale University’s Yale University Travel, Smithsonian Journeys and Travel with The Met from the Metropolitan Museum of Art are three examples of institutions that offer such cruises. You can have a cultural trip on a large vessel, Mr. Prothero said, but it might take some legwork on your part to do so. “Many big boats have a variety onboard cultural events that they don’t necessarily promote the way that they do other entertainment options,” he said. These events can include lectures and small group dinners dedicated to cultural topics that pertain to your trip. Work with the onboard concierge team to learn more these choices. You can also find out about them ahead of your trip by calling your cruise company’s planning center. Unless your cruise line has shore excursions focused on culture, you might want to consider striking out on your own and prioritize the sights you most want to see. Mr. Prothero encourages travelers to visit small museums and art galleries, dine at restaurants in non-touristy neighborhoods and even catch a daytime show at a local theater. If your time is especially limited, consider hiring a local guide who can show you that destination’s top cultural sites. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTest RunWhile travelers have long been able to set up airfare alerts, these apps go a step further in helping flexible travelers plan a last-minute trip.By Justin SablichHave you ever just shown up at an airport without a clear travel plan? If your lifestyle allows for that sort of a lack of planning, but you’d rather ease into such a spontaneous adventure, there are several phone apps that can make unplanned travel feel less risky and more affordable.While travelers have long been able to set up airfare alerts using Google Flights, Skyscanner, Kayak and a host of other web-based tools, the following apps go a step further in helping budget-conscious people who want to go somewhere but don’t know (or care) where. Within the Hopper app there is a feature — once referred to as Flex Watch but now integrated into the Hopper app’s main functionality — which, as the original name suggests, aims to help those with flexible travel dates or destinations as well as spontaneous travelers. You have the option to search for airfare of a specific destination, or you can tap on the box that asks “Flexible?” From there, simply choose your time frame (either “anytime” or any range up to 10 months in advance) and a length range (somewhere between a weekend and two weeks). You then set your home city; your destination can be either a specific city or “Anywhere.”I first tried the former option using a theoretical long-weekend trip from New York to Chicago. After setting the appropriate parameters, Hopper gave me the most affordable options. In this case, round-trip airfare from New York to Chicago for March 1 to 5 was available for $112. Scrolling further down led me to a chart showing which months of the year are the least and most expensive for this route. (It turned out that March is the second cheapest month to travel from New York to Chicago.)I also tried the “Flexible?” option to see what it could offer me from my home base of New York. It provided a range of trips of varying length available over the next several months, from nine days in Denver for a round-trip price of $145 to seven days in Reykjavik for $205. These are great deals if you’re free to go on the specified dates that accompany the airfare.Once you settle on a trip, you have the option to book directly on the app (note that the cheapest fares are often nonrefundable, as my Chicago one was). But if I wasn’t ready to commit, I could have selected “Watch this trip for updates,” which basically bookmarks my trip by putting it on a “Watch” list. Also from Hopper is a separate app with one function: to show you the best flight deals for the current day from your location. Unlike the main app, Get the Flight Out (GTFO) is for spontaneous travelers only. After setting your home city, you’ll see a simple list with destination cities and round-trip airfare. A recent test yielded a nonstop flight leaving for Buffalo that night and returning a few days later (a Sunday) for $336. If I had continued, the app would have sent me to book the flight, whether it be directly with the airline or to a third-party seller like Travelocity. Let’s say you got your last minute flight — you’ll need a place to stay.HotelTonight is an app that offers travelers last-minute, same-day hotel deals and in-app ratings from users. The makers of the app say that hotels with unsold rooms share this information with them, hence the great bargains. Searching for a room in Buffalo for my fake trip, I saw there was one room left at the Curtiss Hotel for $99, a room that the app says would normally cost $161. It looked quite nice, and 91 percent of the 34 people who have booked there using the app liked it. The only problem is this deal was just for one night, and I was (theoretically) planning on eating chicken wings through Sunday. After going back to reset my dates, the Curtiss was unfortunately no longer an option. But there was a Days Inn near Niagara Falls for $45 a night, and many other options.Initially, the app only allowed for same-day bookings, but it eventually expanded to seven days and now allows for up to 100 days in advance. Other apps for last-minute hotel deals include HotelQuickly and One Night. If you prefer to do all of your spontaneous bargain hunting in one app, consider Hipmunk, which studies itineraries and other data to find affordable travel deals.You can search for specific destinations and dates, but those seeking inspiration will like the “Discover” tab, which shows a wide variety of deals based on categories ranging from basics like “Beach” and “Europe” to “Roman Empire” and “World’s Best Nightlife.”Tapping on “Beach” reveals round-trip flights to Cancun from $254, and then a calendar showing current prices for each day through the end of April. But, because I’m all about living in the moment, I decide I want to leave today, which is going to cost me roughly twice as much ($510). There’s also a “Get a Room Tonight” button on the destination page, which will display a ranked list of rooms available for same-day booking. Other apps that let you search for airfare and hotel rates include Last Minute and CheapTickets.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsThe City of Lights is known as a pricey place to vacation, but with these tips you can stretch your dollars and still enjoy the finer things Paris has to offer.By Shivani VoraWhether it’s a hotel stay, shopping or dining out, a vacation to Paris can be a pricey proposition, especially if you’ve got your sights set on an upscale trip. But there are plenty of ways to stretch your dollar in the City of Lights and have a high-end getaway. Barkley Hickcox, a Paris specialist and an owner of Local Foreigner, has a few tips to help travelers make the most of their Parisian getaway. The ideal time to visit Paris is between November and April, when hotel prices are at their lowest. Some high-end properties offer even further discounts if you book a stay several months in advance. Ms. Hickcox is a fan of visiting during the first half of December, when the city is decorated with holiday lights and particularly beautiful. If you prefer warmer weather, April can be a mild and sunny month to visit. But if you’re on a budget, avoid going in June and September because hotel rates are at their peak.Families traveling to Paris should consider staying in a high-end apartment instead of a hotel, Ms. Hickcox said. “An apartment is less expensive than booking multiple rooms at a five-star hotel, and since you have a kitchen, you can save money on food costs by eating in occasionally,” she said. Companies like OneFineStay, Paris Perfect and Paris Attitude have a range of luxury apartment listings in Paris. If you prefer a hotel, choose boutique properties in non-touristy neighborhoods. The Hoxton, in the Second Arrondissement, for example, is a former residence dating back to the 18th century and has chic accommodations at reasonable prices. Another option is Le Saint Hotel a Paris, in the heart of Saint-Germain. Paris is known for fine cuisine, but rather than dining at one of the city’s renowned restaurants at dinnertime, go for lunch, when the tab will be much lower and the cuisine just as good. Several popular eateries offer affordable midday prix fixe menus. Frenchie, for example, has a four-course, seasonally-driven menu for 45 euros (about $56) while the four-course lunch menu at Septime, another seasonal spot, is 42 euros. For dinner, Ms. Hickcox recommended going to restaurants in residential neighborhoods such as South Pigalle, the Haut Marais and Montmartre. “You’ll find lots of great eateries where you can have dinner with wine for 35 to 50 euros a person,” she said. One of Ms. Hickcox’s top resources to find off-the-beaten path restaurants is the blog Paris by Mouth. Ms. Hickcox’s favorite way to explore Paris is on foot. “You can fully appreciate the city’s beauty by walking, and it’s designed for walkers because there are walking paths and sidewalks everywhere,” she said. For longer distances, she suggested using the city’s bike share system, Velib. A weeklong pass costs 15 euros, and there are stations everywhere. Or, try the Metro, Paris’ subway system. It’s convenient, and you can buy daily and weekly passes. While Paris has no shortage of big-name designer stores, the city’s flea markets are full of unusual and far more affordable finds. Marche aux Puces St Ouen, for instance, sells vintage furniture, vintage designer jewelry and handbags as well as old books, maps and other knickknacks. Ms. Hickcox also likes Marche aux Puces de la Porte de Vanves, a smaller, more manageable version of St Ouen. AdvertisementPursuitsLittle has changed on the Scottish island of Islay since its iconic whisky distilleries were profiled in Alfred Barnard’s famously detailed Victorian-era book.Sea mist shrouds Islay, Scotland, a rugged and remote island that is home to iconic whisky distilleries.CreditAndy Haslam for The New York TimesSupported byBy Liza WeisstuchWe were driving on what is locally known as the Golden Mile, a stretch on the wind-pummeled, rugged island of Islay off Scotland’s southwest coast that includes three time-honored, world-renowned distilleries that most Scotch whisky drinkers would recognize by name — Ardbeg, Lagavulin and Laphroaig.It was shortly after 9 a.m. on Islay (EYE-lah), and just over a hilly green on the right, the waves of the Atlantic were lapping against the rocky coastline. To the left were vast expanses of farmland, peat bogs and intermittent homes. We slowed down as a majestic Highland cow crossed the road in no particular hurry.Aside from the fact that the road, a mere gash in this ancient landmass, is now paved, the landscape looks much the same as it did in the 1880s when Alfred Barnard traversed it in a horse-drawn carriage.Barnard, a handlebar-mustachioed Briton, worked for Harper’s Weekly Gazette, a drinks trade magazine that still exists as Harpers Wine & Spirit. He wanted a thorough education on the whisky industry in order to have a solid foundation for his work, so he went on a near-Homerian odyssey through Britain.He visited 161 distilleries (129 in Scotland) and chronicled the journey. His voluminous entries were printed in the magazine and published in 1887 as “The Whisky Distilleries of the United Kingdom,” a doorstop of a book.Leafing through its pages today, the book serves as evidence that the Scotch industry innovates and grows without actually changing much.Among nations with a history of whisky-making like Ireland, Canada and the United States, Scotland is by far the most prominent. In 2017, over 85 million cases of Scotch were consumed globally. Compare that to 44 million cases of American whiskey and 28 million of Canadian whisky and just under nine million of Irish whisky, according to the Scotch whisky Association, a trade group.At the moment, Britain’s northernmost country boasts 126 Scotch whisky distilleries. Fifteen of them have opened in the last three years and more are at various stages of development.Islay, known as the “Queen of the Hebrides,” is the southernmost island of the Inner Hebrides, accessible by ferry and plane. It remains unique among the Scottish regions in that its whiskies are characterized by smoky, peaty flavors and aromas. Many consider it an acquired taste, but for those who have acquired it, like myself, Islay is pilgrimage-worthy, much like Bordeaux is for oenophiles, and like those wine-producing regions where vineyards dominate the landscape, the local drink is more than just a drink on Islay.“There are hundreds of years of history in Scotch whisky and that heritage is just so present and visceral when you’re in Scotland,“ said Flavien Desoblin, who opened the Brandy Library, a bar in New York’s TriBeCa neighborhood, in 2004.Of the more than 600 whiskies he offers, more than half are Scotch. “There’s definitely a clear link between everyday life and whisky throughout the country. There’s an intensity about it. It feels like it permeates everything.”Barnard’s tome reads like a travelogue. Writing in the first person, he captured the lush scenery, encounters with distillery managers and workers, road conditions, even the weather. The morning sun, for instance, “filled our hearts with gladness.” His horse “trotted merrily along.” Yet he makes ”no pretension to literary merit,” as he fastidiously documented the distilleries’ technical details like capacities of grain storage units and sizes of buildings and machinery.Seven of the nine Islay distilleries Barnard wrote about are still operational. Two closed in the mid-to-late 1900s, when demand for single malt Scotches (whisky made from 100 percent malted barley at a single distillery) declined as a result of changes in taste and fashion. Single malts long have been and still are largely used for blended Scotches, which are single malts blended with grain whisky; the pop appeal of single malts is a relatively new phenomenon.When I first visited Islay 12 years ago, I was just starting to write about the spirits industry for magazines and newspapers. I took it upon myself to study the myriad details of production and, as it turned out, learn of Scotland’s colorful history while at it. Looking back, it was not unlike Barnard’s undertaking.What strikes me now as much as it did then as I walked through grand still houses and cold, dim barrel warehouses, the air heavy with evaporated spirit that’s called “the angels’ share,” is how unchanging whisky-making remains.This is despite how much the Scotch industry has grown. Distilleries are building new warehouses for aging whisky around the island and adding stills. And while automation has slightly reduced the need for as much hands-on labor, there’s no way to accelerate production, which consists of grinding malted barley into grist, cooking it in scorching water, adding yeast to ferment the mixture into a beer, distilling it to concentrate the alcohol and letting it rest in oak casks for up to several decades.And the old-worldliness of it all suffuses Islay, which exists on the fringe of modernity. There’s a local paper, The Ileach, but it comes out “fortnightly.” There are public buses, but they double as school buses on weekdays, because on an island with a population of only 3,500, you can get away with that. Some people still heat their homes using peat: decayed, millennia-old vegetal matter that’s used here to fuel fires to dry barley, infusing the air with heady smoky aromas that define Islay whiskies. Many will tell you they never lock their doors.During my stay, I spent several evenings at the Lochindaal Hotel, a fourth-generation owned pub and restaurant with lodgings. As I drank pints and chatted with distillery workers fresh off their shift, it didn’t take long to understand the deeply rooted sense of community that made the unlocked doors common.Referring to a golden age of distilling, Barnard wrote in 1887, “Ten years ago, there were but few Distilleries in Islay, but the increasing demand for this valuable make of Whisky for blending purposes, encouraged further enterprise in the extension of existing distilleries and the erection of new ones.”Now, as ground breaks on new distilleries around Scotland — and the world — it feels as if another golden age is upon us.Barnard’s exuberance and chattiness made me think he’d be a charming companion, so when I traveled to Islay in the winter of 2016, I packed his nearly 500-page tome along with my rain gear in preparation for the island’s classic blustery winter conditions. As it turned out, a Victorian view of Islay is pretty modern.The four-mile road to the village of Bunnahabhain (BUNE-ah-hab-hain) is narrow, steep and serpentine. When the distillery of the same name opened in 1881, the owners constructed the path to the main road for horse-drawn carriages to bring coal and barley to the facility. Today, however, 40-foot trucks use it to take whisky away to be bottled.The narrow road made for a hair-raising encounter on a drive up the hill, as an enormous truck careened down it. When my friend, Jeroen Hanselaer, a Belgian photographer, and I reached the top, a sweeping view of grand Victorian-era buildings and a tremendous pyramid of empty oak barrels stacked six-high-by-13-long came into sight down a shallow slope to Bunnahabhain Bay.We parked and followed Barnard’s path through the stone “noble gateway” into a courtyard surrounded by gray production buildings. “Some say it feels like a cathedral, some say it reminds them of a prison,” Robin Morton, a stillman, told me with a hearty laugh.Morton is a burly chap whose arms are covered with conversation-starting Scottish pride tattoos — a Celtic knot, Gaelic dragons. We chatted amid the echo-y mechanical hiss of the still house, which has a soaring ceiling and four squat yet grand copper stills. They aren’t polished to a shine like the stills everywhere else, giving the space an antique ambience.He started at Bunnahabhain in 1978, when the 36 distillery workers all lived in the quaint, chimneyed houses clustered around the distillery. Today, only one of the houses is occupied and there are plans to raze many of them and renovate the rest as the distillery launches a refurbishment project over the next three years.Morton spends much of his day at a computer screen, which, he’s quick to point out, only monitors the stills’ activity, not controls it. So to heat the stills, he walks over to the steam wheel and cranks it. Nonetheless, that monitor does make things a little easier: When he started, he had to measure the flow rate of the spirit with a wood stick. Now he reads the measurements from the glowing screen.As far as Scottish island distilleries go, Bowmore is practically urban. Built in 1779 in Islay’s capital village of the same name, it’s a collection of whitewashed buildings on four seaside acres, just off the main thoroughfare, which is lined with a bustling grocery, a hardware store, gift shops and a bank.In the cement-floored malt barn, a single beam of light streaming through a small window gave the large, stark room the luminosity of a Vermeer painting. A man was pulling a rake-like instrument across a barley-strewn floor, making furrows so air could circulate through the germinating grains. Bowmore is one of the few distilleries in Scotland to use the old-fashioned floor-malting method. Today this part of the malting process is typically done in industrial-size drums at giant plants.Heather, my genial guide who wore stylish glasses and her hair in a loose pony tail, scooped up a fistful of barley and instructed me to crush a single soft sprouted granule between my fingers — the “maltster’s rub.” It was silky and chalky, moist enough to absorb the peat smoke that ultimately gives whisky its characteristic flavor.“That’ll be going into the kiln at six tonight,” she said, leading me to a steel door at the top of a few metal-grate steps. She removed a sturdy lock and unleashed a blast of heat and plume of smoke. Phenolic, savory aromas knocked me like a right hook. She motioned me into the haze. I sank into a knee-high bed of 21 tons of malted barley in the tennis-court-length kiln, where grain sits for 60 hours, absorbing smoky, savory essences from a peat-fueled fire burning underneath.She suggested I lie down and make a “grain angel,” as one would do in fresh snow. I imagined Barnard would have let his stiff upper lip get in the way of such tomfoolery, so I laid down in the pillowy, fragrant barley and dedicated my angel to his guiding spirit.After wandering through the still house and the cold, dark warehouse known as the No. 1 Vaults, which has been used to age whisky since Bowmore was founded in 1779, making it reportedly one of the oldest maturing warehouses in the world, my friend and I kicked back in the modern but cozy tasting room, which has expansive floor-to-ceiling windows overlooking the sea. I sipped the 12-year-old single malt, the youngest sample in the tasting flight of four — a softly peated drink that smelled of sea spray and grain.During Barnard’s visit here, he wrote, “The Distillers say the proximity to the sea favours the various processes of malting, brewing and distilling.” As I watched the mist fly off the swirling “white horses,” local parlance for the waves of the cobalt Atlantic as they crest and slam against the shore, I appreciated one of Islay’s whiskies’ most crucial ingredients: the local air.As we approached Ardbeg, a cluster of buildings with pagoda roofs that appears like an oasis of civilization amid expanses of green hills, Barnard’s description rang clear: “a lonely spot on the very verge of the sea, and its isolation tends to heighten the romantic sense of its position.”We walked across a courtyard to the visitors’ center, located in a high-ceilinged former malt barn, one of the original buildings. Barley was delivered here when the distillery opened in 1815. It’s been retrofitted with a bustling airy eatery and book-lined gift shop. At the stone-floored restaurant, the Old Kiln Café, locals can be found amid tourists, socializing over fish pies, plates of smoked salmon or scones and cappuccinos.We were greeted by the distillery manager, Michael Heads, a casual avuncular fellow with white hair who introduced himself as Mickey. He brought us to a neighboring building and led us through a long, sepia-hued chamber with deep empty wood vessels on either side of a narrow planked floor. The smell of peat from barley stored here in Victorian times still lingered in the air. An echo resounded when my pen dropped to the floor. There was an ethereal, old-world aura to the space.After being led through a few more equipment rooms, we emerged into a sunlit room with a pitched churchlike ceiling. In front of us were six huge washbacks, vessels in which yeast feasts on sugary solution, generating bubbly activity on the golden liquid surface as it turns starch into alcohol.Through a small window, far past those low cresting “white horses,” I could make out Northern Ireland’s hills of Antrim. Long before trucks existed, the narrow pier right outside was the primary access to the rest of the world: Barley and yeast came off boats, whisky was sent out. It was easy to envision the ships in gridlock on the now bare waters.This distillery’s whitewashed buildings with turquoise-framed windows surround a small courtyard with an entrance just off the main road that runs along the shoreline. Observing the scene from the mash house, Barnard described it as “one of the finest and most healthy spots on the island.”I peered down into the mash tun, a massive iron vessel where giant curved rakes revolved through seven tons of grist steeping in 21,000 liters (or nearly 5,550 gallons) of piping hot water, giving off a heady peat smell that called to mind a smoldering seaside campfire and hot tar. This porridge-like mix would become Octomore, the smokiest single malt on the planet. Spending time in a room heavily infused with the aroma of smoked grains cooking made my sweater smell like iodine and ashes for days. I found it delightful.A study in gears and grace, the nearly seven-foot deep mash tun is the stuff steampunk dreams are made of: a contraption of cast iron, steel and bronze. The nearly 150-year-old machine is one of several pieces of equipment that was restored to its Victorian-era glory. The distillery, which opened in 1881, was abandoned in 1994, then resurrected by an English wine merchant in 2001.Bruichladdich (brooch-LAH-dee) is a compact distillery, the smallest among the ones we visited. I followed a wood walkway, past six hulking pine washbacks, into the still house. It was a hot, noisy chamber where a network of copper pipes connects the stills.Budgie, the stillman, was laser-focused on the spirit safe, a brass-framed, glass-paneled box that captures the 136-proof spirit as it trickles off the still. He methodically measured alcohol levels and temperatures then shuffled over to a wobbly desk to record the data in a broad ledger. With bearlike hands, he wrote in tiny script with a fine-point pen. I later met Adam Hannett, the youthful, soft-spoken head distiller, who told me that Budgie started in 1989.“Of the 60,000 casks we have here, Budgie will have been involved in all the spirit made since October 1989,” he told me. “There’s probably 1,000 casks — or about 500, now that I think about it — that Budgie has not had an influence on. Is that not quite something?”The craggy ruins of Dunyvaig Castle that captivated Barnard are still a vision of faded majesty as we approached Lagavulin, the last of the distilleries on my visit. Perched on a peninsular rock, the ruins dominate the distillery’s seaside panorama. Centuries ago, Lords of the Isles, island rulers during the Middle Ages, retreated to this property overlooking masses of rock rising from the sea, which Barnard likened to “weird monsters of the deep.”The crash of the waves was drowned out by a mechanical rumble when my tour guide, Georgie Crawford, the distillery manager, led us into the mill room where a lofty antique-looking steel contraption pulverizes barley, a large portion of it peated, into a coarse powdery grist. It always amazes me that these fine particles will become elegant, complex Scotch whisky.Ms. Crawford, affable yet matter-of-fact, put a handful of milled grain on a screen in a shoebox-size, weathered wood box, shut it and shook it — 50 times up and down, 50 times side-to-side. This, she explained, is how they make sure each batch of barley isn’t too fine or too course, quite a remarkable thing to do by hand considering Lagavulin makes 2.4 million liters of spirit annually. (It was merely 284,000 liters in the 1800s.)“Sometimes the most basic thing can do the job you need to do. You can get a machine, but we trust our guys to count to 50,” she said with a merry shrug.Barnard does not much comment on the actual whiskies throughout his travels, but he made particular mention of an eight-year-old Lagavulin, declaring it “exceptionally fine” and noting that this distillery was one of the few that released single malts in addition to producing the spirit used for blended Scotch.As a nod to that accolade, Lagavulin, on the occasion of its bicentennial in 2016, reintroduced an eight-year-old single malt. It’s assertive yet elegant, with lively citrus notes popping through the smoke and iodine. I’m sure Barnard would have relished it. I certainly did.Liza Weisstuch is the senior editor at Budget Travel and contributing editor to Whisky Magazine. Follow her on Twitter and Instagram at @livingtheproofAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsBy Shivani VoraThe service at that hotel you just stayed at was so-so. Your friend’s experience at the same property, on the other hand, was spot on. Why the disparity? It may be more than chance.According to Joshua Bush, a hotel industry expert and the chief executive officer of Avenue Two Travel, while good service at a hotel, even a pricey one, isn’t a guarantee, there are a few ways to increase your odds of getting treated well. Keep in mind that most luxury hotels have an ingrained service culture, while budget and mid-tier properties often don’t. “It’s unreasonable to stay at a three-star property and expect the staff to run around for you because they’re not necessarily trained in providing individualized service,” Mr. Bush said. That doesn’t mean you can’t have a stellar experience at a budget hotel — you should just be reasonable with your desires and demands before you book.The staff at luxury hotels, however, are usually trained in anticipatory service, and the need to please their guests. They may even have a budget to “wow” guests with surprise gifts such as a bottle of their favorite Champagne, complimentary meals or included activities, or other amenities designed to make a stay at a luxury hotel live up to the luxury price tag.  Good service is in the eye of the beholder and, as a result, choosing the right hotel goes a long way in your interpretation of service. “It’s possible to spend $1,000 a night in two different renowned hotels and have completely dissimilar service experiences because properties have different service philosophies,” Mr. Bush said. Some high-end hotels, for example, take pride in offering formal and traditional white glove service. Others have a more colloquial approach where the staff greet guests by their first names. Also, some hotels train their staff to constantly check in on guests while others do so with less frequency. Some travelers find the first approach too overbearing while others may perceive the latter as bad service. Consider what you personally prefer, and read up on what type of service the hotel provides before you decide where to stay. Getting in touch with your hotel’s concierge in advance of your stay can go a long way toward a stellar service experience. Let them know why you’re coming, and what you’re looking for from your experience. “Hotels love making your stay above and beyond so if you’re celebrating a birthday or other occasion, make sure to tell the property,” Mr. Bush said. “The more you communicate to the hotel about why you’re there, the better the stay can be.”Say your room service order took over an hour to arrive, or housekeeping missed cleaning your room. Mishaps happen, even at the best properties, and Mr. Bush advised informing the hotel’s duty manager right away when something goes wrong. “A hotel can try to fix the issue or at least make it up to you,” he said. “Too often, guests don’t bother to complain and end up feeling like they had bad service.” But be respectful and calm when you’re explaining the situation. The nicer you are to staff, the nicer they will be to you.Travel agents, especially those part of large networks such as Virtuoso or Signature Travel Network, can often get their clients free amenities, such as property credit or free breakfasts. You pay a premium to use a travel agent, but in addition to the other services they provide, the added perks can be worthwhile.Also, when a booking comes in through a travel agent, hotels flag those guests as V.I.P.s, according to Mr. Bush, and they typically enjoy better service during their stays. “You can’t V.I.P. yourself, but an agent has the ability to do that for you,” Mr. Bush said.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsIt’s easier than you may expect to find, visit, and enjoy the places where your favorite movies were made.By Shivani VoraWhether it’s the “Lord of the Rings” trilogy in New Zealand or “Roman Holiday” in Rome, many noteworthy movies are filmed in appealing locales all over the world that travelers may want to visit and enjoy.According to Angela Tillson, a film location manager in Kauai who has worked on the set of films including “Jurassic Park: The Lost World” and “The Descendants,” exploring a beloved movie set destination through the eyes of the film makes for an enjoyable vacation. “Seeing a place with a focus on a movie you love will give you a perspective that the average tourist doesn’t usually get,” she said. Here are her tips to get started.If there’s a movie you love, you can find out where it was filmed by looking at the credits at the end of the film or by going online to The internet Movie Database, also known as IMDB, which often lists filming locations. Once you know the locale, you can start planning your trip. Or, consider doing what Ms. Tillson often does when deciding on where to vacation: pick a spot you’re interested in visiting, and find out what movies have been filmed there. Then, plan an itinerary based around a film that you’ve seen and liked. “It’s fun to sometimes let a destination determine the movie you’re going to live rather than the other way around,” Ms. Tillson said. There are even some books available on movies shot in certain destinations such as The Hawaii Movie and Television Book and New York: The Movie Lover’s Guide. Do an online search for more options. Before you head to your destination, be sure to rewatch the movie. A rewatch not only reminds you of identifiable spots to look out for during your trip, but it also adds to the excitement of your upcoming exploration. If the movie is based on a book, considering reading the book, too. It may have details about the locale that the movie doesn’t touch on. Also, books often have scenes that don’t make it into the movie adaptations, which gives you a deeper view of the destination. Ms. Tillson also recommended downloading the movie’s soundtrack or score, and listening to it throughout your trip. Some travel companies sell set itineraries focused on popular movies. Luxury tour operator Zicasso, for example, has an eight-day trip to Ireland inspired by “Star Wars: The Last Jedi” and Wild Frontiers has an 11-day trip to India inspired by “The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel.” Ms. Tillson suggested doing a web search or checking with a travel agent to find out about such trips. Also, in some destinations, local tour operators and hotels sell movie-themed tours. For instance, The St. Regis Princeville Resort offers a tour that includes a private helicopter ride to Manawaiopuna Falls, made famous in “Jurassic Park,” and an ATV tour of filming locations of movies such as “Raiders of the Lost Ark” and “Pirates of the Caribbean.” Lunch is even included. The cost is $5,674 for two adults. A more affordable option, in Rome, is the four-hour Roman Holiday themed excursion from HR Tours, where travelers ride a Vespa with a driver and see all the sites from the movie; the cost is 170 euros per person. When they’re not working, movie crews enjoy hitting local bars and casual restaurants that serve tasty local cuisine, Ms. Tillson said. Find out where the behind-the-scenes staff of your film spent their time by asking your destination’s tourist board or your hotel’s concierge, and check out a few of the spots. “It’s another way to get entrenched in the film and spend time in bars and restaurants that you wouldn’t normally think to hit,” she said. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsLas Vegas has a reputation for being expensive, but you can enjoy the best it has to offer without emptying your wallet.By Shivani VoraIf you’re headed to Las Vegas, you don’t have to be a high roller to get the biggest bang for your buck, according to Babs Daitch, a travel consultant at Yankee Clipper Travel. Ms. Daitch resides in Las Vegas and plans frequent trips to the city for her clients. “If you know some insider tips and the deals to watch for, a lavish Vegas trip can be had for a reasonable price,” she said. She shared some of her best tips for a wallet-friendly trip to Vegas that doesn’t skimp on luxury. First, avoid visiting Las Vegas during citywide conventions. Hotel occupancy is higher, which limits your chances of booking a great room, as are nightly rates for hotel rooms all over the city. Las Vegas Tourism’s official site has a calendar of upcoming conventions you should keep an eye on. In general, hotel rates are the lowest in July and August because the city’s hot weather keeps the crowds away. “If you love hanging out by the pool, these are great months to visit because many of the resorts have fantastic pools,” Ms. Daitch said. Hotel rates also dip after Thanksgiving weekend through early January.Dinner at many of Las Vegas’s famous restaurants can easily run $150 a person or more. If you’re keen on a meal at one, go during lunch when prices can be more reasonable. If you prefer to keep your meal options open, or you just want the freedom to try lots of restaurants, buy the Vegas Dining Card from Tix4Tonight. It costs $5 a person for seven days and will save you up to 50 percent at several notable Vegas restaurants including Emeril’s New Orleans Fish House, where you’ll get 20 percent off your food bill, and Planet Hollywood Restaurant and Bar, where you’ll save 50 percent. Two more dining out tips: First, some restaurants have happy hours with half-priced appetizers. Second, Ms. Daitch enjoys frequenting popular spots at breakfast, when food tends to be the least expensive, yet still freshly prepared and delicious. One of her favorite places for a morning meal is Eggslut at The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas, which serves creative egg-based sandwiches. “Eating there is a memorable dining experience, but I’m spending only around $10,” she said. Ms. Daitch also suggests breakfast at Thomas Keller’s Bouchon, at The Venetian. If you’re a gambler, you’re in store for free drinks, Ms. Daitch said. “Vegas casinos serve free drinks to all gamblers, even at penny slots,” she said. In her experience, the Wynn and the Cosmopolitan offer the best free drinks. But fret not nongamblers: you can find drink discounts of up to 50 percent off usual prices at happy hours offered by bars and restaurants all over the city, including many inside the city’s popular resorts.A ticket to one of Vegas’s popular shows can run well into the triple digits, but if you’re open to seeing one last minute, Tix4Tonight lists same-day deals for shows. The site is updated daily, but a recent example included up to a 50 percent savings on a ticket to the David Copperfield magic show. And, try to avoid seeing the newest and most in-demand shows because these tend to have higher ticket prices, and fewer seating options for groups. AdvertisementTijuana, steps away from San Diego, is full of flavor: birria tacos, Caesar’s famous salads and creative Baja cuisine.By SARAH KHANFEB. 6, 2018
The border between the United States and Mexico is in the news every day, in ongoing debates about immigration and spending on security initiatives. But what is it like to visit destinations along the border? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in five pairings of places: Brownsville, Tex., and Matamoros, Mexico; El Paso and Ciudad Juárez; Big Bend National Park and Boquillas; Nogales, Ariz., and Nogales, Mexico; and San Diego and Tijuana.“You’re trying to kill me.”It wasn’t an accusation, or even a question; just a matter-of-fact observation. My friend Shyema may never have actually been at risk of death, but I was about to find out if it was possible to lose a friend by overfeeding her.I hadn’t intended to test the limits of a 12-year friendship when I proposed a weekend in Tijuana. “It’ll be fun,” I promised. “We’ll catch up. We’ll eat tacos.”I neglected to put a number on how many tacos. Few friendships, or waistlines, can emerge unscathed from Tijuana’s relentless onslaught of delectable street food. Tijuana earned a reputation for violent crime during the 1990s to early 2010s; while crime remains an issue, with rising homicide numbers linked to the drug wars, the main areas frequented by visitors felt safe and easy to navigate.And so Shyema and I focused on our taco crawl. I’d spent weeks researching places to go in the border town, looking for landmarks, historic quarters, museums or pre-colonial ruins to cross off my tourist checklist. But instead, every tip yielded by my Google searches and interrogations of frequent Baja-goers came laden with calories. In Tijuana, the long lines are for taco stands, not monuments. So Shyema and I stepped through a turnstile in San Diego on a Friday afternoon and, with a quick glance by an official at our passports, walked into Mexico.Advertisement“The truth is, there’s nothing to do but eat and drink,” said Bill Esparza, a James Beard Award-winning writer in Los Angeles, who heads south of the border at least once a month. He’s also a co-owner of Club Tengo Hambre, which arranges culinary day trips throughout Baja California, the state in which Tijuana is located. “For me, it’s a place to relax.”That might come as news to people who still associate Tijuana with cartel clashes and mass executions. But as crime has gone down, tourism has gone up in recent years, and its proximity to Southern California makes it a popular jaunt for Los Angeles and San Diego residents who want to eat and drink well — and affordably — for a weekend, or even an afternoon. It’s also a quick stop on the way to the wine lands of Valle de Guadalupe and the coastal town of Ensenada.AdvertisementHopping between TJ — as it is commonly known by locals in Mexico and California — and San Diego is a way of life, as residents on both sides of the border crisscross for work, school, medical appointments and night life. Pursuits range from the divey to the thrifty in TJ: American teenagers partying on Avenida Revolución; families stocking up on cheap groceries. If you live in the suburbs south of San Diego and have a Secure Electronic Network for Travelers Rapid Inspection pass, which gives preapproved travelers expedited passage, it can be quicker to drive to Tijuana than downtown San Diego. This frequent back-and-forth makes this border crossing the busiest in the world, open 24 hours with 300,000 people passing through each day.My plan was something like this: Walk across the border. Eat. Walk around. Eat. Take an Uber. Eat. Sleep. Wake up. Eat. Repeat. But first, Shyema and I checked into One Bunk, an ultrahip micro-hotel from a binational brand with branches on both sides of the border. This outpost opened last spring in the heart of Avenida Revolución, Tijuana’s notorious main drag. There, above a boisterous strip lined with bars, souvenir shops and “zonkeys” — donkeys painted with stripes to resemble zebras, something of a TJ mascot — we found a sleek nine-room respite filled with retro design references: vintage suitcases, neon signs, a chandelier made from tennis rackets and a painting of Pancho Villa.I eased us into our epicurean explorations with a salad. But not just any salad: Caesar’s, a Tijuana institution since 1927, is purported to be where the Caesar salad was invented, and between that claim to fame and its location at the heart of Revolución, it sees its share of tourists. Our server prepped the dressing tableside, tossing egg yolk, cotija cheese, mayonnaise, garlic, olive oil, and barbecue, Tabasco and Worcestershire sauces in a wooden bowl. He bathed a handful of lettuce and shrimp in the dressing before showering it with more cotija, and Shyema and I shared a plate while watching the madness unfold on Revolución from our sidewalk table.Next, we walked to the kitschy restaurant La Corriente Cevichería Nais and tried the Taco Kalifornia, shrimp and cheese stuffed in a pepper and shrouded in a tortilla, and a Pacifica Tostada, a ceviche of tuna, lemon juice, hot sauce, serrano peppers,and onions. Both were fiery and bright, with flavors hitting my tongue in unexpected places long after I’d taken a bite.Light, flavorful, seafood-focused cuisine is Baja California’s calling card. While the wall between Tijuana and San Diego — an imposing part of the landscape of this corner of the continent long before President Trump made it an issue in his campaign— clearly delineates a separation between the two countries, on the plate, lines are blurred and flavors are fluid. “Baja cuisine is very much like California cuisine,” Mr. Esparza said. “It’s a cooking style that doesn’t adhere to any kind of tradition. It’s 100 percent Mexican, just not bound by any rules.”Cooks in Baja often eschew lard in favor of olive oil from area farms; wines from Valle de Guadalupe and oysters, sea urchin and the large clam geoduck from the ocean are on the menus. And the back-and-forth north to California has inspired chefs on both sides of the wall. San Diego has some of the best Mexican food outside Mexico, and the California city’s booming craft brewery scene has spread south of the border.Advertisement“The people who have restaurants in Baja, a lot of them grew up going between San Diego and Tijuana,” Mr. Esparza said. “There’s definitely that relationship between these two places.”A Tijuanan culinary stalwart who exemplifies that relationship is Javier Plascencia, whose dining empire has included restaurants on both sides of the border. Shyema and I Ubered from Zona Centro to Zona Rio to eat at Plascencia’s Mision 19, Tijuana’s most elegant restaurant, all white tablecloths and dim lighting in a nondescript office building. Mr. Plascencia grew up in both San Diego and Tijuana and sometimes crosses two or three times a day.“I opened Mision 19 seven years ago, when the city was not in good shape, when everything was happening,” Mr. Plascencia said. “We thought if we open this restaurant, people will want to come and see that Tijuana is not going away, it’s not going to die. It’s going to get better.”The result is a modern celebration of Baja cuisine, the type of place where local residents come to mark a special occasion, perhaps over house-made pasta with octopus, beef fillet picadillo and Mexican chile peppers, or local tuna with cactus, xoconoxtle (a sour cactus fruit), black mole caramel and short-rib chicharron. “Baja California is a young cuisine, not very traditional, and very creative,” he said. “Nobody’s telling us how to cook or what to do.”Over the next day and a half, we raced to sample every place on my list. Throughout the city, tacos were mostly between 20 or 40 pesos apiece ($1 to $2); Uber rides were typically 20 to 60 pesos. Saturday’s first breakfast was at Telefónica Gastropark, a new food-truck trailer park where we tucked into chilaquiles and papas de zefe in outsize portions from La Carmelita. It’s the kind of place that you expect would be overrun by gringo hipsters, but we found locals descending in droves. Brunch was the best sandwich of my life, found, unexpectedly, at a carwash a few blocks away: Tortas Wash Mobile has been plying its tortas since 1964, and a crowd of people hungrily tearing into their sandwiches was huddled around the garish yellow stand. I went around the corner to devour mine on the stoop of a nearby building, inhaling the pile of spicy citrusy carne asada swathed in mayo, guacamole and tomato and nestled in pillowy ciabatta-like bread. A few blocks away I tried the cabeza — cow head — tacos at Tijuana’s so-called “Taco Alley.”San DiegoClub Tengo Hambre CaliforniaMexicoVIA INTERNACIONALTijuanaAv. C Niños Héroes &Calle Salvador Díaz Mirón 4ta.Tijuana R.Zona UrbanaRio TijuanaOne Bunk TijuanaZona CentroCaesar’sCevicheria La Mas NaisTaqueria FrancLa Cahua Del YeyoAsadero ElNuevo TecoloteAzarosaTelefonica Gastro ParkKokopelliTortas Wash MobileTaco AlleyFEB. 9, 2018
Other stops that weekend included Asadero El Nuevo Tecolete, a stand specializing in carne asada; Taquería Franc, a loud late-night spot where locals and tourists alike spill onto the street; La Cahua del Yeyo for stingray and shrimp tacos; a return to Telefonica Gastropark for the ricotta-draped French toast at Azarosa; and Tras/Horizonte, an upscale eatery where I tried the Chicano, a grilled-octopus taco. Shyema lost her goodwill toward me somewhere between the papas and the stingray. But if I was indeed trying to kill her, there are surely worse ways to go than death by deliciousness.Tras/Horizonte is the brainchild of chef Oso Campos, who, as he said, was “born and made in TJ” but who has traveled extensively throughout Mexico and California. “We serve Mexican border cuisine,” he said. “Us as a people, we are a mix of all different cultures and lenguas. Tijuana is a young city trying to find its identity.”The city does seem to have a bit of a split personality: Centro, filled with cheap pharmacies and barbershops and street-food stalls, is gritty, but the landscape of the outlying suburbs is studded with shiny outposts of Costco, Office Max, Sears and IHOP, resembling a not-so-far-flung suburb of San Diego. Most businesses accept dollars, and even Uber has two faces: Riders can opt for Uber English, which guarantees English-speaking drivers at the same price as Spanish-speaking ones.Advertisement“When I told people I was going to Mexico, they laughed at me,” Shyema said. “They said Tijuana wasn’t Mexico proper.”It is Mexico proper, of course, but Tijuana and San Diego seem to exist in a nebulous nation all their own, one not so easily defined by walls. Tijuana feels like it’s on the outskirts of San Diego because, well, it is; some parts of San Diego, like the Mexican-American enclaves of Chula Vista or Barrio Logan, could be an extension of Tijuana.“They call Chula Vista the nicest neighborhood in TJ,” said Gibran Huerta, a creative director in San Diego whose company has employees in both cities. I’d run into him at One Bunk, which he’d helped design. “When you grow up in San Diego, you grew up with TJ in your life,” he said. “When you live here you don’t really see the border. It’s a crazy cross-border lifestyle for those who aren’t afraid to cross.”On Sunday, Mr. Huerta invited us to crash his group’s breakfast plans. “Go where the people are,” he said, and according to him, that morning the people would be at an unassuming, unnamed cart at the intersection of Avenida C. Niños Heroes and Calle 4ta, which ladles vats of steaming hot birria, a beef stew from Mexico’s Jalisco province. We weren’t even sure if the stand would be there when we arrived, but there it was, doing brisk business at 10 a.m. on a Sunday. Mr. Huerta jostled through the crowd and ordered a round of tacos: heaps of birria encased in crunchy, flaky tortillas unlike any I’ve ever eaten before.“Tijuana is not a picturesque place,” said Mr. Huerta. “There’s a lot to eat, not to see.”Except there is one thing. While the specter of the wall looms large in politics, in Tijuana, it’s been a fact of life since the 1990s. The border wall at Playas de Tijuana is not rhetoric but very real, an imposing slatted barrier 18 feet high that extends into the sea, separating Tijuana from San Diego County’s Imperial Beach. On the Mexican side, it’s a lively scene, with people gathering to walk on the beach, eat fresh coconuts, and take selfies with a wall covered in colorful murals. “Vive Libre Sin Muros.” “Love Trumps Hate.” “Earth Was Not Meant to Have Walls.” And on each side of the wall, families who are separated by deportations and tenuous visa status gather for teary reunions through the barrier.“We’ve been living with the wall all of our lives,” Mr. Huerta said. “Trump saying ‘the wall, the wall’ — it doesn’t make a difference to us.”Shyema and I walked back the way we came, after a 40-minute wait at the pedestrian border crossing — not too bad for a Sunday afternoon. Our stomachs had survived Tijuana, and so had our friendship.Sarah Khan is a frequent contributor to the Travel section.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2018, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: Through a Turnstile to a Taco Lover’s Paradise.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.From the Fisher Building to Belle Isle (and beyond), the works of the renowned Albert Kahn endure. Here’s how to see them.
Pursuits By                     
JOHN L. DORMAN

MARCH 26, 2018
On a recent trip to Detroit, I did the one thing that I would never attempt in New York: I stood on a busy sidewalk and looked up at a skyscraper.The skyscraper was the First National Building, an attractive 26-story Neoclassical limestone structure near Campus Martius Park in downtown Detroit. To the outside world, Detroit is known less for its architecture than for its revitalization efforts, which are spreading farther into the city from the downtown core. But as someone who likes to dig a bit deeper, I put the building’s address into my phone to see what would appear. Names like Cadillac Place and the General Motors Research Laboratory appeared in my search results, and I sought out the connection.For much of the early 20th century, Michigan was the industrial capital of the United States. The development of the Ford Model T, regarded as the first affordable automobile, and the images of men building cars on moving assembly lines captured the public imagination. As the automotive industry transformed Detroit’s economy, the city’s population grew, increasing from roughly 285,000 residents in 1900 to more than 1.6 million residents by 1940.During these decades, ornate office buildings, regal academic buildings and grand manors sprouted across the city and the region, largely because of the ingenuity of Albert Kahn. Kahn, frequently referred to as “the architect of Detroit,” designed between 400 and 900 buildings in Detroit, including the First National Building. A few of the buildings have been demolished, an unfortunate reality of redevelopment, and pronounced urban decay. But scores of Kahn’s architectural beacons, including the Art Deco Fisher Building in the New Center neighborhood of Detroit and Belle Isle Aquarium, continue to captivate the public, generations after they opened.AdvertisementAlbert Kahn was born into a Jewish family in 1869 in Germany. He immigrated to the United States in 1880, settling in Detroit. Kahn worked a string of odd jobs to help support his parents and seven siblings, ultimately landing a position as a draftsman at the office of the architect George D. Mason, despite only having a seventh-grade education.“Kahn is one of the last generation of apprentice architects who just came up by working in an office,” said Michael H. Hodges, a fine arts writer at The Detroit News and the author of the coming book “Building the Modern World: Albert Kahn in Detroit. “Mason really took a shine to him and saw his intelligence, ambition and hard work.”In 1891, Kahn won a scholarship to study abroad, traveling across Europe and sketching architectural details alongside Henry Bacon, who would go on to design the Lincoln Memorial in Washington. The experience was a defining event in Kahn’s professional life, along with the founding of his own firm, Albert Kahn Associates, in 1895. Kahn designed nearly 2,000 buildings around the world during his career (he died in 1942).AdvertisementNow, after decades of relative anonymity in architectural conversations, Kahn’s outsize influence is again in the spotlight.Claire Zimmerman, an associate professor of architecture and art history at the University of Michigan, who is working on a book about Kahn, said that he was different than high-profile contemporaries like Frank Lloyd Wright.“Kahn is striking for the fact that he’s so low-key and his immense talents were hidden behind a quite conventional persona,” she said. “I think that’s true of the buildings as well. The buildings are conventional-looking and that tends to throw you off the scent in terms of their innovation and modernity.”Much of Kahn’s legacy is on display in Michigan, from the old banking corridors in downtown Detroit to the lavish architecture in suburban Grosse Pointe Shores to the collegiate landscape of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. I wanted to see how Kahn revolutionized architecture and had an enduring impact on design, and so I devised my own tour of some of Kahn’s most significant works.Mack Avenue is a major thoroughfare that runs northeast from Midtown Detroit and gradually approaches the tony suburb of Grosse Pointe. It is an area of deep contrasts. One side of Mack features neighborhoods on the East Side of Detroit, many of which have fared slightly better than large swaths of the city, but whose fortunes have yet to recover from years of economic decline. On the other side of Mack Avenue is Grosse Pointe, which is surrounded by four cities: Grosse Pointe Farms, Grosse Pointe Park, Grosse Pointe Shores and Grosse Pointe Woods.When it was first developed, the Grosse Pointe area was the epitome of upper-crust Detroit society, with Tudor Revival and classic American Colonial architecture. It is still decidedly affluent, boasting an abundance of quiet, leafy streets with English names like Kensington and Yorkshire. Closer to Lake St. Clair, posh estates dot the shoreline.At the northern end of Grosse Pointe Shores is the Edsel and Eleanor Ford House, completed in 1929. The grounds, designed by the famed Danish-American landscape architect Jens Jensen, feature a picturesque island bird sanctuary, lagoon and gardens.Edsel and Eleanor Ford raised their four children in the elaborate home, built in the English Cotswold style. Edsel Ford, the only child of the auto baron Henry Ford, and the president of the Ford Motor Company from 1919 to 1943, became so fond of the architecture of the Cotswolds when he visited England that he planned the construction of his home in this style. For the design, Ford turned to his close friend Kahn, whom his father had worked with for years, beginning with the Highland Park Ford Plant.AdvertisementThe home is fronted by sandstone and has a slate roof, with stone shingles. Prominent chimneys, a hallmark of the Cotswold style, rise around the house without overshadowing the graceful nature of the home.When I stepped inside the foyer, I was taken by the beautiful, wide oak staircase at my side. The décor in many of the rooms is traditional. The Art Deco rooms on the second floor are filled with curvy furniture and leather wall panels. The Ford House is the kind of grand property that could have fallen into the trap of being too big for its own good, but it radiates class.Many well-known paintings, including Paul Cézanne’s “Bouilloire et Fruits,” line the walls of the Ford House. (He was also on the board of trustees at the Detroit Institute of Arts and funded the renowned Detroit Industry murals, a collection of frescoes by the Mexican painter and muralist Diego Rivera from 1932 to 1933 that depicted the workers who defined Detroit’s manufacturing and labor at the time.)I wandered through a courtyard and onto a small path that overlooked Lake St. Clair. In the distance was a Great Lakes freighter.I walked around the rest of the property, which includes a pool house, power house, lodge and a playhouse with miniature furniture that was built in 1930 for Edsel Ford’s then 7-year-old daughter, Josephine Clay Ford.After seeing the Ford House, I wanted to get a sense of how Kahn designed some of his more prominent public buildings.10 MILESEdsel & Eleanor Ford House96GrossePointemichiganDetroit275Ann ArborMICHIGANnew centerAnna ScrippsWhitcomb Conservatory/Belle Isle AquariumAlbert Kahn BuildingFisher BuildingDetroit R.CadillacPlacebelle isleA. Alfred TaubmanCenter For DesignEducationcanadaDetroit94Maccabees Buildingmichiganmidtown75Albert Kahn Housee. huron st. BurtonMemorialTowerS. state st.Detroit Athletic ClubHillAuditoriumNationalTheaterdowntownKraus BuildingFirst National BuildingAnn ArborAngell HallThe QubeMARCH 26, 2018
I headed to Belle Isle, a 982-acre island park in the Detroit River. As I navigated the wide streets, a greenhouse-style building came into view — one of Kahn’s more subtle public spaces.“What stands out with Albert Kahn is his idea of how the riverfront should be used,” said Ryan Patrick Hooper, a journalist at WDET-FM in Detroit, who also gives tours of the Kahn-designed Fisher Building through Pure Detroit, a company and store that sells Detroit-branded merchandise. “He was thinking about altruistic public spaces at a time when there was an industrial-choking waterfront, which was decades ahead of his time.”AdvertisementThe compact Belle Isle Aquarium opened in 1904 and is one of the oldest aquariums in the country. The Beaux-Arts-style front entrance, featuring dolphins and the seal of Detroit carved in stone, is alluring — but it’s the interior that really reveals Kahn’s breadth of design.The sleek green opaline glass tiles that form the vaulted ceiling give the sensation that you’re in a distant underwater universe. (Fish include speckled damselfish, cichlid, frontosa and smallmouth bass.)The Anna Scripps Whitcomb Conservatory next door, with a greenhouse and botanical garden, is modeled after the long-gone Crystal Palace, the cast-iron and glass space that housed the Great Exhibition of 1851, and the Palm House at Kew Gardens, both in London.Plants that are prevalent in warmer climates, such as the white-haired opuntia of Mexico and the crassula of South Africa, are featured attractions, and the conservatory’s high dome offers a sense of possibility, as if you could climb the tall palm trees inside and see for miles.Back in downtown Detroit, I walked near the First National Building again, glancing across Woodward Avenue, one of the most prominent thoroughfares in the region and the spinal cord of the almost year-old QLine streetcar. The Qube, a modernist 14-story building that was designed and built by Albert Kahn Associates and now serves as an operations center for Quicken Loans, caught my eye.Even though Kahn didn’t personally design this building (it opened well after his death), his influences are evident. The building, which was renovated in 2011, is utilitarian, with narrow windows and a marble exterior. A few blocks away is the Detroit Athletic Club, an upscale, private Neo-Renaissance clubhouse that opened in 1915 and was designed by Kahn. The inspiration for the club’s design came from the Palazzo Borghese, a palace in Rome known for its majestic facade and stunning courtyard arcades.The lobby of the club, with its chandeliers and finely crafted wood paneling, was once a grand gateway for Detroit’s elite. (It’s a private club, so I didn’t go any farther.) But for much of the club’s existence, Jews, as well as African-Americans and women, were barred from holding memberships. The club resolved to make an exception for Kahn, according to Mr. Hodges and Ms. Zimmerman, but he refused.Close to the Qube, the Neoclassical-style Vinton Building, designed with a prominent parapet, now features apartments across its 12 floors. The long-shuttered National Theater features a modernistic design of terra cotta latticework towers. The former Detroit Free Press Building at 321 West Lafayette and the former Detroit News Building at 615 West Lafayette offer a blend of limestone and Art Deco.AdvertisementRoughly four miles north of downtown, the New Center neighborhood was a premier retail area before stores began to gravitate to the suburbs. Home to the world headquarters of General Motors from 1923 to 2000, the neighborhood was able to avoid some of the disinvestment that afflicted surrounding areas. Now, like many Detroit neighborhoods, New Center is buzzing with energy.The 30-story Fisher Building here is one of Kahn’s most beloved structures: a classic Art Deco building with an intricate mix of limestone, granite and marble. The building’s construction was financed by the Fisher brothers, who sold their namesake Fisher Body Company to General Motors. Kahn had virtually an unlimited budget, installing more than 600 bronze elevator doors, both interior and exterior, and 1,800 bronze windows, along with a gilt-tile roof.Opened in 1928, the building was envisioned as part of an expansive, more dramatic complex, with two towers and one large tower in the middle. The stock market crash brought an end to those ambitious plans.My Pure Detroit tour of the Fisher Building started in the barrel-vaulted arcade, with Mr. Hooper giving visitors an excellent sense of what the building was like when it opened. He explained how the adjoining garage would service cars when customers were running errands inside the building. Underground tunnels connected the Fisher Building to the neighboring Albert Kahn and Cadillac Place buildings.The building defies the conventional wisdom that office spaces cannot be inspiring. This was evident from the third-floor overlook of the Fisher arcade, which gave us a view of the frescoes and mosaics that line the ceilings, with images of outstretched eagles that represented American power.“After four years, I still genuinely enjoy giving tours,” Mr. Hooper said. “A lot of the people who come are first-timers or people who haven’t been in decades, and a big part of the experience is surprising people or changing their minds about architecture that’s in Detroit.”Across the street, the Albert Kahn Building, a limestone 1931 Art Deco structure, stands somewhat imposingly even though it has only 10 stories. The lower floors of the building formerly housed a Saks Fifth Avenue store that operated for 40 years. Since 1931, the building has housed the offices of Albert Kahn Associates, but the firm’s offices are moving to renovated space in the Fisher Building later this year. Apartments are expected to replace the old office space.On the tour of the Fisher Building, visitors can see the rooftop of the neighboring Cadillac Place, the former world headquarters of General Motors. With almost 1.4 million square feet of space, it goes without saying that the building is massive. Kahn built a wide, two-story base with four, separate, 15-story buildings, which erased the fortresslike quality that many office buildings possess and allowed for sunlight from different angles.AdvertisementCadillac Place is now occupied by offices for the state of Michigan, but the first floor is open to the public. Italian marble covers many of the walls; the floors are Tennessee marble. An elaborate globe chandelier is a reminder of the building’s opulent past.Across from Cadillac Place is the A. Alfred Taubman Center for Design Education, best known as the Argonaut Building. The red-brown brick building was the location of the General Motors Research Laboratory from 1936 to 1956. The Argonaut is a private facility, so I wasn’t able to get a sense of the interior, but this is one of Kahn’s more expressive buildings: it has beautiful arches with striped banding patterns. The patterns, at the top of the building, are virtually the same as those at the Albert, a downtown apartment building that Kahn designed.A few blocks south, the Maccabees Building was designed in the Art Deco and Romanesque style, with broad windows and a recessed barrel vault arch on the ground floor and arched windows with spandrel panels on some of the upper floors. The 1927 building, built for the fraternal organization Knights of the Maccabees, has a limestone exterior and is owned by Wayne State University. Although it is a university building with academic programs, visitors can still see the lobby and its ceiling with intricate patterned mosaic tiles.In the nearby Brush Park neighborhood is the Albert Kahn House, where the architect lived from 1906 to 1942, at the corner of Mack and John R. Street. Now the headquarters of the Detroit Urban League, the home embodies much of the charm of Tudor designs, with a blend of brick and stucco.The Detroit region was home to many of Kahn’s industrial laboratories, including the Highland Park Ford Plant, where the Model T was produced, along with the Packard Automotive Plant and the Ford River Rouge Plant in Dearborn. Unfortunately, most of the Highland Park Plant has been razed. At the Ford River Rouge plant, virtually all of Kahn’s buildings have been torn down or significantly modified. But the Packard plant is still very much visible, with its durable brickwork and the pedestrian bridge over East Grand Boulevard evidence of past economic might.“It was based on the Packard No. 10 building that Henry Ford hired Albert Kahn to build the Highland Park Plant in 1908,” Mr. Hodges said. “The building is interesting because it had no ornamentation whatsoever and was stripped down to the bare essentials to save his client money.”At its peak, the Packard Plant had 3.5 million square feet of usable space, and it was one the first industrial facilities to use reinforced concrete. There are plans to convert part of the building to office space, but Kahn’s industrial signature will remain. (Pure Detroit now offers walking tours of Packard.)“Kahn truly influenced the Modern movement with his industrial work,” said Alan Cobb, an architect who has been the president and chief executive of Albert Kahn Associates since 2013. “[Walter] Gropius and [Ludwig] Mies van der Rohe looked to Kahn for their philosophies. Basically, while they were creating the philosophy behind modern architecture, Albert Kahn was quietly building it.”AdvertisementThat was clear when I entered the Hill Auditorium at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor and heard beautiful crisp notes coming from the stage, acoustics that Kahn must have dreamed of when he designed this facility. The auditorium, which opened in 1913, reminded me of Radio City Music Hall in New York, with its striking main arched stage.Next to the auditorium is the imposing Burton Memorial Tower, which has a student-run carillon on weekdays. Minutes away, the stately Angell Hall, with its numerous columns, helps define the collegiate atmosphere. The Natural Science Building, a short brick building with a dignified, arched entrance, has been a center of learning for decades.“In the 1920s, Kahn worked with other members of the University of Michigan community to modernize the campus plan as part of the Committee of Five,” Ms. Zimmerman said. “The buildings have a consistency to them in terms of how they look, but they also have a functional consistency. They really turned the campus from a 19th-century campus to a much more modern 20th-century campus.”In Ann Arbor, and in Detroit, Kahn’s buildings not only seem modern — they’re timeless.The Edsel and Eleanor Ford House is located at 1100 Lake Shore Road in Grosse Pointe Shores, roughly 35 minutes from downtown Detroit. General house tours ($12) are available Tuesday through Sunday at select times.The Anna Scripps Whitcomb Conservatory on Belle Isle is open Wednesday through Sunday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Belle Isle Aquarium is open Friday through Sunday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.Pure Detroit offers free tours of the Fisher Building on Saturday and Sunday at select times. The tours are roughly 45 minutes to an hour long.John L. Dorman is a contributor and a senior news assistant for the Travel section of The New York Times.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2018, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking Up in Detroit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »The vast coastal county of Cornwall, England, had a profound effect on the future writing of the impressionable young girl who would become a literary star.
Footsteps By                     
RATHA TEP

FEB. 26, 2018
Virginia Woolf wasn’t always the radical we imagine today. Before the debates on truth and beauty with her circle of early 20th-century artists, intellectuals and writers known as the Bloomsbury Group; before the polemic feminist lectures at Cambridge; and before the ever-constant push to experiment with new forms of fiction, there was the impressionable young girl, born Adeline Virginia Stephen, who spent seaside summers in Cornwall, on England’s rugged southwestern tip.On a gray morning last October, I found myself on the Great Western Railway, rolling along the same route that Woolf would have taken about a century before, the train hugging tight past a progression of wide swathes of golden sand and languidly sloping green cliffs, with the deep blue of St. Ives Bay and the Godrevy Lighthouse in the distance.The rail line to the coastal town of St. Ives opened in 1877, causing a huge uptick in tourism there, and it is easy to understand how it would have lured well-to-do Britons like her family to this once hard-to-reach stretch of Cornwall, now a thriving arts haven with its own branch of the Tate museum.Long an admirer of this modernist literary pioneer, not only for how Woolf redefined the possibilities of the novel but, for the simple reason that no other writer has given me, sentence for sentence, such pleasure, I decided to go in search of Woolf in her early years. I headed to the vast coastal county that, by most accounts, had a profound effect on her future writing, making its way into the novels “Jacob’s Room” and “The Waves,” and forming the basis of one of her greatest works, “To the Lighthouse.”AdvertisementWoolf’s summers in Cornwall were a reprieve from her upper-middle-class life in London, where, for most of the year, she spent her days in “the rich red gloom” of a tall London townhouse. A Victorian girl bound by Victorian-era trappings, she took informal school lessons in a dining room filled with carved oak and marble, ventured on monotonous twice-daily outings to nearby Kensington Gardens, and awaited a future of ballroom dances in satin dresses and pearls.wales80 mileSbritainLondonCelticSeaenglandCornwallEnglish ChannelGodrevyLighthouse2 mileSCeltic SeaGodrevyBeachPorthminster BeachTate St. IvesSt. IvesGurnard’sHeadTalland HouseA30Carbis BayZennorLelantCarbis BayHotel & EstatePorthmeorCottagesenglandCORNWALLA394A30Map data by OpenStreetMapFEB. 26, 2018
Her father, the renowned literary critic and historian, Sir Leslie Stephen, rented a house overlooking St. Ives Bay in Cornwall, which he described in an 1884 letter as “a pocket-paradise with a sheltered cove of sand in easy reach (for ‘Ginia even) just below.” That house, that bay, that lighthouse: all would be immortalized in her famous novel. While Woolf was always careful to abstract somewhat from her personal past, and set “To the Lighthouse” on the Scottish Isle of Skye, it’s steeped with almost direct imagery from her time in Cornwall.From 1882, when she was only a few months old, to 1894, when she was 12, the year before her mother died, Woolf spent a few months each year in Talland House, situated on the outskirts of St. Ives, then a small fishing town on the Cornish coast.AdvertisementIt was the sheer physical freedom of Cornwall, compared to the constrictions of Woolf’s London life, suggest the scholars Marion Dell and Marion Whybrow in “Virginia Woolf & Vanessa Bell: Remembering St. Ives,” that helped her buck against the constructs of her day and conceive of independent achievement.Woolf roamed free in the salty air of the sloping garden, with the expanse of the bay and its distant lighthouse before her. She swam and poked among rock pools down at the beach below, and hunted great-winged moths on rambling nighttime expeditions.“In retrospect nothing that we had as children made as much difference, was quite so important to us, as our summer in Cornwall. The country was intensified, after the months in London,” and formed “the best beginning to life conceivable,” she wrote in 1940 at age 58, in her autobiographical essay, “A Sketch of the Past.”Celebrating St. Ives’s outsized role in Woolf’s life, and a marker in its own right for how far the town has grown, is the recently refurbished and extended Tate St. Ives, one of only two branches of the art museum outside London, which runs “Virginia Woolf: An Exhibition Inspired by Her Writings” until April 29 in its sprawling new hall.But while St. Ives has dramatically evolved from Woolf’s day, some parts of Cornwall, a sprawling county with a population of over half a million, seem frozen in time. Just down the coast, I found a rural, stark, ethereally beautiful landscape that remains today, despite the occasional car and hurtling tractor, close to how Woolf would have remembered it as a child.Once a 10-hour trek from London, the train voyage to St. Ives today can be made in under six. Winding my way up from the town’s sole rail station, as Woolf and her family would have done — with cooks, servants and mounds of luggage — the mid-19th-century stone villa looms large, seemingly incongruous among the motley assortment of architecture that has sprung around it, like the glossy modern apartment complex, with glass balconies, next door.“Her family would move their entire way of life, their whole household, for two or three months out of the year to this house with a magical garden in this very remote setting, and it would become a kind of Eden for her, the place she would idealize and always remember,” said Alexandra Harris, author of “Virginia Woolf” and a professorial fellow at the University of Birmingham in England.“In ‘To the Lighthouse,’ Woolf, as a successful middle-aged writer, comes face to face with her mother in the garden which is very much the garden at Talland House,” Ms. Harris said. “The novel embodies the feeling of having left something unfinished through those childhood summers.”“To the Lighthouse” encapsulates Woolf’s love and longing for her mother — as well as her conflicted view of her mother’s vision of Victorian womanhood. All those bottled-up feelings, seemingly suspended in time after the family gave up Talland House following Julia Stephen’s death, found their release in the novel.AdvertisementWoolf herself wrote as much in “A Sketch of the Past:” “ … when it was written, I ceased to be obsessed by my mother. I no longer hear her voice; I do not see her.”While Talland House was carved into five flats in the 1950s and isn’t open to the public, visitors can, from Talland Road above, catch a glimpse of the sloping garden, the house’s cream-colored facade and views across St. Ives Bay to the iconic Godrevy Lighthouse. Though for the best tableau, it’s best to mimic the writer and her three siblings on their first trip back to the house as adults.“We passed through the gate, groped stealthily but with sure feet up the carriage drive, mounted the little flight of rough steps,” wrote Woolf in a 1905 diary entry, adding that they peered through a chink in the escallonia hedge and “hung there like ghosts.”The original wooden gate no longer exists, though the “rough steps” and hedging, now about chest-height, are still there, beyond which is a full-on view of the house and its stately French windows and balconies. Visitors can also walk up the paved driveway, the former “carriage drive,” around the side of the garden, said Peter Eddy, the house’s longtime owner (with his brother, John Eddy), who met me there.I found Mr. Eddy with a few of the house’s current residents, Woolf enthusiasts who are also deeply embedded in the town’s fabric (one is the chairman of the St. Ives Chamber of Trade and Commerce, another a volunteer at the St. Ives Archive). Ad hoc gatekeepers of the Talland House myth, they were poring over a map of the property from 1906 and historical photos, which showed a smaller and less imposing house. (Roof and side extensions were added later.)I walked around, soaking up the spirit of the place.The garden is more manicured now, lacking the bursts of color from fiery red-hot pokers, and various pockets of charm, which were given names like the “love corner,” “coffee garden” and “lookout place,” that had defined the original garden. Yet a few relics remain, including feathery spears of pampas grass near where Woolf would have played evening games of cricket, and mixed hedging around the garden’s bottom border that included Woolf’s beloved escallonia, “whose leaves, pressed, gave out a very sweet smell.”Looking across St. Ives Bay from the garden, I recalled one of the best-known lines from “To the Lighthouse:” “For the great plateful of blue water was before her; the hoary Lighthouse, distant, austere, in the midst …”AdvertisementWoolf fans have been concerned about the obstruction of this view ever since Cornwall Council granted planning permission in December 2015 for an apartment complex to be built below Talland House. But on my visit, it was not clear to me this would happen. I couldn’t find any signs of construction, and permission is set to expire if work doesn’t start by December 2018.Just minutes’ walk away is Primrose Valley, an area once blanketed with apple orchards and a little dirt path that Woolf and her youthful siblings would have taken down to Porthminster Beach below. Now, sprawling houses with gray-shingled mansard roofs edge up to one another, with hedging and moss-covered stone lining a paved route. The beach, though, with its wide crescent of smooth, powdery sand and turquoise bay, still retains its essential, sweeping majesty.From the beach, it was a few blocks to the center of St. Ives. I walked past a girl with a butterfly net, and thought of Woolf, and got lost among the labyrinth of cobbled streets. But I couldn’t find much left of the “windy, noisy, fishy, vociferous, narrow-streeted town” as Woolf recalled it. Long gone are the wooden boats that would have been anchored near the shore, awaiting the pilchards — small, sardine-like fish that would come into the bay by the millions. All that has largely been scrubbed clean, replaced with a more tourist-friendly image: St. Ives, the arts haven by the sea.Woolf was witness to the beginning of this change. In “To the Lighthouse,” she noted that the artists had already started to come to the fictional fishing town inspired by St. Ives, perhaps a reference to the American painter Whistler, who stayed in St. Ives in 1883 and 1884. In the early- to mid-20th century, a new wave of artists made their way there, most notably Barbara Hepworth, Ben Nicholson and Naum Gabo, whose abstract sculptures and paintings were inspired by the area’s landscape.For the first time, these modernist works have a permanent dedicated space in the Tate St. Ives, which has a vast new extension dug into a hillside off Porthmeor Beach, a favored spot with surfers that doubled the museum’s gallery area in October.While traces of Woolf’s work were noticeably absent at the museum in autumn, “Virginia Woolf: An Exhibition Inspired by Her Writings,” showcases the works of more than 80 artists, including her sister, the painter and Bloomsbury Group member Vanessa Bell, who have either been directly influenced by Woolf or explore recurring themes important to Woolf, such as feminist perspectives on domesticity.Bell, one of Woolf’s greatest confidantes, received a rather alarming letter, written on Christmas Day, 1909. “I went for a walk in Regents Park yesterday morning, and it suddenly struck me how absurd it was to stay in London, with Cornwall going on all the time,” Woolf wrote. Woolf impulsively purchased a train ticket and arrived at the Lelant station, near St. Ives, at 10:30 p.m., without “spectacles, cheque book, looking glass, or coat.” Pacing that same platform recently, I was struck by how Woolf might have chosen her lodging: The Lelant Hotel, now The Badger Inn, was the closest accommodation, looming large up a short, steep walk to the top of Station Hill.There, I met Paul O’Brien, the pub’s historian, who has put together snippets of Woolf’s letters about Lelant, a village of 1,056 residents, in a frame that hangs on a wall near the bar. It was a Tuesday afternoon, and convivial locals were drinking pints of St. Austell’s Tribute, a popular regional ale, their dogs underfoot.AdvertisementFrom The Badger Inn, it’s about seven miles to Godrevy, a beach and headland that is now part of the National Trust. There, sunlight streamed down through the clouds and seemed to reflect the golden sands, lighting up the whole place in the area’s infamously soft glow. I walked past wild flowing grasses before reaching the closest point on shore to Godrevy Island and its lighthouse. And then the literary landmark stood before me: stark, solid, sacrosanct.Woolf’s next trip to Cornwall was more scripted. Back in London and nearing, at age 28, the end of her first novel, “The Voyage Out,” Woolf spiraled into a mental breakdown so severe it landed her in Burley Park, a home for mentally ill women outside the city. (While Hermione Lee, arguably the foremost Woolf expert, called her “a sane woman who had an illness” in her biography “Virginia Woolf,” she also associated Woolf’s symptoms with what would now be recognized as manic-depressive illness or bipolar disorder.)Part of her recuperation that summer was a walking tour around Zennor, the name of both a tiny village and parish (population 207), just southwest of St. Ives, with a nurse, Jean Thomas.Tramping through a light mist, I found my way to the handsome stone farmhouse where Woolf and Ms. Thomas stayed, now the private residence of Lee and William Berryman, whose family has lived and worked on the surrounding farmland for more than 400 years. Inside their cozy sitting room, Ms. Berryman and I pored over small sepia-colored photographs, some nearly a century old, of former lodgers. (My heart leapt when I found one of two women sharing a motorcycle and sidecar, though, while possessing the same independent spirit, it ended up not being Woolf and her nurse.)Then we ventured outside, touring two nearby structures that have been turned into holiday accommodations, called Porthmeor Cottages. Chickens pecked outside a coop, and in the distance, cattle grazed open pastureland that seemed to drop off into the sea below.Three years later, in 1913, a similar pattern of illness emerged. Woolf sank into periods of severe depression, and was again admitted to Burley Park. In September, Woolf attempted suicide. After a period of rest, she slowly improved, and with her husband in 1914, headed again to Cornwall.They spent a portion of their stay at Carbis Bay, a seaside resort village about a mile and a half up the coast from St. Ives, that is today dotted with tanned surfers in wet suits on the beach and, looming above, whitewashed, glass-fronted villas.The Carbis Bay Hotel & Estate, where the Woolfs stayed, has its own beach that was awarded Blue Flag eco-certification, as well as a spa. Its palm-tree-fringed views of the sweeping turquoise bay could have been from anywhere, more Caribbean than Woolf’s Cornwall. Except there, in the distance, was the Godrevy Lighthouse, and in a hallway off a glass conservatory hangs a photo of the couple from around that time, with Woolf’s guest signature in purple, below.AdvertisementDuring the 1920s and 1930s, a creatively fruitful time for Woolf, when she worked on the three novels most closely associated with Cornwall, the couple mainly stayed in the parish of Zennor whenever they visited the area.As I made my way around its medieval farming tracts, sweeping moors and winding coastal paths, I understood why. It was an antidote not just to the frenzy of London, but also to the rapid growth of St. Ives and Carbis Bay.Off the main road and onto a dirt track sits the tiny hamlet of Poniou, which then, as now, consists of only three cottages beside three granite footbridges. I met Sue Allen, a longtime resident, who told me the Woolfs had stayed next door in 1921, with their bedroom facing the sea.Woolf marveled at seeing Gurnard’s Head, a glorious headland named for the local fish, from that bedroom window.Then as now, it remains the most distinctive landmark in the area. But it is still, as Woolf described it, “so lonely,” reachable either along a winding “rabbit path round the cliff,” or by following a faintly visible path through fields dotted with grazing cattle and rudimentary stone steps. Taking in the faintly sweet smell of cow dung and the roar of the waters crashing against the rocks below, I didn’t pass a single soul on two trips in October.About three miles away is the private residence Eagle’s Nest, distinct and visible from the main road. The Woolfs stayed there with friends on several memorable visits, including on Christmas Day, 1926, which Woolf spent revising drafts of “To the Lighthouse.” She despaired that “All my facts about Lighthouses are wrong,” in a letter to an assistant at the publishing house, Hogarth Press, which she and her husband set up and ran.The couple stayed there again in May 1936, Woolf’s last trip, at age 54, to Cornwall, an attempt to keep yet another breakdown at bay. They wandered round St. Ives and crept into the garden of Talland House, and in the dusk, her husband wrote, “Virginia peered through the ground-floor windows to see the ghosts of her childhood.”I peered through those same windows, and I imagined the writer trying to recapture a vanished past when life had felt so new, seeing only inescapable childhood ghosts basking in summer days of exquisite happiness.Ratha Tep, based in Dublin, is a frequent contributor to the Travel section.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2018, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: Virginia Woolf’s Lost Eden.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsThe Eternal City is home to historic art and architecture, designer clothes and accessories, and luxury lodgings — here’s how to have it all, on a budget.By Shivani VoraA visit to the Eternal City with all the bells and whistles doesn’t have to put a big dent in your wallet, says Simone Amorico, a native Roman and a co-owner of Access Italy, a company that sells luxury trips to Italy. “If you know where to stay, dine and shop and when to visit, you can come to Rome and have an affordable luxury trip,” he said. Here are some of his best tips to do just that. January through March and November and December (the week before Christmas is the exception) are the best times to visit Rome, especially if you’re looking for a break on lodging. High-end travelers can get between 30 and 50 percent off usual rates at five-star hotels. This also when hotels offer special promotions, like a third night free or a spa treatment and daily breakfast included with your stay. Mr. Amorico advised travelers in the United States to consider a trip during Thanksgiving week. “While Americans may have time off, Italians don’t celebrate the holiday, and it’s considered low season which means hotel prices are low,” he said. For those who can’t travel to Rome during off-peak season, Mr. Amorico said that it’s best to stay in hotels in less touristy but still located in well-situated neighborhoods such as Monti, Testaccio and Parioli. The properties in these areas have nightly rates at least 20 percent lower than ones in touristy spots. Or, consider renting a luxury apartment, which can be between 30 and 50 percent less expensive than a luxury hotel. Sites like Access Italy and OneFineStay offer a portfolio of Rome apartment rentals.Stay away from the overpriced, average restaurants situated in Piazza Navona, Pantheon and Campo dei Fiori, Rome’s main squares. You’ll enjoy less expensive and tastier meals and also get more of a local flavor of the city by dining at spots in Monti, especially on Via Urbani, where there are some excellent trattorias. Other areas worth visiting for great local restaurants include Via del Corallo, Piazza del Fico, Via Giulia and Via del Governo Vecchio.When it comes to lunch, Mr. Amorico suggested enjoying a thin-crust pizza (around $10) at a pizzeria or going to a trattoria for a bowl of pasta (around $12) such as his favorite, cacio e pepe. This strategy allows you to save your money for a nice dinner or two with wine in some of Rome’s terrific seafood and fine dining spots. His top recommendations are Assunta Madre for seafood and Ristorante Tullio for classic Italian dishes like cannelloni and Roman-style artichokes. A private guide is a pricey indulgence and worthwhile mainly if you’re interested in learning more about a particular topic, like historic architecture or art. But if you plan to hire one, do it during a weekday. During the week, guides in Rome cost usually around 20 percent less compared with weekends (and during low season, they can be up to 40 percent less). If you’re in the city between May and October and want to hire a guide to see the Vatican Museum, do it on a Friday night, when the museum is open late. “A guide will charge a lower price on these Friday nights than during the day because it’s a lot cooler and less crowded,” Mr. Amorico said. Rome’s many designer stores, including big-name luxury brands you may be familiar with, usually have sales twice a year, Mr. Amorico said. Winter collections get discounted in early January while summer collections get reduced in early July. The sales last between four and six weeks. But Mr. Amorico also suggested checking out the fashionable and well-priced clothes, shoes and handbags from lesser-known designers for great looks on a budget. They’re usually sold in independently-owned boutiques in Monti, Trastevere, Parioli and Fleming. Finally, regardless of your budget, the best way to see Rome is by walking. Don’t bother spending your money on a car and driver or taxis, Mr. Amorico said. “Rome is like an open-air museum, and the only way to experience it is on foot,” he said. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe GetawayA look at tours and programs that address the impact travelers have on the communities they visit.By Elaine GlusacThe term “sustainable travel” has a green glow to it, connoting eco-friendly practices and environmental responsibility. But the human side of sustainability, as defined by the World Tourism Organization, addresses community impact, both social and economic, and is newly gaining traction among travel companies.Social impact travel aims to ensure money spent on a tour or a trip stays in the community. A vital source of income to developing nations, travel is the first or second source of export earnings in 20 of the 48 least developed countries, according to the W.T.O., yet a 2013 report from the organization noted that just $5 of every $100 spent in a developing country stayed in that destination.“There’s a lot of people who think ‘eco-tourism’ when they hear ‘sustainable tourism,’ but that’s a piece of the puzzle,” said Kelley Louise, the executive director of the Impact Travel Alliance, an industry nonprofit organization that focuses on sustainable travel. “Sustainability has a positive impact not only on the environment, but the culture and the economy of the destination you’re visiting.”Among new developments, the Jordan Tourism Board created the Meaningful Travel Map of Jordan in March, highlighting 12 social enterprises in the country, including a Bedouin camp stay, a women’s weaving group and village tours that support local entrepreneurs. Last fall, the tour company Collette launched Impact Travel Tours, which spend half of the time sightseeing and the other half visiting community-based improvement projects. Earlier this year, the safari company andBeyond launched philanthropic-focused itineraries in Tanzania, Kenya and South Africa. Organizations promoting social impact travel aim to emphasize not just big do-good trips, but to educate travelers about their smallest decisions, such as eating at a locally owned restaurant.“Every time you have a meal, get accommodations or do activities, you can have a positive impact just by traveling,” said Paula Vlamings, the chief executive of Tourism Cares, a nonprofit organization representing the tourism industry that, among other programs, trains Good Travels advisers, travel agents who specialize in socially responsible travel experiences. “Leaving money in the community is such an important way to have a huge impact. The ripple effect, particularly for women, girls and the environment, demonstrates the power of travel.”Some sustainable trips are priced like luxury vacations, a fact that prompted the 2015 launch of Giving Way, a platform linking volunteers directly with nongovernmental agencies, cutting out intermediaries that link the two.“Volunteering should be accessible to everyone, not just a rich man’s privilege,” said Orit Strauss, the founder and chief executive of Giving Way, which now works with nearly 1,900 organizations in more than 115 countries. About half are free and the other half charge nominal fees to cover food and lodging. Activities range from working on an organic farm in Costa Rica to mentoring youth in rural South Africa.Assessing the claims of a social impact travel company requires asking where the money goes. “That information isn’t readily available now,” said Salli Felton, of the nonprofit Travel Foundation, which tests programs that benefit local communities. “What’s critical is tracing the impact. If customers ask, they’ll start doing it. If they can’t answer that question, that should be a red flag.” Doing good doesn’t require traveling through multiple time zones or long stays. New initiatives like Kind Traveler, which launched in 2016, aim to make each trip, however short, an opportunity to improve local lives. The hotel booking website offers discounted rooms to users who make a $10 donation to a charity affiliated with the hotel. Hotels are vetted for their sustainable practices, including environmental and community impacts. The company now offers hotels in 30 destinations in the United States, Mexico, Canada, Costa Rica and the Caribbean and plans to add hotels in Aspen, Colo., Washington, D.C., and Richmond, Va., this spring.Day trips that take place in communities often give back to them. Ninth Ward Rebirth Bike Tours in New Orleans, for example, donates $5 of its $65 fee to local charities. Oyster hauling or crabbing with Virginia Watermen Heritage Tours provides a secondary source of income to fishermen in a string of coastal communities. The tour booking site Visit.org allows users to search for experiences by interests, including women’s empowerment and human rights.When it launched its Experiences tours in 2016, Airbnb added social impact programs; 100 percent of the fees go to nonprofits and entrepreneurs highlighted in each tour. They may include an outing in Venice with the founder of a community garden, a LGBTQ history tour of New York with an activist or an experience making notebooks in Prague with the founder of a nonprofit that works with artisans challenged by mental and physical disabilities.For those who have the time, tour operators offer myriad ways to contribute to social causes.It’s not uncommon for safari companies in Africa to add community tours to their itineraries, often to show off how they’re spreading the wealth locally via education and health care. This year, andBeyond introduced Travel With Purpose trips, which spend more time visiting conservation and community projects based on the interests of millennial travelers interested in philanthropy.“Only when you actually get your hands proverbially dirty by rolling up your sleeves and engaging in these projects and initiatives can you really learn and understand the issues and how we can make an impact, however small,” wrote Joss Kent, chief executive of andBeyond, in an email.Many high-end tour operators such as Audley Travel and Scott Dunn partner with Me to We, the travel arm of the We Charity devoted to sustainable development, to offer social impact trips. African Travel, Inc. offers ME-to-WE Adventure to Kenya (four days from $2,195) in a Maasai Mara community, including learning traditional beading and helping to build a school. Me to We executives say half of its net profits go to the charity.At Nimmo Bay Wilderness Resort in British Columbia, guests can pay to attend its 10-day May guide school alongside resort guides. For each paying traveler, the resort will sponsor training for an indigenous youth from the area. The program, launched this year, is already sold out, but the lodge plans to offer it again in 2019 (5,000 Canadian dollars, or about $3,910). Village Ways, named best tour operator in the poverty reduction category in 2017 by Responsible Travel, a travel agency that specializes in sustainable travel, guides trips in Bhutan, India and Nepal that focus on village life. New this year, the company will offer trips with the Anwals, migratory shepherds in the Indian Himalayas, walking with them for two days as they drive their sheep to the high meadows. The rest of the time, guests walk from village to village, staying in local guesthouses (10 days from £1,052, or about $1,480).AdvertisementAncient fortresses, crisp mountain streams, curious people and healing cities: Travelers are discovering the Kurdish region of Iraq, a place of great beauty, haunted by war.
Explorer By                     
TIM NEVILLE

JAN. 29, 2018
The Mar Mattai monastery clings to the side of a steep mountain, and on a clear day a visitor can stand against its fortresslike walls and discern far below the winsome farmlands of Upper Mesopotamia. Here, in the cradle of civilization, the building is one of the oldest Christian monasteries in the world. From this peaceful perch, it is difficult to imagine the horror.One hazy morning last spring, Harry Schute, a retired Army colonel in his 50s with a Cheshire grin, walked through the monastery’s heavy doors and along its shaded arcades. A boy played with a soccer ball in the courtyard, the boom of each kick cracking off the stone walls. At its peak in the 9th century, the monastery housed as many as 7,000 monks. Today it has five, a bishop, this boy and his family — all survivors of the Islamic State.We were on the western fringes of Kurdistan, a Netherlands-size, semiautonomous region in the north of Iraq that is home to 5.2 million of the world’s estimated 30 million Kurds, a stateless people who populate the border regions between Iraq, Turkey, Iran and Syria. The fact that the monastery still stood; that this Christian boy and his family were still alive; that a small group of North Americans now felt safe enough to travel here — all of it seemed like a miracle.Mosul, Iraq’s second largest city, one of the most dangerous cities in the world, sat 20 miles southwest. In June 2014, ISIS overran it and the group’s leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, stood inside its Great Mosque of al-Nuri and named himself caliph of the terrifying regime. By August 2014, ISIS’ ominous black flags snapped just three miles from where I now stood. Under the cover of night, the monastery’s manager, a priest named Yousif Ibrahim, whose brother had already been murdered by the militants, spirited away scores of ancient documents, the last of the monastery’s once magnificent library, and even a discolored hand bone fragment believed to have belonged to St. Matthew the Hermit, who founded the monastery in 363 A.D. He was certain the monastery would be lost. But then the airstrikes began and the Kurdish Peshmerga and Iraqi Army turned the tide on the ground. The caliphate began to crumble.AdvertisementIt was now May 2017 and most of the artifacts had been returned to the monastery. This was one of the first times that Mr. Schute had brought travelers here since ISIS had come so close. Today Mr. Schute believes that Kurdistan could be one of the world’s great travel destinations if people would only stop confusing it with the Iraq they see in the news.To be sure, Kurdistan is nothing like the Iraq of Mosul but a Middle Eastern Montana with ruins: a cooler, welcoming tableau of crisp mountain streams and scrappy peaks. A traveler can ski at a new resort serviced by gondolas or wander through the sun-roasted walls of the deepest canyon in the Middle East. You can drink city water from the taps and stroll around Erbil, the regional capital, concerned with only how to decline, politely, invitations to drink tea.“Hello, my friend, have some bread.”“Come, sit.”“Please, mister, enjoy my country.”For now, the war with ISIS was still winding down. Soon we would watch a 500-pound coalition bomb erupt over the militants’ last stronghold in Mosul and send a huge mushroom cloud curling over the city. The concussion, heavy and round, would ring for miles. Here at the monastery, though, on this pleasant spring day, birdsong ricocheted off the cliffs and the only thing to explode were the poppies.AdvertisementAs a West Point history major with a soft spot for heavy metal, Mr. Schute had been a state trooper in New Jersey before being called to Iraq in April 2003 to command a United States Army Reserve civil affairs battalion. “Those are the guys who help get people and things out of the way so the Army can come in and break stuff,” he said. Soon he became something of a celebrity as the senior American officer in Kurdistan; to this day, the Kurds — who view Americans as their liberators for ousting Saddam Hussein — recognize him on the street and ask for photographs with him. As his tour drew to a close, Mr. Schute began to feel anxious.“It was like there was a hole in me,” he said. “I felt I was in the middle of contributing worthwhile things and I wanted to continue to contribute. I wanted to stay.”The Kurdistan Regional Government eventually offered him a job in Erbil, about 225 miles north of Baghdad. For a history buff, Kurdistan was a dream. He could hear swords ringing on grassy fields where ancient armies collided. He ran his hands along the ramparts of forgotten fortresses and felt the dampness in the crypt-like passages of mystical shrines. He learned Kurdish and married a Kurd.In 2003 at a Kurdish investment seminar in Erbil, Mr. Schute met Douglas Layton, an American who came to Kurdistan in 1992. Mr. Layton, whose round spectacles and woolen cap lend him the air of a paperback spy, had survived a $1 million bounty on his head, courtesy of Saddam Hussein. After the dictator’s capture and execution, Mr. Layton journeyed to Hussein’s palace in Baghdad, where he found his outlandish throne and sat in it. “You’re gone,” Mr. Layton whispered to Saddam’s ghost, “and I’m still here.”Mr. Schute and Mr. Layton, who had been working for the Meridian Health Foundation, both knew of Kurdistan’s cultural riches and friendly people, so they joined forces to create what eventually became Kurdistan Iraq Tours, the only inbound tourism operator in Kurdistan. The idea seemed absurd.“Everyone said no one will come to Iraq, and I said but they’ll come to ‘the other Iraq!’” Mr. Layton recalled. “I believed, and I still believe, that tourism is the future.”For their main local guide, they hired and trained Balin Zrar, a charismatic, chain-smoking Kurd. Mr. Zrar had spent seven years running an Italian restaurant in London after he smuggled himself to Europe — an epic tale that involved time in an Iranian prison camp and riding for days curled atop a spare tire under a tractor-trailer. After the London bombings, Mr. Zrar returned to Kurdistan to dabble in real estate. For the guide-position interview, Mr. Layton asked him if he liked history. “I hate history,” replied Mr. Zrar, now in his early 40s, and the candor landed him the job. No one believed he’d be busy.In 2008, though, things took off. The company landed a contract with California-based Distant Horizons to run its Kurdistan cultural trips and soon others followed. Momentum built. By 2011 The New York Times put Iraqi Kurdistan on its annual list of places to go. National Geographic Traveler did the same. “Top Gear,” the British television show, filmed a special there. In 2012 tourism arrivals surged 30 percent, year-over-year, to about 2.2 million visitors. Copycat inbound companies sprang to life. Starwood, Kempinski and Marriott lined up to manage new luxury hotels. By spring 2014, Kurdistan Iraq Tours had 15-person groups booking 11-day itineraries and was actually making some money.Then, ISIS showed up.The militants steamrolled down the Tigris and pushed into Kurdistan. They got so close to Erbil’s city gates that even Mr. Schute was worried. Tourism companies shut down. Seventy hotels closed. Many flights ceased. “We were the last guys standing,” Mr. Layton said.AdvertisementBut all through those awful years the men worked behind the scenes, speaking to lawmakers and publishing a gorgeous, comprehensive guidebook to the region. As soon as ISIS was gone they knew travelers would come wandering back.THE RED-EYE FROM AMMAN touched down just before dawn in Erbil where Mr. Zrar waited. He had a slim build and black hair flecked with gray. He fidgeted, as most Kurdish men do, with a string of beads called a tasbih. Outside the air was hazy and cool.Our contingent of five North Americans had pretty much spent a lifetime traveling. Even so, only one of us, the head of an adventure travel trade association, had visited Kurdistan before. This time he’d brought along his son, who’d turn 17 on the trip. A Canadian expat living in Hong Kong and a photographer from Los Angeles who had been to North Korea 10 times rounded out our group.We piled into a mini bus and rolled into the city. Rows of half-finished skyscrapers rose from the earth like the picked-over rib cage of a great steely beast. Barbershops, bookstores, mosques and carts laden with wild cucumbers and cigarettes scrolled by the window. Unlike Iraqi Arabs, few Kurdish women wore head scarves. If you ignored the road signs pointing to Baghdad, you could mistake this for Turkey.TURKEYAmediDuhokLalishiraqikurdistanIRANMosulErbilDukanLakeTigrisSulaymaniyaArea ofdetailHalabjaIRAQBaghdad50 milesJAN. 29, 2018
The plan was to spend a week traveling in a clockwise loop that started and ended in Erbil, taking in cities like Duhok and Sulaymaniyah along the way. We’d hike in the Zagros Mountains, paddle kayaks on Lake Dukan, and eat kebabs and flatbread. Often we’d pause over sugary tea outside noisy bazaars and linger in museums highlighting Kurdish traditions and history. Mr. Layton, who now lives in Connecticut, could not join us, but Mr. Schute, still in Erbil, would spend time with us.Immediately it became clear that this would be unlike any other trip. Mr. Schute also serves as a senior security adviser to the Kurdish interior ministry and works closely with the Peshmerga, which means “those who face death.” More than 100,000 of these Kurdish soldiers — our allies against Saddam Hussein and ISIS — manned a nearly impenetrable front riddled with tank ditches and checkpoints that has kept Kurdistan an enclave of comparative security while much of the rest of Iraq remains too dangerous for tourists. The Peshmerga, coalition forces and the Iraqis had cornered the last of ISIS’s fighters in Mosul’s old city along the Tigris. The effort to root them out for good was being coordinated through the Zerevani Peshmerga headquarters outside Erbil. Mr. Schute arranged to take us there.C-17s roared overhead as we arrived. In the distance you could see a dome that the South Koreans had built for a gym and several squat metal buildings. Guards led us into a room with a long table set with bananas and apricots and cold cans of Pepsi. United States Army Lt. Col. Darin E. Huss, the center’s director, and Iraqi and Kurdish generals, came in to answer our questions about the fight. “In 10 days it will be finished, inshallah,” Staff Major Gen. Saad Khalid Yasin told me. (It would be more like six weeks.)AdvertisementMost eye-opening of all, though, was the base’s Mad Max junkyard of captured ISIS vehicles. The militants had welded thick armored plates around old Soviet personnel carriers and attached grids of rebar along their sides to disperse incoming rocket blasts. Some rigs had heavy metal prows to better ram a checkpoint. Others had been reduced to mangled heaps of metal. I climbed inside one that had been scorched beyond all recognition. On the floor lay a chalky white bone. Lamb. Someone’s lunch had ended poorly.OVER THE NEXT FEW DAYS we took in more mainstream sites. We strolled around Erbil’s citadel, a fortress on a mound, that dates to 6000 B.C., and mingled with Arab Iraqis from the south who seemed overjoyed to friend an American on Facebook. I stuck my nose in sacks of za’atar and sumac in the city’s frenetic bazaar and watched two teen lovebirds — she in a hijab, he in jeans — kiss behind a tree in a park where no one could see but God.The next morning our driver headed north toward the Mar Mattai monastery. We slipped past wheat fields, gas stations with knockoff names like “Shall” and “Nobil,” and a refinery — a reminder of Kurdistan’s agricultural economy and the fact that Iraq controls some of the richest oil fields in the world, a quarter of which lie in Kurdistan. Kids played on the banks of the Greater Zab River where earthen bunkers once shielded Iraqi tanks during the 2003 invasion. This was the Green Line, the point behind which Saddam withdrew his forces after the creation of a no-fly zone over Kurdistan following his defeat in the 1991 Gulf War.The air turned hair-dryer hot as we wrapped up our time at the monastery. From there we drove to a field just outside a village called Amian. A lone cow stood in the grass. A kid in a yellow shirt rode by, waving, on a bike. In the distance rose a gumdrop-shape dollop of earth. It was a tell, or a man-made hill formed when ancient villages are built and rebuilt atop one another over thousands of years until they’re abandoned and the grass reclaims them.Kurdistan is littered with these. Very few of them have been excavated, Hashim Hama Abdullah, the director of the Slemani Museum in Sulaymaniyah, would tell me later after I’d spent a morning studying the museum’s ancient stelae, tablets and other artifacts. “No excavating happened at all under Saddam,” he said. “Now teams are coming in.”Kurdistan has no real budget for tourism projects, which means few attractions have basic things like interpretive signs. This field, which also has never been excavated, would be just a field without Mr. Schute to explain it. In 331 B.C. the Persian king Darius III picked this now peaceful place to face Alexander the Great of Macedonia once and for all. The ensuing fight, the Battle of Gaugamela, saw Darius’s far greater force suffer such horrific losses that soon the Macedon kingdom would stretch from Greece to Pakistan. The battle counts as one of the most important military victories of all time, Mr. Schute said.“Can you feel it?” he asked, as he imagined the war elephants, the scythed chariots and the tens of thousands of soldiers lining up to hack each other to bits. “I get here and I can feel it.”We pressed on toward Duhok, a city tucked between the Shandukha and Spi mountains, just as rain began to fall. We stopped to take a short hike to see carvings of Assyrian kings left in a hillside and grabbed a lunch of nesik, a lentil soup, and sawer, a bulgur dish served with pickled squash. Murals on walls said “respect the Peshmerga.”AdvertisementOf all the people that ISIS fought, the militants were particularly vicious toward the Yazidi, one of Iraq’s most mysterious religious minorities, who were massacred by the thousands. The Yazidi allow no outsiders to convert to Yazidism and the contents of their holy text, the Meshef Resh or Black Book, are only for other Yazidi. In the most general of terms, they believe in one god and that the angel cast from heaven in Christian faiths is now the reconciled leader of all angels, and takes the form of a peacock. Some Yazidi don’t wear blue.The faith holds that every Yazidi should take a pilgrimage to the center of their world, or Lalish, a lovely mountain village about 30 miles southeast of Duhok. The Yazidi believe that Noah’s Ark came to rest here after a snake used its body to plug a hole in the boat, thus saving all of creation.Yazidi kids gathered around us as we walked toward temples tucked against scruffy hillsides. The village had stone buildings and narrow streets, and families sat together on carpets inside courtyards and on patios. Everyone, like us, was barefoot. Shoes aren’t allowed in Lalish.“Where you from?” asked a boy in sunglasses.Another, a teen with immaculate hair, wanted to take a selfie with us. Soon everyone wanted a selfie with us. They followed us toward a shrine with a conical roof. Sheik Adi, a man as holy to the Yazidi as Jesus is to Christians, was buried inside. “Step through the door!” a boy told me, meaning I shouldn’t step on the threshold. Angels rest in doorways.Inside the air was cool and moist. A woman pressed her forehead against a threshold, kissed it and mumbled. Others walked around Adi’s tomb, chanting; holy water burbled up from deep within the mountain. In one room I found two holes in the floor. One went to heaven, the other to hell, but no one would tell me which was which.That seemed to be a fitting image for the rest of the trip, which oscillated between breathtaking beauty and heartbreaking anguish. We visited the spectacular town of Amadiya, perched on a butte, perhaps home to the three wise men, and toured refugee centers where children had posted notes for dead parents. We danced in shin-deep water at the Ali Begg waterfall with giggling Arab Iraqi men, then visited Halabja where Saddam murdered thousands of Kurds in chemical gas attacks. I gazed over endless peaks that stretched toward Turkey, while standing in the blown-up husk of one of Saddam’s once-lavish palaces. Never once did I feel unsafe.Even so: “I don’t know what the future is,” Mr. Zrar told me. “It’s not wise to be hopeful.”And yet all across the Middle East you get the sense that something deep is afoot and that adventure travel stands at the center. Jordan has a new trans-country trail. Palestinians and Egyptians are learning to rock climb. You can run marathons in Oman. “The act of getting outside and taking a step forward is seen as an act of empowerment,” David Landis, an American who helped coordinate the rise of the Abraham Path, a trail network currently underway from Egypt to Iran, told me.AdvertisementNear the end of the trip we met Rekan Rasool, 25, who started a hiking and kayaking club for Kurds. In 2010 his Rock Your Bones group had a handful of members. Today it has more than 6,000.Standing along the Lesser Zab River, he told me how he dreams of opening an outdoor shop in Erbil, of hiking across Kurdistan through the mountains, of getting more women involved in the outdoors. Like Mr. Schute and Mr. Layton, he sees something in Kurdistan that would be obvious were it not for the news.“When there is no war in my country, Kurdistan is the best place,” he said. He stuffed inflatable kayaks, coolers and tents into his S.U.V. for a long weekend of adventure with his girlfriend. We said goodbye. Then he drove down a road that arced out of sight.The Kurds voted in September to declare independence from Iraq, a move that triggered Baghdad into placing a punitive ban on international flights into the region. Talks in mid-January hinted that the ban might soon be lifted. The Kurdish news agency Rudaw has an English website and has been covering the flight ban regularly. Until it is lifted, travelers have two options for getting into Kurdistan.The first is to go overland through Turkey. To do that you would fly to Sirnak or Diyarbakir, both in southeastern Turkey, then cross into Iraqi Kurdistan via the Habur-Ibrahim Khalil border crossing. You’ll need a Turkish visa. The second way is to connect on a domestic flight through Baghdad. To do that, you’ll need an Iraqi visa.Visa rules for Kurdistan may change as Kurd and Iraqi authorities negotiate the results of the independence vote. For now, passport holders from the United States, Britain, the European Union, Australia, New Zealand and Japan can get a free 30-day Kurdistan visa at the border crossing and, presumably, upon arrival at the Erbil airport in Kurdistan once flights resume. Again, that may all change. Check the Kurdistan Regional Government website for more information. As of press time the K.R.G.’s Department of Foreign Relations website had removed its webpage related to Kurdish visas.For these reasons, it’s recommended that would-be travelers find a reputable company to organize their trips and to keep them up-to-date on visa requirements. Kurdistan Iraq Tours (info@kurdistaniraqtours) offers custom trips that can range from single-day excursions to two-week itineraries or more for up to 15 people. Prices are all-inclusive (without flights) and vary depending on the group size, hotels and the exact itinerary. Expect to pay from $2,000 to $9,000. (Note: Kurdistan is a cash economy. You can use a credit card at major hotels but Kurdistan Iraq Tours can only take cash.)Kurdistan Iraq Tours works with outfitters based in Britain and the United States, such as Steppes Travel, Native Eye Travel, Undiscovered Destinations, Young Pioneer Tours and Spiekermann Travel. Mountain Travel Sobek plans to offer a Kurdistan trip in 2019. Wild Frontiers Travel may add it again in the future.The State Department strongly advises against traveling to Iraq and it didn’t support the Kurdish referendum. Travel insurance is a must. Companies like World Nomads and First Allied offer coverage in Iraq. It’s also a good idea for United States citizens to register with the State Department through its Smart Traveler Enrollment Program before going. Kurdistan Iraq Tour’s high-level contacts within the Kurdish government allow for a more nuanced and real-time understanding of what’s safe and what isn’t. Situations can change, of course, but I, and other members in my group, never once felt unsafe.Tim Neville is a frequent contributor to the Travel section.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2018, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: Haunted by War.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsNot knowing the local language is no reason not to travel. Here are some tips to get by from someone who does it all the time.By Shivani VoraTraveling to a foreign country can be daunting if you don’t know the local language, and while François Thibault, the cellar master and co-founder of Grey Goose, speaks only French, his job requires constant travel around the world. “Over the years, I’ve learned how to navigate foreign countries with limited verbal communication,” he said.Mr. Thibault has a number of tips to help travelers manage in a destination when they don’t speak the native tongue, based on his own experience. Here are a few of them. Traveling in foreign countries has become much easier in the past few years thanks to the many foreign language apps which translate words on the spot. Mr. Thibault tends to rely on Google Translate and suggests that travelers find an app that works for them. Ideally, find one that specializes in the language you need to translate especially if the language uses a character set you’re not familiar with, or have difficulty pronouncing. But take note: in Mr. Thibault’s experience, these apps work best when you’re trying to decipher something in writing, like a restaurant menu or a street sign, rather than in the midst of a conversation. Pointing with your hands and nodding or shaking your head, Mr. Thibault said, are an easy way to communicate with locals in the country you’re in. “Gestures are almost all universally understood,” he said. There are exceptions however. In many of the countries in the Balkans, for example, nodding means “no,” and shaking your head means “yes.” Also, although a smile usually conveys friendliness, in some countries such as Russia, locals don’t smile at people they don’t know. A quick web search for the country you’re visiting and “gestures” or “body language” will turn up anything you need to be aware of before you go.Knowing basic words and phrases like “hello,” “thank you” and “I’m sorry, I don’t speak [insert the language of the country you’re visiting], do you speak English?” are a must, Mr. Thibault said. Showing that you care enough to learn some of the language before you went, and at least enough to acknowledge that you don’t know more, is a form of respect and will go a long way to endear you to locals. He suggested going on YouTube to find a tutorial on how to spell and say basic words and phrases, ideally from native speakers eager to teach would-be visitors. “It’ll take five minutes of your time and is well worth it,” he said. If you feel particularly uncomfortable in the country you’re headed to, and you have to go anyway, relying on a local travel agent who knows both your and your destination’s language can be incredibly useful. He or she can step in to help translate over the phone should any major issues arise, especially with things like flights, lodging, or other travel-related issues. Many agents also offer services 24 hours a day, so help is just a quick call away no matter what the problem may be. A tour guide can help you get a better grasp of the local language and is a good person to practice words and phrases with. Whenever Mr. Thibault visits a new country, he books a sightseeing tour with a guide on the first day of his trip. “I use this day to learn about my destination and get familiar with the language,” he said. You can always search the web for local tour guides and fixers before you go, or alternatively find a guide through your hotel’s concierge a travel agent or by calling the local tourist office. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe GetawayHistory museums, attractions and destinations around the country are emphasizing the civil rights story in an age of renewed activism around race and equality.By Elaine GlusacOn assignment in Montgomery, Ala., recently, I toured the Rosa Parks Museum with a capacity student crowd; sang “We Shall Overcome” in the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s former church with tour-goers from Ohio, California and China; and waited 10 minutes in line at the Southern Poverty Law Center museum to buy my souvenir water bottle (for a good cause).My experience, it turns out, is indicative of the current excitement surrounding civil rights tourism in the United States 50 years after the assassination of the movement’s leader, Dr. King. “It’s a part of American history, not just African-American history,” said Andrea Taylor, the chief executive of the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute in Birmingham, Ala. “There seems to be a convergence of interest in telling a more complete version of American evolution to include communities of color and particularly African-American communities.”The institute is part of the U.S. Civil Rights Trail, which launched in January, and identifies 110 locations associated with Civil Rights history in the 1950s and 60s across 14 states. They range from the F.W. Woolworth lunch counter in Greensboro, N.C., where peaceful protesters staged sit-ins, to the house of Daisy Bates, an organizer of the desegregation effort at Little Rock Central High School in Arkansas. The trail is expected to draw five million visitors this year; those visitors will spend some $725 million on travel, according to Lee Sentell, the director of Alabama’s tourism department who oversees the trail.“The whole purpose is to elevate this group of mostly modest locations, churches and schools where significant events in American history happened, that for the most part have not had a great deal of local support,” said Mr. Sentell.On and off the trail, history museums, attractions and destinations around the country are emphasizing the civil rights story in an era of renewed activism around race and equality.“We see parallels between what happened then and what’s happening now,” said Ms. Taylor. “People are looking for touchstones from history that give credibility and direction and momentum to their current activities.” The following trips and attractions bring the era to life. Visitors to Nashville can explore the infamous Woolworth lunch counter where sit-ins took place in a very visceral way at the new Woolworth on 5th  restaurant. The original downtown five-and-dime, where the congressman John Lewis, then a student protester, was arrested, has recently reopened with an updated menu (there’s harissa fried chicken), an upbeat atmosphere (clips of musical dance sequences play on a movie screen) and hints at the site’s past, including photos of the protests. “We’ve had people come in here and touch the walls and say, ‘My mother was arrested here,’ and it’s emotional,” said the owner, Tom Morales, who aims to straddle historic interest with contemporary hospitality. “We wanted to represent the change that people sat in for.”In addition to live music in the basement ballroom, Woolworth on 5th holds a monthly program called “The Big Idea” in which the actor Barry Scott pays tribute to the lives of civil rights activists, including Rosa Parks (June) and Fannie Lou Hamer (July), and to the music of the Harlem Renaissance (September) and slaves (October).In Philadelphia, the National Constitution Center is celebrating the 14th Amendment to the Constitution in its 150th anniversary year. The amendment, which guarantees equal protection, was the legal basis of the civil rights campaign and is the theme for the center’s annual Constitution Day celebration, Sept. 17. The special programming will include constitutional studies experts discussing “Civil Rights Across the Centuries” on June 11. At the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center in Cincinnati, the virtual reality simulation Rosa Parks Experience, opened in 2016, puts museum-goers on the bus and in the seat of Ms. Parks who refused to give it up to a white passenger in Montgomery in 1955, the act that led to the explosion of the civil rights movement.Eight South Carolina cities dot the official Civil Rights Trail, but the Green Book, a mobile travel guide to African-American cultural sites across the state, lists more than 300 entries. Originally a national guide to safe places for African Americans traveling between 1936 and 1966, the Green Book was revived in May 2017 as a mobile site (greenbookofsc.com) by the South Carolina African-American Heritage Commission. It identifies nationally or state-recognized historic places and is searchable via categories such as historic churches, cultural attractions and H.B.C.U.s, or historically black colleges and universities. In New Orleans, a new section of Press Street is being renamed after Homer Plessy, the early Civil Rights activist whose case for riding in a whites-only train car led to the Supreme Court’s “separate but equal” ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson in 1896. The New Orleans Civil Rights Movement Tour from Tours by Judy follows the story from slave auction sites in the French Quarter to the cemetery where Mr. Plessy is buried and weaves in stories of Canal Street sit-ins demanding equal treatment at lunch counters and in shops.Roughly midway between Memphis, Tenn., and Birmingham, Ala., Tupelo, Miss., isn’t on the new Civil Rights Trail, but has its own heritage trail that identifies Civil War and Civil Rights sights as well as those related to the indigenous Chickasaw Nation. Though Tupelo is perhaps best known as the birthplace of Elvis Presley, its historical markers identify the site of the Woolworth lunch counter where protests occurred, the Spring Hill Missionary Baptist Church, which served as a gathering place for Civil Rights activists, and the 1964 March of Discontent over voter registration and minority hiring. In April, VisitDallas created a new self-guided Civil Rights tour that visits the bungalow home of Juanita Craft, a prominent leader in the movement, the Dallas Civil Rights Museum at the Martin Luther King Jr. Community Center and the trendy Deep Ellum neighborhood, the historic black entertainment district. The itinerary is available online (visitdallas.com/civilrightstour) or in a brochure at the visitor center.For a deep dive into the subject, the educational, nonprofit travel company Road Scholar guides eight-day Heart of the Civil Rights Movement road trips. Tours will take place in October and November and visit sites in Atlanta, Montgomery, Selma, Ala., and Birmingham. (from $1,859 a person). For those who can form their own groups, Freedom Lifted arranges custom itineraries to Civil Rights sights primarily in the South. Its past clientele has included students, clergy, activists and families. Groups range between 15 and 45 people. Prices vary based on group size, itinerary and trip length and generally require six months to organize.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealResorts and restaurants in upstate New York are offering deep discounts and attractive amenities to lure travelers looking for a getaway close to home.By Jessica Colley ClarkeIf boutique hotels in upstate New York are beyond your budget during the peak summer and fall season, consider off-season deals instead. For travel before May 1, travelers will find extra value for their dollar at hotels in the form of multiday packages, discounted spa treatments and midweek restaurant specials.Hasbrouck House, a restored 18th-century stone mansion in Stone Ridge, N.Y., is offering a midweek special through April 30. The “Stay One, Get One 50 percent Off” winter package offers 50 percent off the second night for stays booked from Sunday to Thursday. Snowshoe rentals and smores kits are free for all guests. The in-house restaurant, Butterfield, sources almost all of its ingredients from within 40 miles, ideal for those who enjoy local, seasonal cuisine. Get extra value with $20 bottles of wine on Thursdays and a three-course prix fixe for $35 on Sundays.Spa lovers can also find value this spring. The peaceful Buttermilk Falls Inn and Spa in Milton, N.Y., has a package available through May 31 that includes a two-night stay, a 60-minute massage or facial, and a poolside spa lunch with prosecco for $725 ($1,030 if each part of the package were booked separately; available Sunday through Thursday). April is also Digital Detox Awareness month at the inn; surrender your phone and receive a free hand treatment with any facial or massage.Discounts at Emerson Resort and Spa in the Catskill Mountains come with the opportunity to practice a hobby. Packages are built around guided fly fishing excursions, art workshops at the Woodstock School of Art and learning about edible mushrooms during a two-hour guided hike, led by expert mushroom hunters. Rates also include 20 percent off the regular room rate. Restaurants also offer extra value for budget-savvy travelers, especially during the middle of the week. With an open kitchen and wood fired grill, Silvia in Woodstock has midweek discounts including 20 percent off all bottled wine on Mondays, $1 oysters on Thursdays and $5 happy hour draft beer and wine Mondays through Fridays. Duo Bistro in Kingston offers specials on Tuesdays, including $10 burgers and $6 margaritas. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawayWith air travel expected to be at an all-time high, a look at where we’re flocking as a new season begins.By Stephanie RosenbloomA record number of people are expected to fly the nation’s airlines this spring between March 1 and April 30, an all-time high of about 151 million passengers. That’s up four percent from last spring, according to Airlines for America, the trade organization for the major United States airlines. For many of those travelers, “spring break” means only one thing: a beach vacation. And as in years past, travelers looked to classics like Florida, the Caribbean and Mexico for their early spring getaways — even as the islands are recovering from hurricanes and the State Department has issued travel warnings about Mexico. In North America, searches for January, February and March showed that Cancún, Guadalajara, and Mexico City were among the top five long-haul destinations, along with London and Paris, according to Sojern, the travel research and marketing company. The most popular short-haul destinations were Miami, New York City, Orlando, Los Angeles and Las Vegas. Other industry groups have reported similar findings. Allianz Global Assistance, a travel insurance provider, said its own analysis of travelers’ plans showed Orlando and Cancún to be the most popular domestic and international destinations for spring break (which the company defined as Feb. 23 through April 16). Based on bookings through AAA Travel, the most popular destinations in March for Florida travelers included Orlando and Ft. Lauderdale, Honolulu, Punta Cana and Cancún. In January, the World Tourism Organization reported that tourism to Mexico was robust, and that the Caribbean was “showing clear signs of recovery in the aftermath of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.” That same month, the State Department began ranking every country in the world on a scale of 1 to 4 to help travelers make decisions about their safety. Mexico was given a Level 2, which simply calls for increased caution — the same ranking as destinations like France, Italy and Britain. Yet certain areas within Mexico — Colima, Guerrero, Michoacán, Sinaloa and Tamaulipas states — that experience violent crime from gangs and criminal organizations were given the highest ranking, Level 4. Quintana Roo — home to tourist areas like Cancún, Cozumel, Tulum, the Riviera Maya and Playa del Carmen — was given a Level 2, again the same as France and Italy. But on March 7, the United States Embassy in Mexico City prohibited government employees from traveling to Playa del Carmen, citing a security threat. The alert came after an explosion on a tourist ferry in February at a pier in Playa del Carmen that injured more than two dozen people.On March 9, two days after the alert, the United States government updated it to say that personnel were prohibited from travel only to certain neighborhoods in Playa del Carmen: Centro, Calica, Gonzalo Guerrero, Quintas del Carmen, and Villas del Carmen. The alert advised United States citizens to avoid the neighborhoods as well. The United States Embassy in Mexico City also said that government personnel are prohibited from using ferry services between Playa del Carmen and Cozumel until further notice, and that United States citizens are also advised not to use those ferry services. It remains to be seen if the alerts lead to vacation cancellations in the area, but it’s clear that for the first quarter of 2018, Mexico, which has many cities that the State Department has essentially deemed safe to visit, was at the top of traveler’s lists. The day after the updated alert, Southwest Airlines began nonstop routes on Saturdays between a couple of cities in California and Cabo San Lucas/Los Cabos; and between Indianapolis and Cancún (seasonally). The airline also began offering nonstop daily flights between San Diego and Puerto Vallarta (seasonally).The United States government recommends that travelers who decide to spend their spring vacation in Mexico buy travel insurance that specifically covers them in Mexico and includes medical evacuation insurance.In previous months, Mexico was for some travelers a substitute for the Caribbean in the wake of hurricanes that devastated several islands. Yet now the rebuilding is underway, and most islands are open for business, creating more options for spring break getaways. Indeed, TripAdvisor announced that travelers won’t have trouble finding low hotel prices and airfare to popular islands, and that April is the most affordable month for a Caribbean trip. For instance, the travel planning and booking site found that, based on average accommodation rates and airfare from February to April, travelers departing from the United States could take a weeklong trip for less than $2,000 a person in Curacao, the Dominican Republic, Guadeloupe, Martinique and Puerto Rico. Hotel rooms were available for less than $250 a night. Expedia’s deals page is featuring spots in Punta Cana and San Juan, as well as Cancún, Orlando and Miami. And resorts are also offering deals, like the Seven Stars Resort & Spa in Providenciales, Turks and Caicos, where you can save 20 percent off all room types for travel now through April 16, and 30 percent off all room types for travel April 14 through Aug. 10 (if interested, book before March 31). For those looking to visit the United States from other countries, New York City is a top springtime destination, according to Sojern’s research. In Europe, search trends for the first three months of this year turned up leading European cities like Paris and London, as well as places in the Middle East and Asia such as Bangkok, Istanbul, Dubai, and Marrakesh. New York City was the only place in the United States to be among the top long-haul destinations, according to Sojern. In the Asia-Pacific, the top short-haul searches between January and March were Bangkok, Singapore, Tokyo, Hong Kong and Seoul, while the long-haul searches were for London, Honolulu, Paris, Los Angeles and New York City. In Latin America, during the same time period, Sojern found that travelers were gravitating to Mexico and Brazil, and for long-haul trips, Madrid, Lisbon, New York City, Miami and Orlando, the East Coast home of Mickey Mouse. Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerThe city has all you could want — museums, green spaces, good music and exciting new restaurants — plus that distinct Midwestern friendliness. By Lucas PetersonTom Duggan, the man behind the counter at Lemon Gem Kitchen Goods in St. Louis, Mo., was so talkative that I couldn’t help but stay and chat. He was filling in for his daughter, the shop’s owner, Beth Styles. I asked him what he liked about St. Louis and he said he once had a job that entailed a lot of travel, and that he always liked coming home. “It’s a great place to raise a family, the schools in the county are good, and the real estate is reasonable,” he said. “It’s a big small town.”This isn’t mere aw-shucks sentiment — as someone who grew up in Illinois, I can attest to the fundamental, if understated, truth of what Mr. Duggan said. St. Louis has all you could want in a city — museums, green spaces, good music and exciting new restaurants — plus that distinct Midwestern sense that if you stop random people on the street, there’s a very good chance they grew up nearby and are excited to share the name of their favorite bar with you. It also happened to be a good fit for my modest budget, making it an ideal place to spend four days this past month.My Airbnb in the Central West End neighborhood ($65 per night for a private room in a resident’s house), about 4 miles west of downtown, centrally located and close to the Metro, made for a good home base. I also spent a night in downtown proper at the Magnolia Hotel St. Louis, where I landed a AAA rate of $125 per night. It was easy to get out to Central West End from downtown, about a 15 minute ride, on my $7.50 Metro day-pass. I also used the Transit app, which works in over 100 cities, to make my riding as efficient as I could.I spent a day walking around downtown, and had my first encounter with a helpful local at Star Clipper, a sanctuary for all who love things comics- and fantasy-related. A relative neophyte, I asked one of the managers for help. Celeste, with silver hair peeking out from under a Darth Vader knit cap, was more than happy to assist. I asked her for something a little out there; a little weird. Her face lit up, “So … how weird do we want to get?” she asked before directing me to work by St. Louis-native Jim Mahfood.Maybe I had comics on the brain this particular trip, because I headed to the Moolah Theater & Lounge for a Wednesday evening showing of “Black Panther.” Admission on Wacky Wednesday, as it’s called, is just $5, a great deal for a first-run movie in a beautiful old theater like the Moolah. The building, originally constructed for the Shriners in 1913, has wonderful architectural details like a massive barrel-vaulted ceiling in the middle of the theater, as well as some comfy couches for those quick enough to grab them. The attached bar in the theater, in addition to serving $2 Busch beer, had some themed drink specials: The King T’Challa, for example, got you a draft beer with a shot of Crown Royal for $10.From the Moolah, I headed up North Grand Boulevard past the shining marquee of the 1920s-era Fox Theater in search of some live music, an area where St. Louis shines. I found it at The Dark Room at the Grandel, where the trumpet player Kasimu Taylor was leading his “Kasimu-tet” through a jazz set (no cover charge). I grabbed a seat at the bar and had a bowl of Italian wedding soup ($7) as well as a blonde ale from local 4 Hands Brewing ($5) and enjoyed the abstract music in the cool, subdued atmosphere.It was just the first of several fairly distinct musical journeys I’d take in St. Louis: Downtown at the Broadway Oyster Bar, I watched the band Alligator Wine noodle its way through some Grateful Dead covers while I sat with a big plate of cornbread and chicken and sausage gumbo ($5 cover; $5.50 for the gumbo). Just a stone’s throw away up Broadway at the wonderfully named BB’s Jazz, Blues, and Soups, I grooved to soul and R&B covers played by Torrey Casey and the South Side Hustle ($5 cover). The vocalist who sat in on many of the songs, Teec’a Easby, positively killed a rendition of Aretha Franklin’s “Baby, I Love You.”My favorite show, though, was at Thurman’s in the quiet Shaw neighborhood just north of Tower Grove Park. Riding in the back of an Uber in the pelting rain (which punctuated much of my trip), I was positive that we were lost: I couldn’t see any businesses, just quiet residential streets. Thurman’s appeared like a beacon in the darkness, and the whirlwind of jazz that was taking place inside dried my rain-sodden clothes near instantaneously.Kendrick Smith was playing the alto saxophone like his life depended on it. The other two in his trio could barely keep up with what he was doing — the mode changes, the rhythmic variations, not to mention the technical skill. I spoke to him afterward about his modified saxophone, which I noticed was straight and didn’t curve upward (typically only the soprano is straight). “I did some research on the saxophone and the inventor actually intended for them all to be straight,” he said, saying he enjoyed the darker timbre. You could easily spend a week in St. Louis seeing music nonstop, but then you’d be missing out on one of the city’s most budget-friendly aspects: its free museums. Hopping off the Metro at the Forest Park-DeBaliviere station just north Forest Park, I spent an afternoon enjoying some of the best publicly-funded institutions in the nation: the Saint Louis Art Museum, the Saint Louis Zoo and the Missouri History Museum. The history museum in particular had some interesting showings, including an exhibit about the 1904 World’s Fair and the Summer Olympics that took place within that same period.Most affecting was the exhibit “#1 in Civil Rights,” which presents the case for Missouri being on the front lines of the war for black equality since the 1800s. The struggle continues to this day: St. Louis is one of the country’s most segregated cities, according to a 2017 study, and black residents live at a poverty rate over three times higher than whites. Areas in the northern part of St. Louis and St. Louis County, as well as across the Mississippi River in the city of East St. Louis, are plagued with crime.The exhibit taught me about important figures like John Berry and Mary Meachum, abolitionists who worked with the Underground Railroad, as well as the Negro Bar Association (established in 1922) and the Colored Clerks’ Circle, a group formed in 1932 that initiated economic boycotts of businesses and set precedent for strategies enacted during mid-20th century Civil Rights movement.But it was elsewhere that I found one of the most odd and engaging art projects and public spaces I’d visited in awhile. Started by the artists Bob and Gail Cassilly, the City Museum is an interactive collection of different installations with no real unifying themes I could ascertain besides maybe “adventure” and “wrought metals.” There’s a hamster wheel big enough to accommodate a full-grown man, an enormous old walk-in bank vault, and dozens of underground caves, narrow passages, and giant slides that take you from one floor of the museum to another. It was a bit like “The Muppet Show”: Geared toward kids on the surface, but with plenty of oddities — sneering gargoyle sculptures, taxidermied animals, an abandoned school bus — random and fascinating enough to keep adults entertained, too.The museum ($14 admission) is mostly housed within an old shoe factory that’s entirely too big for the contents within, but that’s sort of the point. When I went, there were a bunch of children running around and having the times of their young lives, but it was very easy to find a corner of the museum that had seemingly never been discovered. For parents: This may become your kid’s new favorite place on earth, but not a lot about the museum struck me as particularly childproof. Keep a close eye and consider bringing kneepads. I’m not kidding — I wedged myself into a couple of those passages and wasn’t sure I was going to make it out.After my visit to the City Museum, I went and tried St. Louis-style pizza at Imo’s Pizza, a decision I simultaneously savored and regretted. The defining features of St. Louis-style pizza are a wafer-thin bottom and the use of Provel cheese, a slick-tasting processed mixture of Cheddar, swiss and provolone. It is, let’s just say, an acquired taste. (Celeste from Star Clipper was not a fan: “it tastes like a cracker with fake cheese,” she said.)Most of the city’s other food offerings, though, don’t require you to have grown up eating them to appreciate them. I had some killer baby back ribs at Sugarfire Smoke House — four meaty bones with a side of “rack ‘n’ cheese” (macaroni and cheese mixed with pulled pork) cost $10.49, and came with all the thick, molasses-y St. Louis-style barbecue sauce I wanted.On the other side of the pizza spectrum from Imo’s is Union Loafers, a bakery that puts its own twist on Neapolitan-style pizzas, cooking them in their bread ovens instead of using a traditional wood fire. The result is not disappointing: my 18-inch classic with cheese, tomato and basil pizza was simple elegance and very tasty ($17).St. Louis has an ambitious culinary scene that is steadily growing, and so I headed for lunch to Vicia, a seasonal, vegetable-forward restaurant on this year’s James Beard Awards’ Best New Restaurant shortlist. The lunch deal happens to be exceptional — choose two or three items on the menu and pay $12 or $15. I had a sandwich with grilled ham and salami on a fluffy focaccia alongside a salad of fresh beets in tangy yogurt with seed and oat granola added for a nice crunchy texture.Walking around one evening down the Delmar Loop near Washington University, I milled around with young families and college students while stopping into various establishments on the strip: Avalon Exchange for some used clothes; Vintage Vinyl slinging crates of 99-cent records; Blueberry Hill, the huge restaurant and music venue where St. Louis native Chuck Berry performed hundreds of times. There was so much to see and do — as much as a city twice its size — and all of it within easy reach.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe Caribbean NowEvenings can be lively in Cruz Bay and the beaches are still inviting. But major resorts are closed and cleanup efforts continue.By Mireya NavarroHurricanes Irma and Maria devastated islands in the Caribbean last September. Six months later, how are they recovering? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in Vieques, St. Martin, St. John (below), Dominica and San Juan, P.R.  The ruins of a windmill that crushed stalks of cane in the 19th century was off-limits, a red sign warning of its “unsafe condition.” So were many of the other spots of interest along the trail of the Annaberg Sugar Plantation in St. John in the United States Virgin Islands after Hurricanes Irma and Maria swept through the Caribbean six months ago. St. John suffered major damage to its hotel and housing stock, charter boat business, beach facilities and the national parkland that extends over about 60 percent of the island. It lost its clinic and its only public school buildings. Now visitors are trying to look past uprooted trees and roofless buildings to focus on the natural beauty that has been St. John’s main draw. At the Annaberg ruins in the Virgin Islands National Park, one sight remained untouched: the ocean view with a cluster of British Virgin Islands in the distance, looking as majestic as an oil painting.  “There’s two ways to look at it,” said Cathy Malley, 68, of New Milford, Conn., who has been coming to St. John for three decades with her husband Art. “Some people may say, ‘What a mess.’ On the other hand, you still have the beautiful views and the beautiful beaches.”Loyal visitors like the Malleys are still coming but tourism is down — by more than half for this time of the year, local business owners said. The island’s two largest resorts, Caneel Bay and the Westin St. John Resort Villas, remain closed, most likely through 2018, affecting both tourism and jobs.During a visit in early March, the evening scene was lively in Cruz Bay, the town on the western side where restaurants and shops are concentrated. The streets were filled with people and laughter, and music spilled over from restaurants and bars, including Morgan’s Mango, which had just reopened after the hurricane. Mongoose Junction, the stone and mahogany shopping center with about 30 stores and restaurants, was up and running.But there weren’t the usual jam-packed crowds for this time of the year, some business owners noted, and many stores were closing early.“We just don’t have the same business and some businesses don’t have the employees,” said Beverly Lockett, who is in charge of customer service at the jewelry store Caravan Gallery and serves as president of the Mongoose Junction Merchants Association. The decline in visitors was most glaring during the day, when there was no trouble getting a parking spot at the most popular beaches. The island’s beaches have reopened but they are not equally ready to welcome guests.Salt Pond Bay beach on the southeastern shore of the island, with an actual salt pond a short hike away, looked picturesque on a Tuesday morning, with beachgoers bobbing among catamarans in the water or lying on the sand and sitting under umbrellas. A protected cove, its waters were calm even as the nor’easter dumping snow in the United States was roiling the Caribbean with huge waves. By contrast, Cinnamon Bay, a drive west along the northern shore, had drawn only a handful of surfers to its waters. One of St. John’s most popular beaches, Cinnamon Bay suffered extensive damage to its campgrounds, cottages, concessions and bathrooms, and only chunks of masonry walls remained of the Cinnamon Bay Archaeology Museum, which had been housed in a structure dating back centuries. (The contents of the museum had been removed for hurricane season.) There had been no cleanup of the wreckage. The amenities at another popular beach, Trunk Bay, were in better shape although bathroom facilities were closed, replaced by portable ones, and there was no running water for showers. Sitting in the picnic area, Cathy and Art Malley, the visitors from Connecticut, said newcomers may not notice the things they missed, like the palm trees and sea grapes that they said used to frame the beach and provide shade. On the plus side, some visitors noticed that several beaches were wider. The snorkeling was still good, with plenty of fish but some damage to reefs.“You saw some broken coral,” said Donna Siefert of West Chicago, Ill., who snorkeled in several beaches with her husband, Ernie. “The coral was covered with this dust.”The Sieferts, who have been returning to St. John since their first visit in 1995, had their reservation for one of the cottages at Cinnamon Bay canceled because of the damage. They stayed in a condo complex far from the water and the sound of surf but were glad they didn’t change their plans. “It’s still a beautiful island,” Mrs. Siefert said. Many residents said they were thrilled with the pace of recovery given the initial damage from back-to-back hurricanes. They remember the impassable roads, the trees snapped in half, the sunken boats and the widespread gutting of houses and other buildings.“The park was devastated,” said Joe Kessler, the president of Friends of Virgin Islands National Park. “There was a tremendous amount of tree fall. The hillsides of the park resembled Mount St. Helens after the eruptions.”The park, which has 27 trails and more than 15 beaches, reopened in December after a cleanup and now, Mr. Kessler said, the harder task of repairing buildings, restoring trails and other recovery work continues. Beverly Nicholson-Doty, the Virgin Islands commissioner of tourism, said both power and water have been restored to 99 percent of the territory. She estimated tourism was more than 60 percent down, largely because of a significantly reduced hotel inventory. Flights are also at about half the pre-hurricane levels, officials said, but some airlines have announced more flight restorations and additions in the coming months.“Every day gets a little better and better,” she said.St. John benefited from some early intervention from famous part-time residents like Thomas F. Secunda, a co-founder of Bloomberg L.P., and Kenny Chesney, the country music singer. Both mobilized help, with Bloomberg Philanthropies paying experts on power restoration and other consultants to expedite recovery in St. John and the rest of the territory. The organizations, including Mr. Chesney’s Love for Love City Foundation,  remain active in rebuilding efforts along with volunteer groups like All Hands and Hearts — Smart Response, which has about two dozen volunteers helping owners, all uninsured, with debris removal. The volunteers have focused in the Coral Bay area, which took Hurricane Irma’s direct furious punch — these days parts of it have the look of a busy construction site with debris transfer areas and trucks carrying new, sturdier fiberglass power poles for installation. At one property, nine volunteers in purple shirts were helping owner Eugene Foy, 55, remove water-damaged and moldy materials from three small wood and Sheetrock structures that had lost walls and roofs or portions of them. Many windows were broken and most of the contents were exposed. In one roofless bedroom, the open bottom drawer of a dresser held rubble. In the kitchen, a vine from the outside had found its way over to the sink. Mr. Foy’s wife had moved with relatives in St. Thomas, he said, and so had the nephew who lived with them and had found work in recovery efforts. Mr. Foy, a construction worker, said: “I tried to do a little bit but I need the help. I appreciate it so much. It’ll take some years.”One volunteer, Leslie Zengler, 54, of Portage, Ind., said she had once been a visitor. Twenty years ago, she had taken the ferry to St. John from St. Thomas for the day, on Thanksgiving Day, and she, her husband and friends had eaten turkey sandwiches on the beach. Now she found “a lot of devastation,” she said, “but a lot of businesses are open and the greenery is coming back.”The volunteers have taken over the human resources building and employee cafeteria at the Caneel Bay resort, sleeping in cots, bunk beds and outside in tents. Caneel Bay has also made room for National Park Service and federal emergency employees in 30 still-habitable rooms.But the 166-room luxury resort, spread over 170 acres of federal parkland and built by Laurance Rockefeller in the 1950s, has yet to start its own repairs. The owner, Equis Financial Group’s CBI Acquisitions LLC, expects to spend $100 million rebuilding but is first seeking a 60-year extension on its rental agreement with the federal government for use of the site, Patrick Kidd, the resort’s director of marketing, said. The current 40-year agreement expires in 2023.“The owners need to know that they’ll have a financial benefit from making that investment,” Mr. Kidd said. The U.S. Virgin Islands representative in Congress, Stacey Plaskett, has introduced a bill authorizing the 60-year extension, noting Caneel Bay, with about 400 workers, is St. John’s largest employer. Some hotels suffered only minor damage and never closed. David Guidi, the co-owner of Hotel Cruz Bay, where I stayed during my visit, said that he first housed local families in his 11 rooms, then relief workers. From his second-floor porch, I could see fallen trees, boarded-up houses and the mangled roof of the kindergarten-to-eighth grade Julius E. Sprauve School, so badly damaged that government officials are planning to have it rebuilt at another location.  Only now has Mr. Guidi started “transitioning to tourists.”“Workers don’t spend as much,” he said. “Tourists drink until they can’t see anymore.”But hotel owners and managers say visitors are overwhelmingly return guests, mostly from the northeastern United States, and it is very much uncertain when exactly tourism will bounce back in full. A short walk up the street from Mr. Guidi’s hotel, the 60-room Gallows Point Resort looked unscathed but was only 58 percent filled, the general manager Akhil Deshwal said. Gallows Point has a newly rebuilt restaurant and is still repairing a handful of rooms. Many water activities — sunset sailing, island hopping — have been severely curtailed because a large number of charter boats were destroyed.But the hotel managed to keep most of its landscape in the hurricane winds; spread over five acres overlooking Cruz Bay and the Caribbean Sea, it seemed to have its bougainvillea and tropical vibe back.Still, some first-time visitors felt the island had a long way to go. Helen and Ted Roberts, of Boston, said they made it to St. John at the end of a weeklong catamaran trip through the Caribbean. They had already sampled five beaches.“I felt a little sad,” Mrs. Roberts, 64, said. “Just watching them put up electric poles. That’s going to take a long time.”Mr. Roberts, 69, said: “In fairness it has to be compared with other Caribbean places like Aruba and Cayman. As it is right now, St. John isn’t as good as those places.”Just like in the rest of the Caribbean struck by Hurricanes Irma and Maria, the U.S. Virgin Islands for a while were not suitable even for some of their own residents. St. John shed some of its own population of about 4,500 after the hurricanes as people left for the States looking for jobs and schools. Ms. Nicholson-Doty said that the Virgin Islands, including St. Thomas and St. Croix, temporarily lost about 10 percent of its population but that many have been returning. Many of those who never left expressed optimism that a complete recovery was not too far away.As Mr. Foy, the Coral Bay resident, put it: “The papaya trees are already springing up.” Mireya Navarro, a former reporter for The New York Times, is the author of the memoir “Stepdog.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawayWhy we seek them, and what they tell us about ourselves.By Stephanie Rosenbloom“Nobody sits us down and tells us to collect objects when we’re young,” writes Rolf Potts, “it’s just something we do, as a way of familiarizing ourselves with the world, its possibilities, and our place in it.” Few of us would call ourselves collectors, but most travelers have, at some point or other, bought a keychain, pocketed a seashell, or saved a ticket stub from a vacation​. ​ ​Turns out, as Mr. Potts notes in a new little book called “Souvenir,” there’s more to this seemingly simple​ (perhaps frivolous to some​) ​practice than meets the eye. For one thing, it’s a ritual that spans millenniums, dating back to the oldest​ described​ journeys. And, likely unknown to many travelers, academic researchers ​have ​classified souvenirs — even mass-produced items like “I Love New York” T-shirts and plastic miniatures of Michelangelo’s David — into ​various categories. Which categories do the things I’ve bought or found in my travels fall into? I began wondering this when Mr. Potts, a travel writer and the director of a summer writing workshop at the Paris American Academy, mentioned to me in passing that there are names for different classes of souvenirs. Further, what’s really behind our need to bring home mementos? And what do the things we keep say about us? If you’ve ever pocketed a pebble or saved a Champagne cork, you’ve got yourself what scholars call a “piece-of-the-rock,” a physical chunk of a place or experience, we learn in “Souvenir” (Bloomsbury). Piece-of-the-rock mementos, along with another category of souvenirs that scholars call “local products” (“everything from Uruguayan leatherwork, to Mozambican piri-piri sauce,” Mr. Potts writes), predate today’s multibillion dollar mass tourism industry. These sorts of souvenirs stretch back to the earliest of journeys, when pilgrims brought home dirt from holy places as a religious souvenir.Over time, intellectual curiosity became the driving motivation for personal travel. Yet even as travelers began collecting historical and scientific mementos, not just religious items, the things they brought home had echoes of sacred objects. In the 1700s, when Thomas Jefferson and John Adams carved slivers of wood off a chair in Shakespeare’s home in Stratford-upon-Avon, it was “as much an attempt to commune with the Bard’s aura as it was to commemorate a moment of travel,” writes Mr. Potts. (The wood chip said to have been taken by Jefferson is at his former home, Monticello, in Virginia where slicing off pieces of the furniture is not allowed.)“Souvenir” reminds the reader that plundering was not unusual tourist behavior into the 20th century, especially with industrialization and better transportation allowing travel to flourish — not only among the wealthy, but also the middle-class. In the 1800s, “breaking off pieces of Plymouth Rock in Massachusetts was such a common practice that a nearby grocery kept a hammer and chisel on hand for tourists,” Mr. Potts tells us. During the 1876 American centennial, “tourists visiting the Capitol snipped off swatches of the gallery curtains (and carved off chunks of the Speaker’s desk) in the House of Representatives.”By the close of the 19th century, cheap mass-market souvenirs were becoming alternatives to objects plundered from historical sites. And by the end of the 20th century, Mr. Potts writes that in tourist areas around the world, imported keepsakes had become the standard — and mass-produced souvenirs were a global industry. Scholars group these souvenirs into different buckets, including “markers” (location branded items like T-shirts and teacups); “pictorial images” (postcards and posters), and “symbolic shorthand” (for example, Statue of Liberty key chains), with the latter two categories being emblematic of, though not exclusive to, mass tourism. The bulk manufacturing of such items underscores the relationship, or the lack thereof, between the souvenir and the place. As Mr. Potts observes after visiting a Paris gift shop, little Eiffel Towers sold there are manufactured in China and can be ordered online and shipped to Dubuque, Iowa, no plane ticket to France required. What then, a traveler may ask, is the point?“Souvenir” offers ideas about what may be in play when we seek mementos. For instance, buying souvenirs may function as part of gift-giving customs, like the Japanese omiyage ritual. Or, the act of shopping for souvenirs may give the traveler a certain comfort: It’s a familiar activity in an unfamiliar place that also allows the traveler to conjure loved ones back home.Whether purchased or found, procuring a souvenir may also “be a way of slowing down a real-time experience that is by definition ephemeral,” as Mr. Potts puts it. To combat disorientation, “the tourist thus collects mementos as a way of gaining power of moments that he doesn’t fully understand.” For some, collecting mementos is a way to advertise worldliness, even though as Mr. Potts writes, many souvenirs end up speaking to “stereotypical shorthand rather than lived experience.” For others, acquiring a souvenir is aspirational. Consider the large clamshell Mr. Potts found at Lake Michigan as a child. He viewed it less a souvenir and more “a totem of faith that I might one day travel beyond the landlocked prairies of my youth, see an actual ocean, collect a real seashell, and journey outward to farther shores.” Indeed, in the end, “Souvenir” suggests that the meaning of a keepsake is not fixed (its importance to the owner can change over time) and that its significance is bound up in the traveler’s identity. “When we collect souvenirs,” Mr. Potts writes, “we do so not to evaluate the world, but to narrate the self.” The story begins the moment we take a trinket off a shelf, buy it and walk out of the store. The object can then become part of our personal history, “a way of mythologizing our own lives,” Mr. Potts says. And ever more so in an age of Instagram, he told me recently, when conspicuous consumption plays out in real time, making the objects we choose to keep seem even more personal. He himself has had plenty of keepsakes displayed around his home (more often, he’s on the road) in Kansas — Asian masks, Bacchus beads from New Orleans, pebbles — things that remind him not merely of the places he’s been and the people he’s encountered, but of former life phases. “Try as I might to articulate to other people the meanings and back stories of these objects,” he writes, “they ultimately exist as a kind of private sign language that only I can understand.”Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawayMore and more apps are promising to help you catch some shut eye on the road. By Stephanie RosenbloomSome of us have enough trouble sleeping in our beds at home, let alone while traveling or changing time zones.There are those who drift off by instructing their Amazon Alexa or Google Home to play recordings of babbling brooks and cicadas. Others listen to podcasts like “Sleep With Me” which tells dull bedtime stories. Some watch YouTube videos of people whispering or performing mundane tasks, or listen to electronic and ambient music, like the British group Marconi Union’s “Weightless (Ambient Transmissions Vol. 2),” which has been reported to induce deep relaxation.What might do the trick for you? More and more smartphone apps are promising solutions. They join the ranks of traditional white noise and sleep machines with settings said to aid relaxation or alleviate jet lag. Yet such gadgets, even so-called portable models that come with their own cases, are clunkier and more costly than apps. The Tranquil Moments Bedside Speaker & Sleep Sounds from Brookstone, for instance, has a dozen sounds (like ocean surf and rain); is portable and intuitive; has a nice clear sound (the speaker can pair with your smartphone if you want to play your own music); and it can be loud enough to drown out noisy neighbors, which not all devices or apps, can do. Yet it’s $99.99, about the size of a large softball. (If you’re in the market for a white noise machine, Wirecutter, the recommendation site that is part of The New York Times company, recommends the LectroFan by ASTI and the Marpac Dohm DS, each about $49.95.) For frequent travelers, such devices aren’t practical solutions to take hither and yon. And so instead they turn to free white noise and meditation apps like myNoise, Relax Melodies (among my favorites as it’s lovely to look at and allows for easy mixing of sounds like wind and rain), Rain Rain Sleep Sounds, White Noise Deep Sleep Sounds and Calm. An app called Seasons from Logicworks is delightful as you can choose sounds — like spring peepers, a barbecue, leaf raking, and icicles dripping — based on the four seasons. For no money or a few dollars on iTunes, you can download soothing music and nature sounds, and you need not pack any extra gear. (If you find yourself tiring of the free sounds, most of these sorts of apps have a paid version with additional tracks.) A travel colleague recommends White Noise Plus, as well as White Noise Ambience, from the makers of the Seasons app. (Her favorite sleep sound? “Airplane cabin.”) I’ve found a method that involves a combination of a gadget called SleepPhones, along with audio or videos of background talking (which, for me, seems to mask voices in hotel hallways and on airplanes). SleepPhones are flat speakers in a padded headband that allow side sleepers to avoid in-ear pain from earbuds. It fits around your forehead, though I position the band so the speakers are over my ears and the fabric covers my eyes. The options include a wireless ($99.95) and a wired version ($39.95), and both play any music, talk radio or white noise you have on your smartphone or computer. There are, as with most products, downsides. Because the speakers aren’t in your ear, the sound has never been loud enough for me to drown out noisy passengers on an airplane the way sound through earbuds can. (This could also be a problem for those who want to use SleepPhones to tune out a vigorously snoring partner.) And charging the wireless Bluetooth version through its USB port is inelegant: You have to open the fabric headband to get at the wiring. But that said, this little device causes no ear pain and is as light and as small as a sock, so there’s barely any added weight or space in your luggage. Also, while SleepPhones come with an app that includes soothing sounds, you don’t need it for the headphones to work. That’s a relief: A number of sleep-related products have apps that are awkward to use and instruction booklets that put you to sleep faster than the devices themselves. Yet while sleeping away from home can be challenging, when it comes to managing jet lag, things get even tricker. A handful of new apps purport to help by adjusting your circadian rhythms. Chronoshift says it uses the travel details you input to create the ideal sleep-wake schedule for the days before your particular trip (free). Uplift aims to fight jet lag through a personalized regimen that involves activating certain acupressure points ($9.99 a year). The Illumy Sleep and Wake Mask by Glo to Sleep ($149) uses an app and colored, pulsing light panels to help encourage sleep (a slow, red pulse to simulate a setting sun) or wakefulness (faster, blue pulsing for a gradually brightening morning sky). The mask is controlled through a smartphone app (for instance, you can adjust the duration of the simulated sunset and the time you want to be awakened). And it’s thick enough to block out light, though this also makes it a bit heavy and stiff — indeed, this side sleeper couldn’t wear it. I did, however, find the slightly weighty mask with its pulsing red light somewhat comforting to begin to doze off in on my back at the end of the day. But then, I was tired at the end of the day — so perhaps it simply felt good to lie down? The company says its regimen of sunset and blue sky exposure is like the system used to help astronauts in space keep their body clocks in sync. The Mayo Clinic recently offered some sound advice on its website, explaining that in addition to modifying your schedule before you depart, you should stick to your destination’s schedule as soon as you leave home and once you arrive, stay well hydrated by drinking liquids on the flight (note: go easy on the alcohol and caffeine), and, if you’re traveling fewer than eight time zones away from home, use bright light to get your body on the new schedule, like morning light if you have traveled east, and evening light if you have traveled west. The division of sleep medicine at Harvard Medical School has explained how crucial light is to regulating our biological clocks. Of course, the cheapest and least complicated way to tackle jet lag is to force yourself to stay awake when it’s daytime wherever you are, then end the day tuckered out, so you’ll sleep most of the night. But that, as those of us with a half dozen apps with lapping waves and wind chimes on our phones know, is easier said than done. Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 Places TravelerThe first half of our 52 Places Traveler’s trip around the Caribbean brings her to Trinidad and its famous Carnival, and to St. Lucia, where she had a relaxing stop.By Jada YuanOne doesn’t have to look very far to find Carnival in Port of Spain, the capital of the dual-island state of Trinidad and Tobago — it will find you. That became clear when my taxi took a right turn toward the city center, and smack into what might be the most entertaining traffic jam I’ve ever experienced. Within seconds, hundreds of revelers, many of them wearing sparkling bikinis, elaborate feather headdresses — and little else — had engulfed our car, streaming down the street in the opposite direction. One woman in a sequined, beige one-piece flashed a cheeky smile and began “wining” with our front bumper. (That’s a dance that typically involves a woman and man standing back-to-front and “winding” their hips against one another.) [READ MORE: 52 Places Traveler — The Suffering and Spirit of San Juan]To my left a shirtless young man was grinding up against my window, while a woman behind him smacked his rear end. I was sharing the cab with three Londoners I’d met at the airport, and the woman among them burst out laughing: “I brought way too many clothes.”Trinidad’s Carnival is second in reputation only to Brazil’s for both beauty and debauchery. The massive, joyous street party I’d experienced upon arrival, I soon found out, was actually an off night. The real action would begin the next day, with serious celebrants in serious costumes hitting the street as early as 8 a.m. and dancing until dawn on Ash Wednesday. “You can’t come to Trinidad and not play mas!” said Linda Wells, a Trinidad-born nurse living in Brooklyn who’s been coming back to her home country every year for 20 years to celebrate. She was using the nickname for “masquerade,” a tradition that dates back to 18th-century balls that French plantation owners used to throw (and their slaves mimicked) to let loose before the asceticism of Lent.Ms. Wells is 56 but looks about 30 years younger, with a long blonde braid springing from the top of her head and the rest of her hair shaved off underneath. I had run into her and her girlfriends — an accountant, a bank manager, a former publicist — getting ready near Queen’s Park Savannah, where “bands,” or costumed groups, go to compete for prizes. (A shocking number of Carnival-goers I met were Trinis from New York City.) The custom-designed dress Ms. Wells was to wear, she showed me, was flesh colored, with an intricate pattern of green sequins and a train of green feathers, and would have put everyone at the Oscars to shame. She’d be adding a “backpack” of flowing green and blue fabric, splayed out to look like a peacock’s tail that was so heavy it required the help of two young men to get it on. Then she would dance all day in it. “I’m with the K2K band. You have to follow us. We’re going to be fabulous!” she said, and sent me down to the park under the protection of her husband, Earl Wells, a field surveyor who was wearing an antlered headdress, face paint and head-to-toe tie-dye. Soon I was in the midst of several hundred people twirling around in elaborate fabric wings, or getting down to soca music with sparkling suns on sticks attached to their backs that shot up 20 feet in the air. Karen and Kathy Norman, Trinidad-born twin sisters living in New Jersey, designed all of the band’s costumes, and to join, all Ms. Wells had to do was sign up and pay for her costume in advance. This was her second year with K2K and she was sure she’d be back. “They’re so different. In Trinidad, you mostly see people in two-piece bikinis. But K2K, it’s about the fashion. You don’t see anyone wearing anything like that. I like the elegance, and you’re covered up! We’re old. We need it!” Technically, Trinidad had not been on the original itinerary of the yearlong, worldwide trip I’m on for The Times, visiting each place on the 52 Places to Go in 2018 list. In an effort to convey to readers that the Caribbean, large swaths of which had been hit by two hurricanes last year, shouldn’t be avoided as a travel destination, my editors had put the entire region at No. 4. Working with data scientists from Kayak, the online booking site, we crafted an itinerary that would take me to two islands that hadn’t been affected by the hurricanes (Trinidad and St. Lucia) and one that very much had (Puerto Rico, which I’ll be writing about next week). That lineup scratched a few itches: the desire to experience Carnival; to island hop (to me, another defining Caribbean experience); and to go somewhere that had sustained damage and see for myself what being “back open for business” really looked like. What would it mean to be a responsible visitor to such a place, and how could I both encourage tourism while accurately conveying the situation? What followed was a visit to the Caribbean at a breakneck pace that I would advise no sane person to mimic. For complicated logistical and cost-related reasons that made sense at the time, I’d mapped out a plan with Kayak to go to St. Lucia, then to Trinidad and back, then off to San Juan — all in four days.Traveling to Trinidad during Carnival turns out to be stressful even when you’re not on a 24-hour, please-don’t-try-this-at-home marathon. The Brits I shared my taxi with showed up only to find out that their hotel had given away their reservation (common, apparently), so they came to my place, President’s Inn, where we all encountered the surprise that the front desk only took cash. (For me, that meant a trip to an A.T.M. on a dark and isolated street. Our heroic taxi driver refused to let me go alone.) Still, as simple as our hotel was, it was in an ideal location close to the action. Just three blocks away, I found a calypso show called Pandemonium in a dirt lot and featuring incredible steel-pan players from as far away as Paris. I had good luck finding that show, and the K2K band, while walking around, but nearly everyone I ran into seemed horrified to see me on my own. When I strayed from the show to look for something to eat, a young man raced up behind me. His name was Kadeem and he wanted to warn me that I had just narrowly escaped a robber who had been casing me, and who was blocking my way back to the show. “Be careful of that guy. He’s not a nice guy,” he said. “He won’t bother you, but he looked like he wanted to get someone at the corner.” Later, back at the show, I befriended a female pan player named Lenitia Solomon who happened to be a police officer in another part of town. “Trinidad is not safe, especially around Carnival. A lot of phone snatchers. Believe me, I’ve seen it all. Be aware of who’s around you,” she said, before telling me the story of a Japanese pan-player friend of hers who had been murdered at last year’s Carnival. She insisted on taking me back to my hotel with a male friend who had come to walk her back to the show. Despite such warnings, Trinidad was vibrant and colorful and edgy, and I loved every minute of it.But I also wouldn’t trade the serenity of the brief time I got to spend in St. Lucia. A volcanic island known for its twin mountains, the Pitons, it has a kind of rugged charm one doesn’t normally associate with Caribbean luxury. (It’s also the only island I got to spend any time on during my one previous visit to the Caribbean, on a friend’s sailing trip more than 10 years ago, and has always held special memories for me.) The hurricanes largely skipped the island, though Judith Verity, who owns the Mango Beach Inn, where I stayed, kept mentioning how much more beautiful her incredibly beautiful garden had been before the storm. “We are blessed people. God loves us,” said my taxi driver, Barry Augustin, of why the jungle paradise where he’s lived his whole life had been spared. “In St. Lucia, the economy is already so hard, so God protects his children.” While I missed most of St. Lucia’s best attractions — a hike up the Pitons, the sulfur hot springs — I did get to experience some of its lush beauty. There are banana plantations everywhere. On the side of the busy Micoud highway, Mr. Augustin pulled over at a family-run roadside stand he calls the Creole Bread Place (real name: Golden Palace) that he claims makes the best baked goods on the island. A gray-bearded man named Mango was pulling spiral loaves out of a wood-fired oven with a wooden paddle, while Seco, his daughter, split them open and filled them with curried, shredded fish, and his son, Earl Joseph, who turned out to be the owner, handled the money.Though there are far more luxurious places to stay — Mr. Augustin has a second job at one, the Ladera resort — I was charmed by Mango Beach Inn. There’s no way to get to its location, in an old building on Marigot Bay on the northwest side of the island, other than by ferry, and one day I came in to see that the maid had decorated my mosquito netting with rose petals. Down the stairs was Hassey’s Waterside Bar, which just might be the perfect vacation lounge, flush with the bay and covered in strings of lights. I met a 21-year-old beach worker named Jamal Felix, who described his job: “I put the beach lounges down, I go fishing, I climb the coconut trees, I use the swing on the coconut trees and fall in the water, I go swimming.”I felt completely at odds with everyone else on the island, from the natives (like Mr. Felix) whose jobs included regular swim breaks, to the many couples on romantic vacations who were spending their days on hikes or boat rides. I mainly stressed out about how to squeeze in this ridiculous Trinidad idea, or sat in Mango Beach Inn’s lovely common room overlooking the bay and wrote. As my taxi driver, Domitiana René, saw me frantically trying to post to Instagram on my way back to the airport, she told me not to worry. The island would still be there. It was blessed. It was paradise. I could always come back to check out St. Lucia’s Carnival in June and July. It was her favorite time of year. “I think we are becoming more and more like Trinidad,” she said. “Every year I’m noticing people wearing less and less clothes.”Jada Yuan will be traveling to every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.Previous dispatches:1: New Orleans2: Chattanooga, Tenn.3. Montgomery, Ala.4. Disney Springs, Fla. Next dispatch: San Juan, Puerto RicoAdvertisement“No one can predict what will happen to Cuba in the coming years, which is why you must rush there now. As in, right now.”
Pursuits By                     
REIF LARSEN

MARCH 12, 2018
Just before New Year’s Eve, my wife and I left our two young children at home with my parents and sneaked down to Havana for a brief getaway. You might be familiar with this uncanny sensation of kidlessness, as if you are getting away with something reckless and potentially illegal. More than once, I felt as if we had discovered a cheat code that had opened a portal into a parallel universe. Suddenly, we were allowed to get a drink. We were allowed to sip this drink. We could read more than a single page in a book at one time. We could enjoy a meal without cleaning yogurt off the ceiling.Yet this odd feeling of defeating space and time came as much from our destination as anything. Cuba, that elusive island unfurling across the Caribbean like a tangled flag, sits barely 100 miles south of Key West. 100 miles! And yet, in some respects, it might as well be 10,000 miles. The country’s complex identity is inherently bound up in the duality of this proximity, in its ability to feel both so close and yet so far away at the same time.Our visit came at a strange time for Cuban-American relations, as the country languishes in a period of post-Fidel, post-Obama uncertainty. Many Cubans we talked to cited President Obama’s 2016 visit as a watershed moment, a critical first step in normalizing relations between the two countries. But such optimism has given way to a kind of stagnant waiting game, filled with more questions than answers: Is the sudden explosion of private businesses (like Airbnb) on the island a sign of things to come or merely window dressing on what remains a totalitarian regime? What will happen when Raul Castro finally steps down? In this age of Trump, are Americans even allowed to go to Cuba anymore? And if I did go to Cuba, would my capitalist mind be turned into mush?Like many, I had been particularly taken by reports that American diplomats in Cuba had suffered from a range of mysterious symptoms, including nausea, hearing loss, dizziness, memory loss and even brain damage. Both the media and the U.S. State Department bandied about an attack by a “sonic weapon” as a possible explanation. It felt like a last, toxic gasp of Cold War subterfuge.AdvertisementWhat, pray tell, would this even look like? I pictured a Russian agent in a dingy hotel room, a gadget-filled suitcase open on the bed, various satellite dishes pointed at his target in an adjacent building. Scientists and acoustic experts have dismissed such theories of ultrasonic sound rifles as extremely unlikely. A more plausible hypothesis is that the diplomats were exposed to some kind of toxin. Still, sound as an all-pervasive, invisible weapon remains a primal fear of mine. I even wrote a novel in which a New Jersey teenager discovers a particular frequency, that, when played at exactly the right decibel level, has disastrous physical effects on his classmates.AdvertisementSo then why go to Cuba and dive into the cross hairs of both diplomatic and acoustic uncertainty? Because this is why we travel. As José Martí, Cuba’s talismanic national poet and philosopher once wrote, “In a time of crisis, the peoples of the world must rush to get to know each other.” No one can predict what will happen to Cuba in the coming years, which is why you must rush there now. As in, right now. To visit is to witness a rare bird about to fly the coop.We flew direct to Havana from Newark Liberty International Airport on United Airlines. I know! I was as shocked as you that this is now possible. The cheat-code feeling began in earnest at the airport in Newark, where they made you check in at a whole special area dedicated solely to the handful of us flying to Cuba. This seemed like a complete waste of money and infrastructure, but these are the strange byproducts of what feels like a decades-long playground argument between our two countries.I was a bit nervous about my qualifications. Officially, you are not allowed to visit Cuba as a tourist; rather, you must travel under the auspices of 12 official reasons. I was armed with my very official reason (I was engaged in “Journalistic Activity”) and my very official itinerary (I would go to this restaurant … to engage in “Journalistic Activity”).In the end, no one batted an eye. We paid $75 for each of our Cuban visas and that was it. Amazingly, the cost of our Cuban medical insurance was baked into the cost of the plane ticket. For the brief time I was there, I would have much more robust (and much cheaper) insurance than I currently have in the United States.The flight to Havana took just over three hours. Three hours to another world. There’s a bit of consumerist whiplash that goes on when one travels from New Jersey to Cuba. The landscape around Newark Liberty is a surreal holding ground for all the trappings of capitalist excess: shipping containers packed with plastic Chinese toys; warehouses of kombucha to be shipped out to thousands of New York’s corner bodegas; parking lots full of new cars ready to replace slightly less-new cars.There is no such excess in Cuba, where things are used and then used some more and then used until they eventually fall apart. And then they are fixed. Imagine that. Our driver in Havana had inherited his cherry-red 1959 Buick Invicta convertible from his father, who had inherited it from his father. The engine was original. I asked how many miles the car had on it. “This can’t be measured,” he said.Much in Cuba resists measurement. Time becomes slippery. When we drove into the city from José Martí International Airport, we were instantly immersed in a whirlwind of ghostly history: American Plymouths from the 1950s, Soviet Ladas from the 1970s, Polski Fiats from the 1980s, donkey carts, the odd Peugeot. It was as if every moment that came before was also present now.Cubans have a complicated relationship to time. The socialist system demands that time is not one’s own; time, like most everything else, is a shared commodity. Thus people are used to waiting in lines for services. They are so used to waiting in lines that there are no lines anymore. There is only a group of people living their lives, chatting, who just so happen to also be waiting outside a bank or at a bus stop. When someone new shows up they ask “Quién es el último?” A finger goes up. The queue quietly grows by one and time tumbles on.AdvertisementOne of the young Cubans we talked to waiting in line shrugged off this inconvenience.“Yes, there are shortages of goods. No, it’s not ideal,” he said. “Private enterprise is important. But we don’t just want to copy the American system — no offense — where everything is about money.”One of the great gifts of our short time in Havana was time itself. Specifically not having constant access to the internet. Back home my phone is my safety blanket, my cigarette, my friend, my enemy. Havana has recently allowed for public Wi-Fi, but only in certain parks and street corners. One has to purchase a little card to buy time online. And so we guiltily joined the masses at night in John Lennon Park (not to be confused with Lenin Park outside the city), huddled around the glow of our smartphones. The public parks are once again filled with addicts; it’s just the nature of the fix that has changed. Would this be where the new revolution began? And would this revolution have its own emoji?floridaAtlanticOceanbahamasHavanacubaCaribbean Seahaitijamaica200 milesChrist of HavanaHavana BayMalecónLa Zorra y El CuervoCallejón de HamelLennon Park HavanaFábrica de Arte CubanoMARCH 12, 2018
We were wandering through dark parks at night because, for the most part, Cuba itself is perfectly safe. There is no crime to speak of, or so the Cuban government says. As is often the case, when you dig beneath the surface, all is not as it seems: Cuba has the seventh highest incarceration rate in the world (the United States is number 2). If there is no crime, why are there so many criminals? Or is there no crime because all the (potential) criminals are locked up? When I asked our driver about this he shrugged.“There’s an old joke,” he said. “11 million Cubans, 5 million are police.”I will not be the first to tell you that the streets of Havana are an intoxication. The city is ridiculously photogenic, no filters needed. Our Airbnb was in Vedado, a deceptively calm residential neighborhood of aging mansions which also features a few of the city’s most thumping night clubs and Fábrica de Arte Cubano, an old cooking oil factory turned into a sprawling multiuse arts complex with a terrific restaurant, El Cocinero, on its rooftop. The night we went, there was a fashion show, a concert, a gallery opening all wrapped up into one. Cubans are ingenious at adapting what they have into something that is greater than the sum of its parts.From Vedado we walked. We walked without our kids, which meant we could actually get somewhere. We walked along the Malecón, the seafront avenue and promenade known as the “sofa of the city,” where young people come out to see and be seen as the ocean pounds the city’s sea wall. We strolled through the crumbling party of Centro Habana, the “real Havana,” as many people put it. Everyone was home for the holidays; the mood was festive. We dodged water flung from balconies. Men fixing cars. Cars fixing men. We drifted through the Callejón de Hamel, an alleyway covered in palimpsestic layers of Afro-Cuban street art by Salvador González — inscribed bathtubs embedded in walls, bright murals of bodies entangled in dance. We passed the joyous scrum of a rumba street festival.Was there a rumba festival here everyday? I wouldn’t be surprised.In fact, Habaneros are some of the more upbeat people I have ever met. Citizens in many of the Socialist and post-Socialist countries I’ve visited often radiate a carefully honed cynicism (see the perfect scowl of an escalator attendant in the Moscow Metro). Cubans are just the opposite. They are not blind to the problems in their country but there is no time to be down because … there’s a rumba street festival! (And a car to fix, an apartment to rent, eggs to track down …)Even Jesus was in on the action. The Christ of Havana is a 66-foot-tall statue made of Carrara marble that overlooks the city from a hilltop across the bay.Advertisement“In Rio their Jesus is like this,” said our guide, holding out his arms. “In Cuba he is like this, with a mojito and a cigar.” The Cuban benediction.We were constantly called out by strangers: “Where are you from?” People beamed when we told them. “We love the U.S. I have a cousin in Queens. It’s cold there, yes? I would die. Please tell everyone that Cuba is beautiful. No Mafia, no war. Just Mojitos and salsa dancing.” Hand on stomach, the dance was demonstrated, the toe expertly twirled in the dust.This was all part of the pitch. For the average Cuban, it is of course not just mojitos and salsa dancing. Every day is an act of improvised survivalism. But as visitors on this miraculous island, we followed the Christ of Havana’s lead and drank our fair share of mojitos. They went down like water. The food was almost universally forgettable, but this is not why you come to Cuba. You come to be transported. To dance, to twirl your toes in the dust. To soak in the jaw-dropping collage of colonial and Art Deco architecture, to ponder the sad-alien street murals by Yulier Rodriguez, to hear stories of a parallel world, a world that begins to slowly merge with your own.And you come for the sound. Havana is a land of sound. Never have I been to a place whose identity is so entangled in its auditory fingerprint. The guttural putt putt of eight cylinder Cadillacs built before my father was born; the ocean rising and slapping at the Malecón like a newborn babe; the dip and pull of the timbale’s bell chattering at a bar across the street, tin tin — tin tin tin; the shuffle of a man demonstrating salsa for you on the sidewalk; the swish and chop of a broom on a doorstep; the plush boom of the ceremonial cannons fired every evening from the Fortaleza de San Carlos de la Cabaña; the clink of ice cubes in the most delicious mojito de piña you will ever taste.I could not help but think: Could this blessed collage of reverberations really be the site of those sonic attacks? Before I left for Cuba I had listened to a brief audio recording of what some of the diplomats had allegedly heard. It was unlistenable, like a cloud of cicadas on acid. A thromping high-pitched acoustic minefield. It cleaved open my consciousness, crushed my spirit, shut down all possibility. Sound can be terrifying.It can also be beautiful. Our last night in Havana we went to see the eternal Roberto Fonseca and his band Temperamento at the famous La Zorra y El Cuervo jazz club. To enter, you must wait in line before descending through a replica of a red British telephone booth into a small subterranean space.Mr. Fonseca and his bandmates slowly arrived one by one, greeting one another, testing their instruments, testing the wind, the mood. There was no rush. The music didn’t start until well after 11 p.m. Yet when that first note was struck, everything seemed to fade away: the city, the island, the ocean, the world. We were floating. The drummer was humble, incorruptible, generous. He dove back and forth with Mr. Fonseca, who dashed up and down his keyboard like a gazelle. The conga player, when his time finally came, let loose such an avalanche of rhythm the atoms in the room began to quiver and split. Tell me, is there a more ecstatic instrument than the conga drum?Jazz, when it is good, makes all possibilities seem possible. And yet whatever is played at the moment also feels perfect, intensely true. This is what was meant to be. When the song finally ended, the world came rushing back, changed, unchanged.We were in Cuba, still.We took a breath and began to applaud.An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated the year that President Obama visited Cuba. It was 2016, not 2015.Reif Larsen is the author of the novels “I Am Radar” and “The Selected Works of T. S. Spivet,” which was adapted into a feature film, “The Young and Prodigious T. S. Spivet.”A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2018, on Page TR1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Symphony of Sound.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTrendingFrom meditation apps to exercise videos, healthier snacks to gourmet meals, airlines both international and domestic are renewing their commitment to healthy passengers.By Shivani VoraWellness isn’t a concept that seems synonymous with the ever-growing hassles of flying, but that could finally be changing. Some airlines are embracing the idea of healthier flying, offering calorie-conscious menus and new exercise videos.According to Beth McGroarty, research director for The Global Wellness Institute, a nonprofit organization for the wellness industry, even as seats shrink and flights get more crowded, many carriers want air travel to be more bearable (and even enjoyable). They believe wellness is the way to do that. “It’s part of the larger wellness movement happening in the travel industry,” she said.And, unlike the usual trend of amping up onboard amenities for only their first and business class customers and stripping them away for passengers in economy, Ms. McGroarty said that no passengers are left out in this recent wellness push. “Wellness in the air, in many instances, is more democratic,” she said. All United Airlines and JetBlue customers have access to the popular digital meditation service Headspace as part of their in-flight entertainment. JetBlue’s Headspace content includes videos that address travel topics, such as fear of flying and difficulty sleeping upright. Among international carriers, Swiss Air offers Headspace onboard long-haul flights, and British Airways has a Well Being channel on its in-flight entertainment systems that includes meditation and stretching exercises. Also, the Hong Kong-based carrier Cathay Pacific recently launched six in-flight videos, called “Travel Well With Yoga,” in a partnership with Pure Yoga, the popular yoga studio chain. Each video is between five and 20 minutes, and feature yoga and meditation exercises such as hip and back stretches and deep breathing. American Airlines started prioritizing wellness after conducting customer surveys and running focus groups with fliers about what they want. “We learned that our passengers care a lot about their well-being,” said Nick Richards, the company’s director of customer experience. According to American’s research, travelers wanted to sleep more soundly in the skies, and to that end, the airline recently tapped the mattress and bedding brand Casper to design pillows, blankets and other products which are supposed to help with a more comfortable sleep. Premium economy passengers receive a lumbar pillow and a soft cotton blanket while the Casper amenities for international first and business class fliers include mattress pads, pillows, blankets and pajamas.Mental well-being and sleep aside, airlines are also incorporating wellness onboard by offering healthier food and drink options. Turkish Airlines, for instance, has a new Fly Good Feel Good campaign that includes a menu of herbal teas such as one with rooibos, sage and lavender to help relieve stress and promote sleep. Another is an energizing blend with mate, mint and ginger. Children are offered a traditional Turkish drink with milk, carob powder and date syrup that’s meant to strengthen the bones. In January, TAP Air Portugal tapped five Michelin-starred Portuguese chefs to create low-calorie Portuguese-influenced entrees for its business class passengers. Those entrees will also be offered to economy passengers starting this summer, said Joel Fragata, head of the airline’s in-flight products. José Avillez, of the two Michelin-starred Lisbon restaurant Belcanto, crafted a stone bass in tomato and onion stew, along with coriander and basil potatoes for TAP’s fliers while Henrique Sá Pessoa, of the Michelin-starred Alma, also in Lisbon, came up with a lemongrass and ginger chicken curry. “We want to showcase our delicious cuisine but do it with health in mind because people today are more and more health conscious,” Mr. Fragata said. A handful of domestic carriers, too, are encouraging mindful eating. Dr. Charles Platkin, a nutrition and public health advocate, and the director of the Hunter College NYC Food Policy Center, conducts an annual airline food study where he analyzes the economy food of every domestic carrier. In his latest study, released last December, he declared that Delta Air Lines is a leader “by a long shot” in its commitment to improve “its food in terms of health and consciousness.” Dr. Platkin’s analysis found that Delta’s meals, snack boxes and individual snacks have an average of 480 calories, a decrease from the year before, at 527 calories.Delta also frequently updates its food choices including its free snacks. Almonds, a pretzel snack mix and a KIND Dark Chocolate Chunk Bar are among the recent offerings, and all are less than 200 calories and gluten-free. To purchase, fliers can choose from a menu that includes wraps from Luvo, a company whose mission is to create nutrition-focused meals. In commending other carries in their commitment to wellness, Dr. Platkin also called out JetBlue’s newly available AmuUp box, packed with gluten-free crackers, hummus, olives, almonds and a fruit energy bar. Tamara Young, a spokeswoman for the airline, said that adding the box to its onboard menu lineup is one of the ways the airline is weaving wellness into “its customer experience.” AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byQ & AThe author Sara Clemence is an advocate of mindful travel, which means slowing down and really connecting to your destination.By Elaine GlusacAs the former travel editor for The Wall Street Journal and a past news director at Travel + Leisure, Sara Clemence knew about making the most of her time in the field, cramming in as much as possible while traveling. In 2016, burnout hit and she began thinking about information overload and fractured attention spans, her own included. “Fifteen years ago, travelers would be looking around and reflecting and absorbing,” she said. “Now they’re looking for the best place to take a selfie.” Her answer to what she identifies as “digital saturation in travel” is slowing down and easing up on electronic use, the topic of her new book “Away & Aware: A Field Guide to Mindful Travel” (Dovetail Press). Full of Zen-channeling ideas for enriching trips, the illustrated book advocates living in the moment and embracing circumstances, including jet lag, a lesson she learned on a trip to China at age 10. Sleepless before dawn, she heard Shanghai gradually awaken beginning with a distant bicycle bell and growing to a full crescendo of cycling commuters. “I would never have had that memory if I had had some magical remedy to jet lag,” she said. The following are excerpts from a conversation with Ms. Clemence.What is mindful travel?Mindful travel is about tuning into your destination. It’s about disconnecting from your devices and connecting to your surroundings, being aware of and attentive to the people and food and culture and scenery around you. It’s something that’s gotten a little lost in this hyper-connected age. Many people are too absorbed by the convenience and distraction of their phones to pay close attention to their surroundings.In the age of “1,000 Things to Do Before You Die,” what are the benefits of under-scheduling?If you’re looking for meaningful experiences, chances are you’re not going to get them by hustling around checking things off your list. You need time to discover, to reflect, to have a conversation with a stranger. In my experience, that’s when something really special can happen. Also, under-scheduling gives our minds a break from the regular grind. Slowing down can be really restorative and that’s one of the many reasons that we travel. What are your tips for meeting people while traveling?Starting a conversation with a total stranger is challenging whether you’re traveling or not. It really helps to ask a question. One of my favorite ways to start an actual conversation with somebody is to ask about food because so many people really like to give their opinions about food. So, ask them where they like to eat. There’s a fine distinction between asking, where should I eat — I being the tourist — and where do you like to eat. Sometimes people will give a tourist-friendly place. But if you ask where they like to eat, it’s more likely to yield a local, interesting restaurant or food stall or market.You advise leaving the camera at home to focus on the experience. Is there some way to shoot and be mindful?It can really help to be more thoughtful about how you use your camera. Say you’re only going to take three photos a day or only photograph certain kinds of things. Photographers say everybody needs to be taking fewer better photographs. It has a dual effect. One, it makes you more thoughtful about what photographs you’re taking and it also removes the temptation to photograph everything.How can families practice mindfulness while traveling?Letting your kids help plan your travels is a big one, because then it becomes a team effort. They’re invested in what you’re doing. It’s important to set limits on devices just as you set limits on yourself. When your kids start getting bored, it can be really hard not to rush to fill their time with some sort of activity. It’s perfectly healthy for children to be bored. When we were traveling for six months last year, my 5-year-old son started making toys out of whatever materials we had at hand. He would make a house out of tissue box, or he’d make a bottle into an airplane. It made me feel we were accidentally enhancing his resourcefulness.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawayA look at what’s new, including apps that enable travelers to order food and headphones at their departure gate, more biometric boarding, and higher fees for some United States passport applicants. By Stephanie RosenbloomIt may not feel like it in certain parts of the country, but it’s finally spring, and changes are underway at the nation’s airports, including apps that allow travelers to order food and have it delivered directly to their departure gate, the expansion of biometric boarding using facial recognition technology, and higher execution fees for certain United States passport applicants. Below, a look at the latest developments and coming changes.Beginning April 2, the execution fee for a United States passport (which is in addition to the $110 application fee for a passport book) will increase to $35 from $25 for some travelers, including first-time passport applicants over the age of 16, children under 16 and people who are reapplying after reporting their passport lost or stolen. If, however, you’re eligible to renew your passport by mail (using an online form called the DS-82) rather than in-person at a post office or with a court clerk, you still pay the usual application fee ($110 for a passport book), but not the $35 execution fee. To find out if you’re eligible to renew by mail, visit Travel.state.gov. In March, San Diego International Airport introduced an app called AtYourGate, a mobile ordering and delivery service that enables passengers to request food (from airport restaurants like Panda Express and Jack-in-the-Box) or an item they may have forgotten to pack (Dramamine, a phone charger, OK! magazine) through their smartphones and have everything delivered to them at their departure gate or elsewhere in the terminal. Before you check out through the app, you can get an estimate of the delivery time, and see the fee. For instance, on a Wednesday afternoon, while contemplating a foam neck pillow from the CNBC News airport store, I could see that delivery would take about 20 to 35 minutes, and that there would be $2.99 delivery charge. Whether this sort of service will take off remains to be seen, though it’s not the only gate-delivery app. At Baltimore/Washington Marshall International Airport, for example, Airport Sherpa allows passengers to order food, souvenirs and travel sundries on the go. Beyond premium conveniences, the bigger and broader change beginning to take hold at airport gates is biometric boarding.Fingerprint biometrics has become routine for travelers who use expedited government screening programs like Global Entry (where members scan their fingerprints at a kiosk when coming back into the United States instead of waiting in a customs line). But increasingly, Customs and Border Protection has been working with airlines to integrate facial recognition technology with the boarding process. Already its been tested at a handful of airports, such as Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport, John F. Kennedy International Airport and Boston Logan International Airport.In late March, Lufthansa announced that it, too, was beginning biometric boarding using facial recognition technology at Los Angeles International Airport. The airline said in a news release that facial recognition cameras capture images of the passengers’ faces as they approach, then the image is sent to a Customs and Border Protection database for matching and verification; if successful, the passenger is marked as having boarded, no boarding pass necessary.Lufthansa intends to expand the program to additional United States gateways. “In near time, biometric boarding, as well as other aspects of the air travel experience, will be widely utilized across the U.S. and beyond,” Bjoern Becker, senior director, product management ground and digital services for Lufthansa, said in a statement.The use of facial recognition technology at airports has raised questions about privacy rights, including whether the process is invasive and how, exactly, the information can be used. Customs and Border Protection met with privacy rights groups earlier this year to discuss its plans involving biometrics, and its published privacy impact assessments are at Dhs.gov/publication/departure-information-systems-test.The model has been gaining steam in the last five or six years, according to the Centre for Aviation, a market research and data company, which expects to see some 25 to 30 such airlines by the end of the decade. Last year, for instance, Air France-KLM introduced a low-cost carrier called Joon that includes long-haul destinations.Norwegian, among the leaders in the category, announced that on March 27 that it was beginning nonstop service between Austin-Bergstrom International Airport and London Gatwick Airport, making Austin the airline’s first nonstop in Texas. The flight will operate on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays on Boeing 787-9 Dreamliner aircraft.The American airline that carries the most animals, United Airlines, has suspended transporting pets in cargo, not in the cabin, until further notice. The halting of its PetSafe program, created to transport animals that are not allowed to travel in the cabin, came after one of its flight attendants told a passenger to put her French bulldog in an overhead bin during a flight from Houston to New York and the dog died. Shortly thereafter, the airline accidentally flew a German shepherd to Japan instead of Kansas (it was returned home via private jet), and mistakenly sent a dog to St. Louis when its destination was Akron, Ohio (the plane made an additional stop to drop off the dog).“We are taking this voluntary action to conduct a thorough and systematic review of our PetSafe program and make improvements that will ensure the best possible experience for our customers and their pets,” the airline said on its website.The review is expected to be completed by May 1.Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byAuckland’s natural beauty is well worth the trip. Before you go, pack these necessities to make the most of your stay.By Alan HenryAs you go from trekking the Coast-to-Coast Walkway to a night of theater on the waterfront of this multifaceted New Zealand city, you’ll want to be equally prepared for indoor and outdoor adventures. Here are some recommendations from Wirecutter, The New York Times’s product review site. Ria Misra, an editor at Wirecutter, suggests that you remember the shifting weather while packing for your time in this stylish, but casual, city: Days spent on and off boats, beaches, and ferries means that you’ll also want to be ready for bright, breezy, or even damp conditions. Having a windbreaker, sunglasses, sunscreen, and a base-layer top at the ready will help keep you comfortable as you move between activities.Here are some more of Ms. Misra’s suggestions for what to take on your trip, including recommendations from Wirecutter’s experts.This multiport USB charger from Anker is small enough to slip into a handbag or carry-on tote and is rated for use both in the U.S. and abroad, so you can charge up to four devices at once, whether in the airport, on the plane, or in your hotel.A type “I” plug adapter. One is included in this Bestek global plug adapter set that Wirecutter likes, but if you’re not stopping in any other countries on the way, you can simply get the individual plug. (Although Bestek marks it “Australia,” type “I” is also the standard used in New Zealand.)Battery pack, to keep your phone charged (GPS-related apps burn a lot of power)Camera. A mirrorless camera, like the Olympus OM-D E-M10 Mark II, will take up less space in your pack or tote than a DSLR, but still give you excellent image quality. Camera strap, especially if you’ll be hiking or playing on the waterSunscreen Bug spray, for your hike and the beach (remember, the TSA regards aerosols as a liquid, so pack anything larger than 3.4 ounces in a checked bag)A packable tote/backpack. In the market, you’re better off with a zip-top tote; on the trail, you might prefer a backpack; on a walk through the museum, the best bag may be one that you can tuck into a pocket and forget about (most museums in Auckland make you check backpacks). This Patagonia travel tote packs into its own pocket when not in use and also converts into either a tote or a backpack. A light windbreaker, like this hooded one from Outdoor Research, will keep you comfortable while sailing, riding the ferry and hiking. Although it won’t stand up to a downpour, it should handily keep seaspray at bay. Sunglasses A brimmed hat or baseball cap, to keep the sun out of your eyes Comfortable walking shoes. Be sure to choose a flat-soled shoe that will work well on different types of ground, like a pair of trail running shoes, and also that will dry quickly if they get a little damp while practicing your sailing skills. 3 days of hiking socksA base layer top. Although the early autumn temperatures shouldn’t be too cold in Auckland, they can drop low enough make the long sleeves of a base layer appealing while you’re on the trail. This top from SmartWool (available in men’s and women’s sizes) breathes well and also doubles as sun protection (for clear days) and layers easily under your windbreaker (for breezy days).3 days of clothes, including light layers suitable for roaming outdoors in mild, early autumn temperatures between low-50s and the mid-70s.3 days of underwearBeach sandals or flip flops A packable towel, for the beach. This Packtowl Personal scrunches down into a small sack for easy transport. Insulated water bottle. Keep your water cool on your hike and your coffee hot on your way around the city. Binoculars. Whether you’re hoping to get a spot a kingfisher in flight or just look out over the green, volcanic landscape on the Coast to Coast walk, a good set of binoculars, like this pair from Athlon Optics, will keep your view in focus. Carry-on bag. Although individual airlines differ in their exact carry-on sizes, international flights generally offer slightly smaller storage spaces. These smaller, lighter carry-on bags designed for international travel should work for most flights. For a short trip, a carry-on should be all that you need. But if these 36 hours are just one leg of a longer trip, here’s a suggestion for an additional checked bag (that happened to be tested on a trip to New Zealand). Travel toiletry bag. This one from Sea-to-Summit is not only smaller and lighter than most but also has a hook for hanging it. Most flights to Auckland from the continental U.S. will leave you with more than a dozen hours on the plane to fill, so bring a travel pillow, earplugs, and a travel sleep mask to land better rested.Also, noise-canceling earbuds for when you’re not sleeping.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawayWith the couple’s nuptials on the horizon, travel brands are offering themed hotel packages and viewing parties. By Stephanie RosenbloomWith the wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle mere weeks away — and the recent news that the couple will have a carriage procession around Windsor Town after their nuptials at St George’s Chapel in Windsor Castle — hotels and tour companies are trotting out packages for royal watchers.In Britain it’s easy to create your own royal-inspired itinerary with, say, a riverboat ride on the Thames and a visit to Windsor Castle (though note that the castle will be closed on May 18 and 19). From London to Windsor, there will be wedding-themed tea parties, and plenty of bars and pubs from which to watch the festivities (they are widely expected to be televised) and celebrate into the night. In Windsor, the wedding day carriage procession route from St. George’s Chapel will be via Castle Hill, along High Street and through Windsor Town, and then back to Windsor Castle along the Long Walk, according to the Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead tourism site. You can preview the procession route in this video from the tourism association, Visit Windsor: The #RoyalWedding carriage procession route has been announced by @KensingtonRoyal! Here’s what the newly married couple will see in Windsor 🏰💒🍾#HarryandMeghan #MondayMotivation pic.twitter.com/FgQ9sMixeoBut for those who want to go a step further, there are royal wedding packages at hotels and, should you prefer to relish the big day with fellow fans, group tours. Among the most comprehensive is the eight-day Royal Wedding Celebration in England: Inside the British Monarchy tour from Road Scholar, the experiential learning travel company. The tour (from $2,499, excluding airfare) includes an indoor hotel-viewing party with picnic food as well as stops at the Tower of London, Kensington Palace, Westminster Abbey, Hampton Court Palace and Windsor Castle, as well as talks from former royal staff members about how to organize a security team of thousands of people, and the art of creating a royal cake. The Original Tour, which has long offered open-top, hop-on hop-off bus tours of London, has begun, for the first time, operating daily bus tours of Windsor, just months before the royal wedding. The bus passes places such as Windsor Castle, Eton College (attended by both Prince William and Prince Harry) and the Royal Farms Windsor Farm Shop (a 24-hour period ticket is £13, or about $18; £7 for children; £11 for students and adults over 60; £33 for a family with two adults and two children; free for children under 5).There are a variety of day tours to be had in and around London. If you’re considering signing up for one on May 19, be aware that in general, day tours that regularly visit Windsor Castle will not be visiting the castle that day. Companies like Evan Evans, for instance, which typically offers a day tour with stops at Windsor Castle, Stonehenge and Bath, will visit Hampton Court Palace, the former home of Henry VIII, on that day instead of Windsor Castle. The same is true for Golden Tours, which leads a Windsor Castle, Bath and Stonehenge tour but on the 19th will also visit Hampton Court Palace rather than Windsor Castle.Many leading Windsor hotels are already booked that day, though properties nearby and in London are selling royal-inspired getaways. You can even find a vacation rental promising the occasional wedding-themed amenity. “If you are coming during the Royal wedding, there will be a complimentary Champagne hamper provided to help kick off the celebrations,” read one Airbnb listing for a home in Windsor.At the Arch London boutique hotel, the Royal Wedding package, available throughout May, is £3,900 for a two-night stay based on double occupancy and includes a two-bedroom suite; a three-course dinner at the hotel’s restaurant, Hunter 486; a Champagne breakfast; and afternoon tea. The package includes a tour of Windsor Castle (not available on May 18 or 19) and a £100 shopping voucher to Fortnum & Mason, the tea and gift shop. At One Aldwych in London, there will be a Royal Wedding Celebration Package on weekends in May, with rooms starting at £355 a night. For an additional £45, you can order a “royal bouquet” with peonies (reported to be a favorite flower of Ms. Markle, according to the hotel) and a sprig of myrtle (often used in royal brides’ bouquets since the 1800s).The Hotel Café Royal is offering a Regent Royal Wedding package from April 1 to June 21 (with a minimum stay of two nights), which includes accommodations in a suite; a limousine tour to Windsor Castle to visit the Chapel and The State Apartments; a picnic hamper for your day out; a royal wedding memorabilia gift; and an English breakfast, among other amenities (from £2,000). Not posh enough? You can stay in the hotel’s Empire suite with the Empire Royal Wedding package (with a minimum stay of three nights), which includes all of the above as well as additional amenities such as a helicopter tour of London and tickets to the Royal County of Berkshire Polo Club, from £6,500 a night.While the wedding is to take place in Britain, that isn’t stopping hotels in the United States from partaking in the festivities. Among them, the Drake, a Hilton Hotel in Chicago, is offering a “Film and Fondue” series Monday nights in May with movies such as “The Queen,” “Elizabeth — The Golden Age,” and “Victoria and Abdul” (starting at $25 a person plus taxes and tips). There are royal-themed sweets, snacks, teas and bar specials (10 percent of the proceeds from beverages on the Royal Cocktail Menu in May will be donated to Prince Harry’s endorsed charity, the Invictus Games Foundation). And, on the wedding day itself, the hotel is planning a screening of the royal festivities and, in the grand ballroom, a luncheon that was once served to Princess Diana during her visit to the hotel in 1996. ($100 for priority seating; $80 for general assigned seating; taxes and gratuities included. Reservations are required.)Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTrendingVolunteers are needed for recovery efforts in the Caribbean. Resorts, cruise lines and other organizations are offering special programs.By Elaine GlusacLast fall, Kelly Hepburn, a real estate broker in Denver, thought about traveling to the U.S. Virgin Islands, but then Hurricanes Irma and Maria blew in, devastating the destination. In March, Ms. Hepburn decided to go to St. John solo to volunteer, joining projects cleaning up trails in a national park, painting at a local school and assisting at an animal shelter.“I’m only one person and I know I’m not a huge impact, but getting the word out is important,” she said. “Though the islands are up and running there are big projects still ahead and a lot of needs.”After the back-to-back Category 5 storms ripped through the region, anyone hoping to help was directed to give financially and leave the hands-on efforts to professionals. Now, six months after the storms, while fund-raising remains active, travelers are increasingly being invited to volunteer while on vacation.“Just by visiting the injection of foreign exchange in the economy is going to help,” said Hugh Riley, the secretary general of the Caribbean Tourism Organization. “But some want to come to do something in addition to relaxing on the beach and we are seeing many opportunities for voluntourism.”Following the storms, the Friends of Virgin Islands National Park, a nonprofit based on St. John that maintains trails in the park, needed skilled sawyers to clear roads and trails. Now, it is seeking everyday volunteers (email info@friendsvinp.org). Those who can spend a week or more will be given a cot in a shared tent in a volunteer camp (email ivolunteer@friendsvinp.org).Elsewhere in the U.S. Virgin Islands, the tourism board aims to link willing travelers with organizations seeking volunteers to restore gardens, build playgrounds, clean mangroves and reassemble school libraries. Send inquiries to Desiree Wilkes at dwilkes@usvitourism.vi. In Puerto Rico, the environmental organization Para La Naturaleza resumed its volunteer programs in January and refocused them to address hurricane-affected areas. Volunteers can sign up for a range of projects including tree planting, monitoring iguana nests, counting birds and maintaining gardens. The Wyndham Grand Rio Mar Puerto Rico Golf & Beach Resort near the El Yunque rain forest in Puerto Rico, which was devastated by Hurricane Maria, will coordinate transportation for and send packed lunches with guests who sign up to volunteer in the park. Duties may include trail work, painting and surveys and travelers must request a volunteer application and agreement in advance by emailing yunquevolunteers@gmail.com.On Dominica, where Hurricane Maria also made landfall, a number of hotels are making it easy to roll up your sleeves over vacation. Fort Young Hotel in the capital of Roseau has just 41 of its 72 rooms open but is already inviting guests to come for five nights and spend three days clearing a section of the long-distance hiking trail Waitukubuli National Trail. The package starts at $837 a person and includes accommodations, airport transfers, daily breakfast, an island tour and transportation to and from the trail. Similar programs are being offered by other hotels and tour operators, including opportunities to clear debris from a river and, for scuba divers, to clean garbage deposited on the ocean floor by the storm. The island tourism board, Discover Dominica, maintains a list of opportunities.Many of the luxury resorts on Anguilla are still rebuilding post-Irma, but the Four Seasons Resort Anguilla, which reopened in March, plans to offer guests opportunities to participate in island cleanups through the charity Anguilla Stronger founded by Starwood Capital Group, which owns the resort. On Fridays and Saturdays, guests may also assist in distributing bags of groceries and household supplies to islanders. Zemi Beach House, another partner in the relief charity, also offers its guests opportunities to volunteer at the distribution center.Cruise ships in the region are also making voluntourism part of shore excursions. Royal Caribbean Cruises takes passengers to the San Juan community of La Perla for projects like soap making and tree planting. Some enterprising passengers have suggested and helped build a hydroponic garden.When they visit San Juan, Celebrity Cruises ships also offer trips to La Perla for passengers interested in volunteering in the soup kitchen or the community garden or working with children or the elderly.Princess Cruises has announced a new series of service-focused cruises, called Travel Deep sailings, that will participate in volunteer activities on hurricane-impacted islands including Puerto Rico, St. Thomas and St. Maarten. Past trips have included building furniture on St. Thomas and removing over a ton of trash from Guana Bay on St. Maarten.In the Florida Keys, which were also hit by Hurricane Irma, volunteers can email keydeer@fws.gov to volunteer to clean debris from the National Key Deer Refuge, a U.S. Fish & Wildlife Refuge that provides vital habitat for endangered Key deer.On Key West, Casa Marina resort named Christine Steinhauser its director of human resources and voluntourism. She primarily works with groups staying at the hotel to link them with volunteer projects in the islands, such as rebuilding trailer homes. Individual guests can also contact her through the concierge to volunteer their time. While cleanup has largely been completed, areas of need remain.Volunteer organizations, she said, “are still here, still working, still assisting with projects. They branch off in so many different areas you could take your pick of working in warehouses of food goods, delivering clothing and food and water or helping with reconstruction.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byA vibrant art, food and cultural scene make Oaxaca an attractive destination. Before you go, pack these necessities to make the most of your stay. By Alan HenryA city steeped in culture, both ancient and modern, Oaxaca has a lot to offer. From a rich culinary scene and boutique hotels to traditional crafts, art and culture, there’s plenty to enjoy. We’ve shared packing essentials for any 36-hour trip in previous lists, so we asked Freda Moon, our travel columnist who recently visited Oaxaca, to share a few specific things she was glad she brought with her — or wished she had taken. Then we asked Ria Misra, an editor at Wirecutter, for the best items to fill those needs — and her expert suggestions for other things to pack to make the most of your trip. Here are their picks.Travel umbrella. “Oaxaca is in the semi-tropics,” Ms. Moon said, “so unexpected two-hour downpours aren’t uncommon.” Don’t skimp on the umbrella, either. Spending a little more on a good one means you won’t have to replace it every time the wind picks up.A packable daypack. “Oaxaca will make you want to shop,” Ms. Moon said, and considering the wealth of local crafts and art, you’ll have plenty to take home. She also noted that store hours can be unpredictable, so “when you see something you like, buy it.” This day pack from Matador is not only waterproof (in case you do get caught in a shower) but incredibly light. Plus it packs down to about the size of a smartphone, so it won’t take up much space in your carry-on — when it’s empty, that is. A protective bottle pouch. Speaking of luggage, Ms. Moon suggests packing something to protect the bottle of mezcal you’ll probably be bringing home (for yourself, for your dog sitter, for whoever). She used this inflatable bottle pouch from Kohl’s.Feminine products. “In a lot of places in Latin America, it’s hard to find tampons or options are very limited,” Ms. Moon notes. So, if you think you may need tampons (Ms. Misra pointed us to Wirecutter’s applicator and applicator-free suggestions) while traveling, or have brand, type or style preferences, make sure to bring your own. A good, portable camera. We recommend a camera for virtually every destination, but Oaxaca’s natural beauty and art scene really call for one. Shooting with a mirrorless camera, like the Olympus OM-D E-M10 Mark II, means that you’ll get quality images with a fairly compact device. It comes with a nice lens, but if you do want to upgrade to better capture the architecture and street life the city is known for, Ms. Misra recommends a fast prime such as this Panasonic Lumix G 25mm f/1.7.Battery pack. Yes, we know, a battery pack is essential anywhere you go. But hear us out: having backup in case the power goes out is especially important in a place prone to tropical storms and earthquakes, like the kind that have rattled the Oaxaca region. If you’re bringing just a phone, Ms. Misra notes you should get along quite well with a smaller one. But if you’re traveling with multiple devices, she recommends the more powerful Anker PowerCore 20100 as a better option.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byupdateSeveral factors are appearing to dampen interest in visiting Russia for the 2018 World Cup, at least for soccer fans in the United States and England. By Justin SablichThe United States national soccer team failed to qualify for the men’s 2018 World Cup in Russia, the first time it will miss soccer’s biggest event since 1986. This won’t keep all American fans away from Moscow and the 10 other cities hosting the tournament in June, but it’s one of many factors that have appeared to have dampened interest in visiting.“I think more than anything it just feels like a logistical nightmare,” said Dan Wiersema, the head of communications for the American Outlaws, a group of U.S. Soccer supporters that organized trips for fans to the last two men’s World Cups and the 2015 women’s World Cup. “You’re going halfway around the world, and if your team’s not in the World Cup, that seems like a whole lot of legwork for a lot of unknowns.” Mr. Wiersema added that in a country as diverse as the United States, there are plenty of Americans who will be rooting for other teams competing in Russia — but ticket sales show a clear drop in interest from Americans compared to the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.“In Brazil, American fans had a huge presence. Being in a relatively similar time zone and an attractive destination made it very easy for an American fan to travel there,” Mr. Wiersema said.According to FIFA, the world soccer federation, of the nearly 5 million ticket requests made before its random selection draw sales period ended on Jan. 31, roughly 87,000 were from fans in the United States, the 10th most of any country. (Russia was first, followed by Germany.) For the 2014 tournament, spectators from the United States purchased a total of nearly 200,000 tickets, more than any other country other than the host. Some may also be waiting for the 2019 women’s World Cup in France, which is a potentially more attractive travel destination for Americans in terms of infrastructure and location. It’s also where fans can root for the defending-champion U.S. women’s team. “You’re talking about a country that has a great rail network and is relatively close to East Coast-based airports. When you put that all together as an American soccer fan and a travel fan, there’s a lot of people who have eyeballs on it,” Mr. Wiersema said.Mr. Wiersema, whose group sent more than 500 members to the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, also cited potential worries related to Russia’s geopolitical situation, the violent reputation of some of its soccer fans and its government’s position on lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.“Russia has made it quite clear about its stance on gay fans, which I know gives a lot of our members and U.S. fans concern,” Mr. Wiersema said, referring to a law that outlaws “homosexual propaganda.” In response to those expressing reservations, a Russian Football Union official said last November that, “you can come here and not be fined for expressing feelings. The law is about propaganda to minors.”Fan safety may be of particular concern for fans in England, where ticket sales have also been significantly lower than for past World Cups.During a 2016 European Championship match in Marseille, France, Russian and English fans clashed violently in the days leading up to and then the match between the two teams; over 30 spectators were injured. The disciplinary committee of UEFA, which oversees European soccer, fined and sanctioned the Russian soccer federation as a result.“As demonstrated during the FIFA Confederations Cup last year, Russia’s already high security standards have been adapted to meet the specific needs of such major sporting events,” a FIFA spokesman told Reuters in February after another violent altercation involving Russian soccer supporters. More recently, the poisoning of an ex-Russian spy in southern England has added to the tension between the two countries heading into the World Cup.“We do need to be very, very careful for British fans who are traveling there that they are not in any way caught up in the politics of this,” Tom Tugendhat, a British lawmaker, told the BBC. Still, do not expect to see many empty seats at this year’s World Cup, which is easily one of the most anticipated sporting events every four years. The fact that there will still be several thousand Americans attending, in addition to many others from around the world, highlights the strong pull this event has, no matter where it is played. “I have friends who are excited to go because they wouldn’t miss an opportunity like this,” Mr. Wiersema said. If you miss the current online period for purchasing tickets, which concludes on April 3, the final phase for buying tickets is from April 18 through the final match of the tournament and is on a first-come, first-serve basis. VISA card is the preferred method for purchasing official tickets from the event organizers, because of VISA’s sponsorship deal. FIFA.com also states that they will accept bank transfers and other accepted payment cards. For more ticket information, visit fifa.com/tickets.All fans attending World Cup matches will need a Fan ID card. Attendees must have the card along with a valid ticket to enter the match stadium. Fans can obtain their ID once they have received their tickets or after receiving a ticket confirmation notice. The Fan ID has plenty of travel perks, including visa-free entry to Russia for foreign visitors who have purchased match tickets. It allows visitors to stay in the country from 10 days before the first match to 10 days after the last match. For more information, visit fan-id.ru. Be mindful of price gouging. Russian consumer regulators have already issued fines to several hotels, including one in Moscow that was accused of raising prices up to 570 percent above what is allowed by the government.FIFA has set up its own hotel finder, where you can search by city, venue and other destination points. But availability for dates pegged to specific location’s matches is currently difficult to find, so hunting through your preferred travel booking website may yield better results. For more information, visit hotels.fifa.com.Once in the country, those with a Fan ID get free transportation on intercity trains and public transport in the host cities. Others planning on visiting multiple cities within Russia can book regional trains and flights. For more information, visit transport2018.com and welcome2018.com. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe new Book It List program specializes in unusual stays, from a lighthouse in Massachusetts to a shrimp boat in South Carolina.By Shivani VoraWill travelers want to stay in a castle in Kentucky, a former jail in New Orleans or a lighthouse in Massachusetts? Booking.com, an accommodation booking site with a database of more than 1.5 million properties, is betting on a “yes.” The three are part of the site’s Book It List, debuting today, which is a collection of not-so-common places around the United States where guests can hang their hat for a night or more; the list has one option in each state.The company is kicking off this new category by selling one-night stays for March 8 in three venues that have never before offered overnight accommodations: a suite on the 80th floor of the Empire State Building, in New York; a suite at the AmericanAirlines Arena, in Miami; and a tour bus in Los Angeles that the musician Nick Jonas helped design. Each stay costs $1,500.While these are one-time bookings, the permanent possibilities on the Book It List include a man-made cave in New Mexico, a treehouse in Ohio, a base camp in Alaska and a shrimp boat in South Carolina. The list’s properties are in diverse locales ranging from major cities and the mountains to the coast and remote countryside, and prices for a night’s stay range from affordable to extravagant.It costs $65 a night, for example, to stay at the 12-room Town Hall Inn, in Lead, S.D., in the heart of the Black Hills. Originally constructed in 1912 as Lead’s town hall, the building was used for several purposes over the years including the mayor’s and treasurer’s office, a jail, judge’s chambers and even gallows, which were directly behind the building.On the other end of the spectrum, there’s a century-old family farm in Dyersville, Iowa, where the popular 1989 movie “Field of Dreams” was filmed. Tours of the property have been offered for several years, but for the first time, travelers who are willing to pay $2,200 will be able to spend the night in the farmhouse’s upstairs bedroom.Pepijn Rijvers, the chief marketing officer for Booking.com, said that the company introduced the Book It List after noticing that its customers were increasingly reserving stays through the site at independently owned small hotels and nontraditional properties such as yurts and tree houses. “We were getting more bookings for accommodations that were perceived to be different or unusual than we were for the big chain hotels,” he said.The company decided to do a formal survey to find out more, and the results confirmed the trend that it was seeing: from a pool of 56,272 respondents, 22 percent of United States residents and 37 percent of people living in other countries reported that they intended to stay in a unique location in 2018 such as a castle or treehouse.Incidentally, Airbnb’s 2018 Travel Trends report also found that travelers were increasingly booking stays in nontraditional accommodations such as yurts and ryokans. Mr. Rijvers said that Booking.com relied on more than 400 of its employees in the United States to find the properties for the list and that it’s intended to get Americans excited about traveling within the country. “We’re hoping that we’re enticing people who live in the U.S. to visit new destinations because of these unusual properties,” he said.The Book It List may be a clever marketing tool, but it’s a useful one, according to Dr. Bjorn Hanson, a professor at the Tisch Center for Hospitality at New York University. In his research on the factors that motivate travelers when they choose their accommodations, he found that while location, price and loyalty programs figure in, so does a property’s Instagram potential. “Travelers, more than ever before, want to be able to brag to their family and friends about the cool place they stayed in that few others have, and what Booking.com is offering definitely qualifies,” Dr. Hanson said.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 Places TravelerA visit by our 52 Places Traveler to the Puerto Rican capital, still recovering from last year’s hurricanes, was one of the most calming and soul-filling experiences of her trip so far. By Jada YuanHurricanes Irma and Maria devastated islands in the Caribbean last September. Six months later, how are they recovering? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in Vieques, St. Martin, St. John, Dominica and San Juan, P.R. (below). The reports coming out of San Juan, P.R., as I touched down in mid-February, five months after the Category 4 Hurricane Maria had ripped through the island, were still dire. Some 900,000 people were still without power. Four days earlier, an explosion at a power plant had briefly plunged those who did have light back into darkness, and set the already slow-moving recovery efforts back by who knew how long. So the last thing I expected to encounter while waiting at an airport baggage carousel at 1:30 in the morning, was singing. Queremos que Gloria nos baile la pelúaQueremos que Gloria nos baile la pelúaPelúa por aquí, pelúa por alláPelúa por delante y pelúa por detrás.I followed the sounds of laughter and clapping to a dance circle of women in their 50s through 70s, raising and lowering their hands toward one of their own in the center. They were a tour group who’d just come home, delirious and giddy after a 25-hour journey from French Polynesia. According to their travel agent, Blandine de Lataillade, a Frenchwoman who came to Puerto Rico for love 25 years ago and never left, the group began planning this trip shortly after the hurricane. They’d wanted to have something to look forward to. “We want to show the world that Puerto Rico is back,” she said, adding: “People want to travel all over the world because we don’t have any problem with electricity.”[READ MORE: 52 Places Traveler — Island-Hopping on Vibrant Trinidad and Lush St. Lucia]The song the women were singing, they told me, was one you can’t go to a party in Puerto Rico without hearing. “Pelúa” effectively translates as “lady with a lot of hair,” and in this case they were asking someone named Gloria to bailar, or dance, like a pelúa. Typically, each person in the circle gets called out to show off center stage — even shy people can’t demur — and the dance is over when everyone has had a turn. “What’s your name?” one of the women asked me, and then immediately shouted it out to the group, who started singing and clapping all over again. “Queremos que Jada nos baile la pelúa …” I felt like I’d found my people. Ms. de Lataillade was quick to point out that the tour group hadn’t forgotten the devastation: an official count of 64 dead from the hurricane, with an estimated death toll of more than a thousand because of resulting conditions. Of those who survived, many were forced to leave — the elderly for medical issues, the young because they had lost their jobs, and often homes — and had no hope of getting new ones. Many members of the tour would be arriving back to houses in the sin luz (without light) zones — after I left, another blackout hit San Juan, as did flooding from storm-related waves. They had just needed a break, and were among the lucky ones who had the means to do so. I was in Puerto Rico as part of my assignment to spend a year visiting and writing about every destination on the 52 Places to Go in 2018 list. My editors had named the Caribbean — the entire region — to the No. 4 slot and before setting off, we had worked with data scientists from Kayak.com to come up with an impractical, but to me important, itinerary that took me from two islands that had emerged from Hurricanes Irma and Maria unscathed (Trinidad and St. Lucia) to one of the hardest hit, which also happened to be a United States territory. When I envisioned myself as a normal traveler, who just wanted a relaxing vacation, and who had a choice of spending my money anywhere, though, I could understand why not many are jumping at the chance to visit Puerto Rico, in this state, right now. The tourism department has put together a “Ready to Enchant You” campaign filled with post-storm footage and featuring Luis Fonsi touting how picturesque the beaches are, and how many hotels are open. Those claims are true, but they’re a bit like shoving a mess into a closet before guests come over. Nothing about Puerto Rico after the storm approached normalcy. The beauty I saw was in the rebuilding, in the lives being lived with joy and grace in the most trying of circumstances. Being there was one of the most calming and soul-filling experiences of this trip so far.Getting there was easy; the airport is in fine working order. My boneheaded assumption that lodging would be ample, though, couldn’t have been more off base. When I tried to book a few days before my trip, every hotel room in the “up-and-running zone” of Old San Juan and the nearby beach area of Condado was already sold out — a combination of, I’d later be told by locals, many hotels operating at a fraction of their capacity (either because of damage or the limits of their generators), and being filled with relief workers. I don’t know how it happened, but the Airbnb apartment I did find, for under $80 a night, was in an ideal location: in Old San Juan, right across the street from La Factoría, the bar and nightclub made famous when Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee filmed their video for “Despacito” there — the most-watched YouTube video of all time with almost 5 billion views. The outside is a nondescript brown wall without any signage. Inside, the place just keeps going and going, with a large bar leading to a tiny cocktail lounge, which leads to a salsa room, which leads to a nightclub filled with colored lights and couples dancing as closely as couples can dance. The kitchen was closed, so I sidled up to the bar in the 10-seat cocktail lounge for an expertly made margarita from a bartender, Christian Ortega, who still stands out to me as the sexiest man I’ve met this trip. A smattering of tourists was there, but most customers seemed to be Puerto Ricans from the sin luz zones looking to blow off steam. My conversation companion for much of the night was a young waiter and aspiring comedian, Victor Emmanuelli, whose opening salvo was about his bar stool: “It’s wobbly, like life.” He had no end of devastating stories to tell, in between recreating his favorite stand-up routines from Dave Chappelle. “I lost my house, I lost everything,” he said. “I didn’t know where my family was, my grandma, my aunt, my cousins, nobody. You want to cry because you didn’t know where your family was and there was not a signal to call them and there was no gas. You had to walk to where you think your family is. I didn’t find them till three months later.” He also had choice words for President Trump, who he felt ought to stop scolding the territory for being over budget and do something about it. He lived 20 minutes from Old San Juan, and had only intermittent running water. “Sometimes,” he said, “I take a shower in the river.” (He recently told me his light and water have returned.)Every morning, I woke up in Old San Juan to cobblestone streets dappled with sunlight, and Spanish colonial buildings painted in every color: pink next to yellow next to green next to orange. It was every bit as charming and beautiful as a city established in 1521 should be. I had electricity and running water that I drank from the tap (likely unwise; most of the island is under a boil water advisory and the Puerto Ricans I met only drank bottled water). My street was not one for quiet contemplation — music from bars and restaurants started blasting at noon and didn’t stop till 4 a.m. — but I found the liveliness comforting. I also loved how during the day I could walk for blocks and barely see another person. When I told Rebeca Rivera Vázquez, a 27 year-old high school science schoolteacher, and Ms. de Lataillade’s stepdaughter, she was horrified. Winter is supposed to be San Juan’s high tourist season, when its seasonal businesses make all their money. “That’s no good!” she said. “You shouldn’t be able to walk in the streets. Old San Juan should feel like the middle of Fifth Avenue right now.”All the more reason to book a ticket, I thought: The crowds may never again be this thin, with weather this perfect. I never knew San Juan before the hurricane, but my guess is that those looking for the city they knew before the storm will not find it. For every cleaned street in the old city there are 10 just outside it with lampposts snapped in two, and fallen trees barely pushed off the sidewalks. It says much about the intense beauty of this island that the devastation barely detracts from vistas and skies that seem designed to produce audible gasps at every turn. In the colorful hipster arts district of Santurce, where one can find street art on every wall, in every direction, I saw a bus stop that was completely caved in and an open-air flea market that, a vendor told me, had brick walls until last September. Over in ritzy Condado, just down the beach from the tourist hotels, a concrete boardwalk simply disappeared into the ground, as if struck by a meteor, and, nearby, a car sat dusty and unused under thick steel fencing that appeared to have crumbled like paper. Locals I met, like Ms. Rivera Vásquez and her friend Francisco Muñoz-Torres, a statistician and bar owner, pointed out the “Dr. Seuss trees” that looked as if they’d been drawn by someone on LSD — sticks shooting up into the sky with a tiny puff of plumage at the top. What did they look like before? “Well, they were complete trees,” Mr. Muñoz-Torres said. “They had leaves and branches. They looked like trees normally look.” A quiet night drinking with friends was no longer something locals took for granted. I went to a lovely boozy happy hour in the apartment of an engaged doctor and nurse, Luís Ortiz and Sheyla Garced, whose Condado high-rise is featured in a famous photo of people sitting in their living rooms without walls. I’d shown up in Puerto Rico not knowing a soul, and through a chain of events stemming from a random encounter with singing women at the airport, was being welcomed inside the home of strangers (they were friends of Mr. Muñoz-Torres, whom I’d met through Ms. Rivera Vásquez, whom I’d met through Ms. de Lataillade). Incredible hosts, they took me out on their normal Saturday night: Drinking at a gas station (way more fun and popular than it sounds), then heading to Gemileo, a wine bar inside an incense shop. For 10 days after the hurricane, the Puerto Rican government had imposed not only a curfew, but also dry laws. “It was horrible, because the water wasn’t safe to drink, so it was like, what will we drink then?” said Ms. Garced. “We were in our homes, we had no electricity. No one was driving. It was like, ‘Come on, just let us have a beer!’” On a Sunday, I went with Adnelly Marichal, a Nuyorican documentary filmmaker, to an organic farmers market in Placita Roosevelt in the Hato Rey neighborhood of San Juan. All of the vendors we met, from cocoa purveys to herbalists, came from the interior of the island and not one of them had luz. One farmer, Rafael de Leon, told us it had taken him five months to recover enough to get back to the market, but he’d also had to stop making cheeses and anything that couldn’t be served immediately. “I don’t have refrigeration,” he said in Spanish, “so we have to do everything the day of because there’s no way to keep it.” Somehow, we wound up with an invitation to La Fiesta de la Amistad (Party of Friendship) on La Finca de Carlos Cuevas, a large farm about an hour outside the city in the region of Cidra. All along the highway were billboards ripped to shreds and giant metal signs felled and crumpled in the medians. As we headed into rural areas, our cellphone GPS began to fail. Not a single traffic light we passed was working. Drivers were operating on a courtesy system with no real order. It had been this way since the storm, Ms. Marichal explained.In the countryside, while extremely lost, we met a retired teacher, Maria Berrios, cleaning up the side of the road. “I clean because if I didn’t clean, no one would,” she said. “It was four months of trees and dead animals rotting by the side of the road and it smelled so bad I couldn’t stand it anymore.” Her tiny community had just gotten light, and she was pretty sure they were the only ones in the area who had it. They’d pooled their money and hired their own electricians to come in and fix the damage. “If we waited for the government, we’d never have light,” she said. The finca, when we finally found it, too, had light. The entire valley had shown up — 400 people at least — as had musicians from all parts of the island. The house bandleader and cuatrista (player of a small Puerto Rican guitar), Christian Nieves, had just come back from performing “Despacito” at the Grammys. Guests lined up for lechón, or roast suckling pig on a spit, while chickens and roosters ran around on the tiered hills below. “We’re here for a festival of friendship,” said José Antonio Rivera Colón, a famous cuartista known as Tony Mapeyé. “We all came here because it’s important, because friendship feeds our souls.” As the sun set, we headed back, down twisty roads, through intersections without traffic signals, and back into the world of luz. The Dr. Seuss palm trees were lit up in orange. Someday, those trees would be complete trees again. I felt lucky that I’d gotten to see them as they were. Jada Yuan will be traveling to every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.Previous dispatches:1: New Orleans2: Chattanooga, Tenn.3. Montgomery, Ala.4. Disney Springs, Fla. 5. Trinidad and St. LuciaNext dispatch: Peninsula Papagayo, Costa Rica.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe Caribbean NowThe hurricane did deep damage to homes, roads, forests and trails. But waterfalls, hot springs and helping out are good reasons to visit.By Matt GrossHurricanes Irma and Maria devastated islands in the Caribbean last September. Six months later, how are they recovering? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in Vieques, St. Martin, St. John, Dominica (below) and San Juan, P.R. The hike to Middleham Falls took precisely 45 minutes, just as my guide, Dylan Williams, had predicted. In that time, Dylan, his girlfriend, Miriam Ormond, and I had marched a mile and a quarter up and down (and up and down) the hills of Dominica’s Morne Trois Pitons National Park, starting on a well-cleared trail through rain forest brush — tree ferns, rubber trees, shaggy epiphytes — and finishing with moderate scrambles over damp rock and down slippery wooden stairs. But finally, we stood on a sturdy platform gazing at the island’s highest waterfall as it thundered 200 or so feet down into a broad, inviting pool.Between us and the pool, however, stood a field of water-slicked boulders. Suddenly, I felt every drop of my trekking confidence evaporate. I wanted nothing more than to bound over the rocks, as dreadlocked Dylan was doing in Converse low-tops, and dip my feet in the pristine water, but those feet, I was now irrationally sure, would fail me, and I’d slip, fall, dash my brains out below. Nature, until a moment ago so lovely and generous, had turned threatening and dark. Who was I to risk her wrath?Nature’s Janus-faced narrative also happens to be the fraught story of Dominica, a mountainous little island of 73,000 plopped in the eastern Caribbean between Guadeloupe and Martinique. (Don’t confuse it with the Dominican Republic; the name comes from Christopher Columbus, who sighted it on a Sunday — Dominica in Latin.) For centuries, during which the island was ruled by the Spanish, French, and British before winning independence in 1978, Dominica was a rugged place, fertile but, because it was so consistently hilly, relatively underdeveloped.In the last decade or so, however, travelers had begun to discover the English-speaking island, arriving by boat or prop plane to dive, snorkel and, most of all, hike the untrammeled topography of what was dubbed “The Nature Island.” Local developers established boutique resorts, like the chic cliffside villas of Secret Bay, and international chains such as Marriott and Kempinski announced plans for their own. In 2016, the government unveiled the Waitukubuli National Trail, a 115-mile, 14-segment path — free of venomous snakes and spiders! — that led from the southern tip of the island all the way to the north. In a world where travelers are always seeking the next unspoiled destination, Dominica, was set to dominate.And then it was all undone — overnight. On the evening of Sept. 18, 2017, Hurricane Maria hit Dominica with 160-mile-per-hour winds, damaging or destroying the roofs of an estimated 90 percent of buildings (including the prime minister’s residence) and toppling not only power lines but some of the thickest, strongest, oldest trees in the forests. Maria’s rains triggered landslides and transformed the island’s 365 rivers into raging tendrils that washed away bridges and crops and slashed deep cuts along what had been well-laid roads. At least 31 people were killed, and thousands more left homeless. Everything lay in shambles.Five and a half months later, I arrived in Dominica, my flight from Barbados banking down the steep slope of a lush hill to land at the brief runway of Douglas-Charles Airport. I was there for five days to find out how the island was recovering, and frankly, I didn’t know what to expect: My pre-trip research kept hitting dead ends — websites not updated since before Maria, emails and WhatsApp messages unanswered, Google Maps now outdated. Secret Bay and Rosalie Bay Resort, beloved by friends who had visited, were closed. Would I discover an island back on its feet or struggling through each day?Immediately after I left the airport — in a minivan taxi driven by Daniel Didier, a seen-it-all 69-year-old — the scale of the devastation was obvious. The winding road across the island to Roseau, the capital, was generally excellent, but there were sudden patches, some a couple of yards, others much longer, where the smooth surface gave way to rocks and rubble. Windowless, rusted-out cars and piles of thick logs dotted the roadside. Blue tarps covered the holes in roof after galvanized-steel corrugated roof. One huge fallen tree hovered nearly horizontal, high in the air across the road, propped up by its fellows, ominous.Mr. Didier, however, saw bright spots — reasons to be proud of Dominica’s resilience. He pointed to a river where two women were bathing and washing clothes — the water all over the island was still that clean. And the government, he said, was starting to require builders to use heavier roofing material, at a steeper slant, to protect against future storms. When he heard the squawk of a parrot from the forest, he stopped the minivan and squawked back — parrots, he said, had been rarely seen since Maria.“That’s a good sign!” Mr. Didier said.Still, challenges popped up everywhere. On the way to Roseau, we stopped at the boxy little Rosie’s A-Cuisine for lunch: stewed pork, fried fish, rice, yams, salad. But when I asked for pepper sauce, the woman behind the counter threw up her hands.“Ration, ration — everything rationed!” she said. Dominica, once known as the breadbasket of the Caribbean for its exports of bananas, mangoes, citrus, taro, guavas, now barely had pepper sauce. (It took many market visits to find a bottle of local Big G “Fireball” sauce — which airport security, deeming it dangerous, eventually confiscated.) Not helping matters was the sea itself, where big swells were keeping cargo ships from docking with supplies.Still, those crashing waves looked awesome outside my balcony at the waterfront boutique Fort Young Hotel, which has reopened 41 of its 72 rooms since the storm. (The hotel’s reservation system said no vacancies, but Hotels.com let me book.) In my room, or with a nutmeg-fragrant rum punch in my hand at the hotel bar, I was hypnotized by the sea, by its barely contained violence: the vast spray of foam across a wooden walkway, the thunder of rocks slammed together by unimaginable forces.In dense downtown Roseau, normalcy was gaining ground. An old man strummed a guitar on a street corner. Uniformed schoolchildren strolled past the dilapidated childhood home of Jean Rhys, whose novel “Wide Sargasso Sea” reimagined the “madwoman in the attic” in “Jane Eyre” as a Dominica-born Creole. At the Musik Land bar, soccer fans drinking Kubuli, the local beer, and rum spiked with the aphrodisiac bwa bandé cheered Juventus over Tottenham. When night fell, the city calmed. I ate grilled snapper on the terrace of the Great Old House, with a piña colada because they were out of rum punch, and though the streets below were black (electricity remains unreliable) the only danger I felt was that I might stumble on an unseen cobblestone.If I was going to stumble, though, I wanted to do so not in the urban grit of Roseau but out in the green backcountry. So I hopped into Dylan Williams’s red jeep and headed for the hills.Dylan — who had been recommended by the Experiences Caribbean tour company — was a man of many talents, a 26-year-old at ease discussing the power of essential oils and the correct way to build a plasma capacitor. A vice president of the Dominica Organic Agriculture Movement, he lived with Miriam at the edge of Harmony Gardens, her parents’ farm 30 minutes southeast of Roseau. (I slept in a tent on their property.) More important to me, Dylan had been contracted to help clear Segment 3 of the still mostly closed Waitukubuli National Trail, and I was going to help him out, as a way to both get some hiking in and give something back to this island.As it happened, however, Dylan had, just before I got there, fulfilled his contract, lugging a chain saw and 150-pound pack back and forth along the first quarter of the six-to-eight-hour hike. (A contract for the remainder had yet to be drafted.) By the time he brought me — with cans of blue and yellow paint to mark the trail — Segment 3 was in decent shape, though obviously storm-damaged. I’d hoped to see Dominica as described in “Wide Sargasso Sea”: “Too much blue, too much purple, too much green. The flowers too red, the mountains too high, the hills too near.” No longer. Floods had torn new ravines, toppled trees and washed away a bridge, and the mere fact that we could see through the denuded forest to the other side of the valley was evidence of Maria’s destructive power. It might be years, Dylan estimated, before the foliage fully recovered, though man-made projects were moving speedily.“With all the help that’s coming in, with all the money that’s coming in — ha! — it won’t be long,” he said.I’d never marked a trail before (nor wielded a machete-like cutlass), but I loved the process. More than repainting old marks, we were seeking new ones, on trees and rocks, that would not only be visible from every direction and limn tricky routes but would also provide essential comfort: Relax, they’d suggest, you’re on the right track.With only 1.25 miles of the segment clear, we finished marking in a few hours. But even if this trail was still recovering, much else was open for business nearby. Dylan, Miriam, and I hiked Middleham Falls, where I eventually scampered down to a lower (safer) pool to fill a bottle with potable water — “cold, pure and sweet,” as Rhys described the island’s springs. We swam up the chilly Titou Gorge, where sunbeams meandered past 20-foot rock walls, and we ate sandwiches next to Freshwater Lake, crisp and placid one moment, obscured by fog the next. In the evenings, we’d hang about their house, drinking mint-and-lemongrass tea and cooking vegan feasts of rice, beans, salad, fritters. One night, we drove out for a soak in the sulfurous, open-air Ti Kwen Glocho hot springs. The darkness was deep, and a light rain sprinkled off and on, and I gazed at the stars, about the only things unchanged here since Maria.Maria, Maria, Maria. Everywhere I went, Maria was there. Up north, on a quiet boat trip to Indian River, where parts of “Pirates of the Caribbean” had been shot, I saw juvenile blue herons and gargantuan coconut crabs — and so many Maria-felled trees that the river was closed off above the “Banana Hut” bar. Maria has even found its place in calypso music: At least 15 of the songs in a national competition here referenced the storm, including “Maria Why You Do That to Us” and “Ave Maria.”When I asked Dylan and Miriam whether Maria had become the catchall excuse for anything and everything, they burst out laughing. It was ridiculous, but it was also reality. You can’t escape from it — you can only deal with it.After the boat trip, I had a long lunch next to the docks, at the bare-bones Indian River Bar & Grill. As I drank a Kubuli (or three), and ate chicken and rice (with spicy-creamy house-made pepper sauce!), I observed the scene. One man asked the young bartender so many questions about the soup of the day — turkey, with optional pig snout — that she teased back, “Why you so troublesome?” An American who had fled to Bolivia during the Vietnam War attempted to download the movie “The Last Castle” on his laptop. The chef responsible for the pepper sauce, Kim Mandy, told me she planned to bottle and sell it to cruise-ship visitors. People came, people went, and for a couple of hours, Dominica seemed to relax. This new normal felt … normal.“Is there anywhere better than this?” asked a man named Rickson, sitting to my right.There was, of course, no need to answer.Dominica is still in recovery mode, and with no single, definitive source for information, figuring out what’s functioning — and what is not — remains a challenge. Plan on arriving with plenty of time to explore, and an abundance of patience.Getting to the island, however, is increasingly easy. Although there are no direct flights from the continental United States, six regional airlines provide service from other Caribbean islands, including Barbados, Saint Martin, and San Juan, P.R. While many of Dominica’s hotels remain out of commission, the Fort Young Hotel is open during reconstruction, and offers a five-night voluntourism package ($837 per person) that includes trail-clearing. Secret Bay and Rosalie Bay Resort hope to be operational by fall 2018, with the Cabrits Resort Kempinski and Marriott’s Anichi Resort & Spa to follow in 2019.Many popular tourism destinations, such as Boiling Lake, the Emerald Pool and the trails one takes to reach them, are open and accessible. The Division of Forestry, meanwhile, is hard at work restoring the Waitukubuli National Trail. A spokeswoman for the division, Marcy Gachette, said by email that “work is active” on Segments 6, 7, 11, and 13, with Segments 1 and 3 near completion. With 115 miles of trail to restore at roughly $2,000 per mile, she said, it’s going to be a financial and logistical challenge.Although road conditions vary, getting around the island is straightforward. If you’re comfortable driving on the left, up steep, rough hills, rental cars are available at the airport and in cities. (Best to be familiar with standard transmissions and four-wheel-drive.) Private taxis are on call for trips both short and long. And major routes in and between towns are plied by minivan taxis, which can be hailed from the road and cost very little.Matt Gross, a former Frugal Traveler columnist for The New York Times, writes about travel, food, parenting, running and many other things. AdvertisementBy JAN BENZELMARCH 19, 2018
Hurricanes Irma and Maria devastated islands in the Caribbean last September. Six months later, how are they recovering? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in Vieques (below), St. Martin, St. John, Dominica and San Juan, P.R.. The ceiling fan spun lazily overhead. I’d fallen asleep to the tiny tree frogs’ lullaby and awakened to distant cock-a-doodle-doos. Dishes rattled invitingly in the open-air dining space outside my door, promising hot coffee and an omelet.The fan, the eggs, the hot shower, the full tank of gas, the working A.T.M. on Main Street in Isabel Segunda, the twinkling string of lights along the Malecón in the tiny town of Esperanza, even the coquís, those little tree frogs: After the storms, no one on Vieques takes those things for granted.Slammed in September by Hurricanes Irma and Maria, this lush, wild bit of Puerto Rico, eight miles east of the main island, is still recovering. Winds that howled at well over 100 miles an hour hurled roofs, cars and boats, denuded trees and smashed windows. Pounding rains poured through ceilings. For weeks there was no water. For much longer, no electricity.AdvertisementNearly six months later, Vieques, population about 9,000, is welcoming visitors again. Power is still spotty, largely dependent on generators. Beaches and roads have been cleared. Internet and cell service are back, intermittently. Some restaurants and hotels remain shuttered; others are housing and feeding, along with vacationers, workers who’ve come to repair the power grid. Residents compare notes on insurance claims (agonizingly slow to be paid) and the recovery, sharing cautious hope that although the high season for tourism — the prime driver of Vieques’s economy — may be lost this year, the island will rebuild and be stronger for it.AdvertisementSigns are positive. The trickle of vacationers is increasing, led by loyal visitors who fell in love with Vieques the moment they stepped off the slow ferry or quick tiny plane you take to get here. I’m in that camp.This is not your fancy, umbrella-drink-served-poolside Caribbean island. Getting dressed up means putting on a clean T-shirt and brushing the sand off your flip-flops. Isabel Segunda, the bigger of the island’s two towns, is a patchwork of gaily painted Spanish Colonial stucco buildings in various stages of dilapidation. Wild horses roam so freely that drivers have to wait for them to amble off the roads. And then there are the island’s jewels: palm-fringed, soft-sand beaches, stretches of which you may well have all to yourself.I first went in 2015 and returned the next year. In early February, my seatmate on the puddle-jumper from San Juan was a doctor from Florida taking part in a medical mission. In 25 minutes we touched down on the small runway, and glided past the wreckage of a couple of small planes, crumpled in the storms. The airport buzzed with FEMA workers, greeted warmly by Viequenses, many of whom are still angry at and skeptical of the United States government after its slow response, but who have embraced the responders.I picked up a Jeep at Maritza’s Car Rental and checked in at the Hacienda Tamarindo, a quirky inn up the hill from Esperanza where I’d stayed twice before. The proprietors, Burr and Linda Vail, chose Vieques for a second act 22 years ago after selling their Vermont restaurant business.Their hotel is a New England-Caribbean hybrid of earth-toned Mexican tiles, tropical colors and folk art, with a lovely swimming pool and a grand sea view. The hotel and grounds, a bit battered, were as welcoming as ever. A huge tamarind tree grows up through the inn’s center and an English sheepdog lounges in the shade.In Esperanza — where, pre-hurricanes, visitors, transplants and Viequenses strolled seaside, joking, drinking, eating and listening to music at open-air restaurants — only a few establishments have opened. The pretty white-and-coral cement railing along the walkway had been smashed. But the mood remained lively.Now the drumbeat is the hammering of repair work. Locals in frayed T-shirts and dreadlocks rubbed shoulders with people who’d arrived on dinghies from sailboats bobbing in deeper water, and a few other visitors from colder climates. The first one I met, Stephen, from Atlanta, had been a regular visitor since 2000.“I’ve always thought of Vieques as ‘my’ island,” said Stephen, who was making his second visit since the storms. He’d discovered it when he was living in Boston and spotted a cheap flight to San Juan. “My copy of ‘Let’s Go’ suggested Vieques as a pretty good day trip. So I left my rental car on the ferry dock in Fajardo, figuring I’d be back that night. I ended up staying the whole week.”AdvertisementOthers lured by Vieques’s beauty, lack of pretension and low cost of living, have lived here for decades: In my short stay I ran into a museum director, an academic, artists, a retired nurse and a couple from Colorado, Norm and Deb, who had retired early and moved to the island sight unseen to live, as they put it, “on purpose.” Stephen was staying at El Blok, a Brutalist-style cement hotel at one end of the Malecón. When it opened in 2014 it was hailed as hip, chic and a little fancy, with a menu created by a famous chef — something of an anomaly on Vieques. Now the building has a plywood facade painted with the slogan “Vieques Se Levanta” — Vieques Will Rise. Workers head to the bar after sunset, and the vibe is friendly and a little raucous.A local chef turns out delicious dishes from a mesquite grill. Prices, like those at many places, have been lowered. Burr and I ate there one night, sharing the dining room with electrical workers, visiting doctors and Mark Martin-Bras, who works with the Vieques Conservation and Historic Trust and ViequesLove, a GoFundMe organization that has been a galvanizing force for the recovery. There were also some vacationers, including a couple with a baby, first-timers on the island. Diners flowed from table to table as if they were at a party.Fajardoculebrapuerto ricoVIEQUESIsabel SegundaLa Finca ConscienciaTin BoxHix Island HouseViequesBio BayHacienda TamarindoEsperanzaSun Bay BeachSiddhia HutchinsonGlen Wielgus GalleryIsabel SegundaBlack Beard SportsEl Sombrero ViejoCoqui FireEsperanzac. orquideasc. flamboyanBananasTrade WindsEl BlokEl QuenepoMARCH 19, 2018
“If you take the long view, Vieques will end up better off,” said Mr. Martin-Bras, a biologist who came to work at the Bioluminescent Bay, the ecological marvel that draws visitors from all over the world. “The infrastructure will be stronger. We were on the cusp of a tourism boom; there was the W Hotel, there was talk of cruise ships. Would that be good for the island, or the appeal of the island? Probably not. So now that we have the essentials covered — there’s food in the supermarkets, beer in the bars, music in the streets — we have a chance to create tourism that’s more community-oriented, more nature-oriented, that can preserve and conserve the island, that’s more sustainable.”The trust’s base, a tidy museum in Esperanza that houses nature and history exhibits has reopened. The W Hotel, with 156 rooms the island’s biggest hotel, has not. Its formerly manicured grounds remain gated; a spokeswoman for Starwood, which owns the W, said the reopening date was “up in the air,” and depended on when the power grid was restored so that repair work could be undertaken. Its closing represents a significant loss of jobs and revenue. Tourism accounts for 65 percent or more of the economy, according to Bob Gevinski, a board member of the Puerto Rico Hotel and Tourism Association and manager of the Hix Island House on Vieques.The Bio Bay has suffered, too. On an earlier trip I had paddled it at night, plankton glowing magically as I let my hands drift through the water or a fish waggled by. I’d planned this trip to coincide with a moonless sky — the best time to see the glow — and had corresponded with BlackBeard Sports to line up a Bio Bay excursion, or perhaps snorkel or bicycle to the sugar industry ruins in the island’s interior.But conditions were uncharacteristically windy for those activities, and the Bio Bay, the outfitters said, was glowing only at about “2 on a scale of 10.” The mangroves that surround it and nurture the sea life have not yet recovered.So a guide, Regalado Miró, and I roamed the island in a van. He pointed out relics of Vieques’s richest days, when Europe couldn’t get enough of the sugar the island produced: a decrepit pier near Esperanza and a rusted 19th-century railway engine that had hauled the sugar cane.AdvertisementNext we passed an old military truck, a reminder of the decades beginning with World War II when the United States Navy had used the island for bombing practice. After a Viequense was killed by an errant bomb, Rega took part in protests beginning in 2000 against the Navy’s presence. The environmental lawyer Robert Kennedy Jr., the activists Al Sharpton and Dennis Rivera and the actor Edward James Olmos, among others, joined the cause.Rega took Mr. Kennedy scuba diving to see the effects of bombing practice on the reefs. “Three feet underwater was a junkyard,” Mr. Kennedy recalled during a phone conversation. “There were dozens of sunken ships and hundreds of bombs filled with toxic material.” Mr. Kennedy represented Vieques in a suit against the naval presence and later took part in a protest that landed him in a Puerto Rican prison. The efforts led to the Navy’s departure in 2003. The areas used for bombing practice were designated a Superfund site, and a National Wildlife Refuge. Now beachgoers can poke along dirt roads until they find a spot that suits — gentle waters in coves, waves breaking on rocky cliffs and caves, palm-shaded sand or prime sunset-watching.Elsewhere on the island, Rega and I checked on a huge, gnarled, 300-year-old ceiba tree, sacred to Viequenses. We visited a honeybee farm, La Finca Consciencia, crucial to pollination, and the Tin Box, a funky barbecue joint whose architecture lives up to its name. It hadn’t yet reopened, but rows of arugula, banana trees, avocado trees, cherry tomatoes, cilantro and lemongrass were growing in the garden.Back in Isabel, the lights were out at BlackBeard Sports, but the door was open, and there were even a few customers. Many of the businesses whose buildings were sound enough to open have done so. Owners want employees to have paychecks, even if limited, and open doors boost morale, they say.At the Siddhia Hutchinson Glen Wielgus Gallery, Ms. Hutchinson was leading a workshop in collage-making, while Mr. Wielgus straightened paintings, prints, sculpture and jewelry. Around the corner at El Sombrero Viejo, a lively, weathered bar, locals stopped in to charge up cellphones and maybe drink a cold Modelo.In Esperanza Eva Bolivar had not yet reopened her restaurant, Bili, but she has delivered some 64,000 meals to people in need. Other Esperanza mainstays are also still closed, including Tradewinds, an inn and restaurant; Lazy Jack’s, a hostel frequented by backpackers and college students; and El Quenepo, a restaurant with dishes you’d count yourself fortunate to find in New York.Stephen and I took a taxi to Isabel one night for tacos and margaritas at Coqui Fire. We joined Douglas, a lawyer from Boston, and his client, a developer whose vacation house had been damaged in the storm. When the generator hiccupped and the lights went out, there was barely a shrug; when it came back on there was applause.Another night the four of us — and, in a Fellini-esque moment, just about everyone else I’d met walking Sun Bay Beach or strolling in Isabel — ended up at Bananas, a casual place serving tropical drinks and catch-of-the day dinners. A group of Viequenses played dominoes at a tiled table.AdvertisementEl Blok had no power that day. Nor did Hacienda Tamarindo. “We’re definitely glamping now,” Douglas said, “minus the coffee and the hot shower.”The permanent power supply won’t be back for at least two years, a representative of the Army Corps of Engineers staying at the Tamarindo told me, explaining that the antiquated underwater cable from the main island was broken irreparably and that a new one would be installed. Until then the island would run on government-supplied generators.But in a place where sun is plentiful, solar energy is taking hold fast. Tesla installed solar panels and storage on Vieques and Culebra soon after the storms, fueling waste treatment plants and other key sites, including the hospital.Hix Island House, a sleek concrete complex designed by the Canadian architect John Hix, has opened its one solar-powered building. Neeva Gayle Hix, the architect’s wife, gave me a tour, showing off units equipped with kitchens, the swimming pool and an open-air yoga space.“There was one gift this hurricane gave us,” she said. “So many plants and trees were destroyed, but you can see they’re all coming back,” she added, pointing out the new growth on a stand of whispering pines. “And look at what we have now.” The sweep of her arm took in a vast, glorious, unimpeded 180-degree view of green island and sparkling turquoise sea.A few weeks after I returned home, I checked in to see how things were going. Work on the power lines was continuing, Bob Gevinski said. Tourism had picked up noticeably. Bili and the Tin Box had reopened, and were serving full houses. Good news travels fast on an island that depends on it.Jan Benzel, a freelance writer, is a former editor at The Times.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2018, on Page TR4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Hopeful Return for Vieques.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byThe Caribbean NowThe hurricane battered the island, and most hotels and restaurants have not reopened. The crowds have yet to return, which means visitors will have stretches of sand to themselves.By Michelle HigginsHurricanes Irma and Maria devastated islands in the Caribbean last September. Six months later, how are they recovering? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in Vieques, St. Martin (below), St. John, Dominica and San Juan, P.R. A smattering of sun seekers had arrived at the beach and were greeted by two craftsmen selling necklaces and sarongs. A local chef, her kitchen located inside a rusty shipping container, grilled fish along an otherwise deserted stretch of Orient Bay beach in St. Martin. Gazing out at the calm azure water, a first-time visitor might find it hard to imagine that this long crescent of powdery white sand was once lined with tiki bars, palm trees and thousands of tourists in beach chairs with matching umbrellas.About six months after Hurricane Irma pummeled this quintessential Caribbean island with terrifying force, sweeping away homes, tossing cars and boats, and wreaking havoc on its tourism infrastructure, there is still much to rebuild.“Right now, I see the sea, I see the sun and I see beautiful nature,” said Lorenz G. Winter, 55, a real estate agent on vacation from Munich, Germany, who was sipping cold beers on Orient Bay with his wife and two daughters in their 20s. “Yes, nature is still here,” his daughter Sarah Winter chimed in, her back turned to the skeletal remains of damaged resorts.While signs of recovery are starting to emerge across this dual-nation island, split between a French and Dutch side, St. Martin has a long way to go to restore its tourism industry. Visitors seeking sun, sand and solitude will find all 37 of the island’s stunning beaches open, the roads clear of wreckage and locals welcoming as ever. But blue tarps cover many deserted homes, their roofs damaged or missing entirely. Most hotels and restaurants are closed or under construction — if they are there at all. The destruction across the island is impossible to ignore.Passengers arriving at Princess Juliana International Airport, on the Dutch side of the island earlier this month, were directed onto the tarmac, past the battered terminal to a white wedding-style tent for immigration. Outside the parking lot, the Pink Iguana, a tugboat turned dockside bar, remained capsized in the water. Down the road, Maho Village was practically a ghost town. Of the roughly 40 bars, shops, restaurants and clubs along its entertainment strip, only a pharmacy, grocery store, real estate office and a few restaurants had reopened. All four of its seaside resorts — Sonesta Maho Beach Resort, Casino & Spa, Sonesta Ocean Point Resort, the Royal Islander Club La Plage and Royal Islander Club La Terrasse — are undergoing major reconstruction. None are scheduled to open before summer or fall. In Marigot, the French capital, souvenir vendors set up stalls across from blown-out buildings, seemingly untouched since the hurricane. A few miles north in Grand Case, the island’s restaurant row remained largely shuttered. Out of more than 60 establishments, fewer than a dozen had reopened. Among them: the Rainbow Café, a waterfront restaurant and bar with beach service; two open-air seaside grills, known as lolos; the upscale Bistrot Caraibes and Spiga, an Italian restaurant that the hurricane left largely untouched, despite ripping the roofs off its neighbors. By contrast, Philipsburg, the Dutch capital, was largely back to business, with the gleaming jewelry stores and revamped clothing boutiques of Front Street beckoning day-trippers arriving from cruise ships. Even as workers hammered within the top story of the Holland House Beach Hotel, a mix of American and European tourists lounged on its chic wooden deck and dined on $22 lobster sandwiches in its shaded waterfront restaurant. Down the boardwalk, Pirates in Paradise, a themed bar with a cultlike following from Ohio State, served up $2 beers on a veranda shaded by a blue tarp, despite the gutted second story above it. Around the corner, Juggie Amarnaney held court at his tiny namesake bar, Juggie’s Place, offering returning visitors a cold drink and a Cuban cigar beneath a canopy of some 250 bras — each one representing a $5 donation to breast cancer awareness. “There are people who love this island and there are people who love the people of this island,” he said. “Right now,” he said, nodding to a couple from Wallingford, Conn., who had returned to the island for the 26th time, “they’re the ones who are coming back.” The others, he said, will wait for more hotels, restaurants and flights to open up. “They want all the bells and whistles that come with their resorts. You won’t get that right now.” What visitors do have, at least for now, is the run of the place. Even with a Carnival cruise ship in port, Philipsburg was largely devoid of tourists. A lone Segway zoomed up and down the boardwalk. Parking was plentiful. The red-and-white latticed Guavaberry Emporium beckoned passers-by with reggae music and free tastings of spiced rums. And diners had their choice of beachfront tables. “It’s much more like the first year we came, back in 2001, a little bit quieter but just as much fun,” said Jeff Kish, 64, who owns an ambulance company in Toledo, Ohio, and was vacationing with his wife, two daughters, their husbands and four grandchildren, between the ages of 4 and 14. Irma destroyed the timeshare the family usually stays at, so the Kishes booked hotel rooms in Simpson Bay, where restaurants and bars along the entertainment strip were largely open. The family had no trouble accomplishing their vacation to-do list, which included offshore fishing, relaxing on the beach and snorkeling in Mullet Bay, said Mr. Kish. “We found it’s been just as pleasurable, just as beautiful, once you get past the destruction.” About 80 percent of the island’s 5,667 guest rooms that were open before Hurricane Irma were still out of commission in March, including the 317-room Westin Dawn Beach Resort & Spa, the 258-room Riu Palace St. Martin and the 83-room Belmond La Samanna. Flights scheduled for the month of March to St. Martin are down by 1,507 with 92,252 fewer seats when compared with a year ago, according to data and analytics from FlightGlobal. Yet with another hurricane season fast approaching, much of the tourist zone is not only rebuilding, but undergoing a multimillion-dollar face-lift. The Maho Group alone is putting more than $50 million into a revamp of the Sonesta Resorts, including overhauling the Sonesta Maho Beach Resort, and incorporating a new contemporary design. Sonesta’s Casino Royale, the largest on the island, with more than 21,000 square feet of gaming, plans to reopen this summer with two new bistro-style al fresco restaurants and a rooftop bar and lounge. Shiny new rental cars awaits visitors at the Alamo rental office. The Rainbow Café in Grand Case has a new whitewashed deck, a reconfigured layout, and chic red-and-white furnishings. “Everything is destroyed, so I tried to do something better,” the owner, Gobert Douglas, said with a French accent. Pointing out that he could have spent less on the renovation, he said, “I prefer to do this, change the floor, all the seating, all the style of the restaurant to make it new.” Other business owners said they were hopeful that the renewed development would bring tourists back. “From here St. Martin only gets better,” said Sam Punjabi, the manager and diamond specialist at Shopper’s Haven, a jewelry store in Philipsburg. “There are places that are completely gone. You might see something different come up. You might see something better come up. Like they say, when you hit bottom, there’s only one way to go.”Yet with so many places still under repair, some businesses are recommending first-time visitors wait until next season to come to St. Martin. “I’m wary of bringing first-time clients to the island for the moment,” said Lesley Reed, the owner and broker at St. Martin Sotheby’s International Realty, noting that just 25 percent of the island villas she manages would be ready by April 1. “I think it needs another six months.”But even in early March, visitors appeared to be enjoying themselves. A sunburned crowd gathered at Maho Beach, adjacent to the Princess Juliana International Airport on the island’s southwestern shore, and famous for up-close views — and the jet blasts — of departing and landing aircraft. As incoming planes buzzed low overhead, swimsuit-clad tourists took their positions in an attempt to capture the ultimate selfie on a quintessential Caribbean beach, with a jumbo jet coming right at them. Next door, at the Sunset Beach Bar, an estimated 400 tourists dined on wood-fired pizzas and sipped cocktails from plastic cups. Perched on a stool overlooking the water, Elizabeth Schooley and her boyfriend, Scott Anthony, took in the view. “You can’t beat this — on the beach, the clear blue water, the sun,” said Ms. Schooley, an airline operation agent from Las Vegas who had arrived for the day on a Carnival Cruise. “This is amazing.”Kim Serrant, a manager working in the air-conditioned gift shop next to the pool deck, said that normally the pool and restaurant would be standing room only. “A lot of people are not coming because they think the island isn’t safe or that there isn’t any place to stay. We have villas. There are still some hotels available,” she said, pointing out that the Atrium Beach Resort & Spa, next door was accepting guests. “It is still the same friendly island — St. Martin, sunshine city. I would invite people to come on back. We are waiting here with open arms.” Each day, progress is beginning to take hold. By the end of June, inventory on the Dutch side of the island is expected to grow by 560 rooms with properties like Divi Little Bay Beach Resort and Oyster Bay Beach Resort expected to reopen. On the French side, roughly 600 rooms will be added by year-end, according to the Kate Richardson, the director of St. Martin’s tourism office, including intimate boutique-style properties. Among them: the Hotel La Plantation on Orient Bay (April), the Mediterranean-style Le Petit Hotel (June) and the Grand Case Beach Club (October). New tourist attractions are also welcoming visitors. In November, Rainforest Adventures opened a new zip line — the Flying Dutchman — in Emilio Wilson Park. Visitors can tour a new museum dedicated to the history of the site, a former plantation dating back to the 1700s, and dine in a refurbished stone building that was once the sugar cane boiling house. And with the island’s natural attractions still intact, tour operators continue to offer sailing trips, snorkeling excursions and hikes up to Pic Paradise, the highest spot on the island.“There are some things that the hurricane just couldn’t take away, said Marc Petrelluzzi, whose family owns Le Petit Hotel and its beloved sister property, L’Esplanade. “It’s the view. It’s the sea. It’s the beaches. It’s the vegetation. It’s nature.” Michelle Higgins writes the Fix column, offering advice on home renovations and décor. She has covered travel, real estate and other lifestyle topics for more than a decade at The Times. She previously worked at The Wall Street Journal.@michellehigginsAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byUpdateThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says that an outbreak of the virus means that travelers should get the vaccine before a trip.By Karen WeintraubThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has advice for people thinking about traveling to most parts of Brazil: get vaccinated against yellow fever, or stay home.Brazil is currently suffering a major outbreak of the hemorrhagic fever, and it’s striking places that don’t normally see the virus. Since the beginning of 2017, 237 people, including several tourists, have died after becoming infected with the virus.Carried by mosquitoes, the virus has also spread to the very edge of Brazil’s largest cities, São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, and has also infected mosquitoes on the Ilha Grande, a major tourist destination not far from Rio. “This is the time not to go into an outbreak area unprotected,” said Dr. Martin Cetron, director of the Division of Global Migration and Quarantine at the National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases at the C.D.C. “We recommend people defer travel to these areas of transmission if they can’t be protected by the vaccine.”Dr. Cetron said it’s also important for doctors seeing patients who have recently returned from Brazil to think about the virus as a possible cause if they develop a fever.The mosquitoes that carry yellow fever normally stay in the upper canopies of the forest, said Dr. Edward Ryan, the director of Global Infectious Diseases at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. But for unknown reasons, in early 2017, mosquitoes with the virus began turning up in unexpected spots, including coastal areas. Officials are now worried that the Aedes aegypti mosquito, which can also carry Zika, dengue and chikungunya, will pick up the virus. Aedes aegypti live close to the ground in cities and like feasting on humans, so if they become infected, it puts the population of major cities at high risk, Dr. Ryan said. There’s no specific treatment for yellow fever, just supportive care, Dr. Ryan said.Early symptoms include fever, chills, headache, backache and muscle aches, according to the C.D.C.In about 15 percent of victims, the virus reaches a fulminant form, which causes liver damage that turns the whites of the eyes yellow, hence its name, Dr. Ryan said. The liver is where clotting factors are made, so liver damage can causes blood-thinning which can trigger bleeding. Yellow fever can kill as many as 20 to 50 percent of its victims, he said.The best protection is vaccination. “As far as I know, no one who’s gotten the yellow fever vaccine has ever gotten wild type yellow fever,” Dr. Ryan said. The World Health Organization also recommends that people protect themselves against mosquito bites by using repellents, covering exposed skin and installing screens on windows. The vaccine carries some risks, but they are far rarer than the risks of the disease itself, Dr. Cetron said.The C.D.C. does not recommend the vaccine for those who have an increased risk of developing a severe reaction, including infants under 6 months old, people who are immune compromised or are on immunosuppressive drugs, those who have a rare disorder of the thymus or those with an allergy to the vaccine’s ingredients.The vaccine, which provides immunity for at least 10 years, must be given a minimum of 10 days before travel, according to the C.D.C.Unfortunately, there’s a shortage of the vaccine right now in the United States. Sanofi Pasteur, which manufactures the vaccine, ran into production troubles in 2017 and is currently upgrading its plants in the United States. Sanofi has been importing a limited supply of a similar vaccine called Stamaril from Europe, but because of the limits, the vaccine is only available at about 250 clinics around the country. (The C.D.C. offers a searchable list of clinics here.) So, travelers not only have to plan their vaccination ahead of time, they may have to go through more effort to get the shot, Dr. Cetron said.Summer will shortly turn to fall in the Southern Hemisphere, which, Dr. Cetron said, makes him somewhat optimistic that the yellow fever outbreak will die down. “There’s clearly a seasonality to yellow fever,” he said. But the transmission risk didn’t disappear entirely last winter, so public health experts don’t really know what to expect, Dr. Cetron said. “We really need to stay vigilant.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTRENDINGPromoting sustainability, properties are offering food and beverage credits and other perks for guests who forgo housekeeping services.By Abby EllinThe question came at check-in: Did I want to forgo housekeeping for the two days I was staying at the Flamingo in Las Vegas in exchange for a $10 a day food and beverage credit?Huh?The clerk repeated himself. Some guests, he explained, didn’t want to be bothered during their stay — hangovers and all that. So last summer the Flamingo, along with nearly all of its sister properties in Vegas (it is owned and operated by Caesars Entertainment), decided to give people the chance to decline having their rooms cleaned in exchange for a voucher. I’m familiar with the card in the room suggesting guests reuse their towels and sheets to help the environment, but I’d never heard of hotels eliminating housekeeping altogether. But more and more are doing just that, and extending rebates, hotel points and other perks for those who take them up on their offer.It’s a smart business move, industry experts say. “A lot of hotels were becoming more aware of what consumers like,” said Adam Weissenberg, the global leader of travel and hospitality for Deloitte, in Parsippany, N.J.  “They received criticism from younger travelers. ‘This is ridiculous that they’re changing my towels and sheets every day. I don’t need that, it does harm the environment.’”According to MMGY Global’s Portrait of American Travelers, 2017-2018, 13 percent of United States travelers say that they have selected a travel service provider specifically for environmental considerations, up from 11 percent in 2014. Thirty-eight percent said they would be willing to pay more for a travel service provider who demonstrates environmental responsibility, a 13 percent increase from 2014. “What we’ve seen fairly steadily over the course of five plus years among travelers is that there’s a general sense and appreciation for anything related to sustainability and environmental issues,” said Craig Compagnone, senior vice president of business strategy at MMGY. The thinking is that eradicating housekeeping is better for the environment, and for the hotels’ bottom line. After all, if you’re not washing towels and bedding, you’re saving water — and money. You’re also not sending as many chemicals into the sewer system. “So that’s better from a water perspective,” said Jeanne Marie Varney, who teaches courses on sustainability at Cornell University’s School of Hotel Administration. “You get the benefit of not using cleaning chemicals in the rest of the room. Not running vacuum cleaners saves energy.”Starwood launched its initiative at the Sheraton Seattle in 2008. Guests who declined housekeeping service for up to three consecutive days received a choice of either 500 Starpoints (in its Starwood Preferred Guests program) or a $5 food and beverage gift card. While leisure guests occasionally opted in, frequent business travelers “ate it up,” said James Gancos, the chief executive and founder of the Guestbook, a loyalty program for independent boutique hotels, and the former hotel manager at the Sheraton Seattle. “They told us, ‘I love being green, I love the extra points, I didn’t want people in my room anyway.”That program became Make a Green Choice and Starwood rolled it out to all of its brands except the St. Regis after Marriott International acquired Starwood in 2016, the company implemented similar programs in about 20 of its 30 brands in North America, including Marriott, JW Marriott, Westin, Sheraton, Delta, Renaissance, W, Courtyard, and Fairfield Inn & Suites.Under the Your Choice and Luxury of Choice programs at full-service hotels, guests are eligible for 500 Marriott Rewards points per day. Delta’s GreenSTAY offers guests the option to receive 250 Marriott Rewards points or have a tree planted.Some smaller hotels have also started doing it. Miramonte Indian Wells Resort and Spa, in Indian Wells, Calif., offers a $5 food and beverage credit, and Suncadia Resort, in Cle Elum, Wash., offers guests a $5 resort credit per day that can be used at its coffee shop, spa or fitness center. The hotel Bardessono, in Yountville, Calif., will plant one herb a day per guest in an on-site organic garden. This month, the Ridgeline Hotel in Estes Park, Colo., is launching a free drink incentive for each night guests stay and decline housekeeping. While it’s unclear how many people take advantage of these sorts of programs, Delta recently celebrated its 100,000th tree being planted since the program’s inception. Marriott says it has lowered its energy use by 13.2 percent, its water use by 7.7 percent and its greenhouse gas emissions by 15.8 percent between 2007 and 2016. Other hotels say they simply don’t want to bother guests on vacation. The Moorings Village in Islamorada, Fla., which has 19 private villas, discontinued housekeeping on its property altogether. The property will only clean when a guest requests it. Why? The general manager Debbie Pribly put it this way: “Our hotel team noticed that guests didn’t want their relaxation to be interrupted and don’t want to feel like they’re on a routine while vacationing, so we offer housekeeping by request only,” she said. “This allows us to adhere to the guest’s schedule, offering a cleaning only when it’s convenient for them rather than convenient for the hotel.”    AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerThe quiet neighborhood of Coyoacán captures the capital’s understated cultural soul and, in many ways, is a getaway within Mexico City itself. By Lucas PetersonCall it a case of FOMO — Fear of Missing Out. I’m usually resistant to pangs of envy inspired by social media photos of friends and families on perfect getaways around the world. And seeing that multiple acquaintances had all visited the same destination would, if anything, make me decidedly less likely to visit a place. But this was different. Everyone I knew, it seemed, was going to Mexico City, and having the times of their lives. And I wanted to go, too. But I was determined not to retread — not entirely, at least — the same attractive parks and tree-lined avenues dotted with Instagrammable restaurants and coffee shops as my peers. I would stay away from popular neighborhoods like La Condesa and Roma Norte during this trip, preferring instead to hone my focus about six miles south, on the quieter neighborhood of Coyoacán. Best known as the location of Frida Kahlo’s Blue House, this “place of coyotes” proved to be equal parts serene and invigorating — the understated cultural soul of a city and, in many ways, a getaway within Mexico City itself. And my budget, modest as it was, didn’t limit my enjoyment during a four-day, three-night trip.José Antonio Albanés, my spry middle-aged tour guide whom I’d found through an Airbnb Experience ($50, which included a mountain of food), was born and raised in Coyoacán (which refers to both the neighborhood and the larger borough of the same name, one of 16 that make up the city) and had a laundry list of reasons it was the best area in the city. “Everything,” he said, “is better. The water, the climate, the culture.” The climate? He was adamant. “It is better,” he said. “It’s cooler.” He also maintained that it was safer. “You see this?” he asked, motioning toward traffic crawling northward on a one-way cobblestone street near Hidalgo Garden park. “It’s easy to come into Coyoacán, but it’s difficult to leave.” He said there were traffic bottlenecks on the few roads exiting the neighborhood. “Criminals don’t like to come here.”I couldn’t verify that intel, but there was a lot about Coyoacán that seemed different from the rest of the city. While bustling, it also felt inviting, almost suburban, and largely unruffled from the masses of tourists that crowd neighborhoods like the Centro Histórico. Much of that might be attributable to the lack of big hotel chains in the area — you won’t find Sheratons or Hiltons in Coyoacán. That left me with a handful of options, primarily small inns and Airbnbs. My first night in the neighborhood, I stayed just a couple blocks away from the Blue House at the cozy Chalet del Carmen Coyoacán, where I found a room for 1,330 Mexican pesos, a little over $70. I spent the next couple of nights in a private room with attached bathroom in a great central location near Plaza de la Conchita, booked through Airbnb for $30 per night. My host, Gustavo Hernández Clark, waxed rhapsodic about his adopted home, saying he loved “everything about Coyoacán.” He emigrated from Cuba 20 years ago, murkily referring only to “the situation there” when discussing his homeland. After checking me in, we walked around the corner to one of his lunch haunts, Taquería los Parados de Coyoacán. I had a lovely plate of enchiladas suizas stuffed with chicken and drowning in a tangy green chili salsa for 91 pesos, less than $5, plus a freshly squeezed orange juice for another 35 pesos.It was the first of many excellent meals. Unsurprisingly, the volume of inexpensive street food and casual cafes in Coyoacán didn’t disappoint. My first afternoon in the city was brightened considerably when I stopped by La Casa del Pan Papalotl, where I got a creamy banana licuado (something between a milkshake and a smoothie) for 32 pesos. The cute vegetarian restaurant sits on a lively plaza on Calle Xicoténcatl, and I spent some time hanging out, perusing jewelry and bootleg DVDs peddled by sidewalk vendors. I also couldn’t resist an enormous basket spilling over with churros. I picked up a bag of four of the fried sugary treats for 15 pesos.Sweet, doughy delights are in abundance, and you’d be remiss to visit Mexico without trying a concha, a kind of pan dulce (sweet bread) caked with a cracked, crumbly topping. Rafaella Panadería does a nice, chocolate version (18 pesos) that’s worth the walk to the northwest corner of the neighborhood. A few blocks down on Avenida Division del Norte is El Rey del Taco, which does a decent taco al pastor (12 pesos), but is really worth visiting for the selection of tasty pickled chilies and onions that come with it.Not all the food is quite as casual. Jake Lindeman, a friend and expat photographer based in Mexico City, recommended I check out La Barraca Valenciana. I enjoyed a Gallega torta (135 pesos), a crusty white roll stuffed with tender bacalao a lo tío, or salted cod, alongside an Espanta Pájaros pale ale (65 pesos). Another good seafood option is just down the block at Tu Ceviche, where the quality product made up for what began as an uneven experience. I walked in well before their advertised closing time one evening only to be told they were shuttering early. Fortunately, they allowed me to get take out — a generous portion of ceviche negra (170 pesos), zesty cubes of wahoo fish served with a bag of fresh tortilla chips.And, of course, there are the markets. The Mercado de Comida de Coyoacán, which specializes in food, and the larger Mercado de Coyoacán, which takes up the better part of a city block and sells nearly anything you could imagine, are worth a few hours of your time. Besides the fresh produce, spices, slabs of queso fresco and containers of organic honey (80 pesos for a small jar) at the larger market, there’s also clothing, toys and numerous casual sit-down restaurants where you can enjoy a fresh enchilada or tostada. It also happens to be a stone’s throw from the Frida Kahlo Museum, also known as the Casa Azúl or Blue House, obligatory during a visit to Coyoacán. Here are a few tips: Buy your timed tickets online (200 pesos during the week, 220 on the weekend) and show up early; the lines, even for ticketed customers, are formidable. Also, it’s worth the 30 extra pesos to buy a photo permit so you can snap pictures in the museum — employees are very aggressive about enforcing the permit rule.Once inside, you’ll get a fascinating glimpse into the life of Mexico’s two most internationally famous artists (the other being her partner, Diego Rivera). The museum begins with family portraits — “Mi Familia” and “Retrato de Mi Padre Guillermo Kahlo” — and accelerates from there, displaying pencil drawings, private photographs, and a collection of ex-votos, small panels depicting 19th- and 20th-century Mexican life. A separate exhibition (included with admission) focuses on Kahlo’s wardrobe, bringing into focus an aspect of her life I hadn’t given much thought: childhood polio and a near-fatal bus accident that had lifelong effects on her health and work. Different crutches, braces and girdles — even a prosthetic leg — are on display.A couple of blocks away is the Taller Experimental de Cerámica, or Experimental Ceramics Workshop, a must-visit for anyone interested in the craft. It’s a little tricky to find — you enter on Centenario, not Aguayo, as you might think from looking at a map. And don’t expect anyone to let you in or greet you. I let myself in, reaching through and opening up the big metal gate despite the (ultimately harmless) yapping and snarling of several dark blue-tinged xoloitzcuintli, Mexican hairless dogs. Once inside, I wandered around the sprawling half-indoors, half-outdoors facility, largely unsupervised. Eventually I made it into the main showroom, where I surveyed the gorgeous collection of plates, cups, saucers and other decorative pieces before finally settling on something: A small juicer for 216 pesos. The workshop also has a few shelves of broken and flawed pieces, which sell by weight.Coyoacán has an artistic heart, as demonstrated by the multitude of cultural activities I was able to find in just a short period. Just south of the Viveros de Coyoacán, a big public park, I attended an energetically presented black box theater performance of “Todo” by Janne Teller at the Teatro Santa Catarina (150 pesos, half off for students and teachers). Across the street is the Casa de Cultura Jesús Reyes Heroles, a beautiful cultural center with salsa classes and free performances that is open to the public.I also enjoyed the Centro Cultural Elena Garro, another cultural center that is notable for its large and gorgeous bookstore. I splurged a little and purchased Acridofagia y Otro Insectos, a fascinating book about the consumption of insects, for about 475 pesos. And I was particularly smitten with the Cineteca Nacional, a large, multifaceted cinema and arts complex that’s technically just north of the Coyoacán border. There are bookstores, cafes, a movie memorabilia shop called Belahugozzi (guess the reference) and, naturally, movie theaters. For just 30 pesos, I attended an evening showing of the Best Picture-winning “The Shape of Water.”José Antonio was explaining the history of the city to me as we wandered through Coyoacán’s tree-shaded public parks, filled with vendors, young couples and tarot readers. We walked and talked over the better part of the day, munching on tostadas at the Mercado de Coyoacán and crunching on chapulines (grasshoppers) while sipping mezcal at the restaurant Mezcalero. We covered a good deal of the neighborhood on foot and even had a casual run-in with Rina Lazo, a 94-year-old artist who was an associate of Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo. Finally, we turned down Avenida Francisco Sosa and began heading west, away from the Jardín Centenario park. “Now,” he said, “You will see what I’m talking about with the climate.”Suddenly, the heavy traffic all but vanished. The hubbub from the buskers and kids listening to Top 40 music on boomboxes disappeared. All that remained were thick-trunked trees and leaves trembling slightly in the breeze. We continued walking as the breeze picked up, and the branches swayed and leaves rustled. I could feel it and I had to admit he was right: It was definitely cooler in Coyoacán.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byUpdateA recent report finds that visiting cities like Karachi, Pakistan, and Caracas, Venezuela, can be risky for travelers.By Shivani VoraStaying safe while traveling is a topic which continues to be relevant as terrorist attacks are no longer a surprise and mass shootings seem to be increasingly common. Is almost every destination in the world a potential danger?In fact, according to the latest Safe Cities Index, some places pose considerably more risk than others. The report was released late last year by The Economist Intelligence Unit, the research and analysis division of The Economist Group, a London-based company that specializes in international business.The index ranked the safety of 60 international cities across four categories, including personal security, which scored each city on factors such as the number of terrorist attacks, crime rates, threat of military conflict and threat of civil unrest.The Safe Cities Index was first published in 2015, and the not-so-good news in the second version released in 2017 is that levels of personal security appear to have declined in the past two years, said Christopher Clague, a managing editor at The Economist Intelligence Unit and the creator of the index. Below, according to the Safe Cities Index, are the five most dangerous destinations in the world right now.Karachi, Pakistan The port city of Karachi has ongoing security issues, including ethnic, political and sectarian violence, a high crime rate and terrorism, said Matthew Bradley, the regional director of security for International SOS, a travel risk management company. “Karachi is not a city where you should go unless you absolutely have to,” he said.Greg Boles, an associate managing director for Kroll, a security consulting company, said that Karachi is subject to a high number of terrorist attacks from both foreign and indigenous terrorist groups, including the Pakistani Taliban.“U. S. citizens are a target in Karachi and can get kidnapped for ransom,” he said. Mr. Boles also said that because Pakistan borders Afghanistan, the Taliban and its well-established networks can transport United States citizens from Pakistan to that country.Caracas, Venezuela Venezuela’s capital is unsafe when it comes to personal security, Mr. Bradley said, because of the prevalence of violent crime and frequency of sexual assaults on women. “Crime is endemic, and opportunistic street crime and more serious offenses such as kidnapping, carjacking and armed robbery have become increasingly common,” he said.Mr. Boles, who has previously worked in Caracas, said that the city has a food and medicine shortage, which causes social unrest and protests. “The general population doesn’t have access to basic necessities and can act out in frustration,” he said. “If you’re visiting, you can easily become a part of the mess and may be detained without access to clean water or food.” Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam It may seem surprising to see this French colonial metropolis, formerly known as Saigon and popular with tourists, ranked among the top five dangerous destinations, but Mr. Boles said that crime is an issue there, including violent, organized and petty offenses. Ho Chi Minh City’s dense population makes active policing a challenge, and because bicycles and scooters are a common mode of transportation, perpetrators can quickly flee.Mr. Bradley said that visitors, particularly when in tourist areas such as those around Pham Ngu Lao and Dong Khoi, shouldn’t display any valuable items like jewelry or cellphones, or walk alone after dark. Additionally, they should be aware that drinks and food may be drugged.Yangon, Myanmar The tension between Myanmar’s Muslim and Buddhist communities makes Yangon an unsafe place to be, said Mr. Boles. “The fighting between the two ethnic groups can be violent and unpredictable,” he said. “From a tourist perspective, it’s an unstable city because you don’t know what’s going to happen next.”Rohingya, a predominantly Muslim ethnic group, has been subject to serious human rights abuses, including murder and rape, according to international human right groups like Amnesty International.Quito, Ecuador Yes, it’s a tourist destination, but crime, including pickpocketing, robbery and thefts in hotel rooms, is a significant concern, according to both Mr. Bradley and Mr. Boles. Mr. Boles said that tourists have been robbed when they’re out and about in the city while Mr. Bradley said that Quito has a problem with what are known as “express” kidnappings. “Travelers perceived to be wealthy have been seized and forced to withdraw large sums of money from their A.T.M. accounts,” he said. “While most express kidnappings end in the release of the abductee, in some cases, they have resulted in the death of the targeted individual.”The State Department’s site says that “crime is a widespread problem in Ecuador” and also warns of express kidnappings. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byIf you’re headed to São Paulo, don't forget these necessities to make your stay more comfortable, and more fun.By Alan HenrySo you have a few days to spare in one of Brazil’s largest, most beautiful cities. Whether you plan to roam through Vila Madalena’s market or take in the art at IMS Paulista, the first thing you’ll need is comfortable walking shoes. Beyond that, here are some other essentials, with the help of Wirecutter, The New York Times’s product review site.Ria Misra, an editor at Wirecutter, offers a few reminders: First, pickpockets target tourists, so aim to blend in. Keep your camera secured with a strap, your shopping in a tote or messenger bag (not a backpack) that zips shut securely, and any cash or cards tucked out of sight in a not easily accessible wallet. Regardless of the weather, you’ll probably find that your light jacket gets much more of a workout than your sunglasses. The skies are often overcast, but weather conditions fluctuate by the week, the day and even the hour, Ms. Misra noted. Dressing simply and casually in light, sheddable layers will help you stay comfortable in a variety of both temperatures and situations, from morning walking tours of the city’s vivid street art through an evening of cocktails and live music.With the basics out of the way, here are Ms. Misra’s packing suggestions, complete with specific recommendations from Wirecutter experts.Battery pack. Even if you’re leaving your phone in your pocket or bag as much as possible, keeping GPS-related apps running will drain its battery quickly.Travel charger. This multiport Anker USB charger works both in the United States and abroad, and is especially useful if you’re taking multiple devices, such as a phone, iPad, Kindle, laptop or battery pack.Type “N” plug adapter to power up your electronics in Brazil. Wirecutter likes this one from Bestek, either as a part of a global adapter set or just on its own. Camera. Since you’ll be carrying it all day long, a simple point-and-shoot, like the slim Canon Powershot G9X, will be easily portable and still capture the highlights of your trip.Camera strap. The point-and-shoot we suggest comes with a strap included, but if you do opt to shoulder a more powerful DSLR or mirrorless camera, be sure to secure it, from either theft or falling, with a strap.A pair of comfortable walking shoes.Three days’ worth of socks. Three days’ worth of underwear. Three days’ worth of comfortable, casual clothes for mild temperatures. Be sure to take a few longer, light layers for gray days and walking around on those cooler nights. Travel toiletry bag. Collapsible water bottle, for those long walks. A simple wallet, to carry cash and essentials. If you’re comfortable with a neck wallet or money belt, you may choose to use it to guard against losses from pickpockets.A light, packable jacket, to put in your tote for chillier nights or damp days. City map.Small notebook to jot down directions or key phrases. Choosing a customizable, folio style, like this Traveler’s Notebook, means that you can swap in inserts (including calendars or lined paper) or even tuck tickets or fold your map in there, too. Pen.Sunglasses (just in case).A zip-top travel tote or messenger bag to stash shopping or personal items. This lightweight Patagonia travel tote packs into its own pocket when you’re not using it — we don’t recommend using the convertible backpack option (at least for this trip) while on the street, though. On a long flight (nonstops to São Paulo from the United States range from eight hours to nearly twice that), a travel pillow, a travel sleep mask and earplugs should make it easier to rest.For when you’re awake on the flight, a pair of noise-canceling earbuds. Make every minute count on a short trip like this by carrying on your bag. While O.K.-for-carry-on sizes vary by airline, these slimmed-down international travel bags should work for most. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTrendingTravelers often think they have to travel far abroad to take in majestic wildlife, but there’s an abundance of natural beauty right here in the U.S. worth checking out.By Shivani VoraThink you need to travel to the African savanna or South American rain forest to see fantastic wildlife? Think again. According to Martha Kauffman, a managing director and scientist at the World Wildlife Fund, the United States has an abundance of opportunities for memorable wildlife encounters. “The U.S. is home to thousands of species of wildlife, and it’s possible to see lots of these animals up close in their natural habitats,” she said. Wildlife tours are springing up around the country. Here are four options for this winter and spring. Ms. Kauffman said that one of the most spectacular wildlife viewing experiences she’s ever had was in March in Nebraska’s Platte River valley, when more than 80 percent of the world’s sandhill cranes, more than 550,000 in all, congregate in the area. They roost in the river by night and forage in the surrounding fields by day, and it’s a sight to behold. The birds are on their way to Canada and Alaska, and come from Mexico, Texas and New Mexico. One way to see the cranes is on the overnight photography tour from the Crane Trust. Visitors spend the night in a photo-video blind: a 20 foot by 8 foot plywood structure that can accommodate two people. The blind is stationed near the roosting birds on the river, and it’s possible to photograph them in both the morning and evening. Prices start at $250 a blind, and tours run from March 4 to 31. Reserve by emailing the Trust directly, at info@cranetrust.org.In winter, several species of animals make their home in the 10,000-acre Dogwood Canyon Nature Park, in Missouri’s Ozark Mountains. The park is home to eagles, bison, elk and otters. Visitors can encounter these animals through a private two-hour wildlife viewing tour with a park ranger (prices start at $200 for up to three people) or go on a self-guided biking or walking wildlife viewing tour using the brochure available at the park’s visiting center. Visit the park’s website for more information, and to book a tour.Through the winter, the Shore Lodge, in McCall, Idaho, offers both guests and visitors who haven’t booked a room the chance to go on an hourlong sleigh ride along the Gold Fork River to see and feed Rocky Mountain elk. Riders will also likely see white-tailed deer and foxes on the trip. Tickets are $20 per adult, and nightly rates at the Lodge start at $260. Visit shorelodge.com to book. Nemacolin Woodlands Resort, in Farmington, PA, is situated among 2,000 acres of forest in the Laurel Highlands. The wildlife in the vicinity includes pygmy goats, Iranian sheep, and black bears. Both guests and passers-by can see these animals by signing up for a two-hour tour, offered daily throughout the year. The tours are run by a wildlife expert who takes guests on an open-air cart through the woodlands. During portions of the trip, participants can get-off the vehicle to feed some of the wildlife they encounter, including the sheep. Tickets are $90 a person, and resort rates start at $159 per night. Book by calling the resort directly, at 1-866-399-6957.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFAMILY CRUISESA mother and daughter have plenty of time to enjoy Stockholm, Copenhagen and St. Petersburg on their cruise as well as sashimi and scavenger hunts onboard.By Shivani VoraA cruise wasn’t even a contender when my 8-year-old daughter, Meenakshi, and I were planning our summer vacation. The two cruises I had taken more than 15 years ago had left me certain that I would never go on another. I craved the freedom to explore a destination untethered by time constraints, but how do you do that on a cruise when you have a deadline to be onboard by late afternoon before the ship departs for the next port?Yet there we were on a 13-day voyage from Stockholm to Hamburg on Crystal Cruises’s Crystal Symphony, then a 922-passenger vessel (it now accommodates 848 after a renovation). Through my work as a travel writer, I had learned about an increasingly popular style of cruising where boats spend longer days and overnights in ports. They’re for travelers who want the conveniences and amenities of a ship, but are more interested in spending time onshore than they are onboard.Who knew that Meenakshi and I would be those travelers? We had two weeks off and wanted to take a fun mother-daughter trip to Europe but didn’t want to grapple with the slew of flights we’d have to take to visit multiple cities or the constant unpacking and packing involved on such a trip.On the other hand, using a ship as a mode of transport to see several cities at a relaxed pace was a vacation that sounded appealing, and just like that, I was on a cruise again.I picked an itinerary that I thought would satisfy us both: Two-day stops in Stockholm and Copenhagen, which are known for their child-friendly attractions, and three days in St. Petersburg, a city I had wanted to visit ever since I had learned Russian history in college almost two decades ago. Helsinki wasn’t of particular interest, but we would only be there for a day after Stockholm.The 51,000-ton Symphony wasn’t a mega ship in the vein of those akin to mini cities, but with eight levels open to passengers (an additional five levels are for staff and storage), it had all the amenities that are often a draw of big boats. There was a pool to entertain us, and a library, nightclub, movie theater, casino, several restaurants and a spa.Never mind these frills. There would be upward of 18 hours of daylight at Symphony’s ports of call, a fortunate happenstance coinciding with our trip, and the plan was to seize the long days to explore these destinations to the fullest.The trip began in Stockholm. Symphony was docked a 15-minute drive from the city’s downtown, and we boarded around noon, having flown in from New York a few hours earlier. After a bevy of greetings from smiling crew members, a porter ushered us to our light-filled stateroom.Instead of getting acquainted with our surroundings, we hurried to grab lunch in the main dining room so that we could head out for an afternoon of sightseeing. Although Crystal offers group excursions at every port, I was fairly certain that most weren’t likely to keep a fidgety 8-year-old engaged for long, and so I booked private guides for portions of our journey; we explored on our own the rest of the time. I arranged these guides about a month before the cruise — I went through Crystal’s online planning center for the ones in Stockholm and Copenhagen and used a reference from a friend for our guide in St. Petersburg. The guides cost up to a few hundred dollars more than group tours, but given that they could accommodate our specific interests, I didn’t mind. Our Stockholm guide, Linda Naslund, gave us a sense of the city’s geography of 14 islands connected by more than 50 bridges with a leisurely drive. We stopped at Junibacken, a museum devoted to Swedish children’s literature, namely works by Astrid Lindgren, who wrote one of Meenakshi’s favorite books, “Pippi Longstocking.” From there, we walked to the Vasa Museum to see the nearly intact 17th-century Vasa, a massive ship that sank early in her maiden voyage.Symphony’s proximity to the city gave us the flexibility to go quickly back and forth between the two, and we recovered from the jet lag that was starting to set in with a nap in our stateroom.Later, we made traditional Swedish peppermint sticks at Gamla Stans Polkagriskokeri, a family-run candy store in the city’s medieval center, Gamla Stan (the shop is temporarily closed and is scheduled to reopen this fall). In a state of mint-and-sugar euphoria, we walked through the neighborhood’s streets, which were crowded with locals finding their way into restaurants and bars for a sun-filled night out.A flurry of activity ensued the next morning and afternoon, but the best parts were seeing the wild Nordic animals such as moose and lynx cubs at Skansen, a sprawling open-air museum and zoo covering five centuries of Swedish history, and our bike ride underneath the bright sun along the city’s canals.We raced back to Symphony before its 3 p.m. departure. In “Shipping Out,” a piece by the essayist and novelist David Foster Wallace about a luxury cruise he took, published in Harper’s Magazine in 1996, he described his ship’s departure as “a not untasteful affair of crepes and horns.” Ours, in contrast, was free of such fanfare: Following a safety briefing, we were off.Up until now, our third day into the trip, we hadn’t familiarized ourselves with Symphony. We had also ignored the two newsletters placed outside our door each day — “Reflections” detailed the ship’s movies, classes, guest speakers, nightly shows and other happenings for adults; “Surf Runner” had the lineup for children. Although travelers over 50 are Crystal’s most popular cruisers, summer itineraries attract families with young children, and our trip had around 40 other children within a five-year age range of Meenakshi. In the little downtime we had throughout our trip, Meenakshi raced to the kid’s club, Fantasia, for activities like jewelry-making, mural painting and scavenger hunts. I kept busy with work or by hitting the gym. I also used every last second of the hour of daily Wi-Fi included in the cost of the cruise — all of the line’s voyages now include unlimited Wi-Fi, and if this had been the case on my itinerary, I likely would have spent a lot more time on my computer and phone. (It’s a blessing that it wasn’t because enjoying my surroundings, and not being glued to a screen, was the point of going away in the first place.)Crystal’s cruises are all-inclusive, and the food, drinks (including premium alcohol) and staff gratuities are included in the cruise price. This approach presented a conundrum: When we had to be on board, we enjoyed the freedom it afforded us — I could order as much wine or whiskey as I wanted, and, for Meenakshi, there were unlimited scoops of Ben & Jerry’s from the ship’s ice cream stand. But when we were docked overnight in cities with fantastic restaurants, it was hard to justify paying to dine in them when we could easily head to the ship for sustenance. We ultimately ended up finding a balance between the two.The meals we did have onboard were delicious and unstuffy. Though smart attire was suggested for dinner, dressing up wasn’t mandatory. And we could choose to be seated with others or dine alone (we picked the latter). The menu in the main dining room changed nightly. One evening was lobster night (two for me, thank you for very much), and on another occasion, we ate simple ravioli in a chunky tomato sauce and grilled sea bass on a bed of sautéed spinach.The standout dinner on Symphony was at Silk Road, a Japanese restaurant from Nobu Matsuhisa, the chef behind the popular restaurant chain Nobu (Mr. Matsuhisa’s restaurant is now called Umi Uma & Sushi Bar). I ordered three plates of the yellowtail sashimi with jalapeño, incredulous that this pricey appetizer at Nobu’s namesake restaurants was free for all here. Silk Road was one of the ship’s two so-called specialty restaurants; the other, Prego, served Italian food, and a meal at each was included in the cruise fare.Oh, and those midnight buffets, a tradition on so many large cruise ships? They didn’t exist on Symphony. Meenakshi and I had midnight feasts, sure, but they were of our own design: warm chocolate chip and toffee cookies in our stateroom through room service while we watched movies borrowed from the ship’s DVD library.Following a stop in Helsinki, Symphony spent three days in St. Petersburg, and they were the heart of the trip. To me, the city matched Paris in both beauty and number of attractions, and we tried to take in as much of its majestic feel as we could. A hydrofoil ride down the Neva River took us to Peterhof Palace, often called the Russian Versailles because of its extensive gardens filled with ornate fountains. We also saw the ancient gold-filled rooms at the Treasury Gallery at the Hermitage Museum and the sparkly jewel-encased Easter eggs at the Faberge Museum. At home, Meenakshi’s bookshelf was adorned with a bright red matryoshka or Russian nesting doll that a friend had given her; in St. Petersburg, we painted our own matryoshkas with a local artist, Tatyana, in her studio. We also toured the immaculately clean Metro stations and marveled at their gilded columns and frescoed walls, and caught a ballet performance of “Anna Karenina,” based on the novel by Leo Tolstoy, at Mariinsky II, a concert hall that opened a few years ago as an addition to the original 19th-century Mariinsky Theater. And with the light still bright, we pulled late-nighters with 11 p.m. dinners at local restaurants and 1 a.m. strolls along the Neva, ice cream cones in hand.The full day at sea en route to Copenhagen was a relief after the nonstop sightseeing, even for a restless personality like me. Onboard diversions were at their peak, and Meenakshi was in kid’s club heaven. I splurged on an aromatherapy massage and acupuncture session at the spa. And for the first time I canvassed the ship and chatted with other passengers.While browsing through the library’s collection of more than 5,000 books, I saw a family from Vail, Colo., with two teenage boys who I recognized from our bus tour in Helsinki, the only group excursion we took. It turned out that they were on three consecutive cruises spanning a month. On the top deck while snapping pictures of the Baltic Sea, I bumped into a group of Indians from Australia who raved about Symphony’s vegan Indian cuisine. Over a lunch of burgers and fries at the ship’s burger bar, Trident, Meenakshi and I chatted with an older British couple from Manchester who told us that they were on their 25th cruise but new to Crystal.The day was a chance to become a part of ship life, but with the extensive time we spent docked, getting too involved with Symphony’s rhythm, which is typical on most cruises, was optional. I viewed this as a positive: When I wanted to hang out with my fellow cruisers or enjoy a glass of pre-dinner Champagne without having to pay for it, I could; when I wanted to stay away and spend my time with Meenakshi at port, I was free to do so, too. Our room attendant, Paulo, had informed us at the beginning of the trip that destination-focused itineraries like ours saw a mix of travelers. “Some hang out onboard and want to make new best friends, and others are never on the ship unless they need to be,” he said.Copenhagen was Symphony’s last stop before the cruise ended in Hamburg, and, like Stockholm, the city seemed almost designed for children. Meenakshi and I were delighted by Tivoli Gardens, an amusement park dating to the 19th century. We rode the 1914 wooden roller coaster and also drove the bright red dragon boats on Tivoli Lake, the picturesque man-made body of water at the center of the park.Meenakshi would tell you that her biggest thrill in Copenhagen was going to the National Aquarium and feeding the two sea otters, Mojoe and Agnes. Mine was the early-morning run I took right from our boat, which was docked near the city center. I ran past the famous Little Mermaid, a bronze mermaid statue by the Danish sculptor Edvard Eriksen, through a dense green public park and then by Noma, the restaurant that dazzles food fans around the world.In one way, the trip was no different from others I had taken. In my urgency to see and do as much as possible, I never stopped to fully appreciate the journey as Meenakshi and I were living it. She, on the contrary, had squeezed my hand at various points along the way and said, “Can you believe, Mom, that we’re here? Isn’t it so awesome, Mom?”In reflecting on his cruise, Mr. Wallace wrote, “I have seen 500 upscale Americans dance the Electric Slide. I have seen sunsets that looked computer-enhanced. I have (very briefly) joined a conga line.”My reflection came when we got home, and in some ways, it evoked Mr. Wallace’s. We did see dancing, but it was at the ballet in St. Petersburg, and rather than catching sunsets, we reveled in long stretches of sunlight. We joined lines, but they were for attractions that we couldn’t wait to see. Yes, Meenakshi, it’s awesome that we were on that cruise. Given the chance, I would do it all over again. Crystal Cruises offers several voyages a year where boats spend multiple days at ports. Prices start at $2,500 a person, and include meals, alcohol and gratuities. Children 17 and under sail free on select voyages when traveling with two paid adults.Azamara Club Cruises is focused on destination immersion, and most voyages include late-night and/or overnight port stops. Prices average $300 per person per day, and include alcohol, gratuities and shuttle transportation from the ships to city centers.The French cruise line Ponant offers several voyages a year where boats spend multiple days at ports. Prices start at $1,350 a person, and include meals, alcohol and gratuities.In St. Petersburg, Exeter International specializes in custom private tours. Prices per day for two people, including a car and driver, guide and admission to attractions, starts at $700.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFAMILY CRUISESCruise lines are offering attractions and activities for everyone, from grandparents to teenagers to parents looking for child care.By Elaine GlusacFamilies have long been a bread-and-butter market for the major cruise lines. But increasingly even niche players like river operators and expedition lines are angling to attract all ages. “Something new we’re seeing is skip-generation cruisers, where grandparents take the grandchildren,” said Michelle Fee, the chief executive and founder of Cruise Planners, a travel agency. She noted that the industry’s family focus extends from establishing infant playgroups to Royal Caribbean’s services for autistic children. “For families who have challenges, it’s a great vacation because it gives them a bit of a break and makes their child feel special,” she added.The following innovations at sea range from family suites — with a slide between two levels — to educational programs that teach through play. Among the splashiest of ship launches, Royal Caribbean aims to abolish the bottleneck of ship check-in when its new 5,479-guest Symphony of the Seas sets sail in April using facial recognition software to expedite cabin access on arrival. That will get the children more quickly to the tallest water slide at sea, the Ultimate Abyss, with a 100-foot drop. Families will be able to spread out in the private Ultimate Family Suite, a bi-level cabin with an in-suite slide, floor-to-ceiling Lego wall and a screening room with a popcorn machine and a library of video games. The ship will sail the Mediterranean this summer and transition to Caribbean voyages in November.Most of the family-friendliest ships tend to be deployed in the Caribbean, but the 4,000-passenger Norwegian Bliss, to be christened in Seattle in June, will spend the summer in Alaska. It will have a two-level electric-car racetrack, an open-air laser tag course and a water park with two slides, one that stretches over the side of the ship. Special guests get a special welcome on a number of ships, including the new Carnival Horizon. Coming in April, the 3,934-passenger ship will host the first-ever Dr. Seuss-themed water park, with slides based on the Cat in the Hat and Things 1 and 2. It will also feature a ropes course, a suspended bike ride called SkyRide, an IMAX theater and a 24-hour pizza and ice cream parlor. Spacious family cabins offer access to a family lounge with large-screen TVs, board games and complimentary breakfast and snacks. Debuting in Europe, the Horizon will move to New York for the summer, beginning May 23, offering cruises to Bermuda (four days from $629, all prices are per person) and the Caribbean (eight days from $759).Disney Cruise Line introduced Marvel Day at Sea, offering daylong character interactions with Black Panther, Iron Man, Groot, Captain America and Black Widow on special sailings of the Disney Magic from Miami through April. The event also features a live-action show and Marvel-themed activities like secret-agent training and film screenings. Disney plans to repeat the Marvel series from January to March 2019. It offers similar Star Wars at Sea events. Kids on board have more opportunities to meet their peers, while parents have more date-night options.Princess Cruises has redesigned its youth and teen clubs, including a treehouse-themed hangout for ages 3 to 7, an outdoorsy lodge for those 8 to 12 and a beach house for teens 13 to 17. Activities focus on science, creativity, play and socialization, and include lessons in squid anatomy, paper airplane building contests, scavenger hunts and talent shows. Currently on five ships, the new clubs will be rolled out to the entire fleet through 2019. Celebrity Cruises’ Camp at Sea program offers activities for children 3 to 12 along four tracks, art, recreation, culinary and S.T.E.M. The line offers late-night “slumber parties” between 10 p.m. and 1 a.m.In April, Norwegian Cruise Line will send the Norwegian Escape, featuring four water slides and a three-story ropes course, to New York for weekly cruises to Bermuda (from $629). The ship is the only one in Norwegian’s fleet to offer child care for children from six months to three years old. Expedition ships are adding educational programming that aim to make science fun.This summer, Lindblad Expeditions plans to extend its National Geographic Global Explorers program to Alaska. Launched in the Galápagos last year, the program encompasses science, exploration and storytelling, including learning to drive an inflatable vessel, spot wildlife and create time-lapse videos. The program will be available on the line’s three ships in Alaska and includes listening to whale vocalizations using an underwater microphone (five nights from $4,290).In the South Pacific, Paul Gauguin Cruises is teaming up with the nonprofit Wildlife Conservation Society during the summer months to offer nature-focused educational activities for children 7 to 17. The programming includes naturalist-led snorkeling excursions, shipboard stargazing, dolphin watching and talks about sea turtles, sharks and rays (seven-night itineraries from $5,845, including airfare between Los Angeles and Tahiti). With their port focus and lack of whiz-bang amenities, river cruises generally appeal to adult travelers, but AmaWaterways has joined with Adventures by Disney to offer 16 themed sailings in 2018 that include “Beauty and the Beast” itineraries on the Rhine River, featuring castle visits, film screenings and lessons in macaron making (eight days from $6,139 for adults). It has also enlisted the active travel company Backroads to bring biking, walking and hiking tours to more than 60 sailings aimed at attracting multigenerational sailors.Avalon Waterways’ active series of cruises caters to multigenerational travelers age 8 and up. It’s new active itinerary on the Rhine River between Frankfurt and Amsterdam includes options to bike, hike and run (eight days from $2,149).Uniworld Boutique River Cruise Collection offers the Generations Collection cruises for families. Its new Rhine itinerary takes visitors between Basel and Amsterdam, and includes pedal boating, a castle treasure hunt, bike riding and zip-lining. Designated staffers oversee children’s activities, including cooking classes, craft workshops and movie nights (nine days from $3,519 for adults). Cruise lines that don’t specialize in families still welcome them with activities positioned as multigenerational draws.Normally, children must be at least 8 years old to sail with UnCruise Adventures, which focuses on wilderness destinations. But this summer, the 86-passenger S.S. Legacy will sail to Alaska and drop the age minimum entirely on two departures (seven nights from $3,995). The ship will tow kayaks and paddleboards, and skiff excursions offer wildlife watching up close.One Ocean Expeditions will offer two summer sailings around Canada’s east coast reaching some remote areas such as Sable Island, home to wild horses, and rugged Gros Morne National Park in Newfoundland. Aimed at adventurous families, the 10-day trips include sea kayaking, whale watching, paddleboarding and daily talks by naturalists (from $3,395).Regent Seven Seas Cruises will deploy its refurbished Seven Seas Mariner to Alaska this summer. The 700-passenger ship employs two counselors to oversee children’s programming for ages 5 to 12 and 13 to 17 when the ship is not in port. When it is, most shore excursions — a selection of 44 offered over a weeklong trip — are included (seven-night trips from $4,899). AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFamily CruisesCan a cruise skeptic enjoy four days on the high seas with his family, Mickey and a bunch of princesses? By Dan SaltzsteinEven before we left dock in Miami, I started to get the feeling that our “4-Night Bahamian Cruise” on the Disney Magic was not going to go as smoothly as I had expected. The self-serve soft-serve machines near Goofy’s Pool had run out of ice cream. I asked a uniformed crew member when we could expect the machines to be refilled. Slightly alarmed, she told me she would look into it. While sipping a horribly cloying margarita, I broke the bad news to Anna, my 5 ½-year-old daughter. We soon headed to our gathering spot for the prelaunch shipwide safety drill — ours was inside the Animator’s Palate, one of five restaurants on the boat. After that, it was back to our stateroom, on Deck 6 of 11, to order room service and watch one of the half-dozen or so channels entirely devoted to Disney-owned content. A confession: I’ve been a travel editor for nearly a decade, and yet this was my first cruise. I also haven’t been to a Disney property since my age was in the single digits. Neither thing, frankly, had ever seemed like my bag, but with my wife, Nancy, and I beaten down by a stretch of brutally cold weather in New York, and Anna increasingly Disney-obsessed, the time felt … if not right, then inevitable.A lot of people go on these cruises every year — a Disney spokeswoman wouldn’t tell me how many, but given the fleet has four large ships (and three more on the nautical horizon) with more than 250 total launches per year, a number in the hundreds of thousands is a fair estimate — including plenty of repeat customers (members of the Castaway Club, in Disney parlance). What was I missing? To try to find out, I paid $2,862.79 (for two adults and a child, as well as a “vacation protection plan,” taxes, fees and port expenses; we would end up spending another $1,500 for booze, onboard incidentals and activities) and booked the trip. Things had not started well even before we boarded, actually. We had to delay our flight to Miami because Anna had a fever and a cough. After a night in Miami, we headed to board the ship — though before we could, we had to sign a paper indicating that no one in our party had a fever and a cough (or a handful of other symptoms). Her cough had held on, but her fever had abated, so I nervously signed the paper, waited on the serpentine line to register and get our cruise cards (they serve as both ID and credit card while on board) and, for Anna, a wristband that she had to wear at all times. Then we took a family photo in front of a sailing-themed Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck and boarded the boat, along with more than 2,500 other cruisers. Over the course of the next four days, many of my fears were confirmed. In other moments, my cynical soul was warmed — a bit like Anna’s heart (the “Frozen” character, not my daughter), thanks to her act of true love. Our Anna learned to love pirates and magicians. I spent a lot of money on drinks, a princess makeover and Disney merch. Anna proclaimed the trip one of the best experiences of her life. As we sat in our stateroom bed one night, trying to figure out how much to spend on the measly Wi-Fi offerings, Nancy captured it well: “Everything,” she said, “is enchanting and horrifying.”“My wife will never consider any other cruise line other than Disney. And I don’t blame her.” — comment on a 2017 Disney website post announcing two new ships.My relationship with Disney has always been a little fraught. I adore the movies. With Pixar, Marvel and the Muppets now under the Disney umbrella, I could probably list two dozen of them that we as a family love and watch regularly. But the company’s ubiquity can also be unnerving. And that’s just in general culture; once you board the boat, it is — fairly, I suppose — all Disney all the time. The Disney Magic was the first of the Disney cruise ships, launched in 1998, and renovated in 2013; this month will see another “reimagining,” including a Rapunzel-themed restaurant. It may not be the biggest cruise boat on the seas (that became clear when we docked next to the real behemoths in the Bahamas) or even in the Disney fleet, but its dimensions are still impressive: 11 decks, 984 feet long, 171.5 feet tall. Activities were legion. I had signed up for some in advance. (Not-at-all-pro tips: Sign up early and preregister your children at the Disney Cruise website — many events book up quickly. And download the Disney Cruise app before you leave — it’s how you will communicate with family members.) Other activities were noted on a daily schedule dropped off at our Deluxe Oceanview Stateroom With Verandah. At 3 p.m. on our first day, for example, we could have: caught the second half of “Thor: Ragnarok” in a state-of-the-art movie theater that seats 278; lined up to meet Minnie Mouse on Deck 4, or Princess Sofia (of the Disney Channel’s “Sofia the First”) on Deck 5; joined “Game Show: The Feud” on the promenade lounge; taken part in an (adults-only) origami session; or dropped Anna off at the Oceaneer Club — one of two activity centers open to kids for the bulk of the day and evening. It was all dizzying. Or we could have gone ashore to Key West, our first stop. I couldn’t convince Anna to join me, so I went solo. It turned out Anna had made the right call: It was sunny but cool and very windy; fellow passengers shivered down touristy Duval Street buying their T-shirted kids oversized sweatshirts. I headed to CVS to get some DayQuil for Nancy, who had picked up Anna’s chest cold, then stopped for a mediocre Cuban lunch. I had signed Nancy and myself up for a couples massage later that afternoon — hey, we deserved a break even on day one, O.K.? — so we dropped Anna off at the Oceaneer Club and headed up to Senses Spa & Salon. The massage, given by two Serbian women (their nationalities, as with all crew members, were noted on their name tags), was a good one, if pricey ($170 per person). We passed on the products they had used during the massage, which were for sale. Almost every activity, it would turn out, ended with a gentle upsell. It was time for dinner. There are two seatings nightly, and you are directed to one of four restaurants around the ship, the idea being that you get to try each one. Tonight was Carioca’s, supposedly Brazilian-themed, though I couldn’t quite figure out in what way. We were seated with a couple from Miami, whose daughter was about Anna’s age. The food was fine, but the service was stellar, as it was everywhere on the ship. I can’t say that I was thrilled that my daughter was constantly being called “Princess,” but each crew member seemed genuinely enthusiastic and pleased to be on the boat, down to the person passing out sanitizing wipes to every passenger entering a restaurant. (Hygiene is, understandably, a huge deal on the ship. In addition to the wipes, the kid centers have devices that might best be described as washing machines for hands.) Our servers at Carioca’s at dinner were from Thailand and Scotland and introduced themselves as such, as all crew members did (there are 950 in total, of 80 nationalities, for an astounding customer-to-crew ratio of less than 3-to-1). I found all of this charming and touching. My adult activity that night, which I had signed up for in advance, was a whiskey tasting in the loungey Cove Café on Deck 9. It was not my first bar visit of the trip. The night before, I had grabbed a $20 glass of quality Scotch at Keys, one of the cluster of venues in the After Hours section of the boat (the others are Fathoms, where a D.J. was setting up, and O’Gill’s Pub, which offered beers on tap and free crudités and wings). Keys is a piano bar, complete with a high-end booze selection and a fedora’d player behind the piano. (It also plays host to Friday night Shabbat services.) My bartender, Alejandro, from Peru, was friendly and knowledgeable. Noting my interest in Scotch, he offered me a flight of four Macallan single malts for $60. Another upsell, but also a pretty good deal. Still, four more ounces of booze seemed like a bad idea, so I declined, and instead caught 20 minutes of “Star Wars: The Last Jedi” in the excellent Buena Vista Theatre.At the tasting, the pleasant Jamaican bartender who led our small group asked if we were whiskey fans. “Is Fireball a whiskey?” one woman asked. After a brief primer on the four glasses in front of us, we were asked to sample and guess the varieties. At this point, the boat was swaying noticeably (“It’s the whiskey!” the bartender said with a laugh); a nearby screen noted we were sailing at 22.6 knots into 37-knot winds — the low end of tropical storm territory. Back in our room, I had a tough time falling asleep (it wasn’t just the whiskey; our tablemates at dinner the next evening reported that they had trouble as well). Speaking of that stateroom: It was tiny — 268 square feet to be exact. There weren’t enough drawers to upload our clothes, and no place to lay out a large piece of luggage. I’m not a tall man, but I still only had about two inches of clearance in the shower. Our daughter slept (comfortably, according to her) on a small couch that converted to a bed; a curtain divided her area from ours. We wondered about the cabin next to ours, which, judging solely by their verandah space, was much, much larger. “Although it is possible to avoid the fanfare, why would you want to? It’s free, it’s fun, and whether you’re the oldest or the youngest onboard, we guarantee you’ll be impressed.” — Pirate Night review on cruisecritic.comWhat to wear to the Pirate Night party? Ah, complimentary “Pirates of the Caribbean”-branded bandannas that had been dropped off in our room. Anna, however, was insisting on the $60 girl pirate outfit on sale at the White Caps retail shop. What about the $30 accompanying hat? Nope, sorry kiddo. (By end of day, she had gotten both the outfit and the hat.) But first, up early for the 8:45 “Frozen Gathering” at the Animator’s Palate restaurant. I’m not sure what I expected, but here’s what we got: a shortish line for a photo opp with Elsa, Anna and Olaf. Our daughter was feeling especially shy — despite having talked for weeks about meeting the princesses — so Nancy and I took the photo and I gave Olaf a hug. We soon went ashore to Nassau, our Bahamian port of call for the day. The weather had improved, but we failed to stray from the dock-adjacent blocks filled with restaurants (we chose one more or less at random and chose badly), knickknack shops and hair-braiders. Immersive travel it was not. We did, though, go on a glass-bottom boat ride, past homes owned, according to our chatty and charming guide, by Tom Cruise, Michael Jordan and plenty of other multimillionaires. We saw brightly colored fish and got a free keychain. We headed to our pre-Pirate Night dinner. But wait, everyone was already in costume. Had we missed a memo? And where did all these adults get their costumes? (They probably brought them, and many had packed special costumes for their kids.) We headed to dinner, but Anna — perhaps freaked out by all of the costumed passengers — had a fit of nerves. It took us a while, but we convinced her to go to dinner, then head back to the room to get dressed. Because we had been late for dinner, we ended up late to the party, on Deck 10; a stage was set up in front of the pool, which was covered by a wooden dance floor. That means we didn’t get a great view of the show, but Anna was delighted nonetheless. Various Disney characters took the stage, alongside pirate performers constantly hyping up the crowd. There was a lot of dancing to pop tunes (“Uptown Funk,” “I Gotta Feeling”) and a nominal plot about Captain Hook taking over the stage with, for some reason, a bunch of passengers playing air guitar. Mickey saved the day by flying in on a zip line and got the party back on track. There were fireworks. Mickey, it should be said, was everywhere, which I found sort of sweet — in an age of princesses, the nonagenarian mouse has still got it: He was branded on the giant smokestacks that top the ship and on the toiletries in our tiny bathroom. The three blobs of ketchup poured on Anna’s plate at dinner took the form of his head. I half-expected to come across coral in that same shape when I went snorkeling the next day at Castaway Cay, Disney’s private Bahamian island. Anna was understandably amped up and not ready for bed. Luckily, there was a magic show to enjoy: Kalin & Jinger, Broadway vets who wowed the crowd, Anna (still in her pirate costume) included. “I love magic!” she exclaimed as we headed out. “Not as much as pirates though.”“My hubby loves to do the snorkeling path and visit all the cool artifacts. I spend that time, reading, sunning and cooling off in the water. We stay on the island until about 4PM when we reluctantly head back to the ship to get ready for that evening’s show and dinner.” — comment on travelmamas.com’s “Dos and Don’ts of Disney’s Castaway Cay”Our last full day on the Magic was our most promising. It was Castaway Cay day — a full day to spend on Disney’s private island. We had bought a package that included snorkeling gear, bike rentals and a big floatie ring for our daughter. But I had also booked something in advance: an appointment for Anna at Bibbidi Bobbidi Boutique for a $200 princess makeover — at 11:15, right in the middle of our day meant to be spent off the ship. And afterward, she’d be covered in princess … stuff. Perfect for sun and swimming!I met Anna and Nancy at the boutique. Anna had chosen Ariel as her makeover of choice. Though Anna’s “fairy godmother” (the British woman who would do her hair and makeup) urged her to allow the “king” to stay, I was banished. After a while, we all met up; Anna was in her dress, her hair done up in a (fake) bun, tiara and sparkles, makeup on her face, wielding a light-up wand. She was utterly delighted, and I was delighted with her delight. After some time walking around the ship with Anna, Nancy gently suggested we head down to the beach. “The problem with being a princess,” Nancy began to say, but Anna finished her sentence: “Is that you can’t do anything!” Like, say, swimming in crystal-clear Bahamian waters. So, Anna’s dress and makeup removed, we headed to Castaway Cay, where we had lunch and camped out on the immaculate beach. I picked up our snorkel gear and floatie — as well as a frozen margarita at Conched Out Bar, steps from the beach. I spotted Alejandro, the Peruvian bartender from the piano bar, now in more casual dress, doling out cheap beers in plastic bottles. While splashing around in the shallow bay water, vivid blue fish swam right up to us, as if they, too, had gone through Disney staff training. (Anna got freaked out and wouldn’t set foot in the water for a while.) I went snorkeling, where I saw more fish — so plentiful and friendly that a thought flashed through my mind: Did Disney stock the area with sea life? I shook off the idea and headed back to pick up Anna. Nancy went on a relaxing bike ride and we all met up back at the tram station and reboarded. It was time for our dinner at Palo, the adults-only restaurant on Deck 10. We dropped Anna off at the Oceaneer Club and headed up. Like Keys, it was a simulacrum, though this time of a fancy Italian restaurant. Our waiter had a heavy Italian accent, yet was from Serbia. He seemed very pleased to present us with an antipasti cart — slices of prosciutto, chunks of Parmigiano-Reggiano, marinated peppers — which he then, without asking, doused with aged balsamic vinegar. Everything was overly fussy, but the food wasn’t bad — a Tuscan bean soup was particularly tasty — and service was extremely friendly. And Italian-ish. We took a brief but romantic walk around the promenade deck, and stared off into the blackness of a vast ocean, interrupted only by another cruise ship that glowed miles off in the distance. I thought about the people on that boat, and the ones on the decks below us. I wondered if they were starting to have a good time too.Dan Saltzstein is an editor of the Travel section of The Times.Many readers had passionate reactions to this article. We collected some of them — positive and negative — here. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe brand will offer higher-end accommodations that meet a 100-point quality checklist (kitchens with cookware, plush towels, comfortable mattresses). By Shivani VoraPart of the appeal of booking accommodations through Airbnb is that no single stay is the same. Each home has its own personality, décor and amenities. But this individualized approach can also be a drawback because travelers can never be quite sure what they’ll find when they arrive at the property they have reserved.Will the bathroom have toilet paper and is the kitchen going to be fully stocked? Will there be sheets on the bed, and is the home clean or cluttered and run-down?Now, for the first time, Airbnb’s customers can have answers to all these questions and then some when they’re considering where to stay.Today, to coincide with its 10th anniversary, the company is launching Airbnb Plus, a brand of accommodations that are guaranteed to meet 100 different criteria and come with certain amenities.Airbnb’s chief executive, Brian Chesky, is scheduled to announce the news about Airbnb Plus at a news conference in San Francisco this morning at the Masonic, an auditorium in the city’s Nob Hill neighborhood. Mr. Chesky is also planning to announce new categories on the company’s site and tell attendees about another new brand, Beyond by Airbnb, that will be introduced in late spring and that will offer luxury rentals.Although the company has had 300 million overnight stays since it started in 2008 with a website to book overnight stays on airbeds, it’s still not mainstream enough, Mr. Chesky said, and that’s exactly what he wants to change. “We have evolved, but we think we can go much further and offer something for everyone,” he said in an interview with The New York Times. “Some travelers want predictability and certain comforts, and Airbnb Plus will give them these.”Airbnb Plus is debuting with more than 2,000 homes in 13 cities including Los Angeles, Toronto, Milan and Shanghai. By the end of this year, according to Mr. Chesky, these numbers will grow to include over 75,000 homes in more than 50 destinations. In comparison, Airbnb’s main platform has more than 4.5 million listings in 81,000 cities.One example of an Airbnb Plus listing is a two-bedroom, two-bathroom home in Chicago’s Chinatown neighborhood with balcony views as well as brick and timber touches; it has a nightly rate of $288.Like all Plus homes, the property meets the 100-point quality checklist. The kitchen, for one, is stocked with cooking equipment such as pots and pans and knives and has a clean refrigerator with no stains or damage. The bedrooms that guests stay in have an ironing board, a closet, drawers, window treatments and beds with soft, clean bedding and comfortable mattresses. In the bathroom, the cabinets are free of personal items; the shower, tiles and floors don’t have cracks or mildew; and there are two sets of plush towels. Toiletries include shampoo.More comforts means higher prices: the average nightly rate of an Airbnb Plus home is $200, compared with the $100 average rate per night for a standard listing.Mr. Chesky said that the quality standards were established after a team of employees interviewed several hundred of Airbnb’s top-rated hosts. “We asked them what they did to earn those ratings and discovered that they all had well-stocked homes and delivered a consistent experience to their guests,” he said.Aspiring hosts must apply to have their homes accepted into Airbnb Plus, and once they do, the company will send a local photographer — many of whom are Airbnb hosts themselves — to inspect their properties and determine if they meet the required standards. Airbnb’s lack of quality control has at times been problematic for the company, according to Dr. Rummy Pandit, the executive director of the Lloyd D. Levenson Institute of Gaming, Hospitality and Tourism at Stockton University in New Jersey. “It is such a large and dispersed network that there have been challenges in managing a level of standardization,” he said. For this reason, Dr. Pandit said, the new Plus brand is a smart business move. “There is an untapped segment of travelers who haven’t used Airbnb because they don’t like surprises, but now, they may be open to booking a stay through the site,” he said.In addition to Airbnb Plus, the company’s main site now will have four new property types — boutique hotels, bed-and-breakfasts, vacation homes and distinctive properties such as tree houses and yurts. These are in addition to the three it already has — shared spaces, private rooms and entire homes. The listings in these categories are already on the site, but classifying them makes them easier for travelers to find, Mr. Chesky said. Collections, properties suited for a certain demographic of travelers like families and honeymooners, is also debuting today.Next up, in late spring, Airbnb will introduce Beyond by Airbnb, a collection of high-end homes for luxury-seeking travelers. This is following its purchase last year of the home rental company Luxury Retreats. “We’re still affordable, but we want to offer another tier of homes to travelers who want a more upscale experience,” Mr. Chesky said.HomeAway, another home rental company, has listings of more than two million homes in 190 countries and launched a high-end division, Luxury Rentals from HomeAway, in 2013 with 4,000 listings. That number has since grown to more than 11,400 listings in 80 countries.Airbnb could see similar success if the company can deliver on its promise to maintain a high standard of quality for its luxury listings, according to Kristaiana Capati, an adviser with the New York City luxury travel company Artisanal Experiences. “Wealthy travelers today are very much interested in luxury home rentals, but there is not enough product out there to meet their demand,” she said. “Airbnb, being such a known brand, has the potential to significantly change that.”The company is in an advantageous position to do so. Dr. Pandit said that Airbnb has minimal competition in the home rental market, except in certain destinations where it may face competition from local companies. “There's not another company out there, to my knowledge, that is as big,” he said. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealIf you’re willing to travel in the spring instead of the summer, you can enjoy some of the most luxurious Italian coast resorts for much, much less. By Jessica Colley ClarkeIt’s common for hotels along the Italian coast to be closed during the winter months and full to capacity during the summer. But between these extremes, the spring months offer an attractive combination of mild temperatures and lack of crowds. Hotels from the Lake District to the Amalfi Coast, all the way to Sardinia offer discounts for the season’s first visitors in April, May and sometimes well into June. At the Grand Hotel Tremezzo on the shores of Lake Como, preseason rates start at $495 per night, compared to $750 per night for high season. This hotel is unique for its swimming experience; a floating pool is set right in the waters of Lake Como. In addition to beautiful water views, this family-owned property dating back to 1910 looks out at the Grigne Mountains and the village of Bellagio. Casa Angelina, a 39-room boutique hotel on the Amalfi Coast, reopened for the season on March 24. Located in the town of Praiano, with views of the Tyrrhenian Sea, this hotel also offers four rooms in old fishermen’s houses. Rooms during the summer months start at $961 per night, but during the spring start at $604 per night. A special offer available through May 15 includes extra savings: a further 10 percent room discount and a $99 credit for food and beverages or for the on-site the spa.Set on top of a cliff in Sorrento, the Grand Hotel Excelsior Vittoria overlooks the Gulf of Naples and Mount Vesuvius. Spring rates start at $506 per night compared with $782 per night in the high season. Sea views are especially striking from the terrace, home to Terrazza Bosquet, a candlelit Michelin-starred restaurant. On the island of Sardinia, springtime savings are even more pronounced. At Hotel Cala di Volpe along the Costa Smeralda, classic king rooms start at $398 per night in May and June, compared to $2,228 per night in July and August. At Hotel Pitrizza, also on the Costa Smeralda, rooms start at $542 per night in May and June while prices start at $1,805 per night during the summer months. Both hotels offer an additional 20 percent savings for reservations booked before April 30. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HoursThe gastronomic scene has been growing by leaps and bounds. And then, both within and beyond the city’s boundaries, there’s the wine: malbecs, torrontés and more.By Nell McShane WulfhartThe reliably clear blue skies of Mendoza, with the Andes lined up in the distance and vines everywhere you look, create driving conditions so perfect the wine can seem almost secondary. To fully explore the area’s wineries, you’ll have to travel south and east of the city to the wine-producing regions of the Uco Valley and Maipu. But making the urban center your base means easier access to night life and great restaurants — the city’s gastronomic scene has been growing in leaps and bounds, along with tasting rooms where you can sample not just the mighty malbec, but other varietals like bonarda and torrontés.It’s tempting to see Mendoza though the bottom of a wine glass, but you’ll be missing out on some spectacular scenery. Pre-emptively burn a few calories with a quick hike up Cerro de la Gloria. The hill’s switchback trail takes just 15 minutes (or you can run up like some fit locals) and ends in a spectacular monument commemorating Gen. José de San Martín, who led Argentina, Peru and Chile in a revolution against Spain. The fabulous views of the city to the east include the stadium; to the west is a sprawling mountain range. The surrounding park is popular with Mendocinos playing soccer and picnicking, and makes a great spot for a walk or run. Prep your palate for sampling wines at Mendoza’s bodegas (wineries) with a tasting at Wine Not?, in the city center. Despite the cheesy décor — like cork table sculptures and “save water drink wine” signs — the owner Matias Roca specializes in serious and out-of-the-ordinary vintages from small producers; you might get an unlabeled bottle from a garagista (someone who makes wine in their garage) who produces just 1,200 to 1,500 bottles a year; or an unusual chardonnay without mineral notes or too much acidity. Generous pours of five wines are 500 pesos, or about $25.25, and you’re encouraged to take your time.  A local favorite, serving food like your abuela used to make, Fuente y Fonda serves enormous enamel dishes with entrees designed for two, including fresh pastas and a milanesa (breaded steak) topped with melted cheese, fresh tomatoes and ham. The appetizer of beef tongue, sliced thin and doused in olive oil, vinegar and garlic, is meltingly good, and the wine list does justice to Mendoza’s offerings; on a recent visit a blend of malbec, cabernet sauvignon and bonarda from Matías Michelini, a Mendoza wine star, was on offer. Save room for dessert, which is free, and don’t miss the moist, dense bread pudding (budín de pan) if it’s available; it comes with a healthy dollop of dulce de leche. Dinner for two, with wine, around 900 pesos.  Reserve a spot at Bodega la Azul’s 11:30 a.m. tour and tasting before embarking on the stunning drive (about an hour and 15 minutes) down Route 40 to the Uco Valley, where some of the country’s most lauded bodegas grow their grapes. The drive south, with the Andes to your right, showing clear lines of demarcation where the snow stops, and fields of vines on either side, is breathtaking. Arrive at the tiny, charming bodega, which is the only 100 percent Argentine-owned winery in the area. Ezequiel Fadel Hinojosa, the owner and a third-generation winemaker, introduces visitors to his small-production sauvignon blanc (acidic because of the high altitude) and blends of malbec and cabernet sauvignon, with a stop in the small winery at the back where wine is produced in eight steel vats. The sofas in the garden restaurant make the perfect place to sit with a glass when you’re finished. Tour and tasting: 200 pesos. Just five minutes’ drive up the road brings you to Tupungato Divino, a small hotel with a restaurant and a garden that offers a spectacular view of the Andes, extensive fields and a babbling, man-made irrigating stream that runs right by tables shaded by grape-laden vines. The impressive wine collection of 150 vintages is sourced from nearby wineries, and the seasonal menu is fixed price, with a degustation of starters and desserts. From the list of entrees, opt for the lomo — the steak is served with a malbec reduction and cooked exactly to order; it’s an Argentine classic. Lunch for two, around 1,100 pesos. Zuccardi is a name to be reckoned with in Argentina; the moniker of the winemaking dynasty appears on bottles in restaurants around the country. Their Valle de Uco winery, which opened in 2016, is a stunner, thanks to the sleek and uber-modern architecture that was designed to emulate the line of the Andes that serves as a backdrop to this state-of-the-art complex (alluvial rock and other native materials went into the building as well). Tastings start at 400 pesos per person and include a tour that goes from vines to vats to a gorgeous tasting room (note the innovative concrete amphorae); a sampling of their most exclusive wines is 1,600 pesos.  Dinners in Argentina are eaten late, so assuage your hunger with a stop at a shabby white food truck with “jamón crudo” inelegantly scrawled along the side. It’s parked by the side of the highway where Route 7 intersects Calle Cobos, in full view of the mountains. The owner bakes yard-long loaves of bread and cures Spanish ham himself; then slices it to order, making salty, flavorful sandwiches (140 pesos) that are the perfect late afternoon snack. Pull up a white plastic chair, open one of the bottles you picked up on the day’s tours, and enjoy the view under the bright blue sky.Mendoza’s liveliest shopping and night-life street is the four-block stretch of Arístides Villanueva that runs from Belgrano to Paso de los Andes. Packed with busy restaurants, shops, cafes and craft beer bars with outdoor seating, this is where you can pick up trendy pieces by Argentine designers and get a sense of local life at the same time. At Cosset, a combination bookshop and clothing boutique, you’ll find jeans and soft knits for women from the trendy Buenos Aires brand Ríe, slinky dresses from Allo Martinez, and chunky jewelry from Cuatromusas as well as art supplies and books on film and graphic novels. Moht has Isabel O. slip-on shoes in colorful patterns and Lazaro handbags. Finally, at Espacio Aristides, pick up a pair of jeans from the hip Argentine label Ay Not Dead. Reserve a table in advance for dinner at Azafrán, which has some of the city’s most sophisticated food and a wine cellar to match. The six-course tasting menu (1,250 pesos) departs from the usual Argentine fare, with dishes like tender grilled Patagonian prawns accompanied by a cold almond soup, and pork tenderloin with a sweet potato and coffee purée. Service is thoughtful and friendly. Don’t forget the wine pairing (350 pesos), which includes wines from the creative Maal label (which shares an owner with the restaurant) as well as some of the most interesting bottles in Mendoza. Afterward, if you still have room, stroll across the street to Helados Ferruccio Soppelsa, one of the top ice-cream spots in a city that loves the stuff almost as much as wine. Try the vanilla or cherry flavors, both infused with malbec.The sunny courtyard at Bröd, a small bakery with the best medialunas (small croissants) in town, is the ideal place for planning your next winery visits. The laid-back spot has heartier options, too, like poached eggs, house-made granola and sandwiches. Breakfast for two, around 300 pesos. Across the courtyard is Winery (closed on Sundays, but stop by another time), an extensive wine store with entire rooms dedicated to single varietals. If you’ve still got a crevice left in your suitcase for another bottle, buy it here (they’ll also ship bottles for you if you don’t). The first female winemaker in Argentina, Susana Balbo has her bodega in Luján de Cuyo, a 30-minute drive from the city, and offers an informative tour of the fermentation rooms, which are filled with enormous steel vats, concrete amphorae, and the newfangled, teardrop-shaped barrels the winemaker is experimenting with. The bodega has its own restaurant; post-tour tastings are held in its basement tasting room or an outdoor patio where you’ll be introduced to, among other wines, a bright and fruity torrontés, and Ms. Balbo’s BenMarco Expresivo, a complex blend of malbec and cabernet franc. Tasting, including tour, 260 pesos. Book in advance. The Club Tapiz restaurant, part of a small hotel, has an elegant dining room where the chef Soledad Nardelli constructs a prix fixe lunch menu of three courses (550 pesos), offering sophisticated platings of vacio (flank steak) slow-cooked in milk; pink trout on a bed of mixed quinoa; and cheeses with house-made marmalade and candied walnuts. The wine list is long and mostly from the Tapiz bodega, which also produces good olive oils (ask the server if you want to sample them). On warm days, dine on the patio in front of the enormous tree that’s home to dozens of noisy parakeets.Centrally situated on the city’s main plaza, Hotel Argentino (Espejo 455; argentino-hotel.com; doubles from $110, including breakfast) has 46 rooms, the most basic of which are small but very clean. There’s a pool in the garden that’s perfect for cooling off after a sunny day among the vines.The Park Hyatt (Chile 1124; mendoza.park.hyatt.com; doubles from $180) has been around for a while but it still gives a lot of bang for your buck, with spacious rooms (ask for a mountain view), its own spa and a wine bar.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe Getaway For less than the cost of a Starbucks latte, a surprising variety of businesses — delis, dry cleaners, mobile phone stores — will look after your bags so you can sightsee hands-free. By Stephanie RosenbloomYou’re familiar with the predicament: You’ve got a few hours before you can check into your vacation rental, or before you leave for your flight, and you want to do some sightseeing — but that means slogging along crowded sidewalks with your (undoubtedly overstuffed) luggage in tow. Or does it? Increasingly, you may not only store your bags for a couple of hours at the usual places (airports, train stations, luggage storage companies), but also with a surprising variety of businesses — delis, dry cleaners, clothing boutiques, wine shops, eyebrow-shaping salons — for less than the cost of a couple of Starbucks lattes. In New York City, for example, you can stash your bags for $2 an hour per bag at Chelsea Bicycles, the Puerh Brooklyn teashop, or an Al Horno Lean Mexican Kitchen (which is convenient if you’re also in the mood for a burrito), among hundreds of other untraditional storage locations. Websites and apps that help travelers find these short-term spots have likened themselves to Airbnb for luggage: Travelers go online and book a date (it can be the same day) and location (maps show you your options), then drop off their bags. Afterward, some sites allow users to rate the storage location to help fellow travelers pick and choose. (While many places require advance booking, you can usually cancel free of charge.) Each storage network has its own rules, but they all typically provide luggage security seals as well as some version of insurance against damage, theft and loss.Such services aren’t just handy for travelers: They’re also convenient for local city dwellers who may want to temporarily ditch their bags after work or shopping so they can attend an event or stop by an intimate bar without having to zip home first and unburden themselves.LuggageHero, which offers online booking with a credit card — thus, eliminating the need for users to have local currency on hand — is one of the most recent players to expand its services. In December the company began operating in New York, where today it has some 250 locations. It was founded in Copenhagen in 2016 and expanded to London in 2017, where there are more than 100 locations. In New York, the fee is $2 an hour per bag for the first 24 hours, which includes up to $2,000 insurance coverage for each bag. (You don’t pay more than $12 per bag for the first 24 hours.) The company plans to have a few hundred more locations in New York by the end of the year, and begin operating in more cities as well.It’s hardly the only service of its kind, though. Knock Knock City, another site, is planning to expand to San Francisco this year after being introduced in dozens of locations in New York, where it charges $2 an hour per bag. New York City has turned out to be a popular destination for these services. Yet another network, Vertoe, offers luggage storage by the day ($5.95 per item for credit card payments online; $7.95 for cash), the week ($35 per item for credit cards online; $50 for cash), even by the month ($100 per item for credit cards online; $150 for cash). In Britain, Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam and other international destinations, CityStasher connects travelers with local businesses like Mail Boxes Etc and food stores, as well as hotels. And Nannybag, one of the larger luggage storage networks, has locations throughout France and in major cities like London, Rome, Barcelona, Amsterdam, Brussels, Lisbon and Berlin. (There are also some companies that will pick up and drop off your luggage at your desired locations, though sometimes it’s just faster and less costly to roll in and out of a nearby business.) While storing your luggage at local businesses can make travel easier, allowing users to see more of a city without a suitcase at their heels, the practice raises some questions. For instance, what to do about valuables? Many of these companies say in the fine print not to keep jewelry, cash or other important and fragile items in your bags as they are not covered by the insurance policies. So if you’re considering trying one of these networks, be sure to put any jewelry, essential papers, electronics and medicine in a handbag or lightweight tote that you keep with you.And what if there are materials in the bags that could harm store workers and patrons? The storage sites prohibit certain items from being in users’ luggage. Vertoe, for instance, has a list of things that cannot be stored, including combustible, flammable, hazardous or toxic materials, chemicals, narcotics, fireworks, explosives, weapons and ammunition. Staff at Vertoe locations may ask you to show the items in your bag. LuggageHero also notes in its fine print that your luggage cannot contain things such as weapons, explosive items and substances, and flammable fluids, and that the shop has the right to ask you to open your luggage so they can make sure that none of those items are inside. Read the rules before you book.As with any sharing-economy service, reviews, when available, can make it easier to decide which luggage storage location you’ll feel most comfortable trying. You can see on LuggageHero, for instance, when users felt a location made the process friendly and hassle-free, and when they felt confused about where to go or didn’t like where their bags were being kept. Reviews of the site as well as others such as Vertoe are also available on Yelp and Google (just search the company name and “review”).Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCheck InThe business-minded Omni King Edward Hotel in Toronto offers plenty of meeting space, a spacious gym and colorful pillows for contemporary kings and queens.By Alexandra JacobsA “deluxe” room with — of course — queen or king bed and city view starts at 279 Canadian dollars, or about $222.The King Edward is one of several unrelated though oft-confused Toronto hotels with regal names and corresponding promises of luxury: the Royal York, the Windsor Arms, Hotel Victoria and One King West. Of these “King Eddy,” as it is affectionately known, is both the oldest (having opened in 1903 with the then-modish claim that it was “Absolutely Fire Proof”) and, perhaps, the one with the greatest identity crisis (its current corporate parent, Omni, was preceded by Sheraton and Le Méredien). Though famous couples like Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor and John Lennon and Yoko Ono once canoodled in happy seclusion here, King Eddy is frequented now more by business masterminds. A $40 million makeover was completed in 2015, adding four enormous black chess-piece sculptures to the lobby. Halls that once swirled with cigar smoke and tulle frocks started welcoming PowerPoint potentates in plastic name-tags. But $6.5 million was invested in the 4,600-square-foot Crystal Ballroom, which reopened last year, auguring grand events ahead.On the southeastern edge of downtown, the Eddy is close to both the Hockey Fall of Fame and the Sony Centre for the Performing Arts, whose multicultural programming ranges from the Batsheva Dance Company to “Pokémon: Symphonic Evolutions.” The Ed Mirvish Theatre is also nearby, as is Old City Hall, designed by the same architect, E.J. Lennox, who oversaw completion of the King Eddy. Entrance to the subway is half a block away, a portal to the city’s clean and civil public transportation system that includes buses and charming streetcars. And it is less than an hour’s walk to the small, scenic Billy Bishop municipal airport on Lake Ontario.The gray décor seems intended to soothe and lull rather than stimulate; for that there are Keurig cups of French or Italian roasted coffee, plus black or green tea. My corner chamber with king bed, topped with a red crown-emblazoned pillow and padded headboard, was quiet as Tutankhamun’s tomb, an effect enhanced by blackout shades. Guiltily I eyed — then ignored — the generous desk allotted for work, choosing instead to lounge in a terry-lined robe and play thumb war with the baffling remote control to a 32-inch LCD TV.Toilet and bathing area were separated into two flatteringly lit rooms for extra privacy — even from oneself. There was no tub and the shampoo and lotion were nothing to write home about (though old-fashioned stationery was a charming touch), but the shower was large and glass-walled, with marble tile and two chrome rain-forest-style heads.With restaurants of many far-flung nationalities within easy reach, the King Eddy sticks to comforting basics. Dinner is served in the narrow, clubby, wood-paneled Consort Bar. A waiter there blanched after I ordered a falafel platter ($20) from the Shareable section of the menu all for myself. “It’s too much for one,” he said. Hummus-iliation! When I persisted, at the urging of my companion who was only having drinks, he shrugged with seeming disapproval. Served on a bed of greens with eggplant “caviar” and tabbouleh, the dish was a fine size, if somewhat dry.Breakfast is served in the brighter Victoria’s restaurant. The devil on one shoulder suggested the $29 buffet; the angel on the other the Raw Vegan Oats and Nutty Cluster Porridge with Chia Seeds and Fresh Berries ($7) but in the end I ordered black coffee and rye toast with peanut butter, which came in little packets (around $13 total) and with no attitude.Twenty-nine higher-priced rooms on the 11th and 12th floor include access to a private Royal Club Lounge with its own breakfast buffet, “light bites” in the afternoon, and a happy hour. The 24-hour gym, free to all guests, is spacious and deserted. There is a hair salon in the lobby, along with an art gallery selling oil paintings and goofy figurines, and a spa on the mezzanine level with treatments seemingly directed at the laptop brigade, from a two-hour “executive break” ($150) to a massage lasting a mere 25 minutes ($55).If you need lots of meeting space, and care more about modern conveniences over the faithful preservation of period details, King Eddy’s your guy.Omni King Edward Hotel, 37 King Street East, Toronto. omnihotels.com/hotels/toronto-king-edwardAlexandra Jacobs is a longtime features writer, editor and cultural critic. She has worked at The Times since 2010.@AlexandraJacobsAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe airline is slowly returning to normal but some passengers should anticipate delays.By Shivani VoraThursday’s Air France strike involving the carrier’s pilots, cabin crew and ground staff has ended, and as of today, the carrier’s operations are slowly returning back to normal, according to a statement on its website.The one-day strike disrupted the travel schedules of thousands of Air France passengers all over the world and will likely continue to do so for the next day or two, according to Michael Holtz, the owner of SmartFlyer, a global travel consultancy specializing in airlines.“It usually takes an airline 24 to 48 hours to get back on track after a strike,” he said.In the case of Air France, since the carrier anticipated the strike because workers had made clear that they would take action, Mr. Holtz said that the it likely held most of its planes in Paris, its home base. “Since the planes are sitting in Charles de Gaulle and Orly airports, outbound flights from Paris should be up and running today or within the next day,” he said.In-bound flights to Paris from long-haul destinations, however, could still be delayed for 48 hours, Mr. Holtz said, because the planes need to fly from Paris to reach those destinations in order to operate the routes. “Air France has a flight from Bangkok to Paris,” he said. “The plane needs to reach Bangkok from Paris, which takes more than ten hours, before it can fly the scheduled route.”In fact, the carrier’s flight on that route is canceled today.What should Air France’s customers do if the strike has affected them?Passengers who have an Air France ticket issued on or before Feb. 19, for a flight operated by Air France or its low cost carrier Joon for travel on Feb. 22, can postpone their trip free of charge. If they choose to postpone their trip beyond Feb. 27, change their destination or origin or cancel their trip all together, Air France will issue a travel voucher that will be valid for one year; this voucher can be used for travel on Air France, Joon, KLM or Hop, another low-cost carrier, and is non-refundable.But passengers who had their flight canceled because of the strike or had a flight delay of more than five hours because of it have the option to get a refund on their tickets. If they bought their ticket directly from Air France, they should go to the Refund section on the airline’s site to apply for one. But according to Air France’s site, if they bought their ticket through a travel agent or another source, they should seek a refund directly from their point of sale. Fliers can find out about their rights as declared by the European Parliament and Council of the European Union by visiting the Assistance and Compensation section on the airline’s site.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HoursIn the Portuguese capital, a weekend’s worth of seafood feasts, chic rooftop bars, undulating streets and landmarks, both Old World and futuristic. By Ingrid K. WilliamsForget Lisbon as the budget capital of Europe. Yes, the seafood is still (relatively) cheap, as is the wine. The old canary-yellow trams still rattle along steep hills, and you’ll never pay more than a euro and change for a pastéis de nata, the classic Portuguese pastry. But today the Portuguese capital is better known for its red-hot culinary scene and fine cultural institutions, including a new world-class museum on the waterfront. The faded Old Europe charm remains, but with a stream of exciting openings and fresh inspiration drawn from across the Atlantic, Lisbon seems primed for a new golden era. To gain some perspective on Lisbon’s undulating terrain, ascend the city’s highest hill into the Graça district. Start at the Graça Convent, whose tiled chapel and Baroque cloister opened to the public for the first time after recent restorations (free). Then head outside to admire one of the city’s finest miradouros (viewpoints) that sweeps across the terracotta-tiled rooftops. Afterward, on the steep descent, peek inside Surrealejos, a closet-size atelier producing surrealist tiles — one series depicts an anthropomorphic panda — that are a cheeky twist on Portuguese azulejos (traditional painted tiles). Getting to know Fernando Pessoa, the shape-shifting writer who is considered one of Portugal’s greatest poets, is no easy task. But that’s the goal of Casa Fernando Pessoa, a museum and cultural center in the residential Campo de Ourique neighborhood. Situated in the final home of the bespectacled author, the site is a treasure trove of Pessoa’s early 20th-century works — most published posthumously — including poems written under three well-developed heteronyms. Through interactive exhibits, engage with the poet’s language: “I’m beginning to know myself. I don’t exist.” There’s also a collection of portraits of Pessoa — fittingly, in diverse styles — including paintings by Júlio Pomar. Admission, 3 euros, or about $3.70. For a feast of seafood petiscos (Portuguese tapas), reserve a table at Peixaria da Esquina. Opened in 2015 by the acclaimed chef Vítor Sobral, this low-key restaurant on a quiet corner of Campo de Ourique serves fresh-caught seafood raw, cured, marinated, grilled — you name it. Start with a glass of Douro branco and paper-thin octopus carpaccio topped with cilantro, sweet potato chips and a drizzle of olive oil (13.50 euros). Then move on to the marinated dishes, like citrusy salmon with passion fruit, ginger and cilantro (9.60 euros), followed by Sobral’s superlative version of amêijoas à Bulhão Pato — a steaming bowl of plump clams seasoned simply with lemon, garlic and more cilantro (17.50 euros). Lisbon’s night life reached new heights when a wave of rooftop bars opened around the city. Squirreled away on the Terraços do Carmo, Topo Chiado is an open-air lounge serving cocktails to tables overlooking the castle and the neo-Gothic, wrought-iron Santa Justa Lift. For more al fresco night life, venture west to Rio Maravilha, a new fourth-floor hangout in the resurgent LX Factory area. This sprawling industrial space offers live music, two outdoor terraces and a much-photographed rooftop sculpture. Order a porto tónico — white port and tonic — and head to the roof where dazzling views span the Tagus River and the 25 de Abril Bridge, a doppelgänger of the Golden Gate Bridge. In the canon of Portuguese pastries, the most storied sweet is the pastéis de nata, a flaky, palm-size tart with creamy egg-custard filling. At Pastelaria Alcôa, a standing-room-only pastry shop that opened last year in a prime location in the bustling Chiado district, rows of those golden tarts are displayed alongside a variety of other so-called monastic pastries whose centuries-old recipes originated in Catholic monasteries and convents. Pair a pastéis de nata with one of the lesser-known specialties, like the award-winning Torresmo do Céu, a sweeter cousin of the egg tart featuring a rich almond-and-citrus filling. Home to a third of the world’s cork oak forests, Portugal has dreamed up myriad uses for the natural, sustainable material. Shop for cork-centric souvenirs that extend beyond the bottle stopper at Cork & Co, a bi-level store filled with eco-conscious designs, from decorative bowls to stylish wine coolers carved from the lightweight material. A short walk north, find more innovative cork products at Pelcor, a boutique stocked with cork-lined golf bags and umbrellas made from naturally water-resistant cork skin.If there’s a line outside A Cevicheria, a popular Peruvian restaurant opened by the chef Kiko Martins in 2014, order a frothy pisco sour and wait — it’s worth it. Inside the bright, white-tiled restaurant, a giant foam octopus hangs from the ceiling above a handful of tables and bar seats around a horseshoe-shaped counter. On the menu, you’ll find ceviches and causas, smaller dishes to share, including an excellent barbecued roast octopus with black mashed potatoes. One must-order dish is the transportive ceviche puro of white fish in lime juice with red onion, tiger’s milk and rich dollops of mashed sweet potato crowned with sweet-potato chips. Lunch for two, about 50 euros. Southwest of the city center, the pretty riverfront Belém district is defined by its landmarks: the Manueline-style Jerónimos Monastery, the 16th-century Belém Tower and, since 2016, the futuristic facade of MAAT, the Museum of Art, Architecture and Technology. The latter takes a page from other European capitals — see London’s Tate Modern and Rome’s Centrale Montemartini — by repurposing a former power plant, in addition to that newly constructed exhibition hall encased in gleaming white tile, for showcasing world-class art. Visit both buildings to explore contemporary art installations, interactive science exhibits and video works displayed amid the plant’s hulking, well-preserved machinery (admission, 9 euros).Located in a former grocery store, Taberna da Rua das Flores has the well-worn atmosphere of an old Lisbon tavern, with tile floors, wooden chairs and marble-topped tables. What distinguishes this homey taberna is its innovative, market-driven cuisine. The daily menu — scribbled on a large blackboard and patiently explained by servers — recently included wasabi-spiced oysters, bright mackerel tartare with seaweed and crunchy dried shrimp, and a flavorful pile of matchstick potatoes and local trumpet mushrooms. Add to that a bottle of Tejo tinto and some Portuguese sheep’s-milk cheese for dessert, and a satisfying dinner for two is about 50 euros (cash only).After dinner, swing by Pub Lisboeta in the increasingly lively Príncipe Real district. This cozy, narrow bar opened a few years ago with crowded tables, an emerald-tiled bar, and a variety of Portuguese craft beers — try the Kölsch from Lisbon’s Oitava Colina brewery. For something stronger, continue down the street to Gin Lovers, an elegant back-room bar within a 19th-century palace-turned-shopping complex. The menu lists over 50 varieties of gin and tonic, served Spanish-style in bulbous glasses. Overwhelmed? Order the house gin garnished with orange and cloves. In Portugal, as in Italy, coffee equates to espresso. For a wider variety of caffeinated options, start the morning at Fábrica Coffee Roasters. Established in 2015, this specialty coffee purveyor operates two cafes that serve traditional shots as well as cold brews, pour-overs and frothy cappuccini. At the spacious Chiado locale, order a velvety flat white, take a seat amid the plants, put away the phone (there’s no Wi-Fi) and savor your coffee. In an impressive show of reverse colonization, Brazil has taken over a magnificent mansion in Príncipe Real. Opened in April 2017, Casa Pau-Brasil is a concept shop and showroom for top Brazilian designers and brands spanning fashion, home furnishings, stationery, soaps and more. Ascend the elegant staircase, which is circled by a flock of yellow stuffed parrots, to explore the maze of rooms that recently displayed Lenny Niemeyer’s fashionable swimsuits, orange-trimmed Panama hats from Frescobol Carioca, bars of Rio’s Q chocolate, and exquisite polished-wood armchairs designed by Sérgio Rodrigues. A local initiative begun in 2009 to revive the city’s many abandoned quiosques de refresco (refreshment kiosks) is today a resounding success. With attractive Art Nouveau architecture and prime locations in plazas, parks and scenic overlooks throughout the city, these popular kiosks are natural gathering points from sunup to sundown. Join the local crowd sipping ginja, a traditional sour-cherry liqueur, at purple tables beside the restored quiosque in Praça das Flores, a small, leafy park with a central fountain that doubles as a watering hole for neighborhood cats. In inclement weather, take cover at Cerveteca Lisboa, a quiet beer bar across the street pouring hard-to-find brews from Portuguese craft breweries, like Dois Corvos and Passarola Brewing.Opened last year in a historic building formerly occupied by the consulate of Brazil, Le Consulat is a sophisticated hotel with eight spacious suites decorated with artworks culled from top Lisbon galleries, and views across the lovely Camões square in the central Chiado district (Praça Luís de Camões 22; 351-212-427-470; leconsulat.pt; from about 200 euros).Another noteworthy newcomer, the Corpo Santo Lisbon Historical Hotel is an upscale property that also opened last year near the lively Cais do Sodré district, with welcoming staff, a convenient location, an on-site restaurant and 77 plush, neutral-hued rooms (Rua do Corpo Santo 25; 351-218-288-000; corposantohotel.com; from about 180 euros).If you do plan a trip to Lisbon, check out these suggestions on what to pack for the trip from our colleagues at Wirecutter. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawayThe search giant has been rolling out features and products to make planning and taking vacations easier.By Stephanie RosenbloomFlight delay predictions, mobile trip-planning, automatic itinerary management, language translation through Bluetooth earbuds, and a smartphone that enables users to learn about landmarks by tapping an icon and aiming the phone at them: These are among the travel innovations Google has been introducing in recent days and weeks. While a Google Pixel 2 smartphone costs upward of $650, the company’s latest tools are free. In fact, they may already be on your phone, nudging Google closer to being a one-stop destination for on-the-go vacation planning. Searching Google for a hotel or flight was once two separate activities. You could run a search for a flight across multiple airlines. Or you could search a city for hotels. Now, however, when you use an Android or iOS smartphone to search Google for a flight, a hotel or even a destination, you’ll find a blue navigation bar. It appears on your screen when you tap your Google search result — be it “Rome flights,” “Rome hotels” or simply “Rome.” There are separate tabs for flights and hotels (like you see on sites such as Priceline), as well as an “explore” tab to check out the destination’s top sights and best times to visit, and a “your trips” tab where Gmail users can see their future and past travel reservations, and email those reservations to others. (Travelers can also edit their itineraries and see them offline if they use the Google Trips app, which allows users to check out things to do and places to eat; review transportation options; see emergency numbers; and find out about local currency and free Wi-Fi locations.) With the blue navigation bar, users can now easily move between flight and hotel options. The feature is currently being rolled out on mobile phones in the United States. A spokeswoman for Google said there are plans to expand globally in the coming months.Google has also added new features to Google Flights, its online airfare search and comparison tool. Now users can see what’s included (or not) with new fare types like basic economy. For instance, you can find out whether a particular fare on Delta or United allows you to choose your seat or store a bag in an overhead bin. Users may also be able to find out why their flights are delayed (to check your status, just search your flight number on Google), as well as view predictions about whether a flight will be delayed, based on historic flight status data and machine learning algorithms. (Google said it will share predictions only when it’s at least 80 percent confident of the prediction). These days it’s also possible to book certain flights through Google, as opposed to clicking a link and purchasing the flight on the airline’s website or that of a third-party like Expedia. While these digital tools are free, they aren’t the only additions that may be of interest to travelers. Google Pixel Buds ($159), Bluetooth earbuds that work with Google Translate on the company’s Pixel 2 phone, offer translation in 40 languages, including Italian, Hindi, Chinese and Spanish. For example, let’s say you’re in a cafe in Provence. You begin by gently pressing the right earbud touch pad and saying, “Google, help me speak French.” “Sure,” the Google assistant virtual helper will say, “opening Google Translate” (the app must be installed on a Google Pixel phone for this to work). When the waiter comes by, you can touch the right earbud again and say: “May I have a coffee with milk and a glass of water, please?” Google Assistant will then speak aloud on the phone in French what you just said in English. When the waiter replies in French, you’ll hear his words translated into English in your ear. Throughout the exchange, the phone will transcribe the conversation in English and French, enabling both parties to read on the screen the words being spoken. I’ve been testing the buds for language translation in controlled environments, and the performance has been impressive. Of course out in the real world — where there’s noise and rapid talkers who are not necessarily interested in playing along — results may be different. I’ll be road testing these in other countries soon. Stay tuned. The buds can be used for other travel-related tasks as well. By touching the right earbud, you can ask for the location of the nearest museum, gas station or McDonald’s. Request directions to a restaurant and you’ll be shown a map and suggested route on your smartphone. Aiming to trip up Google Assistant, I said, “Google, make me a reservation at Nougatine,” referring to Nougatine at Jean-Georges, a restaurant in Manhattan. The assistant replied: “OK, let’s make a reservation with OpenTable at Nougatine at Jean-Georges. For how many?” “Two,” I said. “Sounds good,” the assistant said. “For two people. For when?”“Tonight.”“At what time?”“7:30.” “Sounds good. For 7:30. It looks like that time isn’t available. Would 5:30 p.m. work for you?” It would not. But Google Assistant certainly did. The Google Pixel 2 (starting at $649; the Pixel 2 XL starts at $849) comes with a widely praised smartphone camera. It also has Google Lens technology, which enables users to tap a Lens icon and then point the phone at things such as a landmark, an artwork or a movie poster to learn more, whether it’s about a building’s history, an artist or how a film was reviewed. Lens can also provide this kind of information after you’ve taken a photo. That said, these are early days for Google Lens, just as they are for the Pixel Buds. Lens is currently limited to popular images: It can identify, say, the Golden Gate Bridge and Mona Lisa, but not necessarily lesser-known objects, making it a fun-to-have feature for early adopters who can afford a premium smartphone, though not yet a travel game changer. Google said it’s working on expanding Lens’ range. New features were also added to the company’s smart speaker, Google Home, and its siblings, Home Mini and Home Max. Home has long been able to assist with travel by answering aloud the sorts of questions travelers type into Google search: whether they need a visa to visit a particular country, the best time to visit, current weather, currency conversions, how to say “thank you” in another language, as well as flight departure times and traffic conditions. New to that list is flight-price tracking. Google Home users can begin by saying aloud, “O.K. Google, how much are flights to Hong Kong?” Google Home will then reply with the best current price for the route, ask you if you have preferred dates and if you want to track flight prices for those dates. Say yes and you’ll receive an email confirming that you’ve begun tracking prices for that route. If the cost of the tracked flight significantly changes, you’ll receive an email alert. This has also been a feature of Google Flights, and indeed those who don’t have Google Home can sign up for route-tracking online instead. Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawayMore expedited security lanes, new biometric boarding passes and a free customs app that replaces paper forms aim to speed travelers out of the terminal and on their way.By Stephanie RosenbloomMoving through the airport is becoming increasingly high-tech and, for many frequent fliers, faster. The percentage of air travelers who used automated methods (like Global Entry kiosks) during the international arrivals process soared to more than 50 percent in fiscal year 2017, up from about 3 percent in fiscal year 2013, according to United States Customs and Border Protection. And that number is expected to rise. In February, the Transportation Security Administration expanded its expedited screening program, T.S.A. PreCheck, to Air France, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, Brussels Airlines, Philippine Airlines and World Atlantic, bringing the number of airlines participating in the program to close to 50 across some 200 airports. The Global Entry program — where members scan their fingerprints and passports at kiosks instead of waiting in immigration lines — is also growing, and making it easier to join with enrollment at 11 international airports in November (including Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport and Denver International Airport), with more to come. Yet Customs and Border Protection has increasingly been pushing beyond fingerprint biometrics, testing facial recognition exit technology (not without concerns from privacy rights groups) last year at eight United States airports, including Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, John F. Kennedy International Airport and Miami International Airport. Facial recognition technology is also being tested during the boarding process at certain airports like Hartsfield-Jackson, Kennedy and Boston Logan International Airport. Delta, for instance, began allowing travelers to use their fingerprints rather than a boarding pass at Reagan Washington National Airport. The carrier subsequently began allowing travelers to check their luggage using their fingerprints as identification as well. The most effective airport timesavers, like Global Entry, require background checks and fees. Yet in the last year or so a free program that expedites the immigration process has become more popular, even with members of Global Entry. To join Global Entry you must complete a comprehensive online form about your travel history, have an in-person interview with a customs official, be fingerprinted, and pay a $100 application fee (good for five years). It’s the most seamless way to move through customs: You simply stop at an automated passport control kiosk, identify yourself with your passport and finger biometrics, and tap a screen to answer a few questions. (Note: Global Entry is not strictly for United States citizens, nationals and lawful permanent residents; passport holders from Argentina, Colombia, Germany, India, Mexico, the Netherlands, Panama, the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Switzerland, Taiwan and Britain may also apply.) But a number of travelers (Americans and Canadian visitors) have been discovering a free program called Mobile Passport Control — the use of which has increased threefold from fiscal year 2016 to 2017. While not necessarily as quick as Global Entry, Mobile Passport Control still saves users the time and hassle of filling out a paper declaration form. And it doesn’t require any sort of advance approval or interview. Rather, it works through a free Customs and Border Protection app for iOS and Android called Mobile Passport and can be used at about 25 airports (in cities that include New York, Houston and Chicago), as well as at Port Everglades in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. To use the Mobile Passport app, users create a profile by adding their passport information (along with the passport information for each family member traveling with them). Then, when their flight lands at a participating airport, they follow signs to a designated fast Mobile Passport Control lane, open the app and answer five questions about their trip (on behalf of their entire family), submit it, and then receive a receipt with an encrypted bar code. When they reach the Customs and Border Protection officer in their lane, they show their passport, scan the bar code on the receipt, and go on their way. While the Mobile Passport app is not as comprehensive or ubiquitous as Global Entry (Global Entry is at more than 50 airports, while Mobile Passport is at fewer than half that), Customs and Border Protection says they are complementary programs. As veteran Global Entry members know, at certain times of the day and at particular airports there can be a line for the kiosks. Or a kiosk may not be working, slowing up an ordinarily smooth process. For that reason, Customs and Border Protection suggests having both programs so that whenever possible, you have the option of choosing the shorter line. (For those interested in enrolling in Global Entry, some credit cards offer statement credits to customers who charge the fee to their cards, like Chase Sapphire Reserve, Citi Prestige and certain American Express cards.) Members of Global Entry typically also receive membership in T.S.A. PreCheck, the expedited security program that allows them to use designated airport lanes that don’t require members to remove their shoes or their liquids and laptops from their bags (if you don’t do much international travel you can apply just for T.S.A. PreCheck; the fee is $85 for five years). For a while, some travelers who weren’t members of the program were being allowed to the use the PreCheck lanes when they weren’t full. But last year the Transportation Security Administration began cutting down on that practice.If you’re a frequent traveler, you may also want to check out Customs and Border Protection’s Nexus and Sentri programs; Nexus is for those who travel between the United States and Canada (Canadian citizens and residents enrolled in Nexus are allowed to use Global Entry kiosks), while Sentri is for travel into the United States by land from Mexico. Another program, Clear, costs $179 a year for individuals and is not a government-run program. Although T.S.A. PreCheck allows you to join a lane with fewer security requirements, you must first still wait in line (albeit usually a shorter one) to reach a checkpoint where someone looks at your I.D. With Clear, you go directly to a kiosk (where you scan your iris or fingerprints) and are then escorted to the physical security check, bypassing the lines to the identification checkpoints. If you’re also enrolled in T.S.A. PreCheck, you can step into that particular lane. If you don’t have PreCheck, you join the regular lane where you must remove your shoes, belt and the usual items from your bags like liquids and laptops. Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerExploring one of China’s most exciting, progressive cities on a budget.By Lucas Peterson“Now, that bear is definitely not white,” said the Dutch tourist next to me. The giant panda turned in our direction at that moment and let out some kind of loud sneeze or snort as if to say, “Give me a break, pal.” It was raining and muddy, after all, and even slightly smudged, the panda bears at the Chengdu Research Base of Giant Panda Breeding were still absurdly adorable. The bear ambled off to climb a nearby jungle gym-like structure, fell off it once or twice, eventually gave up, and finally settled on a choice piece of bamboo to munch on. Pandas reside almost exclusively in central China, and while a handful can be seen in zoos worldwide, the research base in Chengdu, the thriving seat of China’s Sichuan Province, is one of the only places to see dozens of the animals thriving in a pseudo-natural habitat. It’s just one of many compelling reasons to visit. Despite being one of the country’s largest cities, Chengdu has largely flown under the radar for the tourist set; deep in the heart of China, it’s closer to Tibet than to Shanghai. After recently spending 10 days there over two trips, I can say that it’s a fantastically exciting, progressive city, with plenty of museums and urban temples to explore, great shopping, as well as a famously spicy cuisine that will torch the careless.Animal attractions can be dicey, particularly in China (I once had a very depressing visit to the Beijing Zoo), but the research base is very well done — the animals seemed happy and active — and seemed to serve a larger purpose: conservation and research of a threatened species that’s notoriously slow to reproduce. The price was right, too: only 58 yuan (a little over $9) for admission. My advice is to get there in the morning — not only will you beat the crowds, but it’s the pandas’ breakfast time so they’re more active than usual. Don’t miss the nursery, either, which may have some very cuddly snoozing babies (there were three when I visited).How to get there? I recommend Chengdu’s clean, efficient subway system, and suggest you get used to taking it. The metro, which went into service in 2010, has been built with blinding, almost frightening, speed. There are now six subway lines in operation, meaning that a new one is added every 16 months or so in a city of more than 14 million people. Single-ride tickets vary based on distance, but expect to pay between 2 and 5 yuan when you ride. You’ll also notice no one bolting down the stairs to make a train in Chengdu; there’s almost always another one about three minutes behind.My lodging at the Chengdu Panda Apartment (Chengdu is proud of its pandas and you will see them in advertising and the names of businesses everywhere) was tricky to locate — it’s hidden in a residential apartment block — but the room was comfortable and the price reasonable (276 yuan per night). The décor was, as you might guess, extremely panda-heavy: blankets, towels, bedspreads — everything. Fortunately, I thought it was pretty cute.If you’re looking for something a little more traditional, I also stayed at the Sheraton Chengdu Lido Hotel, just one stop north of Tianfu Square, on the metro’s primary north-south line, for just 488 yuan per night. Getting into the city from the airport, incidentally, is fairly hassle-free. While there are shuttles into downtown, I would download and set up Didi Chuxing before your trip (check out other general China travel tips in my last article). My ride into the city cost just 45 yuan. One nice perk of the app is that if you message your driver in English (to tell him or her where you are, for example), it is automatically translated into Chinese.Taxis are also easy to hail in Chengdu, as are guys on motorbikes who will, for a fee, let you hop on the back and shuttle you to your destination. But I found that walking is the best way to get around Chengdu — the city isn’t as hectic as Beijing or Shanghai, and it’s a pleasant place to take a stroll. For example, I walked to the Wenshu Monastery, a gorgeous and peaceful (and free) place to visit and learn about Chinese Buddhism. Built during the Sui dynasty (581-618 A.D.), the monastery is populated with almost all-wooden structures that are in remarkable shape. The Hall of Three Great Buddhisattva and the Mahavira Hall house gleaming, intricate Buddhist icons and treasures; you won’t be able to take photos of the statues themselves, but can photograph freely on the grounds. Don’t miss the Peace Pagoda of a Thousand Buddhas, a strikingly ornate 11-story tower that’s the tallest iron pagoda in China.Wenshu has one other perk — a lively garden area where tea and vegetarian food is served. It’s here that you can get a true sense of daily life in Chengdu. Purchase a package of tea from a small kiosk near the entrance (jasmine tea was 15 yuan) and grab a thermos of hot water and a bag of sunflower seeds or lightly sweetened peanuts (5 yuan, paid on the honor system). Show your tea receipt to a worker and they’ll give you a ceramic cup with a lid. Find yourself a seat in the meditative environs and drink tea and munch on snacks to your heart’s content. You’ll notice dozens of locals doing the same while laughing, chatting and playing cards — this is typical Chengdu.Park life is essential in China, as it’s one of the few ways to escape from the crush of urbanity that marks its major cities. People’s Park is another great place to walk around, unwind and take in the sights and sounds of local life. You’ll see exercise and singing classes in session, along with electronic meters displaying the current decibel levels (keeping it under 65 is recommended), as well as tea-drinking and ear-cleaning. That’s right — men wearing headlamps wander around with cotton swabs on the end of long, metal rods, offering to clean out your ears. If you hear a repeating tinny clang, you know the ear cleaners are near.Another of Chengdu’s historical treasures, the Jinsha Site Museum, has only been accessible recently, as it was accidentally discovered in 2001 during real estate development. What was uncovered is something of a lost city: excavation of the ancient capital of the Shu Kingdom, dating between the 7th and 12th centuries B.C., has unearthed different pottery, jade, ivory and gold artifacts. Walking the grounds, which include a small bamboo forest and garden of fragrant Japanese allspice, was worth admission alone (usually 80 yuan, but only 40 during the winter season, with an additional 40 for an audio guide). I was able to take advantage of another winter discount at Wuhou Temple, also known as the Temple of Marquis, paying 30 yuan instead of the usual 60. The temple is dedicated to the life of Zhuge Liang and the Three Kingdoms period (220-280 A.D.), an era revered among Chinese for its political intrigue and military strategy. While visiting Wuhou, take some time to browse Jinli Street, which runs along the edge of the temple. There you’ll find, concentrated in one fairly touristy area, an enormous variety of regional cuisine: Roujiamo (a hamburger-like sandwich, 10 yuan), spicy tofu covered in fish mint (10 yuan), and skewers of baby squid (20 yuan). I picked up a block of glutinous rice cake slathered in chili, scallions and hot oil for 8 yuan.Markets are another great place to check out Chengdu’s seemingly endless food offerings. Jordan Porter, who runs a local food tour company called Chengdu Food Tours, tipped me off to a bustling local market near the west side of the 1st Ring Road called Qingyang Market. It has everything you could want, from pig’s feet to sugar cane stalks, homemade sausages, crocks of blindingly potent baijiu (grain alcohol), fresh tofu, spices and vats of doubanjiang, a spicy, fermented bean paste. After doing a couple of loops, I sat down at Yanjing Mian. a small restaurant near the market’s entrance, for a piquant bowl of hand-pulled noodles with pieces of short rib (10 yuan).Street food, incidentally, has its drawbacks. If you’re an adventurous eater, sometimes you get sick. One day on Dongsheng Street, near People’s Park, I noticed some appealing-looking stacked metal containers outside one storefront. They were sputtering steam and brimming with soft, fluffy baozi (dumplings). I bought a bag of eight (6 yuan) and chowed down happily as I turned left on Ningxia Street. After I’d inhaled three, I noticed something felt slightly off. I won’t get into the details, but let’s just say I didn’t find a place to solve the issue in time. It was a long, humbling walk home. The silver lining: Drugstores are plentiful in China (they’ll sometimes have a green awning or ads for knockoff Viagra in the front), and the people who work there couldn’t care less about your problems. Later that day, I went into one called Bai Xin Tang and announced, “la duzi” (diarrhea). The woman behind the counter scarcely looked up from what she was doing as she tossed me a box of pills (30 yuan).If you decide to go the safer restaurant route, you won’t be disappointed, either. Chuan chuan is essential Chengdu — skewers of different meats and vegetables sitting in a bath of spicy oil (dinner for two might run 60 to 80 yuan) — as is getting an entire fish. My first night in the city, I met two friends, Chengdu locals, at Kao Master, a restaurant on the seventh floor of the International Finance Square Mall, near the extremely hip Chunxi Road area. We opted for a whole hot-and-sour fish (qianyu, from Guizhou province, 129 yuan), tangy and flavorful, and slathered in bright orange chili peppers. As I popped one, and then another, of the blisteringly hot peppers into my mouth — primarily to demonstrate that I was a foreigner with an iron gut and unafraid of spicy local cuisine — one of my companions, Jasmine, looked at me quizzically. “Why are you eating all those?” she asked. “They’re just for flavor.” Lesson learned.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HoursFrom upstart creative spaces and obscure bars to neighborhoods where a surprising urban tranquillity reigns, Bangkok remains ripe for discovery.By Seth SherwoodOne of the first Thai words that foreigners learn in Bangkok is farang, or foreigner. And no wonder. More than 20 million farang descend on the temples and temptations of Thailand’s capital every year, making it one of the planet’s most visited cities. You run into each other in hotels and restaurants, in the air-conditioned mega-malls of Siam Square, at the teeming Chatuchak outdoor market and the Buddhist sites of Wat Pho and Wat Arun. Together, you jostle through the crowds along the buzzing Sukhumvit strip and the backpacker haven of Khao San Road. And there you are again, venturing into the famous go-go bars of Patpong and Soi Cowboy. Fortunately, Bangkok is vast and fast-evolving, with many remote corners and newly minted hangouts. From upstart creative spaces and restaurants to obscure back street bars to the under-visited Thonburi district, Bangkok remains ripe for discovery.  “Are Tuk-Tuks and Pad Thai Really Thai?” That question, embossed on a wall, welcomes you to the recently reopened Museum Siam, an interactive, high-tech fun house whose motto is “Decoding Thainess.” Exploring the galleries is like bouncing around a pinball machine: Surfaces light up, bells ring and characters and objects suddenly pop out of floors and walls as you accumulate knowledge about Thai history, royalty, fashion, food, Buddhism and pop culture. (Spoiler alert: Tuk-tuks arrived in Thailand via postwar Italy and Japan.)  Urban chaos gives way to villagelike (and farang-free) tranquillity across the nearby Memorial Bridge. Featuring an ersatz mountain dotted with Buddha statues, the rock garden of the Wat Prayoon complex is a haven of grottoes, pavilions, roaming turtles and fish ponds. Alongside it, a soaring, white, bell-shaped chedi surrounded by 18 smaller white chedis is a simultaneously massive and minimalist monument. Go past the Church of Santa Cruz (originally constructed by Portuguese settlers; the present structure was rebuilt in the early 20th century) and follow the slim riverbank path to Kuan An Keng. The Chinese-built temple is adorned with red pillars, golden bells and sculpted dragons; beyond it, is the dazzling, multitiered, 19th-century Buddhist temples and bell tower of Wat Kalayanamitr. A ferry (5 baht, or about 16 cents) returns you across the river in minutes.Gaggan is regularly ranked as Asia’s best restaurant. Don’t eat there. Just across the passageway is the less fastidious, less expensive, less-hyped, almost-brand-new and truly sublime dining experience known as Gaa, where you don’t have to book weeks in advance. (A few days are enough — for now). Décor consists of industrial materials and autumnal hues, music ranges from bossa nova to Bowie, and the innovative food comes courtesy of the Indian chef Garima Arora, who worked previously at Copenhagen’s Noma restaurant and, yes, Gaggan. The 10-course menu (2,200 baht) might showcase Indo-Siamese hybrids (Thai crayfish on Indian flatbread with shell bisque), high-end comfort food (warm fermented tofu whey with charcoal-roasted cauliflower), meaty-sweet mash-ups (chilled shards of chicken-liver mousse on toast with longan jam) or fruity fun desserts.  For most travelers, Chinatown’s appeals are street food and the huge gold Buddha in Wat Traimit. But the small nearby lane called Soi Nana is a gold mine of new bars. The red neon, flickering candles and dark wood at Ba Hao evoke a sultry den from 1930s Shanghai — complete with Opium (a Negroni variant with ginseng, herbal liquor and tiny chrysanthemum bulbs). Thai pride suffuses the cozy, candlelit Tep Bar. Not hungry for fried baby bamboo caterpillars? Try a herbal liquor, rice wine or Nila Pat cocktail (Thai rum, ginger syrup and a black gelatin cube made with Thai herbs) and absorb the traditional Thai music performances.  Want to rub sweaty elbows with tens of thousands of retail enthusiasts in a 27-acre, sun-seared outdoor market with some 15,000 booths hocking coconut-shell ashtrays, elephant-print pants, jasmine soaps, striped cushions and countless other wares? If not, swap overloaded Chatuchak market for undervisited Papaya, a soaring air-conditioned warehouse-shop packed with a museumlike collection of vintage goods: bellows cameras, Jacobsen chairs, barber poles, 1970s computers, claw foot tubs, Oriental rugs, snuff boxes, surgery lamps and so much else — except other shoppers.  Cheap, noisy, no-frills, white-tiled, overbright: Krua Apsorn bears all the signs of a top-notch traditional eating room. Skip the crab omelet — locally famous but overrated — for spicy seafood specimens like silvery sillago fish (in a fiery soup of beans, peas and leaves) and plump tom yum shrimp (in coconut-milk broth with mushroom chunks). Lunch for two costs around 700 baht. For dessert, nearby Mont Nomsod is a Bangkok institution, beloved for its thick white toast spread with sweet toppings (25 baht) like coconut-egg custard, and chunky corn soup. What happens to old post offices in the internet era? Hopefully they end up like the Bangkok General Post Office, which now houses the Thailand Creative and Design Center. In addition to a library, studios and a large exhibition area — recently host to an excellent elucidation of Thai architecture — the center features a boutique selling hipster sneakers by Truly, minimalist wooden clocks from Pana Objects and other Thai products. Up the road, Warehouse 30 ups the neighborhood’s creative quotient with an indie documentary cinema, a gallery-cafe and shops selling everything from steampunk fashion to vintage stereo equipment.  Like Thai boxing and Thai spices, Thai massage is not for the weak. During a 60-minute session (350 baht) at Ruen Nuad — a humble wooden house amid the skyscrapers and crowds of downtown Bangkok — you become the soft target of the masseuse’s powerful knees, elbows, forearms and fists as he or she stretches you like Play-Doh, twists you like Twizzlers, folds you like origami and presses you down like an overstuffed suitcase. All the pulling, prodding, pummeling and, yes, punching can make you feel like the dummy in a model-mugging defense class, but you will walk outside feeling as limber and light as a ghost. “In praise of the wondrous beauty of nature…,” reads the menu cover at Cuisine de Garden: Unexpected words in a tall, dense metropolis with few green spaces. But this glassy and hushed restaurant that opened last year offers an organic enclave amid the asphalt and concrete. The project starts with the décor — slim tree trunks stretch from floor to ceiling, like an indoor forest — and continues with a four-course menu (1,590 baht) and various amuse-bouche whims. The lineup might include a leaf-shaped brioche served atop a real leaf, a shrimp-mussel-salmon-crab quartet deployed on small white stones, or a soft-boiled egg atop a nestlike structure of crispy rice noodles and a bed of pulled chicken: a gooey, warm, crispy and meaty interplay of farmyard flavors.  “Massage? Massage?” Amid the louche bars and dubious “spas” of the Sukhumvit back streets, two classy cocktail dens have discretely sprouted up. Inside Sri Trat, Frank Sinatra croons while bartenders in vests pour sly Thai cocktails like the O-Liang (Scotch, port wine, Thai coffee and amaro) for guests ensconced on tufted leather stools. Thailand meets Tokyo at Salon du Japonisant, where an unmarked door opens into a chic speakeasy outfitted with Chesterfield-style couches, low armchairs and three menus: one for whiskey and Calvados, one for sakes, and one for cocktails. The Old Fashioned 2017 is a dry, spicy and sophisticated blend of Suntory whiskey, green tea bitters, forest bitters, cinnamon stick, orange and Japanese black honey.  A tranquil and spiritual side of the city appears when you motor through the water channels of Thonburi in a canopied wooden boat. (Sinchai Travel, a.k.a. Longtail Boat Tour, has its ticket office on Sathorn Pier. A 90-minute trip costs 1,500 to 1,800 baht per person.) Bangkok’s towers vanish and soon you are among old wooden canal houses and plank piers where children fish, white cranes swoop down, women in motorboats pass with skewered meats for sale, and magnificent temples and mountainous Buddhas suddenly materialize.  To reach Oldman Coffee, drop your car or taxi at the highway overpass, duck under the fuselage of the decommissioned Lockheed passenger jet, follow the gravel path past the toilet-plunger-toss arcade game, turn left at the helicopter and go past the Victorian-style photo portrait studio. If you reach the huge metal skull the size of a garbage truck, you’ve gone too far. Such are the attractions of ChangChui, a new alternative theme park and Gothic wonderland, complete with shooting gallery, food stalls, vintage shops, artist studios, open-air bars and concert halls — to say nothing of deactivated torpedoes, disused tractor-trailers, human-size robots and an exhibition room with skulls and stuffed birds. If you need lunch, try Insects in the Backyard restaurant. At your own risk.   Opened in late 2017, the 231-room Lancaster Bangkok is a spacious and luxurious newcomer with a gym, spa, restaurant, rooftop pool and multiple bars. Double rooms in February from 3,360 baht. Alternatively, save money at Old Town Hostel — a 1920s building with 12 dormitories and nine private rooms — then splurge at the adjoining 80/20. Decorated in an industrial style, the gallery-restaurant serves daring, playful and delectable neo-Thai concoctions. Double rooms from 800 baht. In the heart of the emerging Chinatown bar scene, 103 Bed and Brews has six rooms with tasteful retro furnishings and a cool cafe with multiple cold brew coffees and Thai microbrews. Rooms from 1,250 baht.  AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byEXPLORERSometimes there’s solitude. Other times, lively discussions with new friends. And at every stop in the hut system there’s the Intentions Book. It’s must-reading.By Jeremy CrononFinally scrambling out of the bush of New Zealand’s South Island, I paused, surveying the alpine valley in the foreground. Then I saw it. Nestled against a slab of moss-covered schist stood a modest structure, no larger than my 8 feet by 12 feet college dorm room. With excitement and relief, I clambered toward Cameron Hut.As a 10-year-old, entranced by the cinematic landscapes of Peter Jackson’s “The Fellowship of the Ring,” I wouldn’t have guessed that backcountry huts would become a focal point of my travels in New Zealand. Sixteen years later, I had come for the forests of Lothlorien, the peaks of the Misty Mountains, the hills of the Shire. But it was in the huts that I immersed myself in the culture of those landscapes and spent time with the people who know and value them most. New Zealand’s wild spaces deserve their fantastical reputation, but it is the country’s commitment to this vast network of public huts that fosters something unique: a community of strangers even in the most remote backcountry.Approaching Cameron Hut, I wondered what I would find inside. No two huts are the same. Some are blaze orange, others beige. Some are over a century old, others less than a decade. Even if they look similar from the outside, each hut has its own quirks, stories and memories. They are a product of their environment, the people who use them, and their moment in history, all of which define a hut’s character.In 1987, the newly established Department of Conservation took responsibility for maintaining New Zealand’s hut network and the web of tracks (the term for trails) that connects them. Some huts originated as outposts for miners, hunters, foresters, or shepherds, others as way stations for alpinists, scientists, tourists or tramping club members. Now, nearly a thousand of these structures are open to trampers (as overnight backpackers are known) for minimal fees. Pushing open Cameron Hut’s weathered door, I found four bunks on one wall with a potbelly stove braced against another. A metal countertop stretched beneath the window with a pair of water buckets and two stools stashed below. A wall shelf contained outdoor magazines, a copy of “The Girl on the Train,” candles of assorted lengths and a jar of ear plugs. And there, over by the window in its familiar bracket on the wall, was the volume I had learned always to peruse when I arrived at one of these huts: The Intentions Book.Setting my pack down, I started scanning its pages. Emblazoned with the Maori greeting “Kia ora,” the logbook serves as a guide to each hut and a registry for all visitors. Trampers use it to record details about their party and intended route — hence the name of the book — along with their comments and stories. While some of this information could prove useful in an emergency, it amounts to a beloved anthology of the shared experiences that define New Zealand’s huts. One page might contain mountaintop epiphanies, off-trail discoveries, weather and trail conditions, speculations about whether a bickering couple would survive the trail ahead and whimsical evaluations of the previous night’s snoring. Together, the entries form a living document of hut culture itself, where stories, knowledge, advice and humor pass freely among strangers.It didn’t take me long to find what I was seeking: the entry my new friends Joanna and Logan had made here a few weeks ago. Our paths had intersected on the Dart Track, a popular, multiday trek through the mountains north of Queenstown, where we had compared lists of must-visit huts over dinner. I was here because they had told me not to miss it. Cameron Hut wasn’t glamorous, but it felt perfectly suited to the needs of a solo traveler.There are four tiers of huts in the system. Basic Huts are any combination of walls and a roof that will pass for “very basic shelter,” but not much more. Standard Huts are more robust but still spartan structures with a few added amenities like mattresses, water access, a toilet and a wood stove — though if users of such huts want a fire, they must forage for downed branches to maintain the wood supply. Serviced Huts feel similar to their Standard brethren, but are generally in high-traffic areas or above tree-line, where the Department of Conservation must supply fuel and upkeep costs skyrocket. Great Walks Huts are the most heavily visited and expensive of the bunch, with gas stoves and resident hut wardens. No matter what its tier, I found every hut worth visiting. Putting away the Intentions Book, I took advantage of the warm afternoon sun to explore the area around Cameron Hut. Just outside the door, a small shed protected a wood pile and well-worn ax. The “long drop,” an outhouse over an abnormally deep hole, sat nestled in a thicket of silver beech 150 feet north of the hut. To the west, I followed the river until I discovered the series of deep pools beneath a pair of towering waterfalls that Joanna and Logan had told me to visit. Laying my towel on a rock, I braced myself for what would be an undoubtedly frigid but equally necessary bath. Not a bad place to call home for the night.When you arrive at a hut, any sense of urgency melts away and is replaced by the easy rhythms of hut life. When a predictably unpredictable New Zealand storm blows through, you close the windows and open your book. When your stomach rumbles, you start dinner. When the sun disappears behind the mountains, you light a candle or flick on your headlamp. In a hut, you face simple choices.As quaint as they may seem, huts also serve a very real need. They provide essential shelter in New Zealand’s most extreme environments. Even hardened adventurers could be convinced to choose the protection of Iris Burn Hut over the characteristic downpours of Fiordlands or the warmth of Mueller Hut over the unpredictable snowfields of the Southern Alps. Huts are at their finest when weather is at its foulest. For me, this realization came on the Richmond Alpine Track as I tramped through storm clouds so dense that I could rarely see more than 30 feet ahead. Exhausted and borderline hypothermic, I kindled a fire at each hut, decorating the wood stove with my saturated layers of clothing As horizontal rain beat hard against the walls, I savored the fire and a steaming mug of soup. It was only after I emerged from the mountains that I learned I had hiked through the remnants of Cyclone Debbie, which had killed 14 people in Australia and caused widespread flooding throughout New Zealand. Without those huts, anyone on the route I had just hiked could have fallen victim to that storm’s violence.But inclement weather was the furthest thing from my mind as I settled into Cameron Hut on this sunny autumn afternoon in mid-March. The valley would protect me from the all too familiar winds that had threatened to peel Slaty Hut right off its exposed perch in the Richmond Range. Neither too big nor too small, Cameron Hut’s modest footprint couldn’t compete with the 32-bunk, multiroom huts with flush toilets on the Rees-Dart Track in Mount Aspiring National Park. Yet it felt palatial compared to the tiny Sefton Bivvy — I couldn’t even stand completely — nestled beneath the Tewaewae Glacier.The size and grandeur of backcountry huts are often linked to their popularity, and prices follow suit. Basic Huts are free, but most huts in New Zealand range from $3 to $10 per night. Bunks fill up on a first-come, first-serve basis, but there is always room on the floor. Great Walks Huts, on the other hand, can cost up to $35 per night and require reservations months in advance.For committed hut travelers, there are six-month ($65) and yearlong ($85) passes, which grant you unlimited access to most Basic, Standard and Serviced Huts. With just a few visits to Serviced Huts, the pass more than pays for itself. At Cameron Hut, my dinnertime ritual began by fetching river water in the buckets. Almost every hut has some access to water, but that was the only time I used buckets. More established huts have well water pumped through interior sinks. Others have external rainwater catchment cisterns with an attached faucet. The Department of Conservation encourages all users to treat or boil their water before consumption.Huts provide water, but hut users pack their own food and stove. Meals are lightweight and calorie-dense, ranging from prepackaged, dehydrated beef stroganoff to a ramen noodle and mashed potato slurry. I will never forget, however, the night when two Italians cooked me a gourmet pasta dinner, utilizing an entire pumpkin (and massive bottle of wine) that they had hauled to the hut. People cook alongside strangers, sharing their meals around communal tables. For dessert, someone almost always passed around a massive bar of Whittaker’s chocolate.As I chopped veggies, I kept glancing down the trail running alongside Cameron Creek, wondering if anyone would be joining me for the night. I would welcome time with strangers, but I also relished solitude.You never know who is going to walk through the door of a hut, but you can be fairly confident that your time together will be marked by a trust and civility that Americans rarely expect from total strangers. Generosity and hospitality anchor the communitarian ethos that makes these backcountry huts so welcoming.More often than not, I shared huts with other travelers. On the Motatapu Track, I spent two nights playing euchre with a trio of Coloradans. I met a French Canadian couple on a sunny afternoon at Greenstone Hut, only to run into them again after a soggy and treacherous day on the Demon Trail. Weeks later, we ended up crammed together in the back seat of a car hitchhiking toward the Travers-Sabine Circuit, an extended route through the mountains of Nelson Lakes National Park. Circumnavigating Mount Ruapehu, I synced up with a good-natured Kiwi couple for four days. Each night, Jade and Steff kept me company, offering food and tips for the route ahead. Later, they even hosted me at their home in Taupo.Conversation always flowed freely, often focusing on the weather, trail conditions, hut recommendations and the inevitable foreign puzzlement about American politics. Every now and then, we would talk our way through less familiar territory. In the shadow of the Darran Mountains, an ensemble of Kiwis, Americans, Canadians, Aussies and Brits had a lively discussion about their respective relationships to British colonialism. During dinner at Mid-Caples Hut, I confronted my own ignorance when I ate with a man from New Caledonia, a French territory in the South Pacific I hadn’t previously known existed. I’ll never forget these people. They turned out to be no less central to my New Zealand experience than the Tolkienesque landscapes I originally thought I had come to find.Local resident or foreign traveler, old or young, novice or expert, hut goers have spent their day exploring the wild. At night, their focus tightens to a small room filled with strangers. You share the experience of a common place, even if you come from opposite ends of the earth. The hut makes this happen. Over dehydrated dinners and morning coffee, people open themselves to their fellow travelers and write each other into their common story.As dusk fell on Cameron Hut, I paged through the Intentions Book again. Foreigners and Kiwis alike noted how they had underestimated the steep trail to the hut, but enjoyed the reward of swimming beneath the waterfalls. Some complained about nasty weather. Hunters documented the number of chamois and tahr, exotic species of mountain goat introduced to New Zealand in the early 20th century. Instructions on how to get above tree line covered an entire page, complete with a hand-drawn map. This hut is remote enough that it often sits empty for days at a time, if not weeks during the winter, yet these entries recorded the enthusiasm of its infrequent visitors and their hope that others would experience some of what they themselves had found here. Wriggling into my sleeping bag, I opened “The Girl on the Train,” knowing that sleep wasn’t far off. In the morning, I would add my own story to the Intentions Book. Then I would tidy the hut, close the door behind me, and head down the trail toward my next night’s shelter.Some heavily trafficked huts, like Great Walks Huts, require advance reservations. Peak season for these huts falls between November and April. Trampers hoping to complete routes like the Milford, Routeburn and Abel Tasman Tracks will need to reserve their bunks up to six months in advance. For booking information for all huts requiring reservations, visit booking.doc.govt.nzFor general information about huts, backcountry hut passes, hut etiquette and an interactive map of New Zealand’s huts, visit doc.govt.nz/hutsJeremy Cronon last wrote for the Travel section about visiting 45 national parks.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HoursOn lush Vancouver Island, this urban jewel offers innovative restaurants, gorgeous parks and gardens, and museums that celebrate the area’s many cultures. By Suzanne CarmickThis compact, eminently walkable city, set amid the breathtaking beauty and bounty of Vancouver Island, is lauded as one of the world’s top small urban destinations. Beyond the picture-perfect downtown waterfront, British Columbia’s capital is an exhilarating blend of cultures, from Canadian and First Nations to Chinese and European (especially British). There are three universities, thriving arts and cultural institutions, significant historic preservation, a celebrated local food scene and Canada’s mildest climate: That means year-round forest visits, biking and golf; gardens galore (daffodils in February); even beehives downtown (at the Fairmont Empress hotel; atop the Harbour Air floating terminal). There is wildness too: “bear jams” disrupting traffic, cougar sightings and soaring eagles, towering ancient trees, log-strewn beaches and distant snowy peaks.  The blocks north of the Empress and west of Douglas Street, including Chinatown, comprise the Old Town. Start at Bastion Square and Wharf Street, overlooking the harbor, where James Douglas founded Fort Victoria in 1843 as an outpost of the Hudson’s Bay Company. This area became the heart of commerce, industry and government, swelling in size after the 1858 Fraser Gold Rush drew thousands of immigrants. Next to the Old Victoria Customs House is a grassy overlook with a display telling the history of British settlement and the indigenous Lekwungen people. Check out the lively Bastion Square pedestrian area of shops, restaurants and cafes, music and markets; then, on Government Street, browse through Munro’s Books, situated in a century-old bank, and founded in 1963 by the Nobel Prize-winning Canadian writer Alice Munro and her then-husband. Detour through Trounce Alley (note the 125-year-old gaslights), then walk east on Fort Street to La Taqueria to snack on Mexican tacos amid festive music and colorful tiles. A juicy carnitas taco with pickled red onions and salsa is 3 Canadian dollars, or about $2.35, and a Baja fish taco with cabbage, salsa and chipotle mayonnaise is 6 dollars; wash it down with Mexican fruit soda or local beer.The Inner Harbour is where seaplanes, water taxis, kayak outfitters, whale-watching tours, restaurants and festivals can all be found. Sit under the trees and watch the boats and passers-by; then head to the chateau-style Fairmont Empress, one of several luxury hotels built across Canada by the Canadian Pacific Railway Company at the turn of the century. Don’t miss the Q restaurant and bar, with its coffered ceiling, gold and purple accents and portraits of Queen Victoria. An elaborate British tea is served daily in the spacious lobby. The nearby majestic Parliament buildings were erected in 1898 to boost the capital’s profile after Vancouver became the railway’s western terminus. Open daily for touring, they are spectacularly illuminated at night. Thunderbird Park on Belleville Street is a quiet spot among the trees, where a regional First Nations house and totem poles were recreated by the Kwakwaka’wakw master carver Mungo Martin in the 1950s.Stepping inside Little Jumbo feels like a warm embrace: The exposed brick, aged wood and glowing copper ceiling take you back in time. The restaurant, which has received accolades for everything from design to food and drinks, is a homage to two New York City saloon owners in the 1860s who championed the art of dining and mixology. Dinner for two — try the warm Halloumi cheese salad, spicy Fernet-roasted nuts and grilled lingcod — including choice British Columbian wines, costs about 131 dollars. Fol Epi bakery is known for its wild-yeast breads, made from milled-on-site organic flours and baked in brick ovens. Choose from an array of loaves, pastries and quiches, then think ahead to a packable lunch of sandwiches. Walk down Douglas Street to Beacon Hill Park: This 200-acre oasis is to Victoria what Central Park is to New York City. The landscape varies from manicured and natural gardens to forest, swampland, lakes, Garry oaks and camas fields (originally planted by the Lekwungen, who harvested the edible bulbs), and includes a children’s farm and a 127-foot totem pole. Great blue herons nest in the towering firs and peacocks strut; relax and listen to birds fussing and fountains gurgling. Make time to tour the nearby Emily Carr House (6.75 dollars); the Victoria-born painter of forests and First Nations scenes spent her childhood gamboling in the park. This scenic stretch on the southern shore of the city, from Fisherman’s Wharf to beyond Ross Bay Cemetery, draws walkers, joggers, bikers and dogs. Have a picnic, clamber down to the beach or simply marvel at the water views and roadside homes. Start at Ogden Point, where interpretive kiosks tell about the Breakwater and the Unity Wall murals painted on both sides, depicting Coast Salish First Nations culture. Walk out to the lighthouse, watching for sea otters and seals. Farther east, past Clover Point, cross the road to Ross Bay Cemetery. This rambling, peaceful resting place of many of Victoria’s notable citizens is also where you’ll find some of the city’s oldest heritage trees, cuttings from which were planted all over the young city (see treesofvictoria.com). Look for deer lying on the spongy grass among the weathered obelisks, statuary and stones in this wondrous place.From the cemetery, head to the exquisite Abkhazi Garden, tucked away on a quiet block behind rhododendrons and Garry oaks. The tranquil gardens, with their several distinct outdoor “rooms,” were designed to harmonize with the rocky glacial outcroppings and native trees on the hilly property, which includes rock ponds (with mallards and turtles) and the 1950s Modernist summerhouse and former home (now teahouse) of the couple whose love story started it all. Suggested fee: 10 dollars (includes guide).At the Art Gallery of Greater Victoria, seven modern gallery spaces adjoin an 1889 mansion that once served as the museum. On permanent display are works by Emily Carr and an impressive Asian collection and garden — second only to that of the Royal Ontario Museum. There are amber and ivory carvings, a Japanese Shinto shrine, and a Chinese Ming dynasty bell presented to Victoria in 1903. Admission is 13 dollars.The 19th-century gold rushes and Canadian Pacific Railway construction drew thousands of Chinese immigrants to Victoria, where they settled above Johnson Street. Today, Canada’s oldest Chinatown is a National Historic Site, a small, colorful (especially red, for luck), vibrant community of narrow streets and alleyways, shops and restaurants, beyond the resplendent Gates of Harmonious Interest. The Victoria Chinese Public School, built in 1909, is still used to teach Chinese language classes. Climb the stairs to the top floor of the Yen Wo Society building to see the oldest active Chinese temple in Canada, honoring the sea deity Tam Kung.Olo (meaning hungry in Chinook) serves up serious farm-to-table fare with a nod to the region’s cultural diversity. The space is comfortable and rustic, with warm light emanating from hanging spheres of loosely wound wooden strips. A recent meal included crisp Hakurei turnip salad, garganelli pasta with a meaty sauce, and a dreamy dessert (rhubarb, salmonberries, elderberry ice cream, fennel macaron), with local wine (about 140 dollars for two). When it opened in 2016, Agrius garnered rave reviews for its organic, local menu. Now the restaurant serves brunch, with hearty buckwheat and rye pancakes, egg dishes (cured salmon scramble with fennel, capers and cream cheese), house-made lamb sausage and pork belly, kale and mushroom Benedict, vegetable pâté, even fried oysters (9 to 21 dollars). In fine weather there is pleasant outdoor seating along a pedestrian way.You could spend hours in this stellar repository of natural and human history, with its singular collection of British Columbia First Nations archaeological materials, as well as provincial archives. The First Peoples gallery includes a totem hall and ceremonial house, an interactive language display and a collection of Argillite (black shale) carvings from Haida Gwaii, while the Old Town recreates period streetscapes and trades — a cannery, hotel, sawmill — even the 1790s ship quarters of George Vancouver. Admission: 17 dollars.Beyond the cemetery, Dallas Road takes other names but continues along the dramatic rocky coast through neighborhoods such as upscale Oak Bay, where you’ll find art galleries and British-style pubs and teahouses. Stop at Willows Beach for a walk or a swim, then continue north past the University of Victoria to Mount Douglas Park. You can hike or drive up; either way, the panoramic view is remarkable: across Haro Strait to the San Juan Islands, toward downtown, or across rural Saanich. Hungry again? Head back to town for Foo Asian Street Food, where a hearty, steaming bowl of curried noodle stir fry with pork and shrimp, prepared while you watch, costs 14 dollars. Alternatively, the charming Venus Sophia Tea Room serves organic teas and sweets — Cream Earl Grey with scones, cream and jam costs 14 dollars — and vegetarian lunch items.In Victoria’s Old Town, two blocks from the harbor, the Best Western Plus at Carlton Plaza, with a gym and restaurant, is close to Chinatown and the Market Square shopping area. Rooms and suites, from 110 dollars; higher in season. The Dashwood Manor Seaside Bed and Breakfast is a Tudor-style former mansion built in 1912 on Dallas Road and Cook Street; step out the door to the waterfront path or Beacon Hill Park. The 11 rooms and suites, appointed with period furnishings, all have ocean views; some have Jacuzzis and fireplaces. Rooms from 149 dollars; higher in season.If you do plan a trip to Victoria, check out these suggestions on what to pack from our Wirecutter team.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawaySeeking convenience and adventure (while avoiding airport security, baggage fees and the hassle of flying with Fido), more travelers are hitting the road.By Stephanie RosenbloomIf ever there was any doubt about the state of the American road trip, the latest research seems to squash it, finding that more travelers are driving hundreds of miles to explore ​unfamiliar ​places, even if they have only four or five days to do it. ​“They’re not taking the two-week road trip of the past,” said Steve Cohen, the senior vice president for Travel Insights at MMGY Global​, one of the largest travel and hospitality marketing firm​s. Road trips represented some 22 percent of vacations taken by United States travelers in 2015, but a year later that number jumped to 39 percent, according to MMGY Global’s 2017-18 Portrait of American Travelers, a report compiled from nearly 3,000 interviews with leisure travelers. The spike ​came as the travel industry ​roared back from the recession​, hitting record levels of vacation spending, ​​ and​ as travelers stayed within the country. Nearly 14 million more vacations were taken within the United States during the past year compared with outside the country, MMGY Global found. Today, most American vacations — some 85 percent — are domestic. ​​And while it may be tempting to attribute​​ interest in road-tripping to nostalgia​ (and there is certainly some of that)​, it seems the top reasons people ​are​ ​hitting the road are ​matters of practicality.The leading two reasons​, according to the research report, ​ are the flexibility of being able to stop along the way, and of being able to pack whatever and however much people want to take in the car. Lower vacation costs ranked third, and have been of particular importance to millennials. Additionally, there’s the airport pain factor. Many travelers prefer to avoid the security lines and hefty baggage fees at legacy carriers, not to mention the 30 to 40 minutes spent waiting at baggage claim. ​For those traveling with pets, driving is easier, especially as airlines begin to tighten rules regarding service animals. (It’s worth noting that MMGY’s qualitative research focuses on the traveling public; people making at least $50,000 a year, which Mr. Cohen said essentially eliminates half the United States population.)​ Speaking of easier, ​inexperienced travelers have also contributed to the spike in domestic travel, Mr. Cohen said, as they tend to shy away from international travel amid political instability and concerns about safety.​​Though some Americans​ may ​fly to another state and begin ​their road trip there, Mr. Cohen and his colleagues are seeing many more people simply driving from home. It’s typically less expensive, and a road trip offers more flexibility in terms of schedule. Travelers can relax, leave at the last minute, and discover historical sites, local cuisine, museums, shopping, hiking, festivals and theme parks along the way. ​Despite taking shorter trips, people nonetheless want to roam as far away as possible. “They don’t want to spend the night any closer than eight hours from home,” Mr. Cohen said. And the trip has to have multiple overnight stops​ with activities and attractions​, “not just Grandma’s house,” he said. For example, Mr. Cohen said retirees typically visit family during their road trips, but most of the time they stay elsewhere.From the inception of the vacation, to the miles logged along the way, social media is a comparatively new aspect of the road trip. In the last four years MMGY has observed the role of social media in recording and sharing travel experiences explode, mainly among millennials. The percentage of people who say they post vacation photos on social media to make friends and family jealous has doubled over the last four years — “we believe that one’s grossly understated,” Mr. Cohen added — as has the number of people who use social media to record their travel experiences. ​Instagram and the like aside, road-tripping is among the few travel trends today not being, er, driven by millennials. Boomers are the largest group of road-trippers (followed by Generation Xers), and for them, it seems there’s some element of nostalgia. For millennials, the appeal of the road trip is often economical, though for many, and for a number of Generation Xers, life experiences like road trips matter more than shiny new things, according to MMGY. How people choose where to travel was something of a surprise to Mr. Cohen, who reasonably figured that the first thing most people do when planning a vacation is to decide where to go. Turns out, less than half the people he studied do that. Instead, he said, people tend to say “Here’s what I want to do, now where can I do it?” For millennials it may be, “I have this much money, where can I best spend it?” There isn’t just one type of road-tripper with a single set of goals. And road-tripping is unlikely to experience another dramatic rise.“It can’t just keep skyrocketing,” Mr. Cohen said​​. But he expects to see modest growth​ this year​ as Americans​ — retirees, young families, millennials, Generation Xers without children — continue rolling on.Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesRochelle ICA will delight you if you’re content with imaginative, delicious food served in an easygoing atmosphere with its own quirky style.By Edward SchneiderSince it was founded in 1948, London’s Institute of Contemporary Arts, known as ICA, has gained attention for exhibitions, screenings and other events focused on serious-minded high culture, not infrequently with a political point to make. Its bookshop, where aesthetics and left-wing politics also overlap, has long been a draw too. But ICA was never thought of as a place for a good meal.In October, however, the proprietors of Rochelle Canteen in the Shoreditch neighborhood of East London set up a second outpost on the ground floor of ICA, a five-minute walk from Trafalgar Square in an area more propitious for genteel private clubs than for decent restaurants serving the general public. One of the owners, Margot Henderson, said it was “time our galleries took their food as seriously as they take their art.” Ms. Henderson is married to Fergus Henderson, founder of the influential London restaurant St. John, who was leading the charge on nose-to-tail eating long before it became a cliché. The kinship between the two restaurants is easy to see at the new Rochelle Canteen — in the calculated plainness of its mostly white, somewhat ramshackle décor, and in the language employed on the ever-changing menu, whose terseness cannot mask the food’s appeal. The words “Guinea Fowl & Smoked Bacon Pie,” for example, could hardly be simpler, but who (other than a vegetarian) could resist them? It was a wonderful and surprisingly light dish, with a perfectly crisp and golden suet crust laid over tender breast and leg meat braised in a flavorful broth that also served as the pie’s poultry-and-bacon-scented sauce.Another favorite was pearly-fleshed hake with a chunky, well-seasoned romesco sauce. Our visit was in late winter — snow had fallen and temperatures had dropped into the 20s — so soup was a welcome restorative: a smooth (vegetarian) purée of white onions that neglected neither the onions’ sweetness nor their natural sharpness. During another visit later in March, the sun came out (briefly), and so did a main course of little artichokes with huge, creamy beans and airy, pleasantly tart goat’s curd.Occasionally, dishes slipped into ordinariness, like roast leg of lamb with Jerusalem artichokes and an Italianate salsa verde that lacked punch. But mostly, the chef, Ben Coombs, is sure of hand and palate with winning combinations such as strips of tender braised cuttlefish and lemon-brightened barley topped with a blob of aioli — a juicy dish best slurped with a spoon.Spoons were advisable also for a pear trifle rich with the kind of thick, ivory-colored cream you find only in Britain and for a bowl of marmalade ice cream with slivers of bittersweet orange zest running through the vanilla base. A fork sufficed for a clever almond tart surmounted with thinly sliced rhubarb that gave it a subtle but palpable zing.If your taste runs to ornate plasterwork rather than white-painted I-beams and faux-institutional furniture (designed by Alvar Aalto), consider joining one of those nearby clubs. But Rochelle ICA will delight you if you’re content with imaginative, delicious food served in an easygoing atmosphere with its own quirky style.Rochelle ICA, The Mall (near the stairs below Waterloo Place, at the foot of Regent Street); ica.art/rochelle-canteen. The average price for two people, including service charge, but without drinks or optional tip, is £65 (about $95). There is also a bar menu with snacks and more substantial dishes. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealSpringtime in Europe isn’t just beautiful, it’s affordable. Here are some wallet-friendly excursions to expand your horizons.By Shivani VoraWhat’s better than a spring getaway to Europe? Answer: A spring getaway to Europe at an attractive price. If you’re looking for a bargain, March through May are value-friendly months for a European trip. According to the airfare prediction app Hopper, for example, round-trip prices for tickets from the United States to Europe were an average of $870 in April. In June, the start of Europe’s peak tourist season, that number jumped to $1,110, and in December, that number is $1,050. Also, Simone Amorico, a co-owner of Access Europe, a company that sells private, high-end trips to Europe, said that a European vacation is 30 to 50 percent less expensive in spring, compared with the summer. “A holiday that’s $10,000 in June will cost between $5,000 to $7,000 in April or May, depending on the destination,” he said. Whether you’re on a budget, or just like to make your dollar stretch, you have plenty of options.In Italy’s Lake Como, the 19th-century Villa Flori, built by the Marchese Raimond (whose daughter was one of the Italian general Giuseppe Garibaldi’s many conquests), has a two-night package for two people that includes accommodations in a junior suite with a balcony overlooking the lake, a welcome amenity of two cocktails, two hourlong massages in the property’s spa, daily breakfast and one lunch. Prices start at 700 euros (about $865), and you can book by emailing the property, at info@hotelvillaflori.it. In Tuscany, Il Poggione, a winery set in the countryside of Montalcino, offers visitors a seven-night package in its agriturismo, situated in a restored farmhouse. Guests stay in a two-bedroom apartment with a kitchen, get a private tour of the winery, enjoy a multicourse lunch paired with wines and have access to bikes they can use to explore the region. Prices start around 1,500 euros. Book by emailing the winery directly, at agriturismo@ilpoggione.it.Costsaver’s 13-day Iberian Explorer itinerary, available through the spring, has stops in nine cities in Spain and Portugal, including Barcelona, Madrid, Lisbon, Salamanca and Valencia. Prices start at $1,695 a person, and include accommodations, breakfast each day, four dinners, internal ticket transfers and even hotel tips. Book by calling 866-617-3751 or directly through their website.The Istanbul-based luxury travel company Sea Song has a seven-night private trip to Istanbul and Cappadocia, a region in central Turkey that’s famous for its geological landscape of cone-shape rock formations. The trip includes accommodations in high-end hotels, including the Four Seasons Sultanahmet in Istanbul and the Museum Hotel in Cappadocia. A private car, driver and guide throughout your trip, three-days of guided sightseeing and a private yacht cruise on the Bosporus in Istanbul are also included, as well as a round-trip flight from Istanbul to Cappadocia. Travelers also enjoy a hot-air balloon ride and lunch in a private home in Cappadocia and all breakfasts included. Packages are available from March through early June. Prices start from $2,720 a person. Book by emailing the company directly, at seasong@seasong.com.British Airways Vacations has several hundred airfare-inclusive packages for trips to London and Paris departing this spring from more than 20 cities in the United States. Each option is valid for specific travel dates, and the inventory is updated frequently, so if you don’t see something that works for you, check back later. One recent deal is a trip to London from May 16 to 22, which includes round-trip flights from New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport to Heathrow Airport and five nights’ accommodations in a four-star hotel in Kensington. Packages start at $999 a person, and you can book directly through British Airways.In addition to complete vacation packages, British Airways also offers affordable round-trip flights through the spring to London from gateway cities in the United States. Prices start around $505 and if London isn’t your preferred destination, the airline also has round-trip spring flights from Kennedy and Newark Liberty International Airport to Charles de Gaulle Airport, in Paris, with prices from $430. Expedia, the travel booking site, has several thousand air-inclusive packages to Europe this April and May. Travelers can expect to pay between 15 to 30 percent less for them during these months, compared with June through October, according to Sarah Gavin, a company spokeswoman. One example, available from May 21 to 25, includes round-trip airfare on the low-cost carrier Norwegian Air Shuttle from Kennedy to Stockholm Arlanda Airport and a three-night stay at Nobis Hotel Stockholm, a luxury property in the heart of Stockholm, all for $1,155 a person. If traveling by sea is your preference, the river cruise line CrosiEurope offers a five-day itinerary this spring from Paris to the Norman Coast, with stops in Versailles, Rouen and Honfleur and includes excursions and all meals and drinks. Tickets start at $1,424 a person. Book online at their website.For travelers interested in exploring Portugal, TAP Air Portugal has fares this April from Kennedy to Lisbon Portela Airport starting at $690 round-trip. It’s also possible to fly round-trip to Rome from $674 a person or Madrid from $705 a person and stop in Portugal for up to five nights for free. This stopover program includes discounts at more than 150 hotels, a free bottle of wine at select restaurants, as well as free local experiences such as tuk-tuk rides and free admission to several museums. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealSpringtime, or the “shoulder season” before the temperatures rise and tourists descend, is the ideal time for a budget-friendly New England getaway.By Jessica Colley ClarkeIf peak summer prices at hotels along the coast of New England are cost prohibitive, travelers may want to explore shoulder season deals in April and May. From Nantucket and Cape Cod in Massachusetts to Newport, R.I., substantial savings are available alongside cooler temperatures and peaceful beaches. At the Nantucket Hotel and Resort, rooms are available in April and May starting at $195 per night, compared to $625 per night during the high season. If the weather isn’t cooperating outdoors, there are several indoor activities including yoga classes, massages and board games. Fondue served by outdoor fire pits and an outdoor hot tub are a nice match for cool spring evenings. A three-tiered deck with several fire pits overlooks the Newport harbor at Gurney’s Newport Resort and Marina. During the shoulder season, rooms start at $189 per night, compared to $329 per night during the high season. A complimentary water taxi connects guests to the heart of Newport for strolling along the Cliff Walk or touring the town’s historic mansions. Some of Newport’s mansions are also hotels, including the 33-room Grace Vanderbilt, built in 1909. Before Memorial Day weekend, rates start at $390 per night compared to $600 per night during high season. This boutique hotel has a spa with an indoor pool and a blooming garden terrace where cocktails and boozy Popsicles are served. In Cape Cod, Mass., shoulder season rooms start at $175 per night compared to $445 per night in the high season at the Ocean Edge Resort and Golf Club. Before the summer heat hits, guests can golf, play tennis and utilize free bike rentals at this 429-acre property. For swimming, the resort has two indoor pools, a heated outdoor pool and several hot tubs. AdvertisementBy OSCAR CÁSARESFEB. 7, 2018
The border between the United States and Mexico is in the news every day, in ongoing debates about immigration and spending on security initiatives. But what is it like to visit destinations along the border? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in five pairings of places: El Paso and Ciudad Juárez; Big Bend National Park and Boquillas; San Diego and Tijuana; Nogales, Ariz., and Nogales, Mexico; and Brownsville, Tex., and Matamoros.We were both headed to the bridge, in her case so she could cross back to Mexico after a long day of work, and in mine so I could eat and drink at one of the places I used to go when people still did things like go across the international bridge to eat and drink. She was an older woman, maybe in her mid-60s, and like so many others she lived in Matamoros and worked in Brownsville. My sister, Sylvia, happened to be back in town teaching a cooking class at one of the local museums where the woman cleaned and today had stayed later than usual to help her pack up. Now my sister was asking me to give her a ride to the bridge. It was late afternoon and once she crossed over she still needed to grab a bus to the other side of Matamoros and then walk the rest of the way home.I had pulled up to the curb expecting her to get in the front seat, but she opened the back door to set her purse and two plastic bags with leftovers down on the seat and then sat next to them. It seemed kind of impersonal, like she’d just hailed a taxi, but then again, she was no one I knew. My sister had told her my name but she kept calling me Cesar, which I didn’t bother to correct. We were just going to the bridge.First she thanked me, then asked if it wasn’t an imposition. “De nada,” I said to let her know she was welcome. It was only a five-minute ride through downtown Brownsville. I glanced into the rearview and mentioned that later I was meeting my sister and brother-in-law and we’d also be walking across the bridge. She didn’t say anything and only shook her head and looked out at the discount clothing stores and fabric shops and shuttered storefronts that make up most of downtown, the remains of the recurring peso devaluation and over the last 40 years customers leaving for first one mall and then another. We were still four blocks from the Gateway International Bridge, but from the signs in the windows — Ropa Para Toda La Familia, Casa de Cambio, ¡Precios Bajos Garantizados! — and the cumbias blaring from stores, you might think we had already crossed over.“I don’t know why you and your sister need to go to the other side, with the way things are,” she told me, referring to the sporadic but stunning violence in the turf war between the Zetas and Gulf Cartel for control of this lucrative drug smuggling route into the United States. “The way things are” also includes the armed robberies, sexual assaults, carjackings, murder, extortions, and kidnappings, the traditional kind with ransoms, and the express type, where the victim is driven to various A.T.M.s and forced to “max out” his bank account, which, depending on the current balance, may take a matter of hours or days. “The way things are” means life with La Maña, as the cartel and, in general, the bad guys are known in Matamoros, according to Dr. Guadalupe Correa-Cabrera, an expert on border security and author of “Los Zetas Inc.”AdvertisementMaybe the woman had a point.Matamoros is where in 2010, the Mexican Navy killed Antonio Cárdenas Guillén, the Gulf Cartel leader more widely known as “Tony Tormenta,” hailing down bullets and grenades in a squall of violence that lasted over eight hours. Afterward the government announced the official death toll at six, while the media reported it at 47, but people living in the city, like the woman in my back seat, figured there had to be over 100 dead.“With so much danger,” she said, and muttered something about her grandson, already grown, having disappeared without a trace six years earlier. Even though he’d been living on this side of the river, in Brownsville, to her it all seemed to be connected.AdvertisementBut the reason she thought we shouldn’t go across was the very reason I had come home to the border, to write about how going across to Matamoros had changed from my childhood in the 60s and 70s, my partying days in the 80s and early 90s, to today when it’s difficult to find anyone in my hometown of Brownsville willing to risk crossing over. There are still those brave souls, like my passenger, who make the trip for work or to visit family, to save money on a dentist appointment, on a prescription, maybe even for lunch, so long as they stay on the main drags and clear out before dark.She crossed back and forth out of necessity, to eke out a living at a job that paid better than one she could find in Matamoros. When I crossed it was to see something I couldn’t find in Brownsville, maybe it was the restaurants and bars, but maybe also because when you grow up here, on the border, at least part of your life and memories exist on that other side. You remember your dad taking you across for your first haircut, buying a case of Joyas and hearing the soda bottles clinking all the way home inside the trunk of the Oldsmobile, attending a wedding in Brownsville and then crossing over for the reception in Matamoros, eating at places like Los Norteños with the cabrito aflame in the front window, and your last night in town at Los Portales with its rustic interior and enormous glass case with the embroidered saddle and sheathed sword, your grilled fajitas and costillas sizzling on the hibachi set atop a rickety orange side table.She wasn’t the first to warn me.“Depending on which way the wind is blowing you can hear the balazos,” Dr. Juliet García had told me of the rapid-fire sound of the gun battles taking place across the border. Until 2015, she was president of the University of Texas at Brownsville, now renamed the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, which stands close enough to the river that police once found a stray bullet that had been fired in Matamoros and lodged itself into the exterior of a campus building. Which is another way of saying that what happens on the Matamoros side of the river, good or bad, tends to wash ashore on the Brownsville side.Part of what’s always made Brownsville an attractive destination is its proximity to Matamoros and South Padre Island, only 30 minutes away. But the sound of the balazos has scared some tourists away, especially Winter Texans, those retirees from the Midwest who drive their motor homes south to spend part of the year in Brownsville and other cities north of here, all close enough to the bridges connecting them to Matamoros and Nuevo Progresso and Reynosa, where the drug war is even more intense.Now a few of the restaurants that tourists and locals might have crossed over for can be found in Brownsville. Some, like Mi Pueblito and Bigo’s, still have their original locations across the bridge, but Mariscos De La Rosa, a seafood restaurant, left for good after 22 years and reopened in Brownsville in 2010.“I didn’t decide to move here, they sent me,” Rodolfo De La Cruz, the owner, would later tell me. I went there because several people had told me La Maña had taken over his Matamoros restaurant, something he preferred to neither confirm nor deny. “I’ll never go back. The ones who have never lived through it don’t know what it’s like.”AdvertisementAlong with the restaurants and smaller taquerias have come wealthy Mexican families with the means to relocate out of choice or necessity. Drive the north end of Brownsville, near the country club and other upscale neighborhoods, and you’ll see a minimalist look favored by many Mexican nationals, the box-shaped homes, the symmetrical gardens and ponds, the tiled driveways and queen palms.It makes sense they would escape the danger to live in Brownsville, a city currently listed as one of the safest in the United States, and almost everyone being of Mexican descent and speaking Spanish. Less than two weeks from now, Feb. 22 to 24, Brownsville will celebrate Charro Days, a festival with parades, dances, concerts, regional food and costumes, all celebrating its cultural ties to Matamoros. Back in the day, before security tightened because of Sept. 11 and immigration concerns led to the United States to build the border wall that connects to the bridge, the Grand International Parade would toddle down the middle of downtown and turn onto the bridge where the floats crossed into Matamoros until they reached the main plaza and wound back to the bridge. Charro Days, now in its 81st year, offers some testimony to our roots being deeper and more lasting than the current violence on one side of the river or the shadow cast from an 18-foot high steel beams of the border wall on the other.“This moment will pass, will run its course. It’s part of the ebb and flow of living on the border,” Dr. García reminded me. And she’s right. We forget Matamoros was here 70 years before there was a border, before there was a Brownsville. We forget Matamoros survived Mexico’s War for Independence, the Texas Revolution, the Mexican-American War, the French Intervention, and the Mexican Revolution. We forget Matamoros endures.In the end, my sister, brother-in-law, and I did walk across the bridge, all 700 feet from here to there, and then to García’s, a popular restaurant and bar, maybe another 300 feet from the Mexican Customs office, in an area some people refer to as the green zone. We sat upstairs, by the window overlooking the manicured avenue, and later, three other friends drove across to meet us there. About the only peril we encountered was not being able to hear one another talk because the lounge act was warming up for that evening’s performance, something our waiter was able to remedy by shuttling us off to the dining room. There we ordered another round of margaritas, a las rocas, and our meals. The menu came with the prices listed in pesos and dollars. Someone at the next table had ordered the steak Diane and the waiter flambéed the meal before the table. It wasn’t Los Portales, it wasn’t Los Norteños, it wasn’t where we’d be if we could be where we really wanted to be, but for a moment, we could imagine it was like old times.Two weeks later I asked my sister to help me contact the woman I’d taken to the bridge. Until she sent me her number I still didn’t know her name. I wanted to ask the woman what exactly she’d seen living in Matamoros and if she’d heard anything about her grandson, but she was too afraid to talk, of something happening to her family if they, Los Mañosos, found out, and none of my assurances that her name wouldn’t be printed here could convince her to answer my questions.“Que Dios te bendiga,” she said as she hung up, “May God bless you,” which was the same thing she had told me a couple of weeks earlier when I said we would keep crossing the bridge.Oscar Cásares is the author of “Brownsville: Stories” and the forthcoming novel “Where We Came From.” He teaches creative writing at the University of Texas at Austin.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2018, on Page TR9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Bridge Now Crossed Less Freely.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »
Personal Journeys By                     
CAREN OSTEN GERSZBERG

FEB. 16, 2018
Motoring along the mouth of the Aghanashini River, our torsos stuffed inside bulky, bright-orange life jackets, we passed a fishing village and a patch of sandy shoreline called Paradise beach. “There! There!” shouted a woman from the back of the skiff, pointing to a dolphin she spotted in the distance. Our young local captain cut the motor. Watching, we waited in silence. And when our group’s yoga teacher, Larissa Carlson, began to chant the sound of om — a Sanskrit word symbolizing the union of body, speech and mind — and the rest of us joined in, creating a collective, continuous round of the humming syllable. As if awakened by the vibrations of our call, a pod of dolphins emerged, leaping through the air, one after another. This, I thought, is going to be an unusual journey.While a trip to India had been on my bucket list for years, it didn’t seem imminent. But then, strewn on the mudroom floor where the mail makes its way daily through a rectangular slot, I came across the fall 2016 catalog for the Kripalu Center for Yoga & Health. Flipping through its pages, I stopped abruptly on page 20 when I saw the words: “Kripalu in India.”A nonprofit yoga and wellness center in Lenox, Mass., Kripalu, now in its 40th year, hosts nearly 50,000 guests a year who come for its wide variety of programs. Over the past decade, I’ve been an occasional Kripalu visitor, attending writing workshops, yoga classes and several courses connected to my training as a life coach. Standing in my kitchen with catalog in hand, I suddenly began to imagine myself as one of Kripalu’s first guests to experience its mission of “whole-person education for body, mind, heart and spirit” away from its Berkshires home.Last May, along with my 23-year-old daughter, Nicole, I traveled to India for a week of yoga, meditation and ayurveda, an ancient Indian medical system aimed at keeping the body and mind balanced and healthy. We spent our first night at the Alila Diwa hotel in Goa. Set among rice paddies and coconut groves, the infinity pool was ideal for cooling off in the intense heat — summer in India lasts from April to June, and humidity is high in the south, with temperatures in the mid-90s. Early the next morning, we met our group under a giant banyan tree for introductions and gentle yoga, led by Ms. Carlson, a Kripalu yoga teacher and former dean of its ayurvedic school.Our group consisted of 14 guests — 13 women, ranging in age from 23 to 82, and Ms. Carlson’s fiancé, David Lipsius, who, as the former Kripalu chief executive, was involved in the early planning stages of the retreat. Each of us had traveled to India for our own reasons. Taking a break from stressful lives. Learning about ancient health practices. Connecting to our breath and body through meditation and yoga. Because she was between jobs and her mother had invited her, in Nicole’s case.AdvertisementMy initial purpose for joining this trip was to discover and explore the only place where practicing meditation and seeking balance may be as common as cellphone use. But this trip took on a new meaning and significance after the sudden passing of my brother three weeks before our departure. On this retreat, I found a space to grieve, a connection to human kindness and a deepening appreciation for self-care — body, mind and spirit — in a safe, nurturing environment.A three-hour bus ride — which involved an adventurous pit stop in an elderly woman’s stone outhouse — led us to our home for the next six days, the SwaSwara resort in Gokarna on India’s southwestern coast. As we approached the hotel, our travel guides, Kyra Sudofsky, of the United States-based Academic Travel Abroad agency, and Sandeep (Sandy) Minhas Singh of the India-based Worldwide Adventures, asked us to fill out a three-page self-assessment chart. Munching on giant cashews, I circled my answers to a battery of questions, covering habits and characteristics ranging from taste preferences and skin temperature to sleep patterns and vein prominence. Each response fell into one of three columns labeled vata, pitta and kapha.AdvertisementWe handed our questionnaires back to Ms. Sudofsky and Mr. Minhas Singh, who announced that along with three body treatments, our retreat included a consultation with an ayurvedic doctor. The doctor would be tailoring our treatments after identifying our dosha — the Sanskrit term used for a person’s biological constitution, which is made up of a combination of elements: vata (air and ether), pitta (fire and water) and kapha (earth and water).Nicole and I checked into our room, one of 24 clustered Konkan villas made with local laterite stone, clay tiles and thatched roofs. Our villa had its own mini grass courtyard, a bathroom and shower open to the sky, an enclosed air-conditioned bedroom and a second-floor deck ideal for practicing yoga, napping or taking in the black-faced langur monkeys that catapulted from tree limb to limb. Unpacking our pricey leggings and fitted tank tops, we answered the door for a hotel worker who delivered two pairs of off-white cotton drawstring pants and matching boxy tops — a yoga apparel set for each of us. We joked at the idea of putting them on, coming to realize after one yoga class the benefit of sweating in those loose, breathable garments rather than our own.Four miles from Gokarna village, SwaSwara resort sits alongside the Arabian Sea and extends across 26 acres, although more than half of its land is left untouched and protects the surrounding ecosystem. Devoted to sustainability, the hotel, its farms and swimming pool use only harvested rainwater — accumulated each year during the monsoon season — which is then treated and filtered.chinapak.1 mileNew DelhiGokarnaindiaMahabaleshwarTemple GokarnaGOAGokarnaindiaSwaSwaraParadise BeachOm BeachArabianSeaMap data by OpenStreetMapFEB. 16, 2018
Entering the ayurveda building for my scheduled consultation on our arrival day, I was greeted by Dr. Firoz Varun, a thirtysomething, mustached man, whose wife, Dr. Kripa Krishnan, is also one of the resort’s three staff doctors. After taking my pulse and blood pressure, he asked me if I had any “body disturbances.”“If you mean injuries, I have a few,” I answered, a bit confused. We discussed my tight muscles, hip pain and hypermobility, and how lifestyle, diet and relationships are all influenced by our dosha. Dr. Varun went on to explain that every person has a combination of the five elements — fire, earth, water, air and ether — but some combinations are more prominent, determining your primary, and often a secondary, dosha. Reaching for the questionnaire I’d completed on the bus ride, Dr. Varun marked in all capital letters: Pitta-Kapha.To beat the intense heat, our days began with yoga at 6 a.m. Mats were waiting when we entered the yoga shala, Sanskrit for house, and Ms. Carlson led us in breathing exercises, meditations, chanting and poses to awaken our bodies. She encouraged us to pause and be mindful of the sounds — we heard many chirping kingfisher birds — smells and sights outside the open windows. For cooling down the body’s temperature, Ms. Carlson taught us sheetali breathing, during which we exhaled through a curled tongue or gritted teeth. Her teaching and crisp voice were a consistent, calming presence in a place where the heat, aromas, sounds and flavors felt, at times, overwhelming. “I’m here to invite in reminders to be and not just do, to pause and take time to reflect,” she said. “It’s an invitation to slow down and taste test India with some Kripalu-style yoga.”AdvertisementWith more limber bodies and quieter minds, we went each morning from yoga to breakfast at the Cocum, the open-air dining room at the center of the resort — named after the reddish-purple fruit used in aruyvedic medicine to treat sores, improve digestion and lessen arthritis pain. All meals were included in our retreat, and breakfast included a daily selection of eggs to order, oatmeal and freshly cut fruit. In an effort to stay hydrated, I refilled my water bottle frequently from the large water tanks located at the yoga shala and domed meditation hut. I quickly learned, though, that ayurvedic doctrine recommends lukewarm water for optimal absorption into the body, so at meals, the water is served slightly warm with added natural flavors, such as fenugreek or cumin, that changed daily.Food — what, when and how much — plays an important role in ayurveda. Lunch and dinner at SwaSwara — served at either the Cocum or by the beach in a shady grove called the Beach Grill — began with a juice of the day (blueberry-lime blast anyone?), followed by an appetizer such as cucumber peanut salad or garden almond gazpacho, a choice of two main dishes, like fish curry cooked in Indian spices and cocum, or vegetable korma made with mixed vegetables, coriander, mint and coconut paste. Desserts were lacking in chocolate for my taste, but some, like ginger-baked banana and date squares, went over well with guests. The food is organic and every meal consisted of fresh, locally grown or sourced ingredients — mainly vegetables and fish — with a plated amount meant to leave you satiated, but not full, which, according to ayurveda, is easier on digestion.Our days at SwaSwara were unhurried and spacious, sprinkled with yoga, a late-morning group activity — bird-watching, nature walk, boat ride — a body treatment, a swim in the pool, or a walk along Om beach, where cows amble aimlessly, leaving hoof prints in the sand alongside those of vacationers’. Gathering in the meditation hut in the late afternoon, our Kripalu group — save for those who were napping — sat for a guided meditation or a gentle yoga class, led by Ms. Carlson or a resident teacher. I tried hard not to doze during a yoga nidra class led by Jayalakshmi Moily, whose melodic voice brought me right to the intended dreamy state of consciousness between waking and sleeping.On Thursday morning, we left the hotel grounds for an outing to Gokarna village, a 15-minute ride via tuk-tuk, a three-wheeled motorized rickshaw. Our guide, Matthew Raj — who doubles as SwaSwara’s art teacher — led us to Mahabaleshwar, a sacred 4th-century Hindu temple and pilgrimage site; to the Koti Tirtha, a sacred water tank used for ritual bathing; and to some shops where we could buy mala bead necklaces, traditionally used in prayer and meditation, and pretty fashionable in yoga and meditation circles.Thursday is market day, and we joined the meandering cows and throngs of locals, perusing the fresh fruits, vegetables and mounds of ginger piled atop tarps on the ground. Mr. Minhas Singh gave each of us 100 rupees (about $1.50) to buy some fresh ingredients, which the SwaSwara chef would use later that afternoon in a cooking demonstration. I spent 60 rupees on a kilogram of purple eggplants, and the rest on crisp, white daikon radishes. Nicole and another guest, Dana Rhoden, a publicist from Miami, pooled their cash to buy some cauliflower, a pricier choice than mine, costing about 150 rupees, or $2.30.After our morning in the crowded village, returning to SwaSwara was a chance to fall back into serenity. That afternoon, I was scheduled for a rejuvenation body treatment, with the addition of murivenna oil, made from a blend of herbs, which Dr. Varun selected because, he said, it increases circulation, and would help heal my muscle and joint soreness. All three of my treatments were given with four hands by Anchu Ajikrishna, a petite 20-year-old massage therapist, and an assistant. I held in my laughter as the assistant farted loudly — in ayurveda, passing gas is encouraged for colon health — while heating herbs and oil over a small flame. Ms. Ajikrishna tied a disposable undergarment around my waist and guided me to sit on a stool, before placing her hands over my head to chant a Sanskrit prayer, which, translated by Dr. Varun, asks “the unknown supreme God and great physician to heal the body from all miseries, body and mind.”The four hands swept in unison up and down my body — front and back — in what felt like a choreographed dance during each treatment. Once the oil rubbing or salt scrubbing part was over, Ms. Ajikrishna instructed me to wash my face and body in an outdoor shower with green mung bean powder, an herbal exfoliant used to cleanse the skin without removing the oil’s benefits. Dry and wrapped in a green robe, I was led back to the stool where Ms. Ajikrishna had recited the prayer. While I sipped a cup of herbal tea with honey, she rubbed rasna churna powder — a mix of plant roots and herbs — into my scalp to maintain the temperature of my body. To finish off the treatment, she placed an orange bindi (a dot, in Sanskrit) made from sandalwood paste, at the center of my forehead, an additional ayurvedic strategy for cooling down the body in the summertime heat.Our group had its final gathering in the meditation hut on Saturday afternoon, where Ms. Carlson asked us to reflect on our experience and share what we hoped to take home with us. “I’d like to make regular space for a yoga practice that is gentle and nurturing, and not one where I am pushing my body too hard,” I said. A few of us shed tears, touching on feelings of loss and resilience. “As the baby of the group, I’ve gained so much from the wisdom of these women who have shared some of their life experiences with me,” said Nicole, the youngest guest by nearly two decades.On the morning of our departure from SwaSwara, I unintentionally woke up at 4:30 a.m. Like the dolphins who leapt from the water earlier in the week, I felt some sort of magnetic pull from the outside. Trying not to awaken Nicole, I put on clothes, grabbed a flashlight and made my way along a path in the darkness to Meditation Hill, an open-air cliffside structure with straw mats and a view overlooking the Arabian Sea and Om beach. I sat down, closed my eyes, and listened to the waves, thinking of my brother, and the healing and nurturing this place provided. I opened my eyes and the morning light was just beginning to shine.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2018, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Place to Reflect, Rejuvenation Included.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byThe 52 Places TravelerI never imagined that my main takeaway from the Bolivian city, where women have struggled for equality, would be one of female empowerment — thanks to everyone from chefs to wrestlers.By Jada YuanMaybe it was oxygen deprivation, huffing my way through a mountainous metropolis 12,000 feet above sea level, but on my first walk through La Paz, Bolivia, I’m not sure I saw a single man. The women, though, were ubiquitous — and gloriously so. Mostly indigenous, of Aymara and Quechua origin, they had an inimitable sartorial flair, in jaunty bowler hats, tiered skirts and colorful cloth satchels that hauled everything from vegetables to babies on their backs. At times, the streets were packed with so many bulbous wool hats — round on top, short of brim — it felt like wading through a river of female Charlie Chaplins.Lore has it that this distinctive headwear, known as a bombín or sombrero de chola paceña (La Paz hat), is a relic from British railway workers in the 1920s. A shipment came in that was too small for men’s heads, or the wrong color, so the importer added feminine adornments and sold them to women instead. Bolivia has a majority indigenous population that, before the inauguration of the current (and first indigenous) president, Evo Morales, in 2006, was subject to systematic discrimination. Those hats became a way for cholitas (as indigenous women here are called — a softened version of the term “chola,” which means “pretty lady” but has a derogatory connotation) to find kinship through their shared choice of dress. “I feel pretty in it” and “It’s part of my identity” were some of the answers I got when I asked cholitas about their hats, for which they paid 500 bolivianos (about $73) and up — a small fortune. I’d come to La Paz — part of my yearlong trek following The Times’s 52 Places to Go list (the city came in at No. 38) — expecting to shop for alpaca textiles and to get altitude sickness. I never imagined that my main takeaway would be one of female empowerment, not just through inspired fashion choices, but also the visible import of women’s work across local culture.Bolivia is not known as a bastion for gender equality. The country has the highest rate of physical and sexual violence against women in Latin America, according to a 2012 Pan American Health Organization survey. The rate of femicide — women killed by men — routinely spikes above 100 per year. “Even though right now there’s a growing feminist movement of the young millennial generation, we still live in a chauvinist society where women are murdered by their spouses,” said Carola Andrade, a 22-year-old journalism student who offered to show me around. “But it was worse in the past. I think through time we’re going to change it.”A peculiarity of that inequality is that almost every tourist-facing industry in La Paz seems to be dominated by women. As I walked around Mercado Rodriguez, one of the biggest food markets in the city, I passed maybe 50 stalls, none of which seemed to have a male purveyor. At another big market, Mercado Lanza, every person I saw selling fruit salads or avocado toast was a woman. “I think that our society has educated us girls thinking that there are things we cannot do or that only men can or should do. So you notice that at work, but also in the market,” said Lorena Calderon, a 24-year-old journalism student who became one of my guides. “I would say it’s because men stay in the land to work and women come to the city to sell,” adding: “I think we are empowered because we have worked hard to earn a position.” (Men also seem to drive most taxis and microbuses — a great, if confusing, form of ground transportation that costs around 30 cents a trip.) As a solo female traveler, though, I felt the constant presence of women in the absence of men to be incredibly calming. The city has a reputation for pickpockets and scams (fake taxi drivers taking passengers to A.T.M.s and forcing them to get out money, for one). Never once did I fear for my safety. That was true at the Feria 16 de Julio, Bolivia’s largest flea market, held on Sundays and Thursdays in La Paz’s adjacent sister city, El Alto. Largely indigenous, El Alto sits on the Altiplano highlands above La Paz, which is itself built in a canyon in the mountains of a landlocked country — and looks like no city I’ve ever seen. Skyscrapers line the valley floor. Houses climb up and over cliffs. A snowcapped peak, the Illimani, looms over all, like a protectorate. A ride to the Feria on the Mi Teleférico cable car system, installed in 2014, offers a view of all of this, for less than $2 round trip. Take the Rojo line up, then the Azul across, just to gawk at the market’s vastness. “They say you can buy anything to build a car here — tires, engine parts,” said Ms. Andrade as we wandered through booth upon booth hawking pieces of rusted metal. Turns out the market sells whole cars, too, as well as sugar cane juice, fried trout and brand new Lacoste polos for around 14 bolivianos, or about $2. (If you want a llama fetus to ward off bad luck, though, you have to go to the Witches’ Market, or Mercado de las Brujas, downtown.) Over the course of my visit, I met my two journalism student guides, Ms. Andrade and Ms. Calderon, neither of whom has a boyfriend or wants one; an architect, Bianca Irina Salazar; and Marsia Taha, who is 29 and one of the head chefs at Gustu, La Paz’s top restaurant. It is now a part of a growing food scene that includes the high-concept vegan restaurant Ali Pacha, and Popular, specializing in elevated traditional dishes using 100 percent Bolivian ingredients. They’re only open for lunch and the wait to get in when I was there was over an hour.Founded by Claus Meyer, the Danish proprietor of Noma in Copenhagen, Gustu began as a cooking school to teach Bolivians about their local ingredients, to give them a reason to celebrate their cultural heritage, and to lift young people out of poverty by giving them jobs in hospitality. Ms. Taha was one of the school’s first employees, and studied cooking in Copenhagen; she is the only remaining Danish employee. My first time at Gustu, I had a three-course meal for $34, including drinks and tip, which included the best-cooked trout of this trip. The second time, Ms. Taha, on her day off, took me through the restaurant’s adventurous 20-course tasting menu, which included a beef heart skewer you cook on a hot stone yourself, alligator ceviche, and tacos made with crunchy ants atop an avocado emulsion and beetroot leaf. I had to close my eyes and squeeze Ms. Taha’s hand as I ate it. Verdict: Not bad, but I have a deep phobia of bugs and I’m not sure I could do that again. Nowhere is La Paz’s curious dominance of women so pronounced as at cholita wrestling matches, held near El Alto market on Sunday and Thursday nights. “The cholitas started to fight because they wanted to demonstrate that the women are stronger than the men. The one important rule is don’t throw things at the wrestlers, because they will respond and you’re not going to like it,” announced Alba, our guide, aboard a bus that was taking around 40 gringos to the “VIP” section. El Alto was also the first place in Bolivia to hire a cholita police officer and a cholita newscaster. About 17 years ago, Juan Mamani, a wrestling promoter, was looking for a gimmick to draw in audiences and figured women going at it in traditional clothing would be as good as his other attraction: dwarves. Soon, though, cholitas began to turn to the ring as a way to take out their frustrations on the indignities they were suffering in the world and at home. Eventually, they formed their own female-centric league, which is where I found myself sitting ringside that night. The warm-up act: men in masks tossing each other around. Then the announcer introduced the main attraction. The crowd roared. Out from behind curtains, ushered in by four dancing women in hula skirts, came a kind of super-cholita. She had on a bowler hat and fringed shawl, which she shed for grappling, as did her opponent — while the crowd shouted “Beso! Beso!” (“Kiss! Kiss!”). They threw each other up against ropes and slammed each other to the ground, petticoats flying in an impressive display of choreographed acrobatics and playacting. One wore a white skirt, which my observant seatmates realized seemed to always signify the “good” cholita, while yellow signified the “evil” combatant. Match after match, the narratives stayed the same. Evil usually beat up good, then good got a second wind and conquered evil. The referee usually meddled too much, and would get slammed to the ground — but he deserved it. Any gringo boy sitting in the front row was subject to a sloppy kiss from one of the wrestlers. Any water bottle in reach of the performers would likely get snatched, with its contents spit back in the audience’s faces. Locals, who sat in bleachers a little farther from the action than the gringo V.I.P.s, were wont to throw plastic soda bottles at performers’ heads. Some even got out of their seats and tried to get in on the body slamming themselves. It might have been the greatest night of entertainment I’ve experienced this trip. No matter how the match went down, a woman always won. “I tell anyone who comes here to go to Uyuni,” Ms. Andrade said of the world’s largest salt flats — an incredible, 4,000-square-mile expanse of level ground covered with mineral deposits from prehistoric lakes, about 12,000 feet above sea level. Three-day tours book up months in advance, but the one-day trek I found at Kanoo Tours was an affordable delight. It began with a $137 early morning flight to Uyuni (bought at the Boa Airlines offices), and by 10 a.m. I was off in a 4 x 4 with five other travelers and our Spanish-speaking guide (at $40 for the day, half the price of an English-speaking one). We stopped for photo ops at the Cementerio del Trenes, a graveyard of abandoned and corroded trains from the early 20th century, but most of our time was spent having our minds blown by those vast fields of salt, covered in shallow water, and so reflective and still that it was hard to tell where the ground ended and the sky began. (You might recognize the landscape as the stand-in for the white- and red-soil planet Crait from “Star Wars: The Last Jedi.”)The safe and WiFi-enabled overnight bus back to La Paz was $39, for a total trip cost of just over $200. Had I taken the bus both ways, it would have been around $110. (If you’re taking a taxi from the bus, make sure the driver is legit. Again: scams.) No. 1: Bolivia was the only South American country on my trip where travelers must have an entry visa. Rest easy, you can get one in the airport. Bring a printout of your hotel and flight reservations, a copy of your passport, passport photos, and $160 in crisp $20 bills. (I saw the attendant reject nearly all of the cash from the woman in front of me.) Altitude meds are available for purchase near baggage claim, though I gave up taking mine after it felt like I was experiencing death by 1,000 internal pinpricks. No. 2: The Bolivian-Chilean border, where you’ll find Salar de Uyuni, is in a total cell and internet dead zone. For mirror-effect photos, go during the wet season, between December and March. Bring waterproof footwear; that salt looks fluffy, but is painful to walk on. Slather SPF everywhere and wear a hat. Be prepared for a drastic temperature drop at dusk. Bring everything you need to take endless pictures — and hand the camera to your driver; they’re excellent photographers. Ride on top of the SUV at sunset; you’ll never forget it. Jada Yuan will be traveling to every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.Previous dispatches:1: New Orleans2: Chattanooga, Tenn.3. Montgomery, Ala.4. Disney Springs, Fla.5. Trinidad and St. Lucia6. San Juan, P.R.7. Peninsula Papagayo, Costa Rica8. Kuélap, Peru 9. Bogotá, ColombiaNext dispatch: East Cape, Los Cabos, MexicoAdvertisement

      By JUSTIN SABLICH

JAN. 30, 2018

How savvy a traveler are you? Here are a few questions, culled from recent articles in our Travel Tips collection, to test your travel smarts.
Related Article
The following is a way you could potentially get T.S.A. PreCheck or Global Entry for free:Spending a certain amount on SkyMall catalog purchases.Getting accepted to certain credit card programs.Joining T.S.A.’s new frequent traveler points program.For a budget-friendly trip, the Frugal Traveler suggests avoiding destinations that have been recovering from Hurricanes Maria and Irma.TrueFalseWhen planning a trip to Norway, consider staying in a luxury hotel, even if you’re on a budget.TrueFalseThe following can ensure that your medication does not get confiscated at an airport:Do research in advance, as laws vary by country.Know the names and amounts of active ingredients.Carry all medication in original, clearly marked containers in your carry-on luggage.Know the names and amounts of active ingredients.All of the above.The standard rules for liquid carry-ons don’t apply to medications in liquid or gel form.TrueFalseThe amount you pay for a charter flight could be a factor in how safe it will be.TrueFalseBrazil has lowered its visa application fee for Americans from $160 to:$40$80$120It still costs $160.Lynda Turley, an adviser at Alpine Travel of Saratoga, specializes in wine-focused trips, suggests limiting the amount of wineries you visit in one day to:1234As many as you can.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCheck InThe Kimpton Hotel Born has an unbeatable location near Union Station. People can enjoy a complimentary wine hour, and dogs get a warm welcome (and a bed).By Kathryn O’Shea-EvansFrom $329Hotels that pretend to be dog friendly yet charge extortionate fees are my literal pet peeve. Not so Kimpton, which is perhaps the paw-friendliest chain. Downtown Denver’s 200-room Kimpton Hotel Born opened in August 2017, with a Wild West-goes-modern aesthetic, and when we checked in with our papillon, Huckleberry, we were greeted with peanut butter and molasses treats. That was nearly where our pampering ended, though, as some amenities the hotel’s website promised — including Tesla rides within a two- mile radius and an art tour of the hotel’s collection curated by the Museum of Contemporary Art Denver — were not available, nearly three months after opening (both are there now). The hiccups may have been symptomatic of growing pains: Kimpton has launched upward of eight properties a year since International Hotels Group acquired the brand in 2015.Unbeatable. The hotel sits adjacent to Denver’s dazzlingly revamped 1914 Union Station, so guests are within walking distance of Tattered Cover Book Store; the Cruise Room, a 1933 Art Deco time warp of a bar modeled after the Queen Mary; and Sassafras American Eatery in the Highlands neighborhood, which serves the best Southern breakfast I’ve had west of Dollywood.Designed by Colorado-based firm Semple Brown Design, our King Deluxe room (translation: standard category) felt large at around 350 square feet, with Frette linens, down bedding, a wood and steel barn door sliding over the closet; blonde walnut and pine wood walls and ceiling added necessary visual warmth against the exposed concrete columns. Our floor-to-ceiling windows overlooked the Beaux-Arts roofline of Union Station and whisper-quiet Wewatta Street; rooms with views of the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains are available upon request. Not long after check-in, a hotel staffer brought up a faux-fur-topped dog bed and lion head bowls for Huckleberry, which he promptly ignored.The most timelessly beautiful part of the room by far, our bathroom had a backlit LED mirror, quartz stone countertops, and gleaming fixtures by Waterworks. Toiletries were in eco-friendly full bottles by Atelier Bloem — a brand created for Kimpton by Matthew Malin and Andrew Goetz — including shampoo scented like oolong tea and geranium conditioner. My two complaints: the shower’s water pressure was abysmal, and there was no bathtub.Guests pay just a penny to visit to the Museum of Contemporary Art Denver, a block away. There’s a 1,000-foot gym, a fleet of public loaner bikes and yoga mats in each room. Boulder-roasted Ozo Coffee awaits in the lobby every morning; a complimentary evening wine hour includes Colorado beers and appetizers like smoked duck breast with dried fig. Our in-room mini bar held Coloradan items, like Avery Brewing Company beer and Rocky Mountain Sunscreen. Sign up for the free IHG Rewards Club for free high-speed Wi-Fi.The hotel’s first floor restaurant, Citizen Rail, is nearly as sceney as Denver gets, with an open kitchen where much of the menu is cooked on a wood-fired grill. Many guests take their drinks into the quiet lobby to cozy up by the flickering gas fireplace. We ordered room service, and while the woman who delivered our dinner was an absolute delight, a couple of the items the kitchen sent up were not. I suppose there’s a reason the expression is “now you’re cooking with gas” — the “ember-melted” apples in my apple crumble were still crunchy. My Nightmoves cocktail — with rum, Cynar, vermouth and black walnut bitters — tasted, frankly, like acetone smells (not great). But the bone-in smoked short rib with tempura fried green beans was excellent, and my french fries arrived hot — an all-too-rare feat of hotel room-service wizardry.Despite its kinks, Kimpton Hotel Born is a worthy stay in downtown Denver, thanks to its locale, Instagrammable collection of local art and inventive amenities for both human and hound alike.Kimpton Hotel Born; 1600 Wewatta Street, Denver; hotelborndenver.comAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byHEADS UPSedona attracts hikers scaling its buttes and New Age pilgrims seeking the fabled vortexes. In recent years, the high desert has drawn a more cultured crowd, wine lovers. By Elaine GlusacThe road to Page Springs Cellars near Sedona in central Arizona dips and rolls over the highland desert terrain, a stony, shrub-dotted landscape terminating amid more unexpected flora, grapevines. On a recent afternoon in its busy riverside tasting room, I found the winery’s owner, Eric Glomski, popping the cork on a malvasia bianca with surprising richness.“People’s expectations are so low, we always surpass them,” said Mr. Glomski, one of the area’s winemaking pioneers who established Page Springs Cellars in 2004.Sedona, gateway to Arizona’s red rock country 90 minutes drive north of Phoenix, attracts hikers eager to scale its striated buttes and New Age pilgrims seeking the fabled vortexes — or energy centers — said to be squired in the rocks. Additionally, over the past decade, the high desert has attracted a more cultured crowd: wine lovers. Today, 18 wineries operate in an area known as the Verde Valley where the vines are stressed by rocky soils and altitudes above 3,200 feet moderate temperatures to produce mineral-accented, juicy fruit.Producers in the region have applied to become an American Viticulture Area, which recognizes its distinct growing conditions. A map of the Verde Valley Wine Trail shows them largely clustered in the close-set towns of Jerome, Clarkdale, Cottonwood and Cornville.Though Spanish missionaries grew grapevines in Arizona in the 16th-century colonial era here, the state’s contemporary production is considerably younger.“Around 1999, I started looking at the terrain in Jerome and the surrounding foothills and realized it looked a lot like places in Spain and Italy,” said Maynard James Keenan, the lead singer for the rock band Tool who released his first Caduceus wines, made in Jerome, in 2004.He later joined with Mr. Glomski in 2007 in founding Arizona Stronghold Vineyards, now the largest winery in the state. (Mr. Keenan is no longer a partner.)Skeptics question how a state like Arizona, more associated with saguaros than Sangiovese, can produce wine, but vintners here say rain and frost are their greatest foes.“In Arizona, you’ve got to go up to find vineyards,” said Corey Turnbull, the winemaker at Burning Tree Cellars, located in a former auto dealership in Cottonwood. “People think it’s cactus and tumbleweed but Arizona is very diverse, with pine forests and snowcapped mountains. You’ll find vineyards between 3,200 to 5,200 feet.”Though wine is now produced in all 50 states, winemakers in Arizona aim to nurture a comprehensive industry, starting with training. Established in 2009, the Southwest Wine Center, a division of Yavapai College in Clarkdale, teaches winemaking and runs a tasting room. In 2014 the operation moved into a repurposed racquetball court beside 13 acres of vineyards where students experiment with different varietals, many of them Spanish or Italian.“Our climate is comparable to the Mediterranean where it’s warm and dry, except that we use elevation in place of the ocean to get 30-degree temperature swings,” said Michael Pierce, the director of oenology and viticulture programs and an instructor at the school.Some graduates move on to Four Eight Wineworks, a Clarkdale winemaking cooperative established by Mr. Keenan in 2014 to allow fledgling vintners to share tools such as stemmers and wine presses, thus avoiding costly start-up investments.The first winery to “graduate” from the co-op, Chateau Tumbleweed in Clarkdale sources its fruit from Willcox in southern Arizona, the largest grape-growing region in the state and, as of 2016, recognized as a new American Viticultural Area.“There was a huge resurgence in the early 2000s in this industry,” said Joe Bechard, the winemaker among four partners in Chateau Tumbleweed as he poured samples of his 2015 albariño under a disco ball in the tasting room. Compared to just over 100 wineries in Arizona now, he said, “There were 10 in 2005 when I started. It’s gone from a joke to people seeing it as serious and competitive.”Like Mr. Bechard, many area vintners pour wine in their tasting rooms, creating a personable tasting trail set against a grand backdrop of sandstone cliffs and the distant Mongollon Rim, the edge of Colorado Plateau that moderates much of the weather here.Among the most scenic, the boutique D.A. Ranch in Cornville produces only estate-grown wines on seven of its 250 acres and offers tastings of its plush syrahs at a log lodge by appointment.It is one of the few area wineries to exclusively grow fruit locally. Most local wineries followed Sedona’s tourist crowds here. Cottonwood, about 19 miles southwest of Sedona, has flourished in the wine boom as tasting rooms and restaurants have revived the once struggling Main Street.“Cottonwood was a dead town, and now we’re a gourmet destination for Phoenix,” said Sam Pillsbury, a New Zealand-raised filmmaker and owner of Pillsbury Wine Company, which operates a tasting room in Cottonwood, though its winery is in Willcox.In November 2016, Mr. Keenan opened Merkin Vineyards Tasting Room & Osteria in Cottonwood, serving charcuterie and house-made pasta along with his line of Merkin wines. He eventually plans to plant vines nearby.“We think people are coming around to low-alcohol, elegant-with-dinner wines,” said Mr. Keenan. Despite their youth, Arizona wines, he added, “are more Old World than you would expect.”AdvertisementBy COURTNEY BONDFEB. 7, 2018
The border between the United States and Mexico is in the news every day, in ongoing debates about immigration and spending on security initiatives. But what is it like to visit destinations along the border? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in five pairings of places: Brownsville, Tex., and Matamoros, Mexico; El Paso and Ciudad Juárez; Nogales, Ariz., and Nogales across the border in Mexico; San Diego and Tijuana; Big Bend National Park and Boquillas, Mexico. “You’ve arrived,” announced our obliviously cheerful GPS navigator, as my buddy and I stared, white-knuckled and slightly teary-eyed, at a padlocked gate barely illuminated by the headlights of our rented S.U.V. We’d already traversed 9.2 hair-raising miles of a twisty, sandy unpaved road that an early-December freeze had turned into icy slush, our tires shifting side to side, our high beams no match for the pitch-black darkness.And now we were wondering what it was going to be like to spend the night in the car, in a vast, sparsely populated patch of far West Texas. But, after a few deep breaths and a modicum of quarreling, we carefully reversed course and slipped and slid 9.2 miles back to the main road, taking comfort in the jackrabbits playfully crossing our path in a single bound and Don Williams serenading us with “I Believe in You” on the satellite radio (“I don’t believe … that right is right and left is wrong, and north and south can’t get along”). Back on blessed pavement, and this time following the explicit instructions I had confidently ignored, we made our way to Terlingua Ranch, a community nestled in the snow-dusted Christmas Mountains, to a gorgeous rental house (where, incidentally, the heat would malfunction and we’d sleep fully clothed in a 41-degree bedroom, blue with cold and tickled pink to be alive).It’s hard to convey how humbling it is to visit this little pocket of the United States-Mexico border, a place the National Park Service calls “one of the last remaining wild corners of the United States.” Boosters market Texas as a “whole other country,” but the land within and without Big Bend National Park really is. One of the least-visited of the federal park system, Big Bend is four hours by car from each of the nearest international airports, in El Paso and Midland. You have to really want to get here (or live here, which makes you a different breed altogether). And those who do, those inclined to make the long trek to the park and its attendant ghost towns (Lajitas, Study Butte, Terlingua), are seekers of a sort, not entirely unlike the homesteaders and fortune hunters drawn to these badlands long ago.AdvertisementBut nowadays the treasures are silence and darkness and undeveloped natural beauty and all those other things that seem to be in short supply of late. If you’re longing for a respite from this era’s relentless beeping and buzzing and yelling and “Dear God, what now?” news alerts, what better place than one with limited cell service and unreliable electricity, where you step outside in the morning and hear nothing but the grumbling of your stomach and the muffled flap of a bird’s wings high above?Big Bend’s dramatic confluence of river, desert, and mountains makes it easy to wax poetic with words like “majestic” and “epic,” and even those fall short. There’s enough in these 800,000 acres for a lifetime of exploring, the tangible result of a landscape that has borne witness to shallow sea and coastal plain and volcanic upheaval. Eons of geological time are visible in everything from the walls of a towering canyon to the dull, dusty stone at your feet that hides the lacy remains of some ancient sea creature. From the grassy banks of the Rio Grande to the cactus-studded expanse of the Chihuahuan Desert to the oak-and-juniper-carpeted Chisos Mountains, Big Bend is a dream for photographers, a paradise for birders (more than 400 species), the promised land for amateur (and professional) geologists. Huge swaths of land are accessible for day hikes and backpacking (200 miles of trails), camping and river trips. More specifically, there’s the Fossil Discovery Exhibit, where you can gaze upon a life-size replica of the skull of a Bravoceratops (“wild horn-face”), pieces of which were unearthed in the park in 2011.AdvertisementAt the Boquillas Hot Spring, situated smack-dab against the Rio Grande, you can sink into a 105-degree pool contained by the remnants of an early 1900s bathhouse and dangle an arm over the rock boundary into the swift-moving, considerably colder water as it passes you by on its 1,900-mile journey to the Gulf of Mexico. (Some advice: Decide when you’re going to visit ahead of time, so that you can don the proper attire in advance. There are no changing rooms, and the vault toilets are like something out of “Trainspotting.” I’d like to take this moment to apologize to whichever park ranger found the bra I left behind in my haste to get out of there.)At any location in or near the park, you can simply look to the ever-changing sky, particularly in the evening, when fiery sunsets of pink and orange and dusty blue give way to an unfathomable darkness spattered with a breathtaking bounty of stars, including a clearly visible Milky Way (Big Bend is a stargazing mecca, officially designated by the International Dark-Sky Association); like me, you may have the stupefying realization that this is what the night sky actually looks like. If you do nothing else but motor around in your car, you’ll have a blast. On our various drives, my friend and I spotted a little family of javelina lumbering across the blacktop, a coyote leaping effortlessly over a fence, numerous roadrunners dashing headlong across the pavement, and a golden eagle resting in some creosote along the side of the road, as if patiently waiting to cross. Finally, where else can you, at least for now, cross the border into Mexico in a rowboat?The Rio Grande (or the Río Bravo del Norte, from a southerly perspective) is all that separates Texas and Mexico within the boundaries of the park, winding its way for 118 miles between forbidding canyon walls; making the abrupt southeast to northeast shift that gives Big Bend its name; and changing in color (chocolate milk in one light, celadon in another) and flow (sometimes grande, often pequeño).There’s hardly a more delightful way to pass over a border; on our first of two trips, we had barely rounded the bend of the descending trail from the Boquillas Crossing Port of Entry before a young man in a “Houston Strong” T-shirt was rowing his way across the river to get us in a waterlogged metal boat, the “seats” covered in what looked like bathmats. It’s $10 round-trip for this makeshift ferry, which hauls its tiny load of camera-wielding tourists back and forth all day during official crossing hours. Once on shore it’s up the hill by foot, burro, or bed of pickup truck to a trailer, where your passport is stamped and you’re granted formal entry into Boquillas del Carmen, the colorful, sparsely settled remains of a former mining town.Borders are always porous, particularly the riverine kind, and so it goes for this one. “Maps that split country into zones of topography, climate, vegetation, and such things have much more neatly sweeping lines of demarcation than nature has usually been willing to go along with,” wrote John Graves, Texas’s beloved chronicler of land and lore, and that goes for people too. For decades the Boquillas border crossing was decidedly informal, illegal but never monitored, a conduit for supplies, a lifeline for loved ones residing on opposite sides, a day’s amusement for tourists. But it always was an international boundary and as such subject to the day’s prevailing sociopolitical anxieties. The crossing was shut down in 2002, in response to Sept. 11, and reopened 11 years later, this time with automated passport control. And now looms another threat.In Boquillas proper, the specter of the wall seems to be just that, haunting the dish towels and koozies for sale on every corner, their hand-embroidered wildflowers, roosters, and javelinas accompanied, in slightly crooked letters, by a simple phrase: “No wall.” A succinct “Trump no bueno” was all we got from a congenial gentleman who walked us into town, that and the declaration in small black letters on his white baseball cap: “The border makes America great” (that message brought to you by El Paso’s Beto O’Rourke, the Democratic congressman running against Senator Ted Cruz in November). The people here exhibit a sort of seen-it-all-before serenity, which seems appropriate, as this battle royal is going down a few miles from rock formations whose strata reveal the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary, i.e., a visible record of the extinction event 66 million years ago.AdvertisementExistential musings aside, a visit to this village of a few hundred people feels much as it has for years. We perused the blankets and molcajetes at the shop at José Falcon’s, then took a seat on the colorful patio of the adjoining restaurant for cheese enchiladas, clay copitas of sotol and sweeping views of the Sierra del Carmen range (and, incidentally, a fellow skinning rabbits and goats next door). The joy in a trip to Boquillas, other than its old-world charm, is the hospitality of the people, allowing a visitor brief proximity to the kind of community you’d expect to find in a remote, only recently electrified town 150 miles away from the nearest city. At Boquillas Restaurant, the proprietor offered to give us the souvenirs we happily picked out before realizing we had run out of cash (had too many of the excellent margaritas). We promised we’d return the next day, which we did, to find our items waiting for us in a neat pile on the counter.“Here’s a song about building bridges instead of walls,” said singer-songwriter Trevor Reichman, the featured talent the night we visited the Starlight Theatre, Terlingua’s main watering hole and music venue. As in Boquillas, you can walk the length of this onetime mining camp in a couple of minutes. And you’ll meet eccentric locals who possess the same equanimity that comes from living in isolated and unpredictable terrain. You’ll even detect the same age-old tension between insider and outsider, though the boundaries are a little less fraught. This seemed to me best encapsulated by a sign on the door of a nearby shop that trades in rocks and cactuses and sundry dusty things: “Keep investors, hipsters, and trust-fund babies out of Terlingua. Just look at what happened to Marfa.”Of course, right next to that is another sign, this one directing customers to just slide a check or cash under the door if there’s no one minding the store. Out here one ranch flies the “Don’t Tread on Me” flag; next door is “Just Resist.” But it seems, to this outsider, at least, that once again community trumps ideological differences among people who look out for one another and demonstrate a surprising forbearance of city folk unaccustomed to the extremes of weather and limits of technology, city folk who awake night after night to the howling of coyotes and, in the morning, find their prints in the frosty dust outside the door.Over an excellent made-from-scratch breakfast at the Bad Rabbit at the Terlingua Ranch Lodge (“Do you want your grits thick or runny? Eggs soft or hard?”), our server warned us away from an “unimproved” road to a nearby city, because of course we hadn’t learned our lesson from the start of our trip. “You’ll have an adventure whether you plan it or not,” she said, after we regaled her with our back-road brush with death (from embarrassment, likely).She’s right. Heed warnings regarding rapidly changing weather and full tanks of fuel. Follow directions, literal and otherwise, regarding flashlights and high-clearance vehicles, snakes and scorpions. Avoid the entire area altogether during the more temperate weeks of Spring Break and Thanksgiving (or, as our white-hatted friend in Boquillas put it, “the fiesta of the turkey”). Do all that and you’ll have a wonderful experience, against a backdrop of almost inconceivable magnificence, along a stretch of border where, for now, you can climb to the top of a bluff pockmarked with perfectly round mortar holes left by ancient civilizations, look down on the gently moving river, and wave to people on the other side, a stone’s throw away and a world apart.Courtney Bond is a senior editor at Texas Monthly.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2018, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: A Hot Spring and a Warm Welcome.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byOn the BorderBy Cecilia BallíThe border between the United States and Mexico is in the news every day, in ongoing debates about immigration and spending on security initiatives. But what is it like to visit destinations along the border? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in five pairings of places: Brownsville, Tex., and Matamoros, Mexico; El Paso and Ciudad Juárez;Big Bend National Park and Boquillas; San Diego and Tijuana; and Nogales, Ariz., and Nogales across the border in Mexico.“Please don’t write another story about drugs,” Sigrid Maitrejean, a volunteer guide at the Pimeria Alta Museum inside the old city hall in Nogales, Ariz., beseeched me in a playful tone. It was not the only time during my three-day visit to the region that people would make a similar plea: enough of the endless media stories and political rhetoric about the supposedly dangerous United States-Mexico border, which only serve to keep visitors away.Residents of this town of 20,000 souls wanted me to see the Nogales they see: a place steeped in layers of rich history and culture, which maintains a uniquely special relationship with its namesake and sister city across the border, Nogales, Sonora. And indeed, in the two Nogaleses — or Ambos Nogales, as locals refer to them — I found the most quintessential of all the border cities.I love the concept of twin cities on the border. Maybe it’s because I grew up in one, or because I’m a twin. I love the idea of two worlds that coexist and intermingle, and in fact, depend on each other for survival.The descendant of families that were already living in the Texas border region when the international boundary was drawn up in 1848, I grew up almost in two countries, spending Sundays across the border immersed in the Mexican universe of my abuelitos and tías and primos. We didn’t talk about it like we were visiting another country — we went to el otro lado, the other side. I liked that my sisters and I could choose what we loved about each of our two upbringings, and creatively mix languages and systems of meaning.There are 16 sets of sister cities that line the 1,950-mile United States-Mexico border, and as a journalist who has focused on the region, I’ve experienced all but two of them. While I’d been in Nogales before to report on immigration and the border wall, what I learned on this visit is that calling Ambos Nogales “one town in two countries” may be a slight exaggeration, but it’s a very apt metaphor. And this is what makes it a fascinating place to visit.“This is one city,” Ms. Maitrejean said. “This is one place that was cut in half. That’s essentially what happened.”That explanation is more or less true.In 1841, when the territory was still part of Mexico, a family by the last name of Elías received a land grant from the government it established as Los Nogales de Elías, a name derived from the walnut trees that blanketed what today is known as the Santa Cruz River Valley.The Spaniards had utilized that mountain pass during the previous two centuries when they explored the Pimería Alta, as northern Sonora and southern Arizona were known, west to California, and it’s believed indigenous groups had traveled the same path for millenniums. Nogales, then, has formed part of an important northern migratory route far before the United States became concerned with border walls.The land was not part of the original territory gained by the Americans at the end of the Mexican War, but the United States government acquired it in 1853, through the Gadsden Purchase, to build the southern transcontinental railway line. Foreseeing the boon in international commerce that intersecting railroads could bring, two Russian brothers named Jacob and Isaac Isaacson set up a trading post in 1880, which was renamed Nogales by the U.S. Postal Service soon thereafter.To support the new trade, a community emerged on the Mexican side of the line that people also referred to as Nogales. Unlike the Texas border, however, where the boundary is defined by the Rio Grande, Arizona’s is a land border, and in Nogales, the border was an unobstructed street called International, half of which technically lay in one country, half in another. Around it, a seemingly singular town spread north and south.But managing an international division, it turned out, wasn’t simple. The first fence on the United States-Mexico border went up here — after the Mexican government called for it.The United States government had grown wary after the Mexican Revolution began in 1910, and relations had tensed as each side accused the other of banditry and incursions. The United States set up a military camp in Nogales, Ariz., and General John J. Pershing was dispatched to chase after the Mexican revolutionary leader Pancho Villa. The Sonora governor put up an 11-wire fence, which got torn down four months later.In 1918, after the two cities went to war for a day because an American guard shot a Mexican citizen at the border crossing, authorities on both sides agreed to construct a permanent chain-link fence between them.But as life resumed, the fence became a technicality, not a reflection of how people related across the line. During Prohibition, Mexicans built saloons that straddled the border, so that patrons could drink so long as they were on the correct side of the building.Ms. Maitrejean remembers how this tight-knit existence endured as she was growing up. In the 1950s, a Mexican shop on International Street would put up a huge blackboard to transmit the World Series as nogalenses watched the games excitedly from the United States side. On Cinco de Mayo, city leaders would build a platform over the fence and crowned a binational queen as a joint parade marched across the border.Eventually, migration from other parts of Mexico grew through the area, and stricter United States enforcement followed. “The border crossing was getting more difficult,” said Ms. Maitrejean, “and, of course, once they put up our horrible Vietnam landing-mat fence in the ’90s, that was really the end.”Made of 10-foot panels of corrugated steel that the United States Army had used to land helicopters in the Vietnam War, that was the fence that locals most resented, for it blocked the view they had always had to the other side. Then in 2011, the federal government replaced it with a rust-colored steel bollard fence, encased in cement footing with four-inch slats between the bars. Now, the two Nogaleses could see each other again, somewhat. Soon, families that didn’t have the right paperwork to cross started coming to either side on weekends to catch up with each other across the bollards.Today, Jessy Zamorano, the owner and operator of Baja Arizona Tours, is struck by how her clients, many of whom are from the northeast or Midwest, react when she takes them to the fence. “Women are very much more sympathetic,” she said. “They will look at it, and some find it quite shocking and obtuse. But many of the men say, ‘build it higher.’”When they spot some of the families reaching between steel bars to hug each other, or holding up a newborn baby for their relatives on the other side to meet, she said, “women will frequently cry.”Driving south the 60 miles from Tucson, where the closest commercial airport is, the highway rises thousands of feet as the desert scrublands of the lower Sonoran desert give way to hilly terrain ringed by the Santa Rita, San Cayetano and Tumacacori mountains.The region nurtures some of the best bird-watching in North America and an abundance of wildlife, such as javelinas, rattlesnakes and hawks. There are many activities in the region that can be paired with a visit to the two Nogaleses, including hunting for deer and mountain lion; fishing at Peña Blanca Lake; wine tasting and hiking in Patagonia and Sonoita; and golfing in Tubac, Kino Springs or Rio Rico.A worthwhile stop is the artists’ colony of Tubac, where you can learn about the Spaniards who first explored the region at the Tubac Presidio State Historic Park and nearby Tumacacori National Historical Park, as well as hike or ride a horse along the same trail that Juan Bautista de Anza traveled by foot with 240 women, men and children on his 1,200-mile journey to establish the first nonindigenous settlement at San Francisco Bay.But in my view, as a lifelong student of the border, the cultural treasure is Nogales itself.Here, the kind of tourism you’re doing changes, and you train your eye and ear to catch things you wouldn’t see or hear in other parts of the country. In Nogales, I heard perfectly bilingual speakers mix Spanish and English more as an artful form of expression than a linguistic deficiency (“le pide a la señorita que nos traiga un sautéed spinach?”).Almost everything is bilingual and international. Twice, I assumed that individuals with fair skin and Anglo last names were white, only to learn they had at least one Mexican parent. I met Mexicans who had dual citizenship and owned homes on both sides of the border, and white residents who spoke excellent Spanish. The Paul Bond Boots shop that has made the traditional custom boots of classic Western films is staffed by Mexican craftsmen.“I sit here every day and I marvel at it. I totally do,” said Nils Urman, the executive director of the Nogales Community Development Corporation. A native of Germany, he married into a local family in the late 1970s. “I think it’s the most fascinating thing I’ve seen in my life, and I’ve been here 38 years.”And there’s more diversity in the city than American and Mexican, he said. “This community’s got French, it’s got Irish in it, it’s got Greek in it, and they’re on both sides of the border.”Economically, Nogales today still thrives on international commerce. It depends on the logistics and transportation services industry that supports maquiladoras in Sonora and on the import of produce, which makes up half of the Mexican vegetables and fruits consumed by Americans.It also relies heavily on Mexican consumers — Nogales, Sonora, has 450,000 residents to its 20,000 — and those shoppers are coming over less and less. Mr. Urman said annual pedestrian crossings into Nogales, Ariz., have dropped to 2.7 million from 7.7 million in the past 10 years.John Doyle, the mayor, said various factors have led to the decline, including the devaluation of the Mexican peso and increased wait times at the ports of entry because of heightened border security. Still, he said, President Donald Trump’s talk of building a longer and heavier border wall is of less concern to him and the mayor of Nogales, Sonora, than his roiling against international trade.“We’re more worried about where the Nafta agreement’s gonna end up, you know?” he said. “But even so, everybody’s getting creative and looking ahead in case of it. Everybody’s working harder.”On the other side of the dividing line, the steel fence gives way to a protest of walls and borders. The government has permitted some local artists to put up creative works that make bold statements, while others have informally drawn on it with spray paint.One piece, titled “Paseo de Humanidad” (“Parade of Humanity”), features a procession of extraterrestrial-looking steel figurines marching toward the border with emblems on their bodies that evoke the economies that drive people to migrate (one figure is made of maize, and another bears an “Hecho en Mexico” stamp, possibly alluding to the maquiladora plants that displace people from their home regions). Another installation consists of 60 small wooden crosses that lean against the fence, each one symbolizing a migrant who has died crossing the border.One painting, which makes a haunting image at night when the streetlights reflect the wall’s bars onto the street below it, simply shows the boyish face of a teenage boy. It memorializes Jose Antonio Elena Rodriguez, a 16-year-old who authorities say in 2012 was throwing rocks to distract Border Patrol agents as two males tried to drop back down to the Mexican side of fence after smuggling bundles of marijuana. One of the agents shot through the fence and killed the young man on Mexican land.The border and its themes naturally infuse some of the artistic production of Nogales, Sonora, because of the way it shapes the artists’ daily lives, said Elena Vega, a local poet and photographer who also experiments through painting, dance, music and spoken word.“In the art world, it’s always like that — some people live over there and come play here, or else we go and present our work over there,” she said. “So, it’s a coming-and-going. Maybe my work has that essence, but it’s not that I’m looking for it. It happens, it emerges from the work.”While Mexico, like the United States, sometimes looks down upon its border cities, Ms. Vega said it is creative precisely because it’s a fluid, heavily traversed zone. “I think it’s the border environment. There’s more openness, it’s more diverse.”Even as downtown Nogales, Sonora, also struggles to remain vibrant with fewer Americans crossing over, the rest of the city is thriving, seemingly growing by the day and producing not just art, but a new gastronomic culture, said Alex La Pierre, the program director for the Border Community Alliance. The alliance, which works with organizations in both countries to increase social investment and improve Americans’ understanding of the border, offers tours for Americans who prefer to visit with a guide. One of the tours introduces them to nonprofits including a migrant shelter. Another takes them to a craft brewery and to Calle Hermosillo, a long street that is home to many new restaurants and bars.“Sonora, in addition to having the best beef in all of Mexico,” Mr. La Pierre said, “also has some of the best seafood in Mexico, because they’re adjacent to the Gulf of California, which Jacques Cousteau called ‘the aquarium of the world.’ What I tell our guests is that Sonora really has the best of surf and turf.”On a warm Saturday in early January, as I walked the downtown zone, averting my eyes to avoid the many vendors who will immediately try to pull you into their curio shops, I felt the energy change immediately. Mexican border cities are always a little busier and more alive than their American counterparts. Cars backed out of parking spots from every direction, and people moved briskly along the sidewalks. Amid endless pharmacies and dental offices catering to mostly-gone Americans, local life pulsed and thrived.As I turned a corner and made my way toward Calle Internacional, the street that once singularly marked the border, to view the wall art, I glimpsed a young woman on the American side of the fence who was reaching through it as she lovingly stroked the head of a teenage boy squatting on the other side. And I remembered Jessy Zamorano’s comment about tourists reacting when they witness these displays of humanity.It seems something fantastic happens when you draw a line on the ground: People almost instinctively reach out across it toward each other. And that’s a hard thing to appreciate from anywhere else but the border.Cecilia Ballí is a writer-at-large at Texas Monthly and has also written for Harper’s Magazine. She lives in Houston.AdvertisementBy JULIÁN AGUILARFEB. 6, 2018
The border between the United States and Mexico is in the news every day, in ongoing debates about immigration and spending on security initiatives. But what is it like to visit destinations along the border? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in five pairings of places: Brownsville, Tex., and Matamoros, Mexico; Big Bend National Park and Boquillas; San Diego and Tijuana; Nogales, Ariz., and Nogales, Mexico; and El Paso and Ciudad Juárez.As I sat at the market in Ciudad Juárez on a weekday in January, it all seemed so familiar: The clanking of the reusable glass bottles; the greeter hollering for visitors to sit in his corner of the restaurant; the smell of grease meandering through the upstairs eatery where Axl Rose was screaming at me from a jukebox. All this while vendors downstairs sold T-shirts with the image of the late singer Juan Gabriel emblazoned across the chest while others negotiated with visitors over the price of a homemade poncho featuring the logo of the Dallas Cowboys.The images of daylong excursions to Ciudad Juárez with my father as a child made their way into my memory, where they collided with the flashbacks of a teenage me sharing buckets of beers with friends who were convinced that going south of the border for a day was more important than sitting through biology.I was one of tens of thousands to cross into Mexico from El Paso that week, challenging the notion that lawlessness in Mexican border cities keeps Americans at bay (but gone are the days of oral declarations; a passport is now required to re-enter the United States as the federal government continues to beef up border enforcement).Even in tougher times, many of us never stopped coming here. It is because there are thousands of El Pasoans like me whose ties that bind them to Ciudad Juárez are familial or economic, or both. The effects reverberate well north of the Rio Grande. Texas is Mexico’s No. 1 trade partner, and the El Paso customs district saw $85.5 billion in two-way trade with Mexico, from January to November 2017. That is the second-highest total in the United States behind Laredo’s $270 billion.AdvertisementIn the heart of Ciudad Juárez I crossed the street to where the parishioners from the centuries-old Catedral de Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe were walking through the adjacent park, the Plaza de Armas. Guards were closing up shop at the city’s old government office, now the Centro Municipal de las Artes.AdvertisementBoth are open to the public, and are just two of the museums and tourist attractions city officials and street vendors hope will lure visitors back to a city considered by lawmakers and human rights groups as one of the world’s most dangerous just six years ago.Two blocks east on Avenida 16 de Septiembre is a museum that captures the spirit of one of the greatest episodes in Mexico’s history, the Museo de la Revolucion de la Frontera. The museum occupies what was the customs building during the civil war that raged in Mexico from 1910 to 1920. Recent renovations have transformed it with a modern sleekness.Photographs of Mexican revolutionary figures like Francisco Madero, Venustiano Carranza and Francisco “Pancho” Villa in different areas of revolutionary Juárez highlight the importance of the city during the war. There is also an emphasis on how the Americans were responsible for some of the mayhem. Such is the case with the exhibition dedicated to Gen. John J. Pershing, who led his so-called “Punitive Expedition” in pursuit of Villa after the Mexican rebel leader led his forces into Columbus, N.M.And although the writers John Reed and Ambrose Bierce are perhaps the most widely known Americans who were fascinated enough by the war in Mexico to become a part of it, the M.U.R.E.F. instead dedicates space to local photographers and writers like Melville Jean Herskovits, Harvey Kiefer and Esther Eva Strauss, whose curiosity and dedication to photojournalism helped document the war for readers in Texas and beyond.After leaving the museum and walking back toward downtown’s Paso Del Norte bridge, I realized there remains a sense of adventure associated with going into Ciudad Juárez, which I assume could still be slightly overwhelming for new visitors. Though violence has decreased significantly, the sight of a federal police truck carrying masked soldiers clutching semiautomatic rifles can still be somewhat jarring to visitors who are not accustomed to it.I spotted two of these conducting routine patrols before my last stop on this day trip: the Kentucky Club. The bar has been in business since the 1920s and was frequented by Americans in need of a beer, whiskey or tequila during Prohibition. It has retained its reputation as a laid-back place for patrons on both sides of the Rio Grande, and was one of the few pubs that didn’t shut its doors during the drug cartel wars that raged in the city from 2008 to 2011. You can stay here for a beer or two, or one of their famous margaritas, or spend hours on end reading about its famous patrons and watching the flat-screen televisions above the hand-carved wooden bar. As the evening wears on, available seats are fewer and the music louder.Farther away from the cathedral and the museums Ciudad Juárez offers up more for visitors willing to take a cab, Uber or drive themselves into the city.AdvertisementVilla del Mar or Los Arcos are just two of the restaurants here that offer affordable seafood dishes.Villa del Mar was a family favorite growing up. The owners opened a branch in El Paso after the drug violence began but the original location is still up and running in Ciudad Juárez.This was my first time at Los Arcos, recommended by a family friend. A delectable dish of bacon-wrapped stuffed shrimp, a beer and a bottle of water was less than 350 pesos, or about $19.Closer to the Bridge of the Americas and Chamizal Park, Viva Mexico! stages a two-hour-long pageant that celebrates everything from Mexico’s indigenous roots to its vaquero culture with song and dance. That follows a buffet dinner that has become so popular that reservations are recommended.Much of El Paso’s identity is rooted in its remoteness. It is in a different time zone than most of Texas. It is closer to the capitals of three other states — Arizona, New Mexico and Chihuahua — than it is to Austin. It is surrounded by mountains and desert that offer few clear distinctions as to where the city in Texas ends and the one in Mexico begins.I was born and raised here. My mom’s house is in the Austin Terrace neighborhood and my father’s house was two blocks from the eastern foothills of the Franklin Mountains, in a part of the city that used to be called Chivas Town (so named because it was where goat farmers lived before the neighborhood was incorporated by the city).After moving away for school and work for a number of years, I realized I had not taken advantage of what the Franklin Mountains had to offer. So when I came back, I set out to explore the hiking trails and mountain peaks my friends brag about on social media during their bike rides and other excursions.The mountains have rugged options for outdoor entertainment—they’re one of the premier spots for paragliding in the United States—and the Wyler Aerial Tramway takes hikers and other visitors to Ranger Peak, 5,632 feet above sea level. From the top, Fort Bliss is visible just beyond the middle-class neighborhoods of Central and Northeast El Paso.AdvertisementThe base, one of the largest in the country, is home to the First Armored Division of the United States Army and spreads across Texas and New Mexico on more than a million acres of federally owned land. Its history is on view at the Old Ironsides Museum on the base, which features exhibits about the history of the base and the division, and rationing efforts by Americans during World War II. A plaque next to an Abrams M1 tank honors Sgt. Israel Devora Garcia, who was born in Zacatecas, Mexico, and raised in nearby Clint, Tex. He died in combat operations in Iraq in 2006. (Admission to the museum is free. Visitors must get a pass to the base before entering; it’s easy but can be time-consuming on weekends.)Fort Bliss is one reason so many El Pasoans are so patriotic (one of the city’s main highways, Route 54, was designated the Patriot Freeway during the first Gulf War).Like Ciudad Juárez, El Paso is experiencing its own downtown renovation, which includes the successful return of minor league baseball to the city. The El Paso Chihuahuas, the Triple-A affiliate of the San Diego Padres, who play at Southwest University Park. The nearby Deadbeach Brewery is just one of a half-dozen or so trendy spots that offer up craft beers and food-truck meals (at Deadbeach, I like the I.P.A.).El Paso is as well known for its Mexican food as it is for its mountains. It is not that people claim the enchilada or menudo was invented here, they just believe they are better in El Paso than anywhere else. Exhibit A: the L & J Café, which has been around since 1927. Out-of-towners are quick to say the chicken molé is the best they have ever tried, but for me the chicken enchiladas are second to none.The Tap Bar is what I consider one of the best haunts in El Paso, where it’s hard to tell if it is 8 a.m. or 8 p.m. once you’re inside. The jukebox will go from Los Tigres del Norte or Marty Robbins to Metallica within minutes.In addition to mountains, desert sunsets and the legend of Pancho Villa, residents of both Ciudad Juárez and El Paso have something the rest of the other cities along the Rio Grande don’t: New Mexico.Less than 10 minutes from downtown El Paso is the Sunland Park Racetrack and Casino. On the way there, people cross south of the Rio Grande but remain in the United States. On my first visit I won enough to gamble and drink for free, which wasn’t bad for a lazy Sunday.Because it is on the border, the entertainment doesn’t consist of Elvis impersonators or a tribute to the Rat Pack. It is something with more of a local flavor — a live mariachi band.Julián Aguilar reports on politics and border affairs for The Texas Tribune.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2018, on Page TR6 of the New York edition with the headline: Music, and Patriotism, Ring Through These Hills.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byTrendingAvoiding non-biodegradable sunscreen may be the one solution to coral bleaching travelers have the most immediate and direct influence over. By Elaine GlusacThe coral reefs around the Turks & Caicos Islands are a major tourist attraction, and Mark Parrish is trying to make sure the visitors he takes there don’t kill them with cosmetics.He co-owns Big Blue Unlimited, a tour operation that guides snorkeling, kayaking and other adventurous excursions around the islands. The company’s website states that, “Big Blue will ONLY ALLOW the use of 100 percent biodegradable sunscreen on all of our trips. Non-biodegradable sunscreen IS NOT TO BE USED on Big Blue trips.”“We make it mandatory, which is easier said than done,” said Mr. Parrish. “The key is telling people well in advance, putting it on the website and saying this is our policy and giving them a chance to shop at home.”After decades of learning that sunblock is vital to a healthy beach vacation, consumers may wonder what’s wrong with their Coppertone. But recent studies that link the active ingredients in protecting skin from damaging ultraviolet rays to coral bleaching has led to a global push for more reef-safe sunscreens.Chemicals in sunscreen that come off while swimming or travel through sewage systems when washed off in the shower are “bigger than climate change,” in causing coral reef damage, according to Craig Downs, the executive director of the Haereticus Environmental Laboratory based in Clifford, Va., which has studied the effects of sunscreen on coral reefs.In 2015, Mr. Downs led a team that reported that oxybenzone, a common chemical found in sunscreens, is toxic to the symbiotic algae that live within corals, which provides their color and performs other vital duties, and also stunts the growth of corals. A 2008 European study published by Environmental Health Perspectives concluded that sunscreen promotes viral infection in corals that can lead to bleaching. They estimated that up to 14,000 tons of sunscreen is deposited in the world’s oceans each year.Last year, lawmakers at the state and county levels in Hawaii unsuccessfully proposed legislation to ban sunscreens containing oxybenzone. The Consumer Healthcare Products Association, a trade association representing makers of over-the-counter medicine, and the Personal Care Products Council, representing the cosmetics and personal care industries, oppose the ban, arguing that sunscreen saves lives by preventing cancer.“The proposed sunscreen bans in Hawaii avoid the real causes of coral decline according to scientists from around the world: global warming, agricultural runoff, sewage and overfishing,” the groups noted in a joint statement.While environmental advocates continue to push for legislation, the travel industry, both in Hawaii and beyond, has responded with grass-roots campaigns designed to educate travelers on how to protect themselves from sunburn without contributing chemicals to the reefs. Aqua-Aston Hospitality, which manages over 40 resorts in the Hawaiian Islands, distributes information on oxybenzone and its role in coral bleaching as guests check in along with a sample of chemical-free sunscreen from Raw Elements considered “reef-safe.” It also stocks free sunscreen dispensers with the biodegradable lotion.The campaign began last April at 16 island locations and is being expanded to all of the company’s resorts, including those in Florida, Lake Tahoe and Costa Rica this year. In March, the company will begin distributing complimentary kits including a bottle of the sunscreen to guests who book using the promo code ALIST.“Everybody wants to do the right thing, they’re just not aware they might be contributing to coral bleaching,” said Theresa van Greunen, Aqua-Aston’s spokeswoman who oversees corporate social responsibility.Outrigger Resorts in Hawaii also provides free samples of reef-safe sunscreen to guests. It has used All Good products, which rely on the mineral-based sunblock zinc oxide, in the past and plans to debut its own Ozone line of environmentally friendly sunscreen this year.In Mexico, areas popular with snorkelers such as Xel-Há on the Rivera Maya and Chankanaab Beach Adventure Park in Cozumel ban the use of non-biodegradable sunscreen. At Xel-Há, visitors with unapproved sunscreen can swap their brands for samples of safe products and get their own back when they exit the park.Resorts are helping spread the word. At the seven Solmar Hotels & Resorts in Los Cabos, guests may purchase biodegradable sunblock on-site and are advised in advance that it is the only kind permitted in area preserves such as Cabo Pulmo National Marine Park.Screening sunscreen for environmental friendliness requires getting familiar with chemicals including oxybenzone, octinoxate and methyl paraben. Haereticus Environmental Lab publishes a list of chemicals to avoid. Mineral sunblocks including zinc oxide and titanium dioxide that are “non-nano” in size are considered safe. Formulations below 100 nanometers are considered nano and can be ingested by corals.Researchers agree that sunscreen isn’t the only culprit in coral bleaching, pointing to rising sea temperatures caused by global warming among other threats. But it may be the one travelers have the most immediate and direct influence over.“This is one impact that we can control,” said R. Scott Winters, the chief executive officer of the Coral Restoration Foundation, a nonprofit conservation organization based in Tavernier, Fla. “If we are to be successful in bringing coral reefs back to a healthy state, it is incredibly important that people visiting them choose sunscreens that do not contain oxybenzone. More important, choosing to cover up with UV protective clothing, rash guards, and hats can also reduce the amount of sunscreen needed.”Sun protection clothing from lines including Patagonia, Coolibar and REI are rated with UPF, or Ultraviolet Protection Factor, figures in the same way that sunscreens use SPF, Sun Protection Factor, numbers.Clothing is considered as effective as sunscreen, said Dr. Henry W. Lim, the president of the American Academy of Dermatology. “The challenge is it doesn’t cover 100 percent of the body’s surface,” he said.For reef specialists like Mr. Downs, less is more.“For a woman in a bikini,” he said, “85 percent of her body will be covered in sunscreen. She can reduce that by 50 percent just by wearing sun shirt. That’s progress.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPersonal JourneysShe didn’t start the trip as a big fan. But after visits to Penny Lane and Strawberry Field, she feels fine.By Liz RobbinsWhen I suggested to my Beatles-obsessed husband that we should go to Liverpool, I won points for the rest of our marriage. What I didn’t realize until later, when I was standing on a certain lane behind the shelter in the middle of the roundabout, was that I would actually enjoy myself. Very strange.I had wondered if, in making such a pilgrimage, there would be a place for the nonreligious. But when slanted sunbeams fell on Eleanor Rigby’s headstone as if on cue, I shivered a little and smiled.My husband, Ricky, knows all the answers (at least when it comes to the Beatles), so I let him engage in trivia contests with our tour guide in Liverpool. Freed from the tug of minutiae, I was able to marvel in the phenomenon of the Fab Four: how one band united the world, and continues to do so, 50 years after the release of “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band.”Everyone loves a good origin story. Even better — at least for me — was the epilogue.Where does one begin the story of the Beatles in Britain? At the crosswalk, of course. Last summer, we headed to Abbey Road in London just hours after we stepped off the plane at Heathrow Airport to recreate the scene on the eponymous album (minus the Volkswagen). A few hundred people were doing the same.Since Abbey Road Studios is still a working recording studio, it was closed to the public. We had to settle on visiting the modest gift shop in the building next door. There, we posed in front of the wall painted with the “Sgt. Pepper” album cover and Brazilian tourists took our picture. My husband bought some guitar picks for his guitar teacher. That was the extent of our entire Beatles souvenir purchases, purists that we are.Outside, we met Shari and Richard Stegman, from San Diego, who were in England celebrating their 30th wedding anniversary. Like us, they were on their way to Liverpool. Not like us, since we were looking to save money, they would be staying at the Hard Day’s Night Hotel in Liverpool.They snapped several pictures of us crossing Abbey Road and we did the same for them. I learned that their wedding song was “Here, There and Everywhere.” They equated the Beatles, Mr. Stegman said, with “a lifetime of love.”Ricky, who first started playing the Beatles on his guitar at age 13, approved of their choice. “That’s a very beautiful song,” he told me. “The lyrics are very romantic and if you pay attention to the chord structure, it’s cyclical. The ending is also the beginning, it’s very clever.”The next day, we stopped in the men’s fashion district to see the former headquarters of Apple Corps, the Beatles’s multimedia operation. The band bought the building at 3 Savile Row in 1968 and played their last public concert there on the roof on Jan. 30, 1969. Two guitars in memorabilia display cases just inside the landmark building are the only signs of the band’s former home. Around them, salespeople bustled. It is now an Abercrombie & Fitch Kids, and salespeople bustled by, indifferent to history.I yearned for authenticity. In Liverpool, Beatles tourism brings in £82 million, or about $116 million a year, according to a 2016 study commissioned by the City Council. I didn’t know whether to expect depth or Disney. We got the latter the first afternoon, glimpsing our first Magical Mystery Tour Bus, and, along the dockyards, a Yellow Submarine houseboat for rent. Outside the Beatles Story museum, Sgt. Pepper, himself, stood hawking tickets. His buttons looked worn.The museum was actually a decent primer for the uninitiated, showing the musical roots of the band, with replicas of the Casbah Coffee Club and the Cavern Club. It prepared me for the next day’s show: the Fab Four Taxi Tour. I had reserved months in advance, informing the company that my husband was not their average tourist.They sent Gareth Byrne, 57, in a black cab with the name “Michelle” on the side. We were soon treated to his deadpan humor, encyclopedic memory and an accent that begged for subtitles. He considers himself a Scouser, a true native of Liverpool. Don’t call him a Liverpudlian, for that sounds too high-class. A Scouser is named for the city’s lamb stew, Lobscouse, that sailors used to eat on the docks, he explained.Throughout the next three hours, Gareth would be part college professor, part stand-up comedian and full-time wedding photographer who insisted he knew how to capture the best angles, taking multiple shots to be sure. We really weren’t in a position to argue. Turned out, he was right.On a cool, cloudy early afternoon, we started slowly by visiting the registrar where John Lennon’s parents got married, the outside of the hospital where John was born, the pub that he first frequented. From there, we saw Ringo Starr’s first home, a rowhouse boarded up and still slated for renovation by the city with other empty houses in the Welsh Streets neighborhood, but stalled in bureaucracy.In contrast, Paul McCartney’s brick childhood home was well-preserved from the outside. The inside was off limits unless you reserved a different tour with England’s National Public Trust, which owns the home.The same with John Lennon’s childhood home. Outside of the Menlove Avenue house where John lived with his Aunt Mimi since he was 5 years old, Gareth told us about the day when his mother, Julia, visited. After years of not hearing from her, following his parents’s divorce, John learned she had lived only a few blocks away. They began repairing their relationship. But one day after visiting him, Julia was crossing the street when she was hit by a car. Gareth gestured toward the corner, and I felt the chill.George Harrison’s childhood home was still a simple, private house, partially blocked by bushes out front. A soft yellow rose burst from one of the bushes, and it felt just right for the most spiritual Beatle.No Liverpool tour is complete without a stop on Penny Lane to see the lyrics come to life. Gareth showed us how the Beatles played with the map, since not all of the verses correspond to places on Penny Lane. Rather, the song “Penny Lane” describes a neighborhood.Tony Slavin’s barbershop was still there, but we didn’t stop and say hello. The bank on the corner is now a medical practice. The shelter in the middle of the roundabout used to house a restaurant, but appeared vacant now. The firehouse closed in 2015. The Penny Lane street sign is replaced about once a week, Gareth said, thanks to vandals. Another, more weathered sign is still painted in the stones across from a school where boys in uniform were practicing cricket beneath blue suburban skies.From there, it was a skip over to Strawberry Field, where we slipped into a parking spot ahead of the Magical Mystery Tour bus, eliciting a victory cry from our driver. The location seemed remote, not like the crowded Strawberry Fields of Central Park fame. In the front seat of Gareth’s cab he had several Beatles books. He had highlighted passages in Mark Lewisohn’s most recent work, “Tune In,” that he thought were factually incorrect. He and Ricky debated those facts.The tour was winding down, finishing in the parking lot of St. Peter’s Church where Paul first heard John and his Quarrymen skiffle band play a Sunday picnic on July 6, 1957. In the cemetery across the street was Eleanor Rigby’s tombstone.Beginnings and endings. We had come full circle.As we were parting, I thought I would ask Gareth his favorite song. “‘I Feel Fine,’” he said with a sigh, as if weary of the question. But he winked, remembering the tip.“There’s a Beatles song for anything going on in your life,” Elizabeth Kiessling, 32, said later that afternoon in Liverpool. A lawyer in Washington, D.C., she was visiting with her mother, Marcia Kiessling, 62, from Evansville, Ind. “The bottom line — it makes me so happy,” Elizabeth said.Her mother recalled how the Beatles were always a family institution, starting from the time they gathered to watch their first United States appearance. “I was 9, and I remember seeing them on ‘Ed Sullivan,’” Marcia said. “My father said, ‘What do you think about those haircuts?’”Earlier that afternoon, mother and daughter had danced at The Cavern Club, where the Beatles played their early gigs. In its seventh decade, the club still hosts live music, and is the finish for the Magical Mystery Tour. Other tour buses come, too, and on that day, a load of retirees from Australia had disembarked to dance. They remembered 52 years earlier how they squealed when they spotted the plane carrying the Beatles to their concert in Adelaide coming in for a landing.On the waterfront, with flags flying on the Cunard Building, four outsize statues of the Fab Four loom.Hector Martinez, 65, a supermarket owner from Cuchilla Alta, Uruguay, was photographing them with his son and daughter-in-law in tow.“This was a dream from a long time ago,” Mr. Martinez said.Could he explain what it was about the Beatles’ music that brought him to Liverpool?“I don’t know. It fulfills me. It’s an enchantment,” he said in Spanish, my husband translating. “Sometimes in Uruguay, I take walks on the beach listening to their music.”The day had turned gray, windy and British again, but Mr. Martinez didn’t seem to notice. As we asked him what the trip meant, his explanation was ours as well.“I think I’m still dreaming,” he said. “I’ll tell you after I wake up.”AdvertisementCrowds and chaotic thrills at the thunderous, lawless, medieval-style horse race in Siena, Italy.Crowds gather in Siena as horses are selected for the race.CreditAndy Haslam for The New York TimesSupported byBy Dwight GarnerWhen Hunter S. Thompson took the English artist Ralph Steadman to the Kentucky Derby in 1970, he tried to prepare him for the chaos into which they were descending. “Just pretend you’re visiting a huge outdoor loony bin,” Thompson said. He added, because he was rarely out of character, “If the inmates get out of control we’ll soak them down with Mace.”“Huge outdoor loony bin” is not the most precise description of the Palio di Siena, the thunderous, lawless, bareback, medieval-style horse race held twice each summer in front of tens of thousands of spectators on a track of packed clay laid down in the downtown heart of Siena, in Tuscany. But it will do for the moment.This is a race in which jockeys — they ride for various contrade, or neighborhoods — feel free to bribe one another, out in the open, before the contest begins. Betrayal is common. Guile is prized. There are no rules but one: A rider may not interfere with the reins of another horse.Jockeys whip their horses, and each other, with crops made from cured distended bull’s penises. If a jockey is thwacked off his mount, his riderless horse can still win on its own, like Garfunkel arriving without Simon.The jockey who finishes second is held in more contempt than the one who comes in last. After the race, the victors celebrate by sucking on pacifiers or drinking cheap wine from baby bottles to symbolize rebirth. Siena comes to resemble a playpen in which many of the toddlers have hairy legs and five o’clock shadows.A few years ago, when the Contrada Pantera (the Panther) was beaten by its long-established enemy, the Contrada dell’Aquila (the Eagle), a loudspeaker mounted on the Eagle’s church tower reportedly boomed out a motto mocking the Panther 24 hours a day for more than a month, the way the United States military blasted heavy metal songs in the direction of Manuel Noriega’s quarters in 1989 to drive him insane.I know these things — they barely scratch the surface of this festival’s part-circus, part-theater ambience — because my English friend, Valentina Rice, has been attending the Palio each summer since she was a child. She tells good stories. I know a bit about the race, too, because I’ve seen Cosima Spender’s fascinating and highly recommended 2015 documentary, “Palio.”Last August, I finally witnessed this spectacle, the world’s greatest horse race, for myself. Valentina, whose family has long owned a house in the Tuscan hillside nearby, invited me along.On a blistering August afternoon, 93 degrees in the shade, we were not in the shade. We were standing in the center of Siena’s main square, the Piazza del Campo, waiting amid a boiling sea of spectators for the race to begin. We’d been there for hours, having staked out a plum spot on high ground. I’d forgotten my cap. In the strong sunshine, one side of my potato head, I fear, had gone from pink to a gruesome tomato-and-bacon sort of hue.It’s possible to purchase bleacher seats for the Palio, but they are expensive — as much as several hundred dollars — and look a bit rickety. If you have the right connections, or several thousand dollars to spend, you can also view the race from a variety of windows and balconies that ring the piazza and function like opera boxes.In Valentina’s family the tradition is to be in the center of the piazza, in the scrum — the equivalent of standing in the infield meadow at Churchill Downs.This was free. I was born in Appalachia. My people like the scrum, too. Still, it’s a bit of an endurance test.One woman fainted. There was a good deal of jostling for position. Men and women who’d had hard weekdays were not going to put up with being pushed around on this particular weekend, especially by tourists. A man near me had stripped down to tiny red briefs in the heat and was pouring ice water down his grizzled chest.Behind me groups of men broke into ribald ballads that honor their contrade. Many women attend the Palio and take part in various aspects, but it is as strenuously male and macho as Nascar or professional wrestling. Yet the scene is mostly peaceful and upbeat.As the sun moved lower on the horizon, a solemn and highly choreographed two-hour pageant, the Corteo Storico, began. More than 600 people in historical costume, many on horseback, began moving slowly around the piazza. Many of the faces were nearly medieval in their El Greco thinness. There were skilled flag tossers, severe-looking military-style drummers, oxen-pulling chariots, floats of ancient design.The pageant and the race are an eyeful. They feature in the opening chase scene of the James Bond movie “Quantum of Solace.” At least a few viewers of that film had hoped that Daniel Craig would go all Indiana Jones on a bad guy with a cured bull’s penis, but this sadly was not to be.Watching this pageant, I realized my cheeks were wet. The parade and the sea of packed-in spectators and the old city center combined to produce a tableau so stirring it brought my heart up under my ears. I’d always found it hard not to tear up when participating in ritual, from weddings and funeral processions to the singing of anthems and old songs. There is more ritual at the Palio that can be easily comprehended.The race, which occurs twice a year, on July 2 and Aug. 16, dates back to the 13th century, and most likely began as Roman military training. The earliest races were on buffalos, and then on donkeys. The word palio itself means banner in Italian, and that’s all that the winning contrada receives. This banner bears the image of the Virgin Mary, in whose honor these wild races are held.There are 17 fiercely rivalrous contrade that ring Siena. These tend to be named after animals: snails, porcupines, she-wolves. Each contrada has its own museum and church and public square and fountain and traditions and banner. Once there were more than three times as many contrade. One of the most moving portions of the pre-race procession is watching the banners of past contrade wind by, ghosts of earlier contests.There may be 17 contrade, but there is room in each race for only 10 horses. A form of musical chairs must occur, and the seven contrade that cannot fit in one race are included in the next. The contrade are allowed to choose their jockeys but not their horses, all of which are mixed breed and chosen in part for their ability not to be easily spooked among the crowds and chaos. These are arranged marriages: Each contrada meets its horse for the first time just four days before the race.We were coming to the point where, in the explaining of the Palio, things began to grow a bit surreal. This is truly a human endeavor about which the more you know, the less you understand. The contrade pay their jockeys handsomely to ride for them, yet these jockeys are hired guns and fundamentally unfaithful. Everyone is a potential double agent.There’s no official betting at the Palio but allegiances are purchased for tens of thousands of dollars. Secret negotiations abound. Did your contrada’s jockey miss his opportunity to peak ahead at that turn, or was he paid to fall back? There’s no knowing.This sort of existential criminality, in nearly any other country, would lead to madness among horse people and spectators. This is a race no Red Smith can handicap. Yet in Siena, no one wishes to change a thing about the Palio.There’s been a good deal of op-ed analysis over the years about how the race illustrates the Italian soul. The Italians admire people, it’s often said, who make good via the wily bending of rules and conventions. Witness Silvio Berlusconi, the former prime minister, who has confidently brushed off sex and corruption scandals. Benito Mussolini is said to have adored the Palio.Sometimes more than guile and payoffs are used to secure a Palio victory. In past years, horses have reportedly been drugged and jockeys kidnapped. Writing in Condé Nast Traveler, Steve King reported a bit of Palio skulduggery that involved inflaming a stallion’s lust: “By the time the race began the poor beast didn’t stand a chance — indeed, could hardly stand at all and barely managed to stagger his knock-kneed way around the course.”During the race, jockeys take their lives into their hands. The race involves three clockwise laps around one-third-of-a-mile track and there are tight turns. There have been dozens of serious injuries; videos of spills are all over YouTube. Horses are more vulnerable. More than 50 have died in these races since 1970; animal rights protesters have staged repeated protests. In response, Palio administrators have increased the padding on some turns and instituted other safety controls. Critics say these measures are not enough.The parade ended and a booming cannon-like shot scattered every bird within two miles. The crowd grew quiet as the horses and their riders entered the piazza. Nine of the 10 racers took up their assigned positions at the starting rope. The 10th rider decided when the race started, when he made a go for it.While this was happening, the riders conversed, swapped taunts and offered bribes. Impatient horses jostled and reared off the crowded line and were ridden back. The 10th horse made multiple exploratory false starts. This to-ing and fro-ing took more than 10 minutes.And then they were off. The race was a clattering blur, whipping around us. It took less than 90 seconds but seemed even shorter. Several riders fell from their horses but none were seriously injured.The winner was La Contrada dell’Onda (the Wave), its colors aquamarine. It was this contrada’s first win since 2013 and its jockey, Carlo Sanna, known as Brigante, was an instant hero, hoisted upon shoulders.He and his horse, the 9-year-old Porto Alabe, were whisked off to receive the winning banner and be blessed at the Siena Cathedral, the Duomo. This event was not hard to find. Hundreds, if not thousands, of people poured through the streets to make their way there, as the carabinieri kept close watch.Out came the pacifiers and baby bottles. The winners wept with happiness. Meals commenced at huge tables set up in the streets. The festivities ran all night, which frankly they’d done for the four days leading up to the race, sometimes keeping us awake in our hotel room.That night we ate pizza margherita, one of Valentina’s Palio-night traditions, at an outdoor table at one of the restaurants that line the piazza. (Tables are hard to come by on Palio night. To watch Valentina secure one in the front row is to witness charm, fortitude and kung fu Italian-language skills in action.) We sat, caught our breaths, drank rehydrating beer over post-Instagram photographs. What else is vacation for?The pizza was delicious — not so delicious that I’ll forget to remind you that August is also the time to find plentiful and inexpensive white truffles in Siena. Some restaurants have entire wings of their menus devoted to their glory. Dishes come buried beneath them, the way the poutine in Montreal comes covered with cheese curds. Again, I wanted to cry.I’d heard that truffle dogs could be rented for an afternoon in Siena. I asked my hotel’s concierge about this. He told me yes, they’re 600 euros. I said, “That’s a lot of euros.” He replied: “Do you know what a truffle dog’s time is worth?”This outdoor loony bin is one I will happily be committed to.Dwight Garner is a book critic for The Times.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPersonal JourneysTwenty years after my first visit to the Vietnamese city, would the people I love most love the land I love most?By Matt GrossAlmost as soon as we landed in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, I set out to make my family miserable. This was not difficult. It was late August, nearing 90 degrees and humid. All I had to do was propose we walk through the streets of the former Saigon to a restaurant for lunch.At first, my wife, Jean, and our daughters Sasha, 7½, and Sandy, almost 4, were game. The road outside our Airbnb — an air-conditioned two-bedroom, with tile floors and brick walls, carved into a crusty ocher Art Deco building in central District 1 — was oddly calm. Shade trees spindled past skeins of electrical wire, while the low plastic chairs of an open-air cafe sat neatly in the shade of a long, blank wall. When we came to a busy avenue, we all held hands and stepped bravely into traffic, trusting that motorbikes would swerve around us with unthinking grace. (And they did!)Soon, though, the sun bore down, and we sweated our way along a market street. The rough pavement was at once dusty and damp, the din of shoppers and small trucks inescapable, the ripe scents of fruits and vegetables, fish and pork, as unrestrained as their vivid hues. All about was action, noise, aroma, drama — the kind of whirling vortex of energy I feed on.Not so the ladies. There was whining, dawdling, worry. One child had to be carried. (I bore that burden.) It is entirely possible that someone asked, “Are we there yet?” Finally, after 15 endless minutes, we reached a fluorescent-lit restaurant, Chi Tuyen, where we sat on blue plastic stools at a lightweight metal table and ordered bun thit nuong, nubs of pork grilled to caramelized sweetness, on a tangle of cool rice noodles, shredded lettuce and herbs like mint and perilla. The kids ate and calmed down, and Sandy played adorably with one of the kittens roaming the restaurant. Outside, rain began to fall, harder and harder, and then even harder. We were trapped, but there was nowhere else in the world I wanted to be.Twenty years earlier, almost to the day, I had moved here to live. Vietnam and the United States had only recently re-established diplomatic relations, and I was a fresh college grad embarking on an adult life of adventure in an unknown land. Over the course of a year, I fell in love with the city everyone still called Saigon — with the seething chaos of its streets, the head-spinning variety of its flavors, the boundless outgoing enthusiasm of its people. In a lifetime of constant travel, Vietnam was my first, truest, deepest love.And yet, though I’d been back to visit a dozen times or more since 1997, I’d never brought my wife and kids, primarily because Jean’s family lived in Taiwan, so that island always took precedence on trips to Asia. In the summer of 2016, however, we found ourselves in Taipei for an extended period — long enough, I decided, to make a weeklong trip to Vietnam. First we would hit Ho Chi Minh City, then spend two days at a beach resort near Nha Trang — nothing overly ambitious, just enough for my family to begin to understand the place that made me who I am. Still, I worried: Would the people I love most love the land I love most?How could they not? All around were visceral pleasures. At the entrance to our building sprawled a sidewalk restaurant, and every morning they’d send up breakfast on a tray: bowls of bun bo hue, a spicy beef-and-pork noodle soup, or banh mi op la, fried eggs with baguettes as light as air. From the next-door cafe, I would fetch tall glasses of Vietnamese iced coffee, made from house-roasted beans and thick with condensed milk, plus pastries from Tous Les Jours, a Korean franchise bakery (not my pick, but the kids adored it). We would eat in our cozy little apartment, and I’d sigh with contentment: This was just like my old life here — but now I had people to share it with.From there, we’d venture out to see friends I’d long wanted my wife to meet. We visited Quynh Anh Pham, a thin, elegant video producer — known as QA — who had reinvented herself as Ho Chi Minh City’s premiere modern florist. Her shop and cafe, Padma de Fleur, lay down a still-unfinished alley; its courtyard was draped with dangling mokara orchids, watering cans painted blue and pastel pink, and weathered metal saucer lamps. The lemonades that QA served my daughters came garnished with pale roses, and there was yet another kitten for Sandy to play with. This was classic Saigon — an oasis of sophisticated beauty that a casual visitor might never glimpse.Places like Padma de Fleur felt especially precious when I witnessed the big, obvious changes to the city’s landscape. Like Takashimaya, the glittering, multistory Japanese mall that had just opened in the heart of Saigon, within sight of the Opera House (still lovely, at about 120 years old) and bustling Ben Thanh Market. It was as fancy a mall as Vietnam has seen, chock-full of international luxury brands (and a Japanese food court!), and it reminded me that back in 1996, there was but one mall, Saigon Superbowl, out near the airport, where country bumpkins would come to gape at, and fearfully attempt to ride, the city’s sole escalator. Now, at Takashimaya, escalators intimidated no one — except for one stylish woman wearing wobbly four-inch heels, who held tightly to the railing as she ascended. The mall felt so utterly normal that I didn’t freak out when Sandy ran off and got lost for 10 minutes — this was no longer the rough-and-tumble city where you’d worry about kidnappers.Every excursion was an opportunity to compare the Vietnam I remembered with the Vietnam it now was, mostly to my delight, occasionally with disappointment. A road along the Ben Nghe Canal, for example, had been widened and landscaped into sunny modernity, but the project had wiped out old buildings, including an auto garage that, at night, turned into a secret shellfish restaurant.Sasha, however, approved. “I like this part of Vietnam,” she said, gazing out the window of our taxi, “because it looks well trained. Nice and clean and it looks good — like it works. The other parts …”She trailed off, and I knew why: Vietnam was not a hit with my family. The heat was rough. (What did they expect during summer in Asia?) They were not fans of the dirt, the chaos, the insects. The kids kvetched about being bored. (Just like at home!) Jean remarked, “I don’t think Southeast Asia is for families.”I didn’t know quite how to take that. For decades, I’d seen foreign families all over Southeast Asia — a major reason I’d wanted to bring my own family here. On the other hand, I understood: Like New York, Ho Chi Minh City exists not for tourists but for its own lively populace; this metropolis doesn't care about coddling outsiders — it’s too busy entertaining itself.So the task of entertaining fell to me. Whenever the heat grew too brutal, we would stop for sinh to, cool fruit shakes — orange, mango, banana, soursop, avocado — sold everywhere from the alleys of the backpacker district to market stalls in Cholon, the city’s Chinatown. We took taxis and Ubers, not motorbikes. We rummaged the racks of Mayhem, a hidden-away vintage clothing store, and emerged with armfuls of finds, including an oversize flutter-sleeve top for Sasha and what Jean described as a “ditsy floral dress” for herself. I couldn’t get over how far the city had progressed: Twenty years ago, used clothes were only for the poor; now you needed a credit card to buy them.Another friend, the Vietnamese-American artist Trong Gia Nguyen, led us through the downtown gallery scene. At Galerie Quynh, which opened in 2003, I gushed over one of Trong’s works, a laser-cut facsimile of a brise-soleil, the sun-shielding patterned screens that you see everywhere in Vietnam, cut to the size of a window or an entire building’s facade. At Dia Projects, Jean and I were entranced by “Fruits, Children & the Cutting,” Mai Hoang’s disturbing, entrancing watercolor renderings of children as fruits — dragonfruit, passionfruit, strawberries — being opened, peeled, dissected. At each stop, Sasha sat on the ground and opened her notebook to draw, engrossed and uncomplaining. Sandy, meanwhile, was kept entertained by Trong’s friend Athésia, a Canadian musician passing through on her way to gigs in Australia. I’m told they discussed “Frozen.”Occasionally, my ladies even entertained themselves. While taking an Uber through Cholon, Jean pointed out a trio of early 20th-century shophouses, slightly decrepit but charming still. “Is this where ‘The Lover’ was filmed?” she asked excitedly, referring to the 1992 movie based on the Marguerite Duras novel. If she could muster such enthusiasm, maybe my experiment was working? Love might be out of the question, but I’d settle for like.Instead, I got ambivalence. For every grand dinner of grilled pork and sour fish soup with old friends, there was a scary cockroach on some sidewalk. The grassy martini at Hum, a stylish vegetarian restaurant, was addictive, but we couldn’t forget that grim immigration officer who’d stamped us into the country. (“I don’t think he’s happy to see us,” Jean observed.) The kids may have enjoyed making crafts projects at the oddly named Somewhereland — Madam Fatty Fatt, a Colonial-era villa that had been renovated into a Hogwarts-like castle, the kids seemed content to work on crafts projects, like cutting felt into hats and cloaks for wooden witch figurines. (Meanwhile, Jean and I sipped iced coffees.) But this was too chill for Sasha. “When you’re young, you don’t want to sit down and relax,” she insisted. “You want to move!”Which is why, on our last day before flying to the beach, I booked a van to the Cu Chi tunnels, the underground former Viet Cong base, about 90 minutes outside Saigon, that is a major tourist draw. At last, the kids could roam and climb, and gawk at the admirably barbaric traps used to catch enemy soldiers, while I pointed out ponds that were really bomb craters and told them about a war I was born too late to remember firsthand. And, of course, we clambered about in the three-foot-high tunnels, which is any kid’s dream but drew rivers of sweat even from this smaller-than-average American.When we emerged, Sandy (who could stand fully upright in the tunnels) explained: “You ate a lot of dinner — that’s why you didn’t fit in the tunnel. You ate a lot of food — like Anna and Elsa!”Sasha was more succinct: “This place is pretty amazing!”As my heart warmed, I also realized: Oh my god, my kids are … tourists. They like it easy. They like fun. They’re on vacation. What did I expect? One day, perhaps, they’d outgrow easy fun, and want to know how Vietnam turned Dad into Dad, but it didn’t have to be today. Tomorrow we’d be at a pristine beach resort, with a swimming pool and a villa twice the size of our Brooklyn apartment — easy fun for $500 a day. Someday, surely, we would return to Ho Chi Minh City. Maybe not next year, but someday. And then we could all compare the Vietnam we remembered with the Vietnam it would become.For her part, Jean had but a single requirement for our return.“Next time,” she said, “I want to stay somewhere nicer.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerThe food is delicious. The access to natural beauty is even better.By Lucas PetersonThe change, and how quickly it came, took me by surprise. One minute we were in the heart of Tucson, Ariz., among the restaurants, coffee shops and businesses you’d expect in a metro area of more than a million people. Scarcely 15 minutes later it was as if we were hundreds of miles from civilization. Surrounded by the muted bronze and sage colors of the desert, my cousin Melanie Kuhlman (and her three children) and I took in the silence, the desert brush and towering saguaro cactuses that stretched 20 or 30 feet into the air. One of the best things about Tucson, I discovered, is how easy it is to leave Tucson. That’s not a knock against the city — I mean it in the most complimentary way possible.The Old Pueblo, as the city is sometimes called, is a special place. Unlike many major urban centers, whose bragging rights are that you don’t have to leave the city limits to find what you want, Tucson is a place that encourages you to explore. Yes, there is beautiful public art throughout, as well as a Unesco-recognized culinary scene. But within easy access are breathtaking mountainscapes, desert kitsch and outstanding wildlife-viewing opportunities. Tucson is worth a visit for any traveler, regardless of means, but I’m happy to say I kept well within my modest budget when I visited last month.“It’s a city that doesn’t feel as big as it is,” said my uncle Brian, an avid outdoorsman and decades-long resident (and Melanie’s dad). Melanie compared the city to Phoenix, just two hours away: “We preserve our natural desert landscape,” she said. “If you look around Phoenix, there are a lot of lawns. People have …” She paused. “Grass.”The civic predilection toward conservation was apparent at the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, just 10 miles outside the city ($21.95 admission for adults, $8.95 for kids ages 3 to 12). The museum, which encompasses nearly 100 acres, aims to challenge the traditional concept of what a museum can be by creating a mutually symbiotic relationship with the surrounding desert. Founded in 1952, it’s a bit of everything rolled into one: a zoo, a botanical garden and a place to hike — 85 percent of the museum is outdoors. It happens to be a great place to take kids but is fun for all, regardless of age. I walked around the grounds with my cousin and her young ones, enjoying the surprisingly lush and diverse species of desert flora: saguaros, brittlebush and the teddy bear cholla cactus, which looks cuddly but is deceptively prickly. (Don’t touch it. Seriously.) We saw wolves, bighorn sheep, prairie dogs and even a mountain lion in different enclosures.While west of the city, I hiked a bit in Saguaro National Park. That is where I really came to appreciate the giant saguaros and understand why they’re called the guardians of the desert. They’re massive, green columnar structures with multiple arms and sharp spines, able to grow as tall as 50 or 60 feet. They look like what a child might produce if you asked for a drawing of a cactus.More great hiking opportunities await in the northeastern outskirts of the city at Sabino Canyon Recreation Area ($5 for a day pass). I went out one morning with Melanie, her husband, Erik, and their kids, and trekked along Upper Sabino Canyon road, forging into the Pusch Ridge Wilderness and intertwining with the Sabino Creek. We passed mesquite trees with their long, tentacle-like roots as well as creosote bushes, which give off a distinct, earthy desert smell after a rain. A trolley will take you up the length of the road ($10 for adults) but we hiked the length of it, and back, a distance of about 7.5 miles.Of course, there’s plenty to do within the city, too. I was lucky enough to be in town at the same time as the Tucson Rodeo, an annual tradition that began in 1925. After paying $25 for a bleacher ticket, I took in some barrel racing, in which competitors on horses run a timed course around a series of barrels — then noticed the crowd grow eager with anticipation as the bull riding began. “And there’s the Copenhagen smile,” said one of the announcers, referring to the lopsided cheeks of someone working on a plug of chewing tobacco. One by one, the riders came out, and one by one, they fell. A bull named Mr. Hot Shot tossed his rider like a rag doll in about two seconds; a rider named Chance Strong had a little more luck, lasting nearly four seconds on a bull named Atomic Drop. To garnish a score, though, a rider must last a full eight seconds. Finally, Nate Perry from Elk City, Okla., was up to the challenge — to whoops from the crowd, he lasted the full eight and was awarded a score of 86.5.I’ve somehow managed to not talk about the food in Tucson yet — unforgivable, given the sheer volume and quality of its Sonoran-influenced cuisine. Southern Arizona has a style of Mexican food all its own, one distinguishing characteristic being the use of homemade flour tortillas. The flour tortilla, unfairly maligned by some, is elevated to an art form in Tucson: a stretchy, chewy, yielding halo that goes perfectly with both tacos and burritos. Get your fix at Tania’s Flour Tortillas and Mexican Food, a modest restaurant in the Drexel Heights area west of the airport. My plate of carne asada was excellent — juicy and smoky — and came with rice and refried beans ($9.89). The best part, though, were the tortillas — two big ones about 18 inches in diameter that clearly had just come freshly off the grill.Also close to the airport is Aqui Con El Nene (there’s another location in north Tucson), a brick-and-mortar that specializes in a taco yaqui ($5.50), a type of taco I didn’t even know I needed in my life. Take a chile relleno stuffed with cheese, mushrooms, beef and bacon, and lay it flat on two tortillas next to some charred spring onions and you’ve practically got a meal. I didn’t stop there, though: The man behind the counter recommended the birria, a kind of spiced meat stew usually made with goat or beef. It was a good recommendation. The spicy bowl brimming with soup and fat was the color of magma, and the shredded beef inside was fall-apart tender ($7 for a small bowl).Another favorite was St. Mary’s Mexican Food, just west of the 10 Freeway, which specializes in traditional home-style Sonoran dishes. Behind the dusty orange edifice of St. Mary’s, which began as a small tamale and tortilla business in 1978, were some of the best burros (or burritos, as you may know them) and tamales I’ve had in ages. I had a nearly perfect bacon, egg and cheese burrito one morning ($4.60) packed into a beautifully pliant flour tortilla. I also got a couple of green corn tamales for the road ($2.25) — steamed in fresh green (rather than the usual tan) husks, these tamales were moist and flavorful.Traditional family-style restaurants abound, too, if you’re in the mood for a full sit-down experience with colorful décor, roaming mariachis and tableside salsas. I had a great meal at Guadalajara Original Grill, which has live music and colorful murals to accompany its traditional dishes. Salsa made at your table by roving employees is fresh and spicy (or not, depending on what you ask for) and the food is satisfying — particularly the molcajete carnitas ($15.39), pork and vegetables in a tomato-based sauce served in a searing-hot bowl made from volcanic rock.After getting a good handle on Tucson and its immediate environs, I decided to explore even farther out. I spent an entire day driving a big loop southeast of the city, stopping at different cities and towns along the way. My first destination? To do some birding, of course. Southern Arizona has some of the finest bird-watching opportunities in the country, and so I made the 100-mile drive to Whitewater Draw Wildlife Area to witness an amazing annual spectacle: the tens of thousands of sandhill cranes that winter there.The majestic birds leave early in the morning to feed, then return late in the day. I arrived around 11 and took my spot among the other watchers. Things didn’t really pick up for another hour or so — but when it did, it was unlike anything I’d ever seen. There was a far-off purring or growling noise on the horizon, with what looks to be a dark cloud. Suddenly, the cloud disappeared. Then reappeared. Finally, the cloud transformed into hundreds upon hundreds of sandhill cranes. The cranes, which share the area with cinnamon teals, northern shovelers and other birds, came in, wave after impressive wave, until thousands were milling around on the banks.Just a half-hour west, the small town of Tombstone was the next logical stop. Known for its place in history as a late 19th-century boomtown because of the presence of local silver mines, Tombstone is most famous as the site of the gunfight at the O.K. Corral. Can you see the very location where Wyatt Earp and Doc Holliday stood? You certainly can ($6 admission). You can also visit the Boothill Graveyard ($3) where the victims of the shootout are buried. The stretch of Allen Street between 3rd and 6th Streets is blocked off to traffic, and it’s fun to walk around and observe the Wild West kitsch and street performers.On my last day, I drove up the winding road leading to the top of Mount Lemmon, the highest point in the Santa Catalina Mountains, with a clear goal in mind: to catch a signature Southwest sunset. The drive up, while slow going, is fantastic. The views of the valley are wonderful, and it’s interesting to see the desert flora change as you get higher and higher (the omnipresent saguaros slowly disappear). Finally, I reached Windy Point Lookout, and exited my car to the noticeably chillier (and yes, windier) weather. I hiked a few minutes out over the rocks until I’d found a quiet place with no other people in sight, just as the sun was beginning to disappear. Watching the prismatic canvas of blues and pinks slowly fade into dusk, the stereotype of “snowbirds” — people who spend their winters in Arizona — suddenly made perfect sense to me. The sandhill cranes really had it figured out.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byQ&AThe singer and his son collaborated with a French winemaker on a rosé. Its name is a salute to the Hamptons, another favorite place. He’s a fan of the Caribbean too.By Shivani VoraJon Bon Jovi, 55, has been a rocker for more than three decades, but that doesn’t mean he is inclined to slow down.On March 14, his band Bon Jovi kicks off a two-month tour, This House Is Not for Sale, in the United States and Canada, and on April 14, the band will be inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame, in Cleveland. But first, in mid-February, Mr. Bon Jovi, along with his son, Jesse Bongiovi, 22, will release a rosé wine, Diving into Hampton Water (the name is a homage to their Hamptons home). The duo collaborated with the well-regarded French winemaker Gérard Bertrand on their venture; the wine is produced in France’s Languedoc-Roussillon region, in the country’s south, and retails for $25.Mr. Bon Jovi’s family has long had an affinity for rosé and drink it frequently when on vacation. “It’s a favorite in our household because you can drink it starting with lunch and into the evening, and we enjoy lots of it whenever we travel,” he said. Over lunch at Wild, a gluten-free restaurant in Manhattan’s West Village where Mr. Bon Jovi regularly dines, he spoke about how he discovered a new part of France through the process of producing the wine and about his travels in general; Jesse was there, too.Below, edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Bon Jovi.You and Jesse visited Languedoc-Roussillon for your wine project. What was your impression of the region?I have been to the Côte d’Azur at least 30 times before but never to this region, which is also in the south of France. It’s a storybook area with castles and ruins and rolling hills, and I really loved the architecture — the medieval castles were in such good shape. Also, you’re not really going to find any chain restaurants there. We dined at all tiny, family-run places, and I ate a lot of seafood, especially shellfish. Americans haven’t discovered this part of France yet, and it was a pleasure to discover. Growing up in New Jersey, I’ve been preaching my whole life that you have to get out to find the beautiful places in this world.How much are you on the road for work?Rock ’n’ roll is cyclical. You do a record and you support it [by going on tour], and then it could be two years before you’re out on the road again.When you’re on tour, what kind of hotels do you like to stay at?I don’t need opulence. I need simplicity because I’m in a different hotel every day so the biggest suite is a waste because I can’t use it. But I do need a hotel with a gym and a humidifier for my room. I also don’t want any flowers in my room because they give me allergies.Do you have a favorite hotel?The Peninsula in Chicago is my favorite in the U.S. Everything about it is awesome — the gym, the bar, the restaurant and the beds in the rooms.What are some of your favorite spots in the Hamptons where you have a home? And how do you spend your time there? I’m one of the owners of the Blue Parrot [a Mexican restaurant in East Hampton] so that’s a clubhouse for me. And there’s a market called Round Swamp Farm which has fresh vegetables, great flowers and amazing homemade meals. I also love to eat at Topping Rose. We live on Main Beach [in East Hampton], and we’re out in the ocean and on the sand every day. The Hamptons is an outdoor life — we go on beach walks, and I’m an avid runner. I also go bicycling.Besides the Hamptons, where else do you enjoy vacationing?The Caribbean. We’ve been going to St. Bart’s for years. I actually honeymooned there in 1989. We rented a house then. We’ve also gone to the British Virgin Islands, Mustique, the Caymans, St. Kitts and Turks and Caicos. In the summer, we go to Europe. We’ve done Turkey and Italy and Greece. We’ll usually go along the coast in a boat.Given the hurricanes that affected the Caribbean in 2017, will you still vacation there this year?Absolutely. I want to support the region and the economy as much as I can. I’d go to St. Bart’s immediately.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCHECK INL’Otel at Dôce-18 Concept House in San Miguel de Allende has a patio, pool and plush bedrooms (complete with striking photographs).By Sara LiebermanFrom $375L’Otel at Doce-18 Concept House is far from a traditional hotel — guests enter rooms from the second level of an open-air building that overlooks a contemporary restaurant and a sort of modern-day mini-mall, featuring boutiques and food stalls from local independent businesses. Opened in November 2016 in what was once a metals factory called Casa Cohen, the hotel has a fresh vibe — from zigzag floor tiles to floral wall murals — with shared spaces that include an outdoor patio and pool; a sitting room with a grand piano; and a library stocked with books like “Imperfect Utopia,” by the artist Carlos Betancourt. In February, the hotel began offering in-room spa treatments and plans to open a dedicated spa space and rooftop restaurant later this year.In the center of San Miguel de Allende, a colonial-era city recognized by Unesco as a world heritage site and just over an hour’s drive from Guanajuato International Airport. The hotel is within walking distance of the pedestrian plaza El Jardín and various art galleries and restaurants. We checked into our deluxe double room at night and were immediately warmed by the electric fire place “roaring” under the Sony flat-screen TV opposite the two queen-size beds. Brightly patterned pillowcases stood out against the otherwise all cotton-colored room (sheets, floors, chairs — everything) decorated with mod furnishings like wooden armchairs, marble shelves and a linen-covered, lantern light fixture overhead. Artwork, such as striking photographs of the Mexican desert taken by Edgardo Trujillo, gave life to an otherwise dreamy setting. The plump mattress covered in 400-thread count sheets provided one of the best nights sleep I’d had in a while and it was hard to leave the daybed, where we’d wrap ourselves in the cashmere blanket knit in Ixmul, a small town in the Yucatán. It’s available to purchase for $560.Separated from the sleeping area by the TV and the fireplace, there was a marble vanity with a deep square sink, bronze faucet and lighting from two hanging Edison bulbs that flanked an oval mirror. Steps away, in a separate room with a door, the toilet and glassed-in shower got illumination from a skylight. (The room did not have a bathtub but others do.) Between the natural rays and the fresh flowers it felt like an oasis. The misleadingly thin towels made of bamboo fibers (to reduce energy during laundry) were absorbent and all the toiletries from the hotel’s own natural Ablu Botanica line were in large dispensers so we didn’t have to worry about squeezing out any last drops. Plus there was a welcome pot of lip butter, which was ours to keep.Beyond the bevy of options in the concept house, the private hotel spaces feel like one’s own living room — if one’s own living room resembled Shakespeare’s “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” as reimagined by Architectural Digest. Until the dedicated spa space with steam and sauna rooms opens, a range of body massages from Swedish and Thai to Deep Tissue and Watsu are offered in-room or by the solar-heated dipping pool. Wi-Fi is available throughout the property and each night for turndown, housekeeping left a lavender and sage spray on our pillows for what the bottle says would be “a calming, tranquil” sleep, and a mini dessert by the bedside. (Our favorite was the citron meringue tart.)Breakfast is served in the courtyard area on glass tables lining the balcony. Fresh juices (from watermelon to orange) as well as yogurt, cereal and cheeses are available buffet-style from the bar, while made-to-order dishes include a mix of Mexican and American favorites such as oatmeal with toasted pistachios, scrambled eggs topped with mole, and chilaquiles with green or red sauce and melted cheese. Downstairs, we tried Jacinto 1930, where cocktails like the Dragon Breath with tequila, habanero extract and agave honey wowed us from the first sip, while the fried panela cheese starter had us wiping the plate with our warm corn tortillas. A unique accommodation that’s artfully designed as a one-stop shop with offerings and comfort that won’t leave guests wanting for anything.L’Otel at Dôce-18 Concept House, Calle Relox 22, Centro, San Miguel de Allende, Mexico; doce-18.comAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byWHERE TO GO NOWFor fans headed to Philadelphia to savor the Eagles’ Super Bowl victory, we have a guide to help you get around the city.By John L. DormanAfter the Philadelphia Eagles won their first Super Bowl title in Sunday’s game against the New England Patriots, all eyes turned to the city’s long-awaited celebratory parade. The parade, which will be held on Thursday, will travel through the heart of Center City, which includes the central business district and neighborhoods including Rittenhouse Square and Washington Square West. Over one million fans are expected to welcome their championship team back to the city and revel in a hard-fought victory. Here are some ways to navigate your trip to Philadelphia for the parade.The parade will begin at 11 a.m. at the intersection of Broad Street and Pattison Avenue in South Philadelphia, heading north through Center City and then shifting northwest along the iconic, tree-lined Benjamin Franklin Parkway to the Philadelphia Museum of Art. It will last for about two hours. There are plans for 14 Jumbotrons along the parade route, which will also be barricaded for the entire length. A formal celebration will begin at 1 p.m. in front of the museum, also lasting for roughly two hours.With more than 1.5 million residents, Philadelphia, the largest city in Pennsylvania, was home to some of the most pivotal historical events in American history, including the signing of the Declaration of Independence and the Second Continental Congress, and enjoys a scenic perch along the Delaware River. The city boasts an extensive road network, but driving into the city is strongly discouraged on Thursday, especially in Center City, as many roads will be closed and extensive parking restrictions will be enforced. Bicycle lanes along the Benjamin Franklin Parkway and Broad Street will be largely closed to the public.If you’re traveling into the city for the parade, the best option is to use public transportation. The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, or SEPTA, connects the city and surrounding Bucks, Chester, Delaware and Montgomery counties through a combination of subway, trolley, bus and train services. On Thursday, the SEPTA Market-Frankford and Broad Street rapid transit lines will both have free admission for all riders, and trains will run every 5 to 7 minutes beginning at 5 a.m., with additional service to accommodate the expected surge in ridership. Individual stations are subject to closure on Thursday if crowd sizes overwhelm surrounding streets. Other SEPTA services will continue to charge their regular fares.For fans from the Philadelphia suburbs and Delaware, SEPTA Regional Rail service will only operate inbound trains into the city on Thursday morning, with service becoming outbound-only after the parade is finished. Regional Rail service from Philadelphia will run from 2 p.m. until 9 p.m. Many stations will not be open, and Center City access via Regional Rail will be available at Jefferson Station and the 30th Street Station. Suburban Station will be closed on Thursday, along with the University City and Temple University stations. Only weekly, monthly and one-day passes will be accepted for Regional Rail service. Prepaid one-day Independence passes to access Regional Rail trains will cost $10 and are currently available for purchase. Cash fares will not be accepted on Thursday.Philadelphia’s 30th Street Station is one of the busiest stations on Amtrak’s Northeast Corridor, which runs from Boston to Washington. It also is a stop on the high-speed Acela Express service. The Amtrak Keystone Service is also available from Harrisburg, the state capital. Seats are still available on some Amtrak trains, but tickets are very limited.Before and after the parade, enjoy the restaurants and cultural amenities that have always given Philadelphia a charm that can’t be replicated. From John’s Roast Pork to the Institute of Contemporary Art, the city is ready for your visit.For parade updates, including new transit information, fans are encouraged to text ReadyEagles to 888-777, with alerts coming from the City of Philadelphia Office of Emergency Management.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe getawayThe State Department has classified every country from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe on a scale of 1 to 4. What does that mean for you? A primer.By Stephanie RosenbloomPlanning to travel abroad this year? The State Department has new advisories at Travel.state.gov that rank every country on a scale of one to four to help travelers make informed decisions about their personal safety. The agency introduced the rankings this month to replace its longstanding system of warnings and alerts, which many travelers found difficult to grasp.“Frankly, I personally was tired of explaining the difference between a travel warning and a travel alert even to some of my colleagues,” Michelle Bernier-Toth, the Bureau of Consular Affairs acting deputy assistant secretary for overseas citizens services, said during a conference call about the rankings.Many people weren’t sure what differentiated travel warnings from alerts, and what they were supposed to do when either was issued. Under the new ranking system, the lower the number, the lower the risk, with Level 1 being “exercise normal precautions,” Level 2 being “exercise increased caution,” Level 3 being “ reconsider travel” because of serious risks to safety and security, and Level 4 being “do not travel” because of the greater likelihood of life-threatening risks and the United States government’s limited ability to provide help. Upon first blush, the rankings may seem like laws. For instance, if you search for a country and it’s a Level 4, as Afghanistan is, it has a bright red heading and the words “Do not travel.” But the State Department does not bar private citizens from traveling to a particular country — even one that it advises they not visit. (In the case of North Korea, however, there is a general travel restriction on the use of a United States passport.) The rankings, even those that are Level 4, are recommendations, not rules. Each level has a corresponding color: blue for Level 1, yellow for Level 2, orange for 3, and red for 4. What the department thinks each country’s particular risks are is detailed on its page. If a country has a ranking higher than Level 1, the agency also shows certain letters on the country page to indicate the threat or threats at a glance: C for crime, T for terrorism, U for civil unrest, H for health risks, N for natural disasters, E for a time-limited event like an election that may pose a safety risk, and O for other. Ms. Bernier-Toth said the State Department hasn’t changed how it assesses a level of threat in a country — just the way threats are presented and described to travelers. Iran, Libya, Syria and Somalia are among the Level 4 countries with “do not travel” recommendations. Canada, Portugal, Cambodia and Vietnam are some of the Level 1, lowest-risk countries. Brazil, which said on its government news site, BrazilGovNews, that it will soon begin allowing American citizens to apply for an e-Visa instead of making an appointment at a Brazilian consulate, is a Level 2 country, because of crime. Cuba is an example of a Level 3 country, a ranking that reflects the agency’s reduced staffing in Havana and limited ability to help travelers, as well as concerns that Americans may be at risk after the mysterious attacks in 2016 that affected employees of the United States Embassy there. In addition to an overall ranking, there can be different rankings within a country. Mexico, for instance, is a Level 2 country, which simply calls for increased caution — that’s the same ranking as other favorite vacation destinations like France, Italy and Britain. Yet certain areas within Mexico — Colima, Guerrero, Michoacán, Sinaloa and Tamaulipas states — that experience violent crime from gangs and criminal organizations were given the highest ranking, Level 4. Those particular states, not all of Mexico, have the same ranking as countries like Afghanistan and Somalia. Read what the State Department says about the states in Mexico and you’ll see that the threat is violent crime. In Afghanistan, the agency says the threat is not only crime, but also terrorism, civil unrest and armed conflict. This is why it’s important to look not just at the ranking number, which lacks that nuance. The smartest way to use the rankings to help decide if a trip is right for you is to read the explicit risks on the country page, which on the overhauled website are more clearly explained. In general, the guidelines, including the differentiation between states in Mexico, for example, are a reflection of the restrictions that United States government personnel in the country adhere to. “Where they can go,” Ms. Bernier-Toth said, “where they’re not allowed to go, where they can go with very specific security precautions.” Travelers who choose to follow the guidelines are doing what United States government employees themselves are doing. The agency plans to routinely reassess the rankings. Levels 1 and 2 will be reviewed at least once a year, unless a new threat emerges or there’s been a change in circumstances that warrants a review. Level 3 and 4 countries will be reviewed every six months, or more if circumstances call for it. Travelers who were already familiar with the department’s online country pages will still find entry and exit requirements, local laws and customs, and health conditions. The website is now mobile-friendly as well.And while the State Department has also done away with emergency and security messages, it will still issue alerts for things like hurricanes and terrorist incidents, which you can sign up for through its Smart Traveler Enrollment Program (STEP), and read at Travel.state.gov. Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesSaporè DownTown is an intriguingly experimental contemporary pizzeria that is easy to miss — but make sure you don’t. By Seth KugelOn a raw, rainy afternoon in Verona, Italy, this past November, a polyglot gaggle of photo-snapping tourists unfazed by the weather jammed the courtyard of Verona’s 14th-century Casa di Giulietta, supposedly the home of the real-life inspiration for Shakespeare’s Juliet.Down a side street just three blocks away, was a far superior attraction that most presumably missed: Saporè DownTown, an intriguingly experimental contemporary pizzeria that hours later was so packed with locals there was a one-hour wait. And that despite the fact the place had not even appeared yet on Google Maps. I almost missed it too — spotting an online mention minutes before hopping a bus from Verona to San Martino Buon Albergo, the small town nearby where 51 year-old chef Renato Bosco opened the original Saporè in 2006. It has since appeared on several best-pizza-in-Italy lists and made him a nationally recognized chef. "Saporè” is an amalgam of the Italian word for flavor and Mr. Bosco’s nickname, Rè. But it’s a bit of a misnomer: he is more obsessed with crunch and pliability, lightness and heft. In other words, he is a crust man, whose years of experimentation have rendered a wild range of results, including some that are definitely pizza and others that are rather out-there interpretations.At Saporè Downtown, those range from crispy-chewy, almost-traditional round pies with no added yeast to his triangular, ethereally light aria di pane style and the oddball mozzarella di pane, inspired by Asian-style steamed buns. (They look like slightly smushed spheres of fresh mozzarella, hence the name.) The menu is only in Italian, but patient, bilingual servers helped my party of two plow smartly through much of the menu in two meals. We were especially enchanted with the no-added yeast “Pancetta” pizza, which came slathered with pumpkin cream, dolloped with mozzarella, studded with pancetta cotta and topped with generous shavings of nutty, sharp asiago stravecchio. Mr. Bosco told me that he used the pumpkin cream to please the “many people” who do not like tomato sauce. I love tomato sauce and didn’t miss it at all here. Another winner was the “Tatin Cipolla” in the rectangular “PizzaCrunch” category. (You can likely guess that style’s distinguishing feature.) On top is a gloriously messy, multi-textured heap of red onion, radicchio, asiago and chopped hazelnuts. “La Classica Sempre Buona,” in the aria di pane section, features burrata dripping out from under 30-month aged prosciutto as if it were melting ice cream. It is both Instagram-ready and delicious. Drinks are an afterthought (though there is a short but varied Italian beer list), but dessert is not: don’t miss strudel-in-a-glass, a version of that pastry from the northern semiautonomous Trentino-Alto Adige region of Italy deconstructed into layers and tweaked, with welcome additions like ricotta foam and pistachio mousse.Back to the main act: some of the more out-there creations might not be for everyone. The glistening, fatty slices of tongue topping a mozzarella di pane filled with celery-carrot cream was not my style and we didn’t (dare to) try the PizzaBagels, their dough boiled in water aromatized with curry, Amarone wine or barbecue sauce. “I believe very much in the importance of confrontation and exchange with cultures different from mine,” Mr. Bosco said. You can say that again.Saporè DownTown, Via Amanti 8; 39-45-803-2221; boscorenato.it. An average meal for two, without drinks, is 40 euros (about $50). AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 hoursNew bars, Michelin-starred restaurants and indie boutiques are enticing, but so are age-old attractions, like Buda Castle and Turkish-era thermal baths.By Evan RailOne of the largest cities in Europe, Budapest is a regional powerhouse in terms of art, design and cuisine, home to a dynamic fashion scene and more Michelin-starred restaurants than any other city in the former Eastern Bloc. Of course, the Hungarian capital boasts a rich and lengthy history, starting with early Celtic settlements and the later Roman city of Aquincum, before hitting a high point during the Austro-Hungarian Empire. But fans of contemporary pleasures will also find far more than a weekend’s worth of new attractions here. Most of the action lies in Pest, east of the Danube, with scores of compelling new bars, restaurants and boutiques in neighborhoods like the Inner City, the Jewish Quarter and the Palace District. Across the river, stately Buda Castle and renewed, Turkish-era thermal baths reward travelers in hilly Buda. For years, Hungary’s art scene was known for being relatively unknown, though several new galleries are working to improve things. One of the best is the 2014 arrival Art + Text, housed in an Art Nouveau building whose ornate 1903 architectural details contrast stunningly against the contemporary artworks on display. Exhibitions focusing on emerging artists and modernist works of the post-World War II era change roughly every month. Get here early: Like many other Budapest galleries, Art + Text is not open on weekends, and only welcomes visitors on Fridays until 6 p.m.Relax over a glass and a bite at Tasting Table, a cool, casual wine shop and bar that became one of the city’s favorite destinations soon after it opened in an atmospheric Palace Quarter cellar in late 2014. Owned by the American food writer Carolyn Banfalvi and her Hungarian husband, Gabor, Tasting Table stocks over 200 wines, which you can compare in flights of three glasses (3,900 forints, or about $15.40), while you sample local cheeses, charcuterie and other snacks. Placemat-size maps illustrate the geography and varietals of the country’s main wine regions, making it easy to justify another round in the name of your ongoing oenological education.Years ago, Budapest led the way for cocktails in Central Europe, with favorites like Boutiq’ Bar appearing on several global “best bars” lists. The new hotness: Good Spirit Bar, which opened last year in the Inner City with more than 350 kinds of whiskey and some 700 spirits overall, including takes on the domestic distillate palinka, made with beet, celery root and carrot. Relax at the spacious, L-shaped corner bar over a relatively obscure Japanese whiskey like the 12-year-old Togouchi (3,700 forints for a dram of 4 centiliters, or about 1.35 ounces), or make your way through the cocktail list, which bounds from classics like the Sazerac (2,400 forints) to such custom creations as Fig in Japan (Nikka All Malt whiskey, fig syrup, sherry vinegar and a dash of espresso, tobacco and bacon bitters; 2,400 forints). The list also includes creative, nonalcoholic drinks like the Sage Stage (sage, cardamom, lime, pear and tonic; 1,100 forints).  Thanks in part to European Union development funds, many of Budapest’s once-rundown parks, sidewalks and squares have been spruced up in recent years. The riverside Nehru Part south of the Inner City reopened in late 2016 with new running tracks, basketball courts, workout equipment, playgrounds and a new skate park hidden under Petofi Bridge, offering great views of the Danube. Afterward, head north to check out the Bálna (or “Whale”) Building, a modern shopping mall partially composed of restored, 19th-century warehouses. The Jewish Quarter offers historic sites, trendy shops, amazing night life and an array of excellent (and cheap) ethnic restaurants. Prepare for your tear through the neighborhood with a hearty bowl of noodles at Ramenka, a minimalist, Japanese-style ramen bar. The house special (1,690 forints) pairs fresh noodles with a savory, pork-based broth adorned with tender slices of braised pork belly, boiled egg, sprouts, chives, carrot matchsticks and wood-ear mushrooms, while those following the neighborhood’s more traditional dietary strictures might prefer the pork-free, miso-based version (1,690 forints).Take a snapshot of the ornate facade of the Rumbach Synagogue, a stunning Moorish Revival building from 1872, originally designed by the great Otto Wagner and currently undergoing a much-needed reconstruction. Then head across the street to shop for handmade souvenirs at Printa, a “zero-waste” print shop, cafe and boutique where you’ll find unusual T-shirts (4,500 forints) and posters (8,000 forints) bearing an illustration of the city’s various bridges over the Danube, as well as “Printa’s Jewish Quarter” (2,800 forints), a frame-worthy map of the neighborhood. Along with several of its neighboring countries, Hungary is coming into its own in terms of fashion. Find apparel and accessories at Punch, launched in 2017 by a consortium of several up-and-coming designers just off Andrassy. Inside you’ll find Anna Amélie’s large purses, made of hydrophobic leather in dynamic colors (around 62,000 forints), velvet bodysuits (24,000 forints) by Anna Daubner and funky women’s hats (59,000 forints) from Vecsei. Not far away is the new flagship store of Nanushka, a cult Hungarian brand hashtagged by style-conscious women around the world. Although the brand can be found in boutiques from Paris to Tokyo, this is currently the only stand-alone Nanushka store, stocking the widest selection of items like “Cascade” skirts with the brand’s distinctive knot in faux leather (74,990 forints) and tank tops with a similar motif in silky “technical” satin (59,100 forints). Craft beer has hit the capital hard in recent years, appearing at stylish new restaurants like Bestia, across from St. Stephen’s Basilica. Inside the spacious dining room you’ll find beer from local producers like Mad Scientist, Hedon and Horizont, paired with excellent modern pub cuisine: massive beef marrow bones topped with bread crumbs and dried horseradish, accompanied by fluffy, focaccia-style toast (3,850 forints); tender, sweet-and-sour barbecue chicken wings (2,050 forints for six); and truffled macaroni and cheese (3,050 forints). Plan to stay a while: The list of draft beers runs 12 deep, and like many places in town, there’ll probably be a club-worthy D.J. playing top-shelf funk and house tunes, or another type of musical performance. Craft beer gives you plenty of options for the night, with sleek arrivals like 2017’s First backing up established bars like the sprawling Eleszto, a “ruin” pub in a former glass works that opened with more than 20 taps of craft beer in late 2013. Other must-sees for beer fans include the labyrinthine Kandallo, the intimate Lehuto craft beer and tapas bar, and the ten-tap Hopaholic. Almost any of these pubs will provide entertainment. However, if a local offers to get you into a late-night private cocktail club like Her Majesty the Rabbit — which does not list an address — by all means drop your pint and take them up on it immediately.  Soak away the excess at the Rudas Baths, one of the city’s most atmospheric thermal pools, originally built during the Ottoman occupation in the mid-16th century. Though it retains much of its original Turkish architecture, a 2014 reconstruction added modern spa facilities, a Turkish-Hungarian fusion restaurant and a panorama pool on the rooftop terrace. Normally reserved for men, the Rudas Baths welcome both sexes on weekends. Don’t forget your swimsuit, and if you don’t have a spare towel, pay for a sheet (700 forints and a 1,500-forint deposit) along with your ticket (3,700 forints). The original Costes restaurant earned Hungary’s first Michelin star some eight years ago. But many locals prefer the restaurant’s newer and less stuffy second location, Costes Downtown, which brought a lighter atmosphere when it opened in 2015 — and which quickly picked up its own Michelin star. The top-shelf Continental cuisine highlights many of Hungary’s renowned products, like goose liver, prepared as a buttery terrine and topped with cubes of fresh pear and quince and a honey-ginger sauce (6,000 forints), or Mangalitsa pork medallions (9,100 forints), which are topped with earthy Jerusalem artichoke chips and dense droplets of savory black garlic purée. Leave enough time for a final glass before you rush off to the airport: The wine list features celebrated producers from regions like Badacsony, Eger and Villany, many of which you’re unlikely ever to find anywhere else.Guests looking for excellent yet affordable views of St. Stephen’s Basilica can book one of three rooftop suites (called “apartments”) at 12 Revay Hotel (Revay utca 12; 12revay.com; doubles start at 92 euros, or about $113), or chose one of the 53 smaller rooms at the hotel, which opened in 2015.Ten years after the arrival of the posh Callas cafe and restaurant, Callas House (Andrassy ut 20; callashouse.com; off-season doubles start around 82 euros) opened directly upstairs in 2016, offering 25 beautiful rooms and suites on Pest’s most stylish boulevard, next door to the Budapest Opera.If you do plan a trip to Budapest, check out these suggestions on what to pack from our Wirecutter team.Editors’ Note: March 31, 2018An earlier version of this article included a reference to the Shoah Cellar Museum. After publication, several readers and experts in Jewish history raised questions about the background of the museum; that reference has now been removed. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byEach country is responsible for maintaining its sites, but leaving the organization means not being on the committee that selects places for the list.By Jessica Colley ClarkeLast fall the Trump administration announced that it would withdraw from Unesco, the cultural organization of the United Nations that is known to travelers for its list of World Heritage sites. The withdrawal is scheduled to go into effect at the end of 2018. There are 23 World Heritage sites in the United States, including Grand Canyon National Park, Independence Hall, Yellowstone National Park and the Statue of Liberty.The World Heritage program, which began in 1972, includes a list of 1,073 sites “that are of outstanding universal value to humanity,” and should therefore “be protected for future generations to appreciate and enjoy,” according to Unesco’s website. But in 2011 the United States stopped funding Unesco, standing with Israel when Palestine was admitted to the organization (legislation from the 1990s requires a cutoff of American funding to United Nations agencies that accept Palestine as a full member). Yet despite cuts in funding — United States contributions were 22 percent of Unesco’s yearly budget or about $70 million before the 2011 funding cutoff — travelers would not experience a direct impact when visiting World Heritage sites, according to George Papagiannis, the chief of media services at Unesco headquarters in Paris. “Maintenance and preservation of the sites is the responsibility of the host country,” Mr. Papagiannis said in a telephone interview. “But we do hold countries accountable to maintaining their sites in accordance with the World Heritage Convention.” Sites are monitored with conservation reports that all countries are required to file every six years. While there would be no immediate consequences for World Heritage sites, the withdrawal by the United States may affect Unesco in other ways. According to Dr. Stefan Simon, the director of Global Cultural Heritage Initiatives at Yale University, “With the U.S. once responsible for approximately 22 percent of Unesco’s budget, of course the announced withdrawal is detrimental, and would painfully reduce Unesco’s ability to fulfill its important missions, such as advancing and promoting literacy, gender equality, freedom of expression and scientific collaboration.”If the United States withdraws from Unesco, it would remain a state party, having signed and ratified the World Heritage Convention. “There is one consequence only,” Mr. Papagiannis said about the United States withdrawal. “The U.S. cannot be elected to the World Heritage Committee,” a managing committee made up of elected representatives from 21 countries. The committee is in charge of allocating financial assistance and determining what sites are included on, or removed from, the World Heritage List. Despite no longer being a paying member, the United States would be able to continue to submit sites for World Heritage List consideration. The World Heritage Committee will next meet in Bahrain from June 24 to July 4, 2018. “The leadership of the U.S. is crucial in this debate,” said Dr. Simon. “Its voice will be thoroughly missed at the table.” The United States played an integral role in the creation of the World Heritage program. Russell Train, the former administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency who is often described as one of the primary architects of World Heritage, talked about the importance of the concept in a 2002 speech at the 30th Anniversary of the World Heritage Convention in Venice, Italy. “The World Heritage Convention itself represents a partnership among 175 nations,” he said in his speech. “I see the program as an opportunity to convey the idea of a common heritage among nations and peoples everywhere. I see it as a compelling idea that can help unite people rather than divide them.”There are several benefits for sites that are included on the World Heritage List. Unesco provides leadership on maintaining the health of the sites, including a focus on sustainable tourism. “An important component of what we do is providing guidance for managing tourism numbers in a sustainable way,” Mr. Papagiannis said.Studies also suggest that World Heritage status has a direct impact on the local economy. In Texas where the San Antonio Missions (Spanish Colonial missions dating to 1690) were designated a World Heritage Site in 2015, an economic analysis conducted by Harbinger Consulting Group estimated that over 10 years, from 2015 to 2025, the designation will generate between 500 and 1,000 new jobs plus up to $2 million in local hotel tax revenue.Increases in tourism can also bring challenges to a site. “Tourism and development can cause both positive and negative consequences,” said Dr. Simon. “Many of the more than 1,000 World Heritage sites are struggling with keeping a balance between the economic benefits created by soaring tourism and development, and connected threats to the cultural significance which originally put them on the list.”According to Mr. Papagiannis, Unesco’s objective is to demonstrate the shared heritage of people around the globe with its World Heritage List. “Stand at the foot of the Acropolis and then stand on the steps of Independence Hall and you can sense the connection,” Mr. Papagiannis said. “Both encourage visitors to reflect on the beginning of the ideas of democracy.” Sites are chosen for “how they speak powerfully to people across cultures,” he said.Beyond the World Heritage List, Unesco also operates a list called World Heritage in Danger. This list of 54 sites, including the Everglades National Park in Florida, raises a red flag for places that are currently facing threats, whether from natural causes like an earthquake or from political conflict. Unesco can also help travelers discover cultural traditions through its Intangible Cultural Heritage program. Travelers may find inspiration when reading about a wide range of customs that include dance, music, crafts, storytelling, festivals and culinary traditions. Reading about the craftsmanship of handmade paper in Japan, beer culture in Belgium or puppetry in Slovakia may plant a seed for a future trip.In addition to the World Heritage program, Unesco works on a range of issues including journalistic freedom and access to information, education, equality for women, climate change, clean water and promoting women in science. “Unesco focuses, in particular, on two global priorities: Africa and gender equality,” Dr. Simon said. “With this, I think it is obvious that Unesco’s mission is more than just valuable, it is essential.” The L’Oréal-Unesco for Women in Science Initiative offers awards to international women researchers and scientists. In 2018, five Award Laureates will each receive an award of 100,000 euros. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byExplorerThe sprawling Nevada wilderness spared by the Trump administration offers desert vistas, petroglyphs and the celebrated “City” sculpture. Getting there really is part of the fun.By Mike SeelySouth of the Welcome to Fabulous Las Vegas sign and the slot-obsessed zombies of the Sin City Strip, there’s a shopping mall that counts Whole Foods among its tenants. If you’re going to make the drive up the Great Basin Highway in hopes of finding Basin and Range National Monument — the whereabouts of which many locals seem utterly unfamiliar with — you’re going to want to stock up on food and water here, because you probably will (and probably should) get lost along the way.I steered my rented Nissan sedan onto northbound Interstate 15 on a mild day in November, eventually arriving at the juncture for the Great Basin Highway, which is signaled by a massive solar farm, its panels resembling a lake of tar. Past the red-rock canyons, craggy cactuses, stacks of boulders, and Lilliputian forests that populate the landscape, you’ll hit something resembling civilization in the tiny town of Alamo, which hosts a few motels, a cafe, a high school, a gas station-supermarket hybrid and not much else.Shortly thereafter, the highway juts east toward Caliente, marking the most picturesque portion of the drive. On this stretch, I encountered a pair of wild horses — dam and foal, presumably — and a disheveled man hauling a wheelbarrow full of possessions down the highway. He made no attempt to hitchhike or flag down help, and I questioned whether he was an apparition until I saw him again on the way back. By “way back,” I don’t mean on the way back from Basin and Range. I’d overshot my intended Mount Irish access point by about 45 minutes before a kind cashier at a service station near Panaca handed me a map. Basin and Range wasn’t on it, so I set out to find a towering silver alien in front of a Quonset hut on Nevada’s Extraterrestrial Highway, so named because of nearby Area 51.As an El Camino in need of a scrub fired up in a large, desolate parking lot, this sheet-metal symbol of galactic sentience stood in front of the Alien Research Center, a deceptively named retail shop that sells clothing, trinkets, U.F.O. publications and Alien Tequila, a brand the operation’s owner, George Harris, manufactures in Mexico. Manning the front desk was Harris’ brother, Malcolm. A welder by trade, he picks up work where he can and helps George out on weekends. I asked him how to access the grounds of the 704,000-acre national monument, which is roughly twice the size of Los Angeles. He told me I’m “about the second” person to ever make this request of him in the two years since President Obama signed an order protecting the land. Mr. Obama did so at the urging of the former Senate majority leader Harry Reid, a Democrat who represented Nevada, and in spite of vocal opposition from elected officials in Lincoln and Nye counties, where Basin and Range lies.Senator Reid was reportedly smitten with “City,” a huge geometric sculpture that the renowned landscape artist Michael Heizer has been constructing from materials mined on-site for the past 45 years, at an estimated cost of more than $25 million. While “City” sits on private land, it is within Basin and Range’s boundaries, and the federal designation was actively supported by Mr. Heizer’s benefactors. (They hope that the artwork will be viewable to the public by 2020.)In April, Basin and Range was among 27 national monuments that President Trump instructed Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke to consider shrinking to accommodate fossil-fuel speculation and other private endeavors. In early December, however, it was announced that Basin and Range — unlike similarly designated lands in Nevada and Utah — had been spared manipulation (for now, anyway). “Every acre of public land is vulnerable until Zinke’s out of the secretary’s chair,” said Patrick Donnelly, the Nevada state director for the Center for Biological Diversity.“This wilderness area, it’s always been a contentious point anyway, because Harry Reid was in on it, and nobody likes Harry Reid in rural Nevada,” Malcolm Harris explained. “I’ve never really seen any exploration out here for oil. I’m sure it’d bring jobs to the area, and that’s important. But it all depends on how they go about it. Most things I’ve seen like that, though, they leave quite a mess.”I followed Mr. Harris’ instructions a short distance up Highway 318 — the road to tiny Hiko, where a lake emerges like a mirage on the right of the highway — to a rusty metal fence. To it was affixed a Bureau of Land Management sticker which requested that I close the gate behind me once I’d driven in.Shortly into my slow, bumpy drive down a rocky road, I realized that I’d have been far better off renting a four-by-four. But the sedan made it through with nary a punctured tire, and there’s something perversely satisfying about taking an ill-equipped car into the sticks and returning it to an airport garage caked in dirt. Twenty minutes in, I pulled over to observe some Native American petroglyphs — manually maneuvered rock formations that typically contain a message. A B.L.M. sign in front of the petroglyphs read, “The precise purpose of these petroglyphs remains a mystery.”As I blazed my own trail on foot, I heard nothing, save for a few chatty insects and the wind. Beyond me was sky and rock and unkempt desert. I felt as small as a granule of sand, dwarfed by the natural world. Sinking into the earth seemed a real possibility, and a profound reminder that this ground was not meant for tires or sneakers, but for paws and hooves. It’s this sense of displacement that appeals to people like Jim Boone. A retired biologist and “grizzled old desert rat,” in Mr. Donnelly’s affectionate terming, Mr. Boone lives in Las Vegas, but makes the trek to Basin and Range regularly. “When national parks start getting too crowded, I start looking for other places,” Mr. Boone said, adding that he is “relieved” that Basin and Range will be left intact. “I like to feel out and alone and connected with nature.”Mr. Boone has been afforded a private tour of Mr. Heizer’s “City”-in-progress, an experience that changed his opinion of the artist’s quest. “I went into it kind of skeptical; I thought it was just some guy tearing up the desert,” he said. “But when I got there I was really impressed, and I understand the background remaining open is so important to it. When they open it, it will draw visitors from around the world.” Yet Mr. Donnelly dismisses the notion that “City” had anything to do with the monument avoiding Mr. Zinke’s X-acto knife.“It certainly helped to rally support for monument consideration,” Mr. Donnelly said. “But do you think public landscape art is a factor for the Trump Administration? If anything, that would motivate them to deregulate [the land] to piss off the liberals.”When “City” is finally opened to the public, it could fulfill Mr. Boone’s prophecy as a magnet for travelers. This may diminish the sense of tranquil isolation felt by previous visitors like Mr. Boone, for whom pragmatism and a willingness to venture further reign supreme.“Visitation will probably just be on one road,” he said of Mr. Heizer’s future exhibit. Basin and Range “will remain big and open. But if that’s not the case, I’ll go further out to somewhere that’s more wild.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESChicago’s storied Uptown neighborhood has emerged from a decades-long slump with new restaurants and cultural centers.By John L. DormanFor decades, Uptown, one of Chicago’s most storied neighborhoods, struggled to regain its early-to-mid-century luster when jazz and swing musicians dominated the music scene and ornate movie halls catered to robust crowds. Despite being well-served by the El, Chicago’s train system, and having a coveted Lake Michigan shoreline, the neighborhood slumped as crime rose and its aging housing stock fell into disrepair. Lately, though, Uptown’s new cultural centers and restaurants have fueled a creative spirit in this highly-diverse neighborhood. While debates over affordable housing and development remain huge issues in the area, Uptown is ready again for its close-up.This cozy coffee shop is the centerpiece of Wilson Abbey, a neighborhood hub that hosts concerts, conferences and other special events. The menu ranges from specialties like the Vader, composed of Mexican Coke, vanilla and quantum espresso, to muffins and breakfast sandwiches made by Baker Miller, a local bakery. Only fair and direct trade coffee is served here.935 West Wilson Avenue; everybodyscoffee.com.Housed in a rather unassuming space, this efficient and friendly vegan cafe impresses with its fresh wraps, bowls, burgers and desserts. Roughly 80 percent of the cafe’s offerings are made with organic ingredients.838 West Montrose Avenue; lovingheartvegan.com.Since opening in 2012, this upbeat bar and restaurant serving American fare has become a neighborhood staple, with its array of craft beers and a popular weekend brunch featuring bottomless mimosas. The décor is decidedly upscale industrial, with exposed brick walls and a garage door. The restaurant features classics like fish and chips and hanger steak, with chimichurri and potatoes.844 West Montrose Avenue; reservoirchicago.com.Founded by the actress and playwright Jackie Taylor in 1976, this sleek, airy building includes a 299-seat main stage, a studio theater, rehearsal studios and music rooms. The theater recently had a well-received run of “Sammy: A Tribute to Sammy Davis Jr.” A play about the life of the singer Patti LaBelle will run in May and June. The production “Hip-Hop Revolution,” which will explore the substantial impact that hip-hop has had on the music industry, is planned for later this year.4450 North Clark Street; blackensembletheater.org.This year-old Korean barbecue restaurant may be the new kid on the block, but it’s a welcome presence and incredibly tasty. The Korean fried chicken, with pickled radish, is all the rave, along with the bibimbap, a mixed-rice dish. Cap off the visit with the bing-su, a Korean shaved ice, mixed with Oreos.4715 North Sheridan Road; solsonsheridan.com.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by5 PLACESBangkok’s Ari neighborhood is increasingly a thicket of sleek high-rise buildings and indie cool-kid hangouts radiating international flavors. By Seth SherwoodIf Bangkok’s Ari neighborhood could write its own autobiography, it might be called “From Bureaucrats to Baristas.” For decades, the low-lying leafy district was known mainly for its federal ministries, municipal administration offices and gated quasi-suburban homes. Increasingly, however, Ari is a thicket of sleek high-rise buildings and indie cool-kid hangouts with international flavors: German beer gardens, Latin American restaurants, Korean canteens, Japanese izakayas, American-style food trucks and numerous freshly minted cafes stocked with Italian espresso makers. All that’s missing is the crowds. Even on weekends, Ari’s hot spots have free seats and ample breathing room — a rarity in bustling Bangkok.With its outdoor seating, picnic tables, rock ’n’ roll music and constant smoke from grilling meats, this beer-and-burgers haven feels more like a backyard barbecue than a restaurant. Created by the Thai-British cook Patrick Stall — who studied hospitality management in Perth, Australia — and his Thai girlfriend, Parichart Payungwong, the laid-back hangout serves everything from Japanese-style chicken wings in ginger-garlic sauce to the signature Chiang Mai Spicy burger, a patty of shredded pork with Cheddar cheese and Thai herbs. If such combinations sound like a recipe for indigestion, request the house-made black hamburger buns. The color comes from activated charcoal — a digestive aid.51 Phahonyothin Soi 5, facebook.com/PaperButter.European-influenced brunch and décor invade Ari at this sun-drenched Italian-style cafe, which opened last year. A La Marzocco espresso machine on the marble bar pumps out ristrettos and macchiatos, while the magazine-like menu proposes “The Italian Benedict” (eggs Benedict with Parma ham), eggplant parmigiana and much other Continental fare. 13 Soi Ari 4, Phaholyothin 7, facebook.com/barstoriadelcaffe.Don’t be alarmed by the mural of the decapitated half-human, half-skeleton skull on the walls at this Scandinavian-owned, Thai-staffed, Latin American bar, which opened last year. Done in cartoonish Day of the Dead style, the image is one of the many homages to Mexico, along with the pink-green-blue-yellow color palette and selection of tacos (from beef tongue to pork belly) on the menu. But the marquee attractions are the beers from the Danish microbrewer Mikkeller and other special guests. If the Drinco de Mayo lager or dark Texas Ranger porter aren’t strong enough, more than a dozen tequilas are also on offer. 68/1 Soi Ari Samphan 1, mikkeller.dk/location/tacochela.Finding a Bangkok bar suitable for your beer-swilling grandmother just got easier. Located in a creaky wooden house on a quiet residential street, this year-old craft-beer emporium is dowdy enough to please her sense of design — white lace curtains, cheap fans, plastic seats, cheesy tablecloths — and stocks enough global suds and local Thai microbrews to inebriate her whole sewing circle for a year. And if she claims to see ghosts after a few house-brewed Nectar Coffee Stouts, it might not be the alcohol talking: The house is rumored to be haunted.71 Rama 6 Soi 28, +66 89 993 1663; facebook.com/DokKaewHouseBarBangkok traffic is notoriously nightmarish. This boutique eases the pain with its slim and elegant Japanese fixed-gear and multi-gear bikes. Many are outfitted with throwback leather seats and handlebar grips by the British manufacturer Brooks, and you can further accessorize your ride with messenger bags by Demano — made in Barcelona from recycled advertising banners — and panniers by the local Bangkok manufacturer Vincita that attach to your rear rack. Forgot your cycling shoes? The shop sells its own brand of low-top sneakers. Just remember that everyone in Bangkok drives on the left.1/5 Soi Ari 2, tokyobike.co.th.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byheads UpA new generation of designers envisions a future where the African nation is known for its stylish fashion, not only its genocidal past. By Shivani VoraThe story of the fashion scene in Rwanda today is a story of hope.In a country often defined by its horrific genocide in 1994, when an estimated 800,000 people — mostly Tutsi men, women and children — were killed in 100 days, a new generation of passionate designers wants to create a future where their African nation is known for producing stylish clothes and accessories and not only its dark, traumatizing past.The government is priming these designers for success through an initiative called Made in Rwanda, aimed at supporting the production of local goods and limiting imports — sending Rwandan designers abroad to participate in trade shows and not taxing them to import fabrics and other materials they need for their designs are two examples of the help Made in Rwanda offers.On my recent trip to the Rwandan capital of Kigali, a city of verdant hillsides and 1.1 million people, I met Daniel Ndayishimiye, who, in 2016, established Fashion Hub Kigali, a nongovernmental organization that is also supporting designers. Fashion Hub helps more than 100 designers in Rwanda by offering them training and access to tools such as pattern cutters and sewing machines. Mr. Ndayishimiye’s father and brother were killed in the genocide, but he said that he has every reason to look ahead, not back.“I have a purpose,” he said. “I want Rwandans to be proud of donning designs by fellow Rwandans. ”Mr. Ndayishimiye grew up with aspirations of being a fashion photographer but said that there was no fashion in Rwanda to shoot. “Fashion was nonexistent, but today, there are designers all over Kigali, and throughout the country,” he said.I spent a day with him driving around Kigali so that he could introduce me to some of the Fashion Hub’s designers.Our first stop was to see clothing and jewelry designer Muhire Patrick at his atelier, in the industrial Gikondo neighborhood. Mr. Patrick’s foray into the business was unplanned: when his sister was getting married in 2009, he couldn’t find anything that he wanted to wear for the celebrations. “I went to every possible store in Kigali, and then one day, on a whim, I decided to create the outfits I envisioned,” he said.Friends and family at the wedding complimented his modern look infused with Rwandan touches such as colorful patterns and asked Mr. Patrick if he would make pieces for them, too. When the inquiries kept pouring in, he launched his label, Inkanda House.Mr. Patrick, along with a small team of women, hand stitch the clothes — a mix of casual and formal — at the atelier, and while visitors are encouraged to peruse the racks hanging with finished pieces, they can also place custom-made orders.But adults aren’t the only market Rwandan designers are seeking: Mr. Ndayishimiye also took me to meet the children’s clothing designer Priscilla Ruzibuka at her store, Ki-Pepeo Kids in Kimironko, a residential area. Ms. Ruzibuka launched her label in 2016, a year after graduating from Oklahoma Christian University. She was intent on finding a way to help women affected by the genocide. “These women typically worked as maids, and I wanted to offer them more opportunity,” she said.Eventually, she decided to make children’s clothes and employ only underprivileged women for the business. Ki-Pepeo Kids currently has four female employees, who help stitch the line’s casual pieces that incorporate typical Rwandan patterns such as animal prints and zebra stripes.The brand has had a strong start: in early 2017, Ms. Ruzibuka received a $10,000 grant from the United States Agency for International Development and used part of the money to buy electric sewing machines. Also in 2017, the Rwandan government, as part of the Made in Rwanda initiative, paid for her to attend the children’s clothing trade show, Children’s Club, in New York. “The show was incredible exposure for me, and since then, I’ve gotten orders for clothes from abroad,” Ms. Ruzibuka said.Rwanda’s pool of fashion designers who are in their 20s to their 40s extends beyond the Fashion Hub.Joselyne Umutoniwase, the founder of the fashion brand, Rwanda Clothing, for example, is renowned in the country for her stylish cuts with African-inspired patterns for both genders, which she describes as “modern African.”When I visited Ms. Umutoniwase at her sprawling three-room store in the heart of Kigali, she told me that local residents have recently started to appreciate fashion. “Rwandans like to dress up and are getting into wearing the latest styles,” she said. This newfound interest is the reason that Ms. Umutoniwase hosts two fashion shows a year for her brand at various locations around Kigali. These “parties,” as she calls them, are a chance for fashion-conscious Rwandans to have a fun night out and socialize with each other.Kigali is also home to at least two other fashion events including Kigali Fashion Week, which started off as a small endeavor in 2012, with 10 designers exhibiting their styles but now has more than 30 participants.Two years ago, seven Kigali designers banded together to form CollectiveRw, and regularly host pop-up stores around town as well as an annual fashion show, where the price for a ticket starts at about $18. The collective’s second annual show, in June 2017 at Kigali Exhibition and Conference Village, had more than 800 attendees.Teta Isibo, the founder of the jewelry and home-goods brand Inzuki Designs, is one of the collective’s members, and said that the group wants to push Rwandan fashion on both a local and international scale.Ms. Isibo’s bold and colorful trinkets are already sold at a handful of retailers in the United States including the gift store at the Field Museum, in Chicago, but she dreams of a bigger presence all over the world.“I’m part of a lucky generation of young Rwandans who have the opportunity to create our own reality and not feel held back because of the genocide,” she said. “I see a future for us that’s bright, and one where fashion thrives.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe mythical nation featured in “Black Panther” was long a mystery, but readers knew what they’d want to see on a vacation there. Artists have their own visions.By The New York TimesWhen “Black Panther” was released in theaters in February, it became a cultural phenomenon. Millions of moviegoers around the world became acquainted with Wakanda, the mythical African nation whose advanced society is hidden from the outside world behind a holographic camouflage. In the film, technology plays a big role, from the prevalence of vibranium to the use of kimoyo beads to remote piloting of planes.We asked readers to share their views of what Wakanda would look like if they could actually visit the country. Here are some of the best responses we received, with visions of the fictional country by the artists Richie Pope and Ojima Abalaka.—Kacper Jarecki Using hologram technology, visitors can play and cuddle cheetahs. This is really popular with families. There is a cheetah gym facility where people get to experience running at 40 miles per hour!There is also a giant rainbow waterfall, which is the biggest water park in the world. Of course, this water park is not completely real, but the thrill is just as real, if not more so. The library is very beautiful and every person who lived in Wakanda has their own book, which is a computer-generated biography. It’s really fun reading about all the different people. And architecturally, the building is second to none.Then, of course, there is the amazing night sky, with close-up views of the stars and planets. Tourists can actually zoom in with their fingers to enlarge and expand the night sky.The New York Times is free to everyone in Wakanda, and boisterous political discussions can be heard in cafes in the mornings ;-)Britni Rillera Start with three days in the city center on walking tours through the markets and riding the trains to chic destinations. Then I’d want a waterfall-infinity pool tour! Possibly with snorkeling in cenotes? I imagine staying in an eco-friendly boutique hotel in a cave with an incredible spa. And then a luxe resort high in the mountains with unbelievable star gazing, gorgeous hiking trials and an incredible chef.Jyhjong Hwang Here’s a 10-day tour that showcases the variety of renewable energy sources adapted to different environments, along with traditional attractions. 1. Hydropower plus natural infinity pool: Enjoy the view over the lip of the waterfall, like the Angel’s Pool at Victoria Falls. Downstream at the waterfall where the ritual combat took place, see the run-of-the-river hydropower plant, which is like the Gouina Hydroelectric Plant in Mali.2. Geothermal plus hot springs: Because there was a meteor strike not too long ago, active geological activities gave rise to geothermal plants, like the Olkaria Geothermal Stations in Kenya. Then jump into hot springs infused with vibranium. 3. Wind turbines plus mountain gorillas: In the windy mountains where M’Baku’s tribe lives, wind turbines line the snowy valley, as they do in some places in Alaska. Then visit the mountain gorillas below the snow line, just like you would at Virunga National Park.4. Solar panels plus rhino safari: In the open plains around the borders of the country, there is a mix of photovoltaic panels and solar towers like they have in South Africa. Then a safari drive among hundreds of wild rhinos. All transportation will be via underground maglev trains, like Japan’s Chuo Shinkansen under construction now, or electric/hybrid cars, which constituted over half the new cars sold in Norway in 2017. Wakanda does not produce crude oil (too much geological activity), nor does it import any from surrounding countries. If Wakanda had to rely on imported oil for all their development, they would have blown their cover long ago.This is not science fiction. This is and can be real life. Try harder, human. Make this one a better place so you don’t have to escape to another.Lisa Hernandez Wakanda has several specialized science museums with advanced interactive exhibits for explaining physics, astronomy, biology and other branches of learning. One should definitely attend performances from Wakandan griots that take place in neighborhood outdoor amphitheaters. These are generally small, casual spaces and allow the audience to mix in and participate. Depending on your interest, you can find griots specializing in history, engineering, design and aeronautics, as well as more traditional fictional tales. Performance schedules are publicized through fliers, posters (Wakandans take great pride in their graphic design traditions), in local media and on WakandaNet. Because of safety and national security concerns, there are no tours of the vibranium mines, but the Cave of the Winds was a small gold mine that was historically used for research and development, and testing for vibranium-mining equipment and techniques; it later became a center for Wakandan airship technology, as gold mining became increasingly irrelevant to the Wakandan economy. The Cave of the Winds now boasts unique aeronautical adventure courses in which jetpacks, hovercraft, maglev transportation and other small air technologies are tested. The Amawele course (the twins course) is gentle enough for tourists to try with a “umoyashare,” a two/four-person aircycle that is commonly used by Wakandan teenagers. Those who prefer a more comfortable seat than the umoyashare offers can go to a virtual reality parlor where several courses can be experienced.Those interested in masks and other carving arts should note that as mining technology advanced in Wakanda, much of the older equipment was repurposed or redesigned for sculpture and modeling, so don’t be surprised to see many Wakandan buildings with elaborate moldings and dioramas carved into the doors and entranceways of even the smallest buildings in the most remote parts of Wakanda. Casey Chon I’ve always imagined Wakanda having a Center for Languages — where people can come and go and become fluent in any and all languages. It would be full of human interaction aided by technology, not the other way around. And then of course, you’d leave the center and go straight to the country whose language you’ve just learned.Debbie Smyth It should have lakes as blue as Tahoe, white sand beaches and beautiful wildflowers. The weather should be mild like Oakland, and it should have the best barbecue on earth.Louis Kramberg I would plan a trip to Wakanda the same as I would any other vacation. I always want to meet the people of an area and experience their daily lives as closely as possible. My favorite scene in the movie was the walk through the marketplace contrasting with their advanced technology. For me, this would be the immersive Wakanda experience.Meher Khan A graceful levitation. Mysterious nooks and crannies. Breathtaking glimmers of past, present and future. Infinite potential. Uncurling state-of-the-art quarks, physiology, art, soul, singularities. Finally a lustful cry into the burst bubble.Esther Greenfield I would see the rhinos which are being trained as warriors — when, that is, they are not playing and kissing their trainers.Jenny Arlene Small neighborhoods of souks exhibiting vibrant batik tunics, biodynamic coffee beans, Wakandan theorists à la bell hooks and Frantz Fanon. Large preserves of indigenous gorilla families, overseen by the mountain tribe warriors. Small cul-de-sacs containing gyms, tracks and spear sheds, where girls entering their teens train for the Wakandan military.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCHECK INThe hotel has a distinctive look, a personable staff and a lively afternoon tea.By Shivani VoraFrom $595 including Wi-Fi. The Whitby Hotel, a property with a serious design personality, opened in February 2017 in midtown Manhattan, part of London-based Firmdale Hotels, a brand with eight properties in London and one other in New York City. Firmdale’s first New York property, Crosby Street Hotel, in Soho, opened in 2009 and is considered to be among the city’s most fashionable accommodations. The company’s co-owner and design director, Kit Kemp, has a flair for creating unique hotels, and the Whitby, too, is a place with serious design personality: each of the 86 rooms is individually decorated, and original art by contemporary artists from around the world adorns both guest rooms and public spaces. The Whitby is on 56th Street, between Fifth and Sixth Avenues. Trump Tower, a popular tourist spot ever since Donald J. Trump was elected as the president, is steps away. While this may deter some overnight guests because of the crowds snapping pictures, the property’s central location is undoubtedly appealing: attractions such as Rockefeller Center, Central Park, the Museum of Modern Art, top restaurants and the stores on Fifth Avenue are all within walking distance. Taxis are readily available, and several subways are within a 10-minute walk including the N, R, F and E lines.My 350-square-foot room felt like being in a guest room in the home of a friend whose design style I admire. The colorful, contemporary space had black fabric walls, a textured pink and beige rug, a long wooden desk with an upholstered lime green chair and a small sitting area with two orange patterned chairs. And could I please buy the luxuriously comfortable king-size bed with a high headboard upholstered in orange for my bedroom at home? The nine-foot high ceilings made the room feel larger than it was, and because the property wasn’t full, the personable front desk employee had upgraded me one level upon check-in from the entry level superior category to the luxury category; the Whitby has nine categories of rooms, all with 55-inch flat screen televisions.The Whitby’s chic but approachable design sensibility extended to the generously sized bathroom. With its black and white gleaming marble walls and floors, it was modern, but the two free-standing white ceramic sinks brought in an old-fashioned feel (there was a shower but no tub). Instead of the generic white robes common at many hogh-end hotels, the pair here had elegant blue piping, and I loved the heavenly lavender eucalyptus scent in the Rik Rak by Kit Kemp toiletries.The Whitby Bar & Restaurant, an all-day spot that offers breakfast, brunch, lunch, afternoon tea, dinner and cocktails; a small but well-equipped gym; a 130-seat movie theater with screenings on Sunday afternoons, open to both guests and the general public (guests can attend for free; tickets for non-guests are $15); and a small drawing room with an honesty bar where guests can pour themselves a drink and request that it be charged to their room.The restaurant is especially lively at breakfast and during afternoon tea, available in both a traditional style with finger sandwiches and scones as well as in a healthy version with dishes such as a roasted beet and melon taco and an avocado and green chickpea crostini (the tea is a pricey $54 a person). I enjoyed a tasty and satisfying breakfast at the restaurant of house-made gluten-free granola, yogurt, mixed berries, nuts and lemonade (breakfast is $30 a person). Room service is also an option, and with rooms so stylish, ordering in is a tempting choice.With its central location, warm service and sophisticated but homey feel, the Whitby stands out in a city where travelers are spoiled for choice when it comes to upscale accommodations.The Whitby Hotel, 18 West 56th Street, New York City thewhitbyhotel.comAdvertisementExplorerThe Selous Game Reserve in central Tanzania is one of Africa’s last, great, uninhabited safari areas, delivering all the big game without the big (human) crowds.Masai giraffes in the Selous Game Reserve, Tanzania.CreditRobert J. RossSupported byBy Jeffrey GettlemanFew wildlife parks in Africa allow you to drift lazily along a calm stretch of water like something out of “The African Queen” and take in an incredible amount of wildlife from a boat. The Selous Game Reserve, a remote and spectacular wildlife refuge in central Tanzania, is one of them.Last year, I took a wonderful safari here with my family, and on one of our first afternoons, we glided along a shallow lake in an aluminum-hulled skiff. There’s something serene — and a little sneaky — about seeing animals from the water. You’re not trailing behind them as they step out of the bushes and move toward their watering holes; you’re inside their watering hole.As we floated along, maybe 100 yards from shore, a distance close enough to observe but hopefully not disturb, we watched baboons, zebras, giraffes and gazelles head down to the lake for a drink. Palm trees on the water’s edge cast long pillarlike shadows. Behind them stood a wall of thick green bushes and thorn trees that wrapped around the entire lake. A rich silence hung in the air, broken only by the occasional chitter of a kingfisher.The Selous’s many shallow lakes dramatically stretch and shrink with the rain. We were there just after the rains and the lakes were swollen and full of life — especially water birds, hippopotamuses and crocodiles. I’ve been all across Africa and I’ve never seen so many crocs, sunbathing their scaly selves on the beach, slithering around in the sediment-rich, chocolate-milk-colored water and waiting until the last possible instant to slowly sink away before our skiff bumped into them.As our boat approached a pod of hippos (Don’t you love animal group names? A pod of hippos? A bask of crocodiles? A coalition of cheetahs? A tower of giraffes? Who gets to come up with these, anyway?), an enormous hippo popped out of the lake. We couldn’t have been more than 20 feet away and it stared right at us, beads of water dripping off its whiskered face, sizing us up. “Don’t you wish you knew what that guy was thinking?” I whispered. “He’s probably thinking one thing,” my wife, Courtenay, answered. “ ‘What’s that?’ ”I wish I could bring all the people I love to the Selous. It’s a magnificent reserve, swallowing you up in endless expanses of acacia trees and emerald green swamps and tawny savannas. Well off the beaten path and one of Africa’s last, great, uninhabited safari areas, the Selous delivers all the big game without the big (human) crowds that descend on the better known African parks like the Ngorongoro Crater in northern Tanzania or the Masai Mara National Reserve in Kenya.I found it so relaxing and rejuvenating — the perfect antidote to staring at a computer all day or constantly checking my iPhone — to just gaze across those mirror-flat lakes and smell the wild jasmine in the air and watch giraffes saunter past so delicately it looked like their long femurs were filled with helium — that’s how lightly and soundlessly these giants float across the earth.I wish, too, the Selous Game Reserve was as animal-friendly as it feels, but that would be giving you the beauty of the place without the truth. A Unesco World Heritage site, the Selous also happens to be one of Africa’s largest hunting grounds. I know, it’s hard to believe, but gunning down endangered wildlife, including lions and elephants, is perfectly legal here, as it is in several other African game reserves. Hunters love the Selous for the same reasons I do: its remoteness and abundance of game.Everybody has an opinion on hunting and I’m no exception. Countless times before, I’ve heard the spirited defense: that big game hunting actually helps protect wildlife, that you sacrifice a few older animals for the betterment of the group, that the presence of licensed hunters scares away poachers who would kill many more animals, and that the proceeds of hunting (it ain’t cheap – in Tanzania, people pay up to $100,000 to kill an elephant) help cover conservation efforts. I’m not going to dispute any of this. But still, there must be more respectful ways to protect wildlife than shooting a few so their heads can be stuffed to gather dust on a wall.If hunting turns you off, please don’t let that keep you from visiting the Selous. You probably will never come across a hunter. The Selous is enormous, nearly 20,000 square miles, bigger than Switzerland, and the designated hunting area within the reserve is separated from the game-viewing side by a big river. In two visits to the Selous that I made last year, I didn’t hear a single gunshot and never saw a single hunter.And the African hunting business isn’t what it used to be, thanks to Cecil. (In case you forgot, Cecil was a beloved Zimbabwean lion blasted into the afterworld by an American dentist. The controversy his death caused in 2015 and the harsh spotlight it cast on African hunting scared away many potential hunters.)For how remote the Selous is, getting there is surprisingly easy, which makes me wonder if its days of tranquillity are numbered. We caught a small propeller plane from Dar es Salaam, Tanzania’s commercial capital. It was a 35-minute flight to a little dusty airstrip inside the reserve. As we puttered through the sky, my boys, Apollo, 8, and Asa, 6, spotted hippos, left and right, below.About a dozen safari companies spanning the range from rustic to glamorous operate in the Selous, far less than say, in the Masai Mara, which may be one reason why the Selous doesn’t draw the khaki-clad masses, at least not yet. We chose the down-to-earth Lake Manze Camp, which several friends who live in Tanzania had recommended. The camp, a collection of 12 large tents, didn’t feel like many of the safari lodges I’ve visited in East Africa. It felt like it had been plopped down the day before we got there.Our tent sat in the middle of a copse of trees and bushes, reachable by a dirt path, positioned so close to the lake that while we lay in bed we could hear hippos splashing around. Our three-day safari, which included game drives, accommodation, food, drinks, park fees, tips and getting up close and personal with a pride of lions, cost about $2,500.Shaun O’Driscoll, a gregarious South African, runs Lake Manze Camp with his wife, Milli. Shaun is opinionated, direct, no-nonsense, but also deeply empathic, a man whose mosquito-bitten legs and perma-smile reveal how much he relishes living in the wild.“You see, we got no gates or fences,” Shaun explained when we arrived, sitting us down in the lodge’s dining area, a big thatched hut. “Anything can come in here. Lions, elephants, buffalos, hippos, anything. You leave your tent, you look around, ‘kay? Now, for you young guys,” he looked down at Apollo and Asa, who were watching him raptly. “No running. You got me? No. Run. Ing. You never know what’s hiding in the bush. And the last thing you want to look like is prey.” Courtenay and I shot each other a worried glance: We definitely didn’t want our kids looking like prey.That night our proximity to nature almost felt reckless. We ate dinner outside under a sky smeared with stars, and after a tasty meal of chicken in ginger sauce, fresh rolls, rice pilaf and chocolate mousse (it’s pretty standard to be stuffed silly on safari), we walked back to our family tent that consisted of two rooms separated by a zippered enclosure. The tent was comfortable but utilitarian – a cot each for the boys, a double bed for us, a steel basin sink, small toilet, shower and a couple of canvas safari chairs on the porch.Around midnight, I heard someone frantically trying to unzip the zipper to our part of the tent. “Daddy! Mommy! Daddy! Mommy!” Apollo yelled. “I just heard a branch break! I just heard a branch break!” Apollo jumped into our bed, his little heart pounding.I had no idea what had stepped on what outside. But I knew that feeling, that sudden terror a random crack in the night can trigger. We quieted him down and he drifted off and eventually so did I. But it wasn’t for long.A few hours later, I woke up again – with a jolt, this time to hear, in the span of about eight seconds, a pod of hippos snorting, two monkeys scrambling on our tent top and one lion a-grunting. A lion’s grunt doesn’t sound like the MGM roar; it’s more of a deep, rhythmic cough. And this cough sounded like it was coming from the next room.My pulse accelerated. The saliva in my mouth dried up. My skin tingled. I confess: I started to panic, imagining two huge yellow eyes surfacing in the mesh window right next to me. I sat up in bed as alert and wired as I’ve ever been. A lion’s claws would have shredded our tent like crepe paper.The next morning at breakfast, in the bright tropical sunshine, we were all cracking up about being wimps as we helped ourselves to scrambled eggs and thick slices of warm banana bread. We then headed off on a game drive – game drives are the backbone of an East African safari, though in the Selous you always have the boat option as well.As our open-sided Land Cruiser rolled through the reserve, I was impressed by how varied the landscape was. Because of all the rivers and lakes, wide swaths of the Selous are impenetrable — picture green, overgrown, scratchy and thorny bush. I can only imagine how grueling and tortuous it was for the first batch of explorers, like Frederick Selous, the Victorian hunter and collector whom the reserve was named after, to hack their way through this place. But the Selous also contains wide-open areas, with wavy yellow grass and, in the distance, jagged brown hills; in between are cool forests.That afternoon we found ourselves in a cool forest. A light rain fell, more like a mist. It softly brushed our skin, tiny droplets sticking to the hairs on our arms. Our falcon-eyed guide, Zacharia, had found some lion spoor near the road and he was tracking it deeper and deeper into the forest. “There!” he finally said, and we all followed where his finger was pointing. Just up ahead a lioness and her three cubs wrestled on a log. We drove even closer and Zacharia cut the engine. We rolled to a stop just a few feet away. Oblivious to us, the lions pawed each other’s heads, pushed each other off the slippery log, tumbled down and hit the muddy ground and sprang back up, training for the rigors of hunts to come. It was as if they were playing king of the mountain but there was clearly a point to it.What made our experience even sweeter was that we were by ourselves. So many times when you’re on safari and spot lions in action, the drivers get on the radio and next thing you know, several other trucks come chugging in, tourists popping out the sunroofs of their trucks, snapping photos like crazy. Here, we were the only car for miles.That’s the magic of this place. It’s all yours. My friend Rob Ross spent four years photographing it for a lavish photo book, “The Selous in Africa: A Long Way From Anywhere.” (Some of Ross’s shots illustrate this story.) He slogged through mucky water, got chewed up by tsetse flies, waited in the intense heat for sleepy wild dogs to wake up and go on a hunt (and sometimes they didn’t feel like it), and he still considers those four years the most rewarding of his life.Where else, he asks, can you “actually feel like you might have been the first person to stand where you’re standing for 10 or a hundred or a thousand years?”I guess the dominant feeling I had in the Selous was being free. Lake Manze Camp made that feeling even deeper. We didn’t have to keep anyone else’s schedule. Shaun gave us a four-wheel drive truck and assigned us a driver and a guide. We could get up when we wanted and drive (or boat) around when we wanted and have our meals in the bush, if we wanted.Every part of the reserve we visited brought the same joys: few cars, zero garbage, trees and plants and wildflowers that couldn’t have looked much healthier, and lots of animals.As Shaun put it on our last evening when we gathered for a final beer by the fire: “There are now traffic cops in the Kruger.” (He was referring to South Africa’s best known wildlife park, which has paved roads cutting across it and the occasional traffic jam.) “This,” Shaun said, spreading his arms as wide as possible, “is the real Africa.”Over the years, in my travels across Africa, I’ve heard that claim many times, in many different places. Who knows what the “real” Africa is. So many of us outsiders seem to be on a search for the Africa we imagined. And for the Africans who live in this part of the world, what we romanticize is simply their home.But that said, there is something undeniably special, and moving, about these last undisturbed places. And standing outside in the dying twilight, surrounded by miles of bush, in the middle of one of the last great untouched spaces left on the continent, I knew exactly what Shaun meant.Jeffrey Gettleman, the South Asia bureau chief for The Times, was the East Africa bureau chief for more than a decade. He is the author of the memoir “Love, Africa.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 Places to Go in 2018How does Jada Yuan, who beat out 13,000 other applicants for the job, feel about spending the year traveling the globe? “Elated and terrified.”So, you are the new 52 Places to Go Traveler! How are you feeling heading into the trip? Elated and terrified — but I keep coming back to elated, which is a good thing. I’ve only been to five of the places on the list, and those are mostly in the United States. I’m so grateful to The Times for picking me to go on this crazy adventure. I’m sure I’m like a lot of people from middle- and working-class backgrounds in that I’d certainly dreamed of traveling around the world — I just never thought it would happen. I grew up in a part of New Mexico where herds of cattle would just wander into our backyard. I went straight from college to working as an editorial assistant at New York magazine, and at the time I was just throwing ideas at the wall, ready to take whatever job came my way. I never thought I’d spend 17 years falling in love with journalism and learning from some of the smartest people I’ve ever met. (Or that I’d get to hang out with Stevie Nicks.) But I also knew when I saw the 52 Places listing, that I’d found the one thing that I wouldn’t be able to turn down if I were lucky enough to get it. Tell us a little about how your professional background will be an asset. The initial job posting said The Times was looking for someone with “the ability to parachute into a place and distill its essence,” and I remember thinking, I’ve done that for years! (Had I known that 13,000 people were going to have the same reaction, I’m not sure I would have felt so confident, but it helped in the moment.) My first writing job at New York magazine was running our party coverage. That meant going to up to four events a night, walking into a strange room and trying to get interviews with whatever celebrities happened to be there. You have to think fast and you can’t have any kind of fear factor, which I hope will come in handy on the road. What tools — literal and online — are you using to prepare? As a great gift to my sanity, Kayak, the online travel aggregator, is working with The Times to handle the first draft of the itinerary, so at least I don’t have to worry about how I’m going to get everywhere or if I’m going to have a place to sleep once I do. That leaves me more time to obsess over packing and gearing up. I’ve been scouring the travel recommendations on The Wirecutter, which was my favorite consumer site before The New York Times acquired it, and The Strategist, which I’d also love even if it weren’t affiliated with New York magazine. I’ve found a lot of great blogs with recommendations, like TripSavvy, SmarterTravel, and Travel Fashion Girl, and have pulled ideas from articles by Ashlea Halpern and Paula Froelich, old work friends who both left media jobs like mine to travel the world. I’ve also had the brains of two foreign correspondent friends to pick: Heidi Vogt of The Wall Street Journal, who’s lived all over Africa and Afghanistan, and Jean Lee, who started The Associated Press’s North Korea bureau. I was just on a snowboarding trip with Jean and downloaded her brain for two hours (look out for that in a future article). What is your greatest hope for the trip? Is it too cheesy to say I hope to fall in love? It’s been a hard road as a single lady in New York and I’m basically going on the most romantic journey I could imagine. It not likely, given how little time I’ll be spending in most places, but I’m trying to head into this trip as open to whatever comes my way as possible, and I promise to write about it if it happens.I also think love could come in many unexpected forms: love of a place that I’ll want to return to once this is over; a renewed love for journalism in the expansive forms I’ll be trying; love for one’s self that comes when you’re stretched to your limits and can see your capabilities. What about your greatest fear?Other than incurring the wrath of Times commenters? Definitely getting sick and being miserable and waylaid for long enough that I mess up the whole project. Do you think you’ll make it to the final destination?Anyone who knows me would tell you that I will be there, even if I’m on crutches and harboring a tapeworm. Bring it on. AdvertisementBy BESHA RODELLAPRIL 2, 2018
GOLD COAST, Australia — Australia has an affinity for nicknames, and Gold Coast — the country’s sixth-largest city — has many of them. In fact, “the gold coast” was once a nickname for the stretch of beach enclaves along Queensland’s southernmost coastline. It wasn’t until the 1950s that the name became official, and the area became a city. These days, people sometimes call it the Glitter Strip.What glitters? The beaches. The aquamarine water. The shiny high-rise condos and hotels that continue to proliferate at an incredible rate.[READ MORE: At the Commonwealth Games, Competing for Medals and Relevance]When the Commonwealth Games start on Wednesday, they will bring massive crowds, but the Gold Coast is built for visitors. Tourism is the region’s biggest industry, and the city’s infrastructure, from its easy-to-access international airport to its convenient light rail system, caters to that industry. There is no shortage of bland but familiar luxury. If you dig a little, though, there is a lot more to the city than its glittery facade.The Gold Coast is famous for its 43 miles of coastline, along which are some of the country’s most popular surfing beaches. If a crowded beach full of beautiful people is your scene, you cannot do better than Surfers Paradise.AdvertisementFor a slightly more nature-focused experience, the tiny Burleigh Head National Park offers an easy hike with stunning views. It ends at the mouth of Tallebudgera Creek, where you can swim in the calm shallow water. This area is the traditional land of the Yugambeh people, and the basalt rock formations in the park are said to be the fingers of Jabreen, a giant who was captured by the mountain.AdvertisementSnaking throughout the city are more than 250 miles of canals, lined with houses, which you can explore via canal cruise or boat charter.For the visitor who cannot leave Australia without cuddling a koala, that experience is (usually) available at the Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary, where you can also feed a crocodile and play with an echidna.Australia’s stellar cafe culture is well represented on the Gold Coast, avocado toast and all. The Paddock Bakery, located in one of the precious few remaining old Queenslander houses, is a great place to start your day.For later, upscale seafood options abound, and it can be hard to parse the tourist traps from the quality establishments.The Fish House in Burleigh Heads (just a short walk from the Burleigh Head National Park) could bank on its view alone — its wide open front windows look out over the arching sweep of the coastline. It is also one of the best places in the country to sample Australia’s incredible seafood bounty, cooked simply and elegantly with a fantastic wine list to match.At Hellenika in Nobby Beach, large pop art portraits of John Stamos and George Michael oversee the dining room, where Greek food gets the fine dining treatment. The restaurant has one of the smartest collections of Greek wine you’ll find anywhere, and slightly updated classic dishes such as dolmades made with veal and wrapped in chard, served with thick, creamy tzatziki.For a less flashy, more intimate meal, it is worth seeking out Lupo, a relative newcomer in the corner of a Mermaid Beach strip mall. Soul music blares, overhead fans stir the air, and the burnished walls and horseshoe bar give it the feel of a vintage expat dive on some tropical island.The food mainly comes from a wood-fired oven but there’s not a pizza in sight — instead you’ll find modern Australian combinations with rustic European underpinnings. Kingfish ceviche comes with a pea puree rather than the citrus brine it gets everywhere else, and steak tartare is reimagined as a raw steak sandwich, doused in smoky Spanish paprika.AdvertisementThere are some charming small towns within easy driving range, and many of them have seen an influx of wealth in recent years as affluence spills out from the Gold Coast and also Byron Bay to the south. Brunswick Heads, about an hour’s drive into New South Wales, has great vintage stores, boutiques and a riverfront park where kids, dogs and families splash in the tidal Brunswick River.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is also home to one of the country’s most lauded new restaurants, Fleet. Reservations at Fleet are basically impossible to secure; for a far more accessible dining experience, the sprawling patio at the historic Hotel Brunswick is one of the region’s great pub experiences.The area’s history as a hippie haven offers some unique sightseeing, such as the Crystal Castle Shambhala Gardens in the breathtakingly beautiful hinterlands above Byron Bay. The gardens are home to some of the biggest crystals in the world, and aura readings (and aura photographs) are available. On your way back down the hill, stop by Federal Doma Cafe in Federal for fantastic Japanese/Australian cafe food.There’s plenty for adventure-seekers nearby, including a ropes course and zip line parks, the largest of which is in Mount Tamborine, a little less than an hour northwest of the Gold Coast. Tree Top Challenge also has a smaller course inside the Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary, but the original Mount Tamborine park has six courses spread over nine acres of forest, with about 100 challenges and 11 zip lines.The surrounding area offers multiple natural attractions, including Springbrook National Park’s Natural Bridge waterfall, which at night is lit by glow worms, fireflies and luminous fungi.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2018, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported by36 HoursA new bike share program, museums, music and, yes, barbecue await visitors. Of special interest this spring: the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.By Elaine GlusacBlues, Elvis and barbecue tend to dominate popular perceptions of Tennessee’s second-largest city. But there are plenty of other diversions, including new developments in entertainment: the opening of Ballet Memphis theater; adaptive reuse projects with significant public art spaces; and an expansion of the museums devoted to Elvis Presley. A bike share system is set to debut this spring, and there is much to discover in lively art districts like Broad Avenue. On April 2 to 4, the city, and specifically the site of the former Lorraine Motel, will mark the solemn 50th anniversary of the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. there with a symposium, day of remembrance and evening of storytelling exploring the question, “Where do we go from here?”After a $27.5-million renovation in 2014, the National Civil Rights Museum, which encompasses the original Lorraine Motel where Martin Luther King, Jr. was assassinated on April 4, 1968, was transformed into an immersive, multimedia experience that begins in a replica slave hold on a ship and covers five centuries of oppression and civil rights struggles (admission $16). Visitors pass through rooms dedicated to the Jim Crow era; a replica of the Montgomery bus where Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat; and lunch counters where students held sit-ins in the 1960s. Transitioning to King and his civil rights activism, the emotional journey culminates outside room 306, the well-preserved hotel room he occupied before he was shot on the balcony. The exit from the museum annex across the street delivers visitors to South Main Street, a historic district undergoing renewal, including the transformation of the former train station into a hotel. On the last Friday of every month, the South Main Historic Art District Trolley Night offers free transit between shops, galleries and restaurants (other times, the fare is $1, or $3.50 for a day pass). The vintage trolleys, temporarily replaced by wheeled versions, are currently being restored and set to resume operations in April. Ride or walk to Stock & Belle to browse caps, patches and prints by Rowdy Dept., and geometric-patterned Kreep Ceramics, both local lines, then hit the beloved dive bar Earnestine & Hazel’s to play the reportedly haunted jukebox.The celebrated chef duo of Andy Ticer and Michael Hudman have collaborated on several Italian-meets-the-South restaurants, including the popular Hog & Hominy. With downtown’s new Gray Canary, they change the pattern, serving up oysters and wood-grilled dishes — from charred kohlrabi salad ($11) to romesco-sauced pork chop ($24) — in a romantic room overlooking the distant Hernando De Soto Bridge spanning the Mississippi. Start with a rum-ginger Wild Rumpus cocktail ($15) and end with the soft-serve ice cream in red wine ($7) to explore their range. Diners seeking the partners’ great Italian ragù — actually, David Hudman, Michael’s father, still makes the family recipe for “maw maw’s gravy” at the restaurants — should hit Catherine & Mary’s two blocks away where the rigatoni with meatballs ($17) warrants an encore meal.Restoring buildings, as opposed to demolishing them and starting over, is a point of pride among Memphians (see the former pyramid-shaped sports arena that now houses a swamp-themed Bass Pro Shop). Once a substantial block of blight, a former Sears distribution center has been rebuilt as the vertical village Crosstown Concourse. The new one-million-square-foot mixed-used development includes apartments, nonprofits, shops and restaurants. Its public art arm sponsors artists in residence and plans to open a performing arts theater in fall. Grab a café au lait ($3.75) from French Truck Coffee and take a self-guided tour of the second-floor gallery including murals, videos and installation artwork. One of the nation’s largest urban parks, Shelby Farms Park, on the east side of town, encompasses 4,500 rolling acres shared with a herd of buffalo. Show up for Saturday’s popular 9:30 a.m. yoga class (free), held on a lake-facing lawn outside the visitor center on fair days, or indoors if it’s raining. If yoga is not your thing, rent a bike ($10 an hour) and cruise the paths. The park lies along the 10.65-mile Greenline, a rails-to-trails conversion that leads back to Midtown Memphis.Having worked up an appetite, sate it with a generous New Orleans-style sandwich at the Second Line in Overton Square, where the popular chef Kelly English pays homage to his Louisiana roots. It resides next to his more formal Restaurant Iris and aims to channel the spirit of musical processions in a destination where, the menu notes, “every day is a party.” Lodged in an intimate bungalow with exposed brick walls and black-and-white photos, the convivial quarters draw fans from around the city for his substantial po’ boys made with braised chicken thighs and Swiss cheese ($12) or fried oysters ($16), including savory sides such as red beans and rice.For music fans, touring Sun Studio (admission $14) is a Memphis pilgrimage. In this modest two-story brick building, the sound engineer Sam Phillips — or, as tour guides like to tell it, his secretary Marion Keisker — discovered a young Elvis Presley. Phillips recorded the future King of Rock ‘n’ Roll’s first single, “That’s All Right,” in 1954, but he was a blues fan prior and recorded other legends, including Howlin’ Wolf and the Prisonaires, whose musical clips are played during the tour. In the actual studio, an unglamorous work room where more recent acts like U2 and Bonnie Raitt have recorded, guides invite tour-goers to pose holding the original Shure 55 microphone used by Elvis and other legends.Memphis’s growing microbrewery scene positions beer as shopping break conveniences in a couple of emerging neighborhoods. Near Sun Studio in the Edge District, High Cotton Brewing Company adjoins Edge Alley, home to a few intriguing shops, including B. Collective, selling artist-made housewares, and Paulette’s Closet, a retailer of fine-condition vintage clothing. Roughly five miles east on an industrial corner next to some train tracks, Wiseacre Brewing Co. anchors the shop-filled Broad Avenue Arts District. Pick up some arty accessories at Falling Into Place then grab a Tiny Bomb pilsner ($5) and hit Wiseacre’s outdoor bocce court and music stage in the shade of a pair of grain silos.New and expanding performing arts venues have concentrated around Overton Square, making the entertainment district a magnet for culture seekers. In August, Ballet Memphis, known for its regionally themed works alongside dance classics, opened a new 38,000-square-foot headquarters here. Glass walls invite onlookers to peer into rehearsals, even when no performances are scheduled. A few blocks away, the acclaimed African-American repertory company Hattiloo Theater recently cast the award-winning playwright Katori Hall as its artistic director. Catch August Wilson’s “Jitney,” April 20 to May 13. Memphis music resounds from downtown’s Beale Street, lined with blues clubs, to venues across town devoted to diverse genres. Begin a progressive listening tour in Overton Square, where Lafayette’s Music Room stages shows from bluegrass to soul in a bi-level room with a raised stage. The retro-furnished Mollie Fontaine Lounge occupies one of the original mansions on Millionaire’s Row downtown, now known as Victorian Village, with music ranging from jazz crooners to D.J.-spun house. Catch boogie fever on the lighted dance floor of the late-night, weekends-only club Paula & Raiford’s Disco downtown.Touring Elvis Presley’s estate, Graceland, home to the kitschy Jungle Room with a carpeted ceiling, remains a bucket-list trip for music fans the world over. As of last spring, there’s much more to see in the new $45 million Elvis Presley’s Memphis, a 40-acre complex of museums, shops and restaurants across the street that aims to cement his place in pop culture history and extend his musical appeal to the next generation of rock ‘n’ roll fans. Tours (from $59) begin at the mansion, where home movies and artifacts like his and her wedding attire focus on Elvis’s personal life. Tour buses bring fans back across the street where a series of exhibits survey the King’s service in the Army, his influence on entertainers like Elton John and Bruce Springsteen, and his collections of showy cars and spangled jumpsuits. A diner named for his mother Gladys serves the fried peanut butter and banana sandwiches ($4.49) he loved.Head back downtown for a few lazy hours at the sprawling outdoor compound Loflin Yard. Backing up to the train tracks, the 1.5-acre site encompasses a cocktail bar specializing in barrel-aged drinks in a former locksmith’s shop, a coach house-turned-bar and a sun-dappled yard between them scattered with colorful lawn chairs. Grab a plate of house-smoked brisket hash ($10) and an aged Tennessee whiskey Old-Fashioned ($10), play a round of corn hole and pretend it’s your own Sunday backyard barbecue. The 1902-vintage Winchester office building has recently been repurposed as the Hotel Napoleon Memphis with 58 crisp rooms. In addition to its pedestrian-friendly downtown location, the hotel houses a restaurant serving breakfast and dinner, and offers free coffee anytime in the lobby. Rooms from $161; 179 Madison Avenue, hotelnapoleonmemphis.com.The Mississippi riverfront glass pyramid that last served as a basketball arena has been refashioned as an immersive Bass Pro Shop, complete with fish- and gator-filled ponds. Overlooking them and the indoor cypress swamp diorama is the rustic-themed, 103-room Big Cypress Lodge. Rooms from $175; 1 Bass Pro Drive, big-cypress.com.The hospitable owners of Memphis Music Mansion rent several private rooms in their spacious home via Airbnb, and host frequent pop-up concerts at the site. Rooms from $75; 539 East Parkway South, Airbnb.com.If you do plan a trip to Memphis, check out these suggestions on what to pack from our Wirecutter team.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBITESThe new restaurant in the Ace Hotel focuses on big flavors, from salty to sweet.By Steve ReddicliffeCheese plays a tempting role in the Aesop’s fable “The City Mouse and the Country Mouse,” so it only stands to reason that a restaurant that takes its name from the tale does so well by dairy: lush feta-style cheese from France, burrata from California that smoothly buddies up with crisp brussels sprouts, bold Cheddar in a bite called Country Mouse.The location may have played a part as well: City Mouse is in the dapper new Ace Hotel Chicago in a space that for decades was an Italian cheese factory called Anona. Ace has earned a reputation for showcasing standout local chefs at its properties; for its hotel in the West Loop neighborhood, the choice was the team from the restaurant Giant, including one of its chefs, Jason Vincent.Giant is actually pretty small — it has 44 seats in a Logan Square storefront — whereas City Mouse has more than 250 when its patio is open. But, Mr. Vincent said, the operating principle behind the menus is similar: “Food tastes better when it has something bitter, something sour, something salty, something sweet and something funky and it’s got some texture.”To make that happen at City Mouse, the Giant crew enlisted the chef Pat Sheerin, formerly of the city’s much-praised Trenchermen and, before that, the Signature Room on the 95th floor of the John Hancock Center.Everything’s delicious and every plate’s a party: sea scallops over a green curry are accompanied by butternut squash, kohlrabi and king crab; Chinese broccoli with roasted San Marzano tomatoes (bonus sweetness and crunch comes from broccoli stems that have been peeled, sliced and grilled); spaghetti with a blizzard of bread crumbs, notably tasty bacon from Beeler’s in Iowa, Calabrian chili and Valbreso feta. Mr. Sheerin’s approach: “Let’s make this vibrant yet have some soul to it at the same time.” It helps that many of the vegetables are grown in the hotel’s garden run by the urban farm Roof Crop.The Roti Mopho at City Mouse is a salute to a similar dish Mr. Vincent was smitten with at the Southeastern Asian restaurant Mopho in New Orleans: here the flatbread is sided with a savory sesame eggplant relish, chunky tzatziki, fresh dates, a chile salsa and feta in olive oil. The Country Mouse is a shout-out squared: to the uni shooters at Giant and to Chicago’s beloved Garrett Popcorn Shops. To recreate the salty-sweet dynamic of the signature Garrett Mix — caramel and cheese corns, combined — City Mouse turns “gorgeous aged Cheddar” (Mr. Sheerin’s words) and “makes basically Cheez-Whiz out of it” (Mr. Vincent), incorporates a corn purée, adds some caramel discs as a garnish and then “a little pop of salt and caviar” (Mr. Sheerin). That’s a happy hors d’ouevre.Desserts (by Angela Diaz, who also worked at Trenchermen) can be just as fun: a sesame-chocolate ice cream sandwich, homespun apple pie with apple ice cream with just a touch of tartness. Drinks are creative and full of flavor: the Middle West sports Old Tom gin, Alessio vermouth, Zucca amaro and Chicago’s traditional bolt of bitterness, malort. Beers are from some of the region’s best brewers (3 Floyds, Tribes).Mr. Vincent gave both Giant and City Mouse their names (the former from Shel Silverstein’s poem “Me and My Giant,” a favorite of his older daughter; the latter from a favorite of his younger daughter). In Aesop’s telling, the rural rodent has a secure life of prosaic peas while metropolitan mouse can dig into sumptuous cheese and honey — but only if a cat and dog won’t pounce (scary). Mr. Sheerin is a city guy, North Side. So which mouse is his restaurant? He thought on it for a moment.“The hotel is definitely city mouse overall,” he said, “but we try to provide the comfort of the country mouse.”Aesop would approve.City Mouse, 311 North Morgan Street, Chicago. Citymousechicago.com. An average dinner for two, without drinks or tip, is about $100.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPursuitsWill the city ban its famed street food offerings? It’s unclear. In the meantime, a quest to find the best fishball noodle stands and much more. By Matt GrossIt was a few minutes after 6 p.m., and Lim Lao Sa, a fishball noodle stand tucked into an alleyway near the Chao Phraya River in Bangkok, had just opened. Rain was falling, hard. A series of deftly arranged tarps sheltered patrons sitting on red plastic stools at a handful of tables. Water drizzled off the tarp edges, down the concrete walls and past exposed wiring. Fluorescent bulbs cast harsh shadows. Lim Lao Sa’s owners — a brother and sister who’d inherited the 60-year-old business from their father — bickered vigorously. My friend Win Luanchaison, a real-estate developer and fervent culinary explorer, and I tucked into our bowls. The quenelle-like fishballs were at once springy and creamy, the rice noodles supple, the broth clear and sure of purpose. It was easy to understand why Lim Lao Sa cooked annually for the Thai princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn. “She eats egg noodles served dry,” said Pawita Boriboonchaisiri, the elder sister.In fact, given all of this — the setting, the food, the feeling that Lim Lao Sa could be washed away in an instant, by a bad mood or even worse weather — I decided that Lim Lao Sa was the platonic ideal of street food. And it was precisely why I’d come to Bangkok. Last April, the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration made international headlines when it announced the city of more than 8 million would ban street food vendors — often considered the world’s best — in order to make sidewalks more accessible. The B.M.A. soon walked back its statement, saying street food would be preserved in Chinatown and the Khao San Road backpacker district, but elsewhere it would be eliminated, the vendors relocated from “vital walkways,” as the Tourism Authority of Thailand put it, to “designated zones and nearby markets.” This would happen by year’s end. Eventually. Maybe. Sometime. I wasn’t going to take a chance. If Bangkok’s ad hoc restaurants were threatened — not only by clean-sidewalk-loving governments but, just as seriously, by gentrification and changing tastes — I had to go before it was too late. In July, I flew to Bangkok for a week of eating nothing but street food.Pretty much immediately, I learned that street food was a term with many definitions. “For me, street food is only a cart,” said Duangporn Songvisava, known as Bo, who with her husband, Dylan Jones, runs the restaurants bo.lan, which received a Michelin star in December, and Err, which serves rustic drinking food with a focus on quality ingredients. When she was young, Ms. Songvisava, now 37, remembered, as many as 20 carts would line up outside her school to sell snacks on sticks to students. “They have, like, the moo ping — grilled pork on a stick, barbecue — the sausage, the fishball. It just fills you up before you have dinner.” Some were pushcarts, others bicycle-based, but all were mobile and ephemeral.That, she said, was the tail end of the golden age of Bangkok street food. “In the old days when someone wants to open a cart or a stall, they know how to cook,” she said. “The idea was, you’re a good cook — maybe you should make some food for other people, for a living. Now, Ms. Songvisava said, profit margins rule. “They just buy everything from the factory, use industrial processed food,” she said. “A lot of seasoning and MSG involved to produce the food because people doesn’t complain.” Ms. Songvisava was telling me this over beers at Talad Saphan Phut, a night market that she considered a sad remedy for Bangkok’s street food woes. It was here, at a lonely, out-of-the-way parking lot, that the city had relocated vendors from the slated-for-destruction Flower Market, on the theory that loyal customers would follow. We were joined by an intrepid eating crew, which included Mr. Jones; Chawadee Nualkhair, the blogger, known as Chow, behind Bangkok Glutton; and the writer Vincent Vichit-Vadakan who had put me up for my stay and is an editor at the Michelin Guide’s Bangkok site.“This is like a good five to 10 kilometers from where the original was,” said Ms. Nualkhair. “So the people who used to eat these guys’ food wouldn’t come here on a regular basis with this special trip.” Only a few vendors in all of Bangkok, she estimated, cooked well enough that people would follow them to new locations. We decided to drown our concerns in the most apropos way: with street food. Along Thanon Chan, in a surprisingly quiet little neighborhood, were sois, or alleyways, full of food vendors, who had been relocated off the main street. Our gang descended upon them, ordering bowls of noodles — yen ta fo, pink rice noodles in broth with wontons and fishballs, and bamee moodaeng, ribbony egg noodles with roast pork — and watery rice porridge studded with bits of duck or nuggets of coagulated blood, and sweet braised pig’s foot, and bags of all kinds of fried things. As we crowded around folding metal tables and accentuated our treasures with chilies in vinegar, or ground dried chilies, and cracked open Thai craft beers, it all felt deliciously normal — the kind of Bangkok street-food life I’d always imagined.That picture grew more complex over the next few days. In the mornings, I’d leave Vincent’s apartment in search of coffee — and more often than not would return with a baggie of sticky rice and skewers of sweet, fatty grilled pork from the moo-ping cart stationed outside his front door. (Vincent lives near a university, so there’s a steady flow of hungry, frugal students. Some things never change.) By lunchtime, I would hook up with a friend for exploratory eating. With Dwight Turner, an American who’s blogged for years at BKKFatty.com, I went to the farther reaches of Sukhumvit Road, a central artery through Bangkok. Several SkyTrain stops past the glistening condos and mega-malls, the street-food crackdown didn’t seem to matter, and Mr. Turner and I had to squeeze past countless vendors — of curries, sausages, fruit, flowers, electronics — occupying sidewalk space.For Mr. Turner, street food was not necessarily defined by mobility. “The necessity,” he said, “is that it’s convenient, at a price that people are willing to pay.”His definition — which will no doubt enrage certain corners of the internet — opened up what I could consider street food to include Bangkok’s shophouse restaurants: boxy, frill-free dining rooms where the cooking is done up front, in a kitchen that’s often little more than an elaborate, sedentary cart. Such was the case at Sai Kaew, the duck noodle shop Mr. Turner brought me to.“In the beginning, I worked full-time in an office like most Thais,” said Sai Kaew’s owner, Ruengchai Chartmongkoljaroen. Thirty years ago, however, he quit his job to push a cart. He set up 10 tables on sidewalk space he’d rented in front of a building, walked his cart in circles to attract attention, and of course worked on his recipes, developing the condiment that became his calling card: light, crunchy, slippery boiled duck intestines, or sai kaew. (Excellent with a slather of his vibrant green hot sauce, and a worthy foil for the sweetly rich duck.) The price for a bowl in 1987: 10 baht, or about 40 cents at the time.“Day 1, we opened from 12 p.m. to 2 a.m.,” he said. “We sold half a duck.”Business improved, but even so, he pushed the cart for 16 years before parking it at this shophouse, where on a good day he and his two daughters, who’ve learned the business from childhood will go through “50 big ducks.” Though his duck noodles are now well known, the price remains right: Lunch for two was 160 baht, or less than $5.This trajectory was one I heard time and again as I ate everything from delicate pig’s brain to incendiary papaya salad to rice noodles stir-fried on a charcoal-fired wok. There might be many reasons to open a cart — a desire for freedom, a love of off-cuts — but eventually, almost everyone wants the security of bricks and mortar. Even Pritipal Singh Sirikumar, whose stand selling crisp, yummy samosas was founded by his father some 50 years ago, dreamed of moving from his open-air nook — about the size of a couch — at the corner of a Chinatown soi. He said it would be to have his own shophouse. “Then we can put in tables and chairs. We can serve more customers. I will serve lassi.”Mr. Sirikumar’s sentiments were echoed by people like Pongsuang Kunprasop, known as Note, a friend I hadn’t seen in a decade but who refused to eat street food with me. “Been sharing sidewalks with rats and cockroach at night for all my life,” he wrote in an email.Over the course of a week, I did not see much vermin, nor did I fall ill. (I did carry charcoal pills, a gift from Ms. Songvisava and Mr. Jones, said to counteract food poisoning.) But I also came to appreciate the appeal of air-conditioning, and to understand that the romance attached to the cart, by Thais as well as Westerners, does not always mesh with reality. It’s hard work to push a cart, and unless you get lucky — like Raan Jay Fai, a crab-omelet stall that won a Michelin star in December (and that is now so busy the owner has said she would like to return the star) — a shophouse restaurant, a permanent stall in a covered market, or even a job cooking “street food” in the food court of a fancy mall promises stability. And for Thais, entering the middle class is often about strolling down a clear sidewalk to work, dining in air-conditioned comfort and going home to a modern condo. Who’s to say they’re wrong in those desires?Today, nearly a year after the crackdown, Bangkok’s street-food vendors and aficionados have grown accustomed to constant change. Talad Saphan Phut, the market where I’d talked with Ms. Songvisava, shut down in December, and the street-food-centric Sam Yan neighborhood is being redeveloped by Chulalongkorn University, whose projects have already displaced vendors in numerous areas. Street food in Bangkok has always been defined by mobility and ephemerality, but this is something new.“Precariousness is the new status quo,” Ms. Nualkhair of Bangkok Glutton wrote via Facebook. “The uncertainty alone is enough to move ppl out of town.”At the same time, street food is a long way from its demise. For every tale I heard of police clearing vendors away, I found a bamee moodaeng stall making its own noodles or heard the late-morning call of a wandering vendor selling curries and fermented rice noodles. However endangered street food is, pursuing it remains an eye-opening way to discover a city like Bangkok. One morning, Rattama Pongponrat, known as Pom, an ebullient culinary consultant and former curator at Museum Siam, led me on a daylong binge, from a breakfast of toast with coconut jam to a sidewalk stand selling noodles with atypically thick slices of offal. There was fried chicken piled atop metal tables. There was glorious mango ice cream from a dinky corner shop. And there was Ms. Pongponrat, overjoyed at it all. When the sun was high, we strode through the shaded alleyways of Chinatown, past tropical fruits pickled in chilies, batter-fried squid roe with a spicy-sweet sauce — until, finally, we burst out onto a bridge where Ms. Pongponrat had hoped to find one particular vendor. Instead, the bridge had been entirely cleared.“Oh, my God, it’s all gone!” Ms. Pongponrat shouted. “I never knew it was a bridge. I’ve never seen this before in my life.” She began swearing, then looked up at a well-tended four-story building, yellow with green shutters, the crisp style at once Chinese and Neo-Classical. “What a beautiful building,” she said in wonder. Then we plunged back into the fray to find another snack.Finding street food in Bangkok is easy — you’ll see fishball and satay stands parked, it seems, in front of nearly every 7-Eleven — but finding the really good stuff takes a little more effort, and a bit of wandering. Addresses for many of the vendors are nonexistent or nonsensical, but this Google Map shows just about every place I visited. Chinatown is an excellent place to begin, for its density of talented vendors and for the official protection they enjoy (at least for the moment). Yaowarat Road is the heart of its street-food zone — think rolled rice noodles with crispy pork belly, or sweet boiled lotus root on crushed ice — but if you wander a little farther afield, you’ll encounter the fishball-noodle stand Lim Lao Sa (on Song Wat Road near Trok Saphan Yuan), Natthapon Coconut Ice Cream (on Phraeng Phuthon Road), and the high-end drinking-food restaurant Err (394/35 Maha Rat Road; errbkk.com). For a stroll through not-yet-gentrified Bangkok, take the Sky Train to Udom Suk station and head down Sukhumvit Road soi 103, through numerous vendors crowding the sidewalk. (Try them!) To the left, in the marketplace, is a bamee moodaeng stall that makes its own excellent noodles, and a few blocks northeast is Sai Kaew, the duck noodle soup shop.To see another way street food is evolving, check out Talad Ruam Sab, known as the Lunch Market, across Asok Road (Sukhumvit soi 21) from Srinakharinwirot University. There you’ll find dozens of tiny stalls serving everything from sweet braised pig’s leg to fiery crab curry with fermented rice noodles. Bring friends, stake out space at a communal table, and order promiscuously.Finally, there is the Michelin guide, whose Bangkok edition includes 28 street-food vendors (all in shophouses, technically). Find it online at guide.michelin.com/th/en/bangkok.AdvertisementFootstepsWhere, but in the Eternal City, is it possible to map a 2,000-year-old eyewitness account of history onto an intact urban fabric?The Portico d’Ottavia is now a soaring ruin at the edge of the Jewish ghetto in Rome.CreditSusan Wright for The New York TimesSupported byBy David LaskinEven without a book or a guide, even after two millenniums of crumbling, the image of the seven-branched candelabrum — the Jewish menorah — is unmistakable on the inner wall of the Arch of Titus in the Roman Forum. Stand at the base of the single-passage arch and look up, and the scene in bas-relief ripples to life with almost cartoon clarity: Straining porters, trudging along what is plainly the route of a Roman triumph, bear aloft the golden menorah and other sacred loot plundered from the Temple in Jerusalem in 70 A.D. The opposite side of the arch depicts the victory lap of the chief plunderer, Emperor Titus — who, as an ambitious young general, crushed the Jews’ revolt, leveled their Temple and brought enough booty and slaves back to Rome to finance an epic construction program that included the Colosseum.I’ve gazed on the Arch of Titus many times in previous trips, marveling at its muscular grace, recoiling from its brazen braggadocio. But it wasn’t until I returned to Rome in October with Flavius Josephus as my guide that I fully grasped the significance of this monument in Jewish and Roman history.“The luckiest traitor ever,” in the words of the historian Mary Beard, Flavius Josephus was a first-century Jewish general who threw in his lot with the Roman legions that destroyed his homeland. When Titus and his father, Vespasian, returned to Rome after the Judean war to inaugurate the Flavian dynasty — successor to the Julio-Claudian dynasty that Augustus founded and Nero destroyed — Josephus went with them. “The Jew of Rome,” as the German writer Lion Feuchtwanger called him in an eponymous historical novel, spent the rest of his days living in luxury in Flavian Rome and writing the history of his times.Turncoat? Asylum seeker? Pragmatic visionary? Historians have long debated Josephus’s motives and character. What’s indisputable is that most of what is known about the violent encounter between Rome and Judea during this period comes out of his work. What’s astonishing is that, with a sharp eye and a bit of research, you can still walk in Josephus’s footsteps in contemporary Rome. Where but in the Eternal City is it possible to map a 2,000-year-old eyewitness account onto an intact urban fabric?The silvery morning light was soothing on my jet-lagged retinas, but traffic was already roaring along Via di San Gregorio as I waited by the gate of the Palatine Hill for Mirco Modolo, the archeologist-archivist who had agreed to take me on a walking tour of Flavian Rome. Today this artery is a rather featureless channel running between the Colosseum and the Circus Maximus — but Mirco, whose youth and reserve belie a tenacious erudition, reminded me that we were standing on the likely processional route chiseled into the marble of the Arch of Titus and inked even more indelibly on the pages of Josephus’s book “The Jewish War.”“At the break of dawn,” Josephus writes, “Vespasian and Titus issued forth, crowned with laurel and clad in the traditional purple robes, and proceeded to the Octavian walks [the Portico d’Ottavia, now a soaring ruin at the edge of the Jewish ghetto].” From the Portico d’Ottavia to the top of the Capitoline Hill, where all proper Roman triumphal processions culminated, is — and was — a 10-minute stroll. But it is clear from Josephus’s account that the imperial entourage took the long way around, circling counterclockwise around the outer precipices of the Palatine before entering the Forum on the side now dominated by the Colosseum.Mirco and I hiked halfway up the Palatine to a terraced ledge overlooking the Forum. “See those tourists following the lady with the flag?” he asked. “They’re walking on the Via Sacra — the main axis through the Forum that the Flavian procession traversed before ascending the Capitol.”I tried to mentally erase the T-shirts and selfie sticks and resurrect the fallen columns. Vespasian and Titus, riding chariots, would have been two dabs of purple surging up the ramparts of the Capitoline through a sea of white togas. In their train, thousands of Jewish slaves shuffled with bowed heads while the heaps of plundered gold and silver bobbed above them, winking in the sun. “Last of all the spoils,” writes Josephus, “was carried a copy of the Jewish Law” — the Torah.Josephus reveals exactly where these spoils ended up. Vespasian had a new temple — the Templum Pacis (Temple of Peace) — built adjacent to the Forum where “he laid up the vessels of gold from the temple of the Jews, on which he prided himself; but their Law and the purple hangings of the sanctuary he ordered to be deposited and kept in the palace.” The palace, in ancient Rome, meant the Palatine (the word palace derives from the hill’s name) — and so, as the autumn sunlight brightened from silver to gold, I mounted the imperial summit.After the buzzing, marble-strewn congestion of the Forum, the Palatine is like a country stroll. The huge squares of weedy grass and clumps of umbrella pines outlined in brick stubs could almost be farm fields — but, in fact, most of the stubs are remains of a colossal royal residence, the Domus Flavia, inaugurated by Vespasian and completed by his wicked, wildly ambitious second son, Domitian. Josephus, whose life spanned all three Flavian emperors, would have come to the Domus Flavia to pay homage to his patrons and perhaps murmur a prayer before the sacred scroll they had cached here.I lingered on the Palatine for half an hour, trying to conjure the nerve center of an empire from its ruins. Somewhere buried under the dandelions and broken shards stood an inlaid niche or marble alcove where the stolen Torah was caged like a captive king.Josephus’ footsteps lie closer to the surface in the Templum Pacis. I’d never heard of this monument, though I must have passed its ruins a score of times on the wide glaring Via dei Fori Imperiali (Street of the Imperial Fora) that Mussolini carved out as his own triumphal route between the Colosseum and Piazza Venezia. On my second morning in Rome, Josephus’s text in hand, I stood by the railing near the Forum ticket booth and peered down at the ongoing excavations of the temple’s sanctuary, arcades, fountains and gardens. Josephus notes that the Templum Pacis, built “very speedily in a style surpassing all human conception,” housed not only the spoils of Jerusalem, but “ancient masterpieces of painting and sculpture … objects for the sight of which men had once wandered over the whole world.”These masterpieces have long since vanished, but a wall of the temple still stands at the entrance of the sixth-century Basilica of Saints Cosmas and Damiano, now a Franciscan convent. One of the resident brothers, who humbly insisted on anonymity, showed me around. “The Templum Pacis was not only a shrine but a kind of cultural center,” he said. “We’re standing on the site of the temple’s library where the Forma Urbis — an immense marble map of the city — was displayed.” He pointed out a rusty bent spike that once fixed marble veneer to the rough-hewed stone. “Go ahead and touch — it’s been here since the first century A.D.”I was itching to get down to the crypt, which covers part of the footprint of the Templum Pacis, but first we ducked into the basilica and took a moment to savor its principal artistic treasure: a shimmering 6th-century apse mosaic of Christ surfing roseate clouds flanked by saints. Perhaps I’ve read too many thrillers, but as I gazed up at this solemnly joyous creation, I imagined a plumb line dropping from the tiles of Christ’s outstretched hand and coming to rest, magically, on the exact spot where the menorah had been stashed — fanciful, but not impossible.The sacred loot has disappeared without a trace, but a shelf of thrillers could be spun from the theories, myths, sightings and urban legends about where it supposedly ended up: hidden in a cave, glittering on the altar of the Basilica of St. John Lateran, carted off to Constantinople, tossed in the Tiber, and, most recently, squirreled away in a sub-subbasement of the Vatican. Alessandro Viscogliosi, a professor of the history of architecture at the University of Rome whom I met toward the end of my stay, has a more plausible — though mundane — explanation: When the Templum Pacis burned in 191 A.D., the gold and silver vessels melted and were subsequently salvaged and recast, probably as coins.“No one really knows what happened to the stuff,” said Steven Fine, a professor of Jewish history at Yeshiva University in New York and the director of the Arch of Titus Project. “There’s a common desire to establish continuity through things — and certainly the visual environment of Rome fosters this.”Copies of Josephus’s books likely burned in the fire as well, but the texts survived, thanks in large part to Christian scholars who embraced him for his early, impartial (but much disputed) mentions of the historical Jesus — the so-called Testimonium Flavianum — in “Jewish Antiquities.” His fellow Jews, on the other hand, have until recently written Josephus off as a traitor and a Roman sycophant.Still, 1,917 years after his death around 100 A.D., Josephus remains one the most famous Jews of Rome — best-selling author, confidante of emperors, member of a religious community that was already well-established when he arrived in 71 A.D. — and is still going strong today with families tracing their lineage “da Cesare,” from the time of Caesar.I reflected on Josephus’s life and legacy as I made a final trek to the Palatine at the end of my stay. The southwest edge of the hill commands an unforgettable view over the Circus Maximus to the skyline beyond, and in the luminous October haze I picked out the distinctive squared-off metallic dome of the Tempio Maggiore — the main Jewish synagogue — and beyond it, the majestic drum of St. Peter’s. Roman, Jewish, Christian: Josephus’s footsteps lead us through the time and place where these three spheres aligned most exuberantly, most surprisingly.David Laskin, a frequent traveler to Rome, is the author of “The Family: A Journey Into the Heart of the 20th Century.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFor years I had wanted to visit my family’s homeland. There at last, I found a memorable tapas bar, soulful culture and a town with my name.By Luisita Lopez TorregrosaAlong the jagged Mediterranean coast of Spain, from Barcelona south to Malaga, along bone-white barren hills and lush olive groves, from the shimmery gardens of Andalusia and the grandeur of the Alhambra, I made my way to the homeland of my ancestors for the first time. It took much of my life to get to Spain. But I’ve known it — the Spain of blood and sand, flamenco, theater and poetry — since I was a child in Puerto Rico. Madrid evoked marvel and dreams for us, and my mother longed for the crimson geraniums of Seville and the dirges of Granada, reciting García Lorca’s lines, “Verde, que te quiero verde. Verde viento. Verde ramas.” My mother, whose ancestors came from Catalonia and Madrid in the late 1700s and early 1800s, wasn’t the only source of my dreams of Spain. Few places have been romanced as passionately as the 1,500-year-old city of Barcelona, capital of the autonomous region of Catalonia. The Catalan poet Joan Maragall called it la gran encisera, the great enchantress. Devastated in the 1936-39 Spanish Civil War and immortalized in George Orwell’s classic “Homage to Catalonia,” Barcelona houses celebrated museums and architecture and was home to the great artists Joan Miro, Antoni Gaudi, Salvador Dalí and the young Pablo Picasso. It has inflamed the passions of visitors the world over: it is the most popular tourist destination in Spain. So that is where I chose to go. I ambled down the mile-long Las Ramblas in Barcelona last summer, through the throng of tourists who, at a fast-rising clip of more than 18 million a year, overrun this Catalan metropolis of 5.5 million people. Las Ramblas, flanked by narrow car lanes and lined by cafes, galleries and souvenir stands, is packed tight night and day, a convivial rendezvous for foreigners and locals alike. The boulevard, which follows the course of a stream that was eventually diverted, was home to convents and monasteries before the anticlerical riots of 1835 destroyed many of them. The promenade, whose name comes from the Arabic word ramla, was rebuilt in the late 19th century and is lined with historic sights: the Teatre Poliorama, where Orwell hid for three days during the Spanish Civil War, and the Mercat de la Boqueria, where the seafood, ham and sausage counters draw hungry denizens. And then there are buskers and backpackers, hawkers and mimes, live human statues in glittering silver makeup, Gypsy troubadours, and, on a second-floor balcony, a Marilyn Monroe look-alike, in a white pleated skirt wafting up to her bare thighs, a takeoff of the steam-vent shot in “The Seven- Year Itch.” The evening was heavy with human heat and humidity, reminiscent of the Caribbean. But I pushed on. To the sea. Finally I reached the Mirador de Colom, an austere 1888 monument to Columbus that looks out toward the Mediterranean. Merchant ships, tourist cruisers, yachts, sailing and fishing motorboats jammed the marinas. I slowed down to study gallery posters and sculptures along the 2.7-mile-long boardwalk. I turned toward a row of open-air fisheries set along the pebbled waterfront, in sight of the crisscrossing steel beams and blue glass of the 44-story Hotel Arts Barcelona soaring over Barceloneta beach. Now, at last, the Mediterranean. It conjures images of the voyage my ancestors took on the way to America.Framed by hills and sea, Barcelona used to be walled off from the Mediterranean by old textile factories and a grimy industrial port. The beaches were filthy with factory waste, railroad tracks and garbage dumps. But after the death of Generalissimo Francisco Franco in 1975 and the birth of constitutional democracy in Spain, which lifted Barcelona as much as the rest of Spain, artists, engineers and architects set about to remake the city, restoring the century-old street grid and redesigning hotels, discos, bars and even food in time for the 1992 Olympic Games. The Games introduced this design-obsessed city to a global television audience. From then on, Barcelona has reigned as a dazzling object of tourism. Now Barcelona is Spain’s most powerful economic engine, a bastion of manufacturing, trade, winemaking, fashion and the arts. With 18 million international visitors in 2016, it is Spain’s premier tourist destination. (The Spanish islands of Mallorca and Ibiza and the Canary Islands off northwest Africa rank second and third, Andalusia is fourth and Madrid sixth.) Today Spain itself is a top international travel destination, with 75.6 million tourists in 2016, nearly double the nation’s population of 46.5 million. Its popularity in Western Europe is nothing short of phenomenal. It ranks third among the most popular travel spots in the world, preceded by France and the United States, according to the United Nations World Travel Organization. Britain, France and Germany provide Spain with nearly 50 percent of its total tourism numbers. American visitors totaled 2 million in 2016. (So far, the rising Catalonia-Madrid political tensions and the Aug. 17 terrorist attack in Barcelona seem to have made little impact on tourism.) Tired and weary of the avalanche of visitors, major destinations are clamping down on mass tourism, issuing proclamations and petitions and holding street protests. Hundreds of thousands of vacationers carpet the strip of beaches along the 99-mile-long Costa del Sol. In landlocked Granada, group tours command vans, taxis and autobuses, pushing to the side pedestrians like myself hiking the uphill cobblestone streets of the old Muslim quarter of Albayzin. Through every major city in Spain, foreigners engulf monuments and parks, meandering up and down castles, fortresses, museums, cathedrals, and, at the Alhambra in Granada, napping in the shade of foliage in the manicured gardens. Over 2.8 million people a year visit Barcelona’s Sagrada Familia, Gaudi’s unfinished cathedral, the most popular monument in all of Spain. On the steamy afternoon that I visited it, I felt that all 2.8 million were there with me, the crowd was that large, unmanageable and distracting. Misdirected from one side to another, I walked outside the monument looking for my guide. I finally found the right group, and we shuffled up the steps to the entrance and were held up by other groups. Our guide, wearing the red jacket that identifies Sagrada Familia doyennes, could barely be heard above the cacophony of voices and scuffling feet. I couldn’t take in the immensity of the church, its iconoclastic design, the inscriptions etched on walls and wooden doors, the towers built like dripping candles, the sweeps of curving walls and statues of odd shapes and faces. On the outdoor steps, tourists plopped down, worn out, sweating, but still dazzled, their eyes raised to the spirals that have become the stuff of souvenirs, fridge magnets and postcards. Pressed by complaints, Spain’s Consulate for Tourism Affairs is moving to redefine international tourism, which made up 11.2 percent of Spain’s 2016 revenue. No one wants the tacky beach-and-booze crowd or the debauchery of the 1980s-2000s when narco traffickers and drug cartels controlled the flow of money, cocaine and hash along the Costa del Sol. “We want tourists who are interested in culture, gastronomy, cosmopolitan travelers,” says the tourism affairs consul in New York, Elisa Sainz Ruiz. In advertisements and promotions, the consulate emphasizes Spain’s diverse culture, gastronomy, ecology, and, of course, art, museums and epic sights. The Costa del Sol’s richest towns are shedding their rogue reputation. On a day trip, I traveled past Marbella’s private clubs and around a Saudi palace compound, and had lunch with a Marbella expert, Natalia Lopez Epin, at a bustling seafront restaurant on a day when the wind off the Mediterranean was sending sunbathers scuttling inside. Founded by a pair of German princes and Spanish aristocrats, Marbella became a splashy and scandal-rich playground for royals, multimillionaires and celebrities in the 1980s, the golden era of Arab tourism. Malaga, too, has cleaned up and revived its fortunes with Michelin-ranked gastronomy, a modern port and maritime walk, and the Museo Picasso, where 204 of his works hang in a restored mansion in the casco antiguo, the old quarter where I got lost more than once. Passenger cruise ships and emerald-green palm fronds at the Paseo del Parque along the bay evoked for me a tropical idyll, and so did evenings around the buzzing streets and paths around the Marques de Lario entrance to the casco antiguo, where I stopped late in the evening at an outdoor bar whose name I cannot remember. It was in Malaga, and in Moorish Granada, where I noticed the ubiquitous presence of Arab culture. I wondered if some of my ancestors had come from that culture, but nothing I found in my family’s history suggested that. But Islamic civilization left a deep mark in Andalusia during seven centuries of domination that ended when Christian forces expelled the Moors with the fall of Granada in 1492. But the Moorish legacy is evident everywhere, in the shadowy tearooms called teterias and back-street markets, in Arab names, the baths called hammams and food. While the teterias I visited in Granada and Malaga had few customers, Arab-influenced cuisine is found everywhere. In Cordoba, a 36-year-old chef, Paco Morales, has opened Noor, an expensive restaurant reinventing Al-Andalus dishes ($83 to $155 per person). But Mr. Morales is neither Muslim nor Arab; he’s Spanish. Some food critics have balked at his quixotic ambition to re-create Al-Andalus kitchen traditions, but he is unfazed, telling me: “People are fascinated with the splendor of the cuisine and the architecture and design of the space.” Over half a million Muslims, mainly from Morocco, which is only eight miles from Spain at the nearest point, have settled in Catalonia, the largest Muslim concentration in Spain. Altogether, 1.9 million Muslims live in Spain, a smaller number than in France, Germany, and Britain. Until recently, relations between Muslims and Spaniards were relatively cordial, quietly strained, or nonexistent. Islamic terrorists killed 192 people in train bomb explosions in 2004, but there had been no attacks in 13 years, unlike the mass killings in the past few years in Paris, Nice, Brussels and London. But in August in Barcelona, a young, homegrown Muslim terrorist drove a van on Las Ramblas, crushing pedestrians, killing 14 and wounding more than 80.The attack revived fears of a Muslim resurgence in Spain and stirred the debate on the role of Muslims in the country’s culture today. Reflecting the complexity of the Muslim issue, some academicians and Arab scholars insist that Muslims are gaining recognition in mainstream culture, but Catalans and Spaniards with whom I spoke dismissed their importance. “Muslims have no influence in the cultural world of this country, and none in our political world,” said Rosa Surinach, an executive with United Nations-Habitat in Barcelona, while emphasizing that there’s no friction between most Muslims and Catalans. Over at the Fundacion de Tres Culturas in Seville, which promotes Muslim and Arab culture, Olga Cuadrado, the institution’s librarian, blamed prejudice for keeping Muslims outside the mainstream. “We need to break stereotypes,” she said. Days later, at Casa Arabe in Madrid, Nuria Medina, an Arab scholar, defended Muslim influence, saying, “That it isn’t in the mainstream doesn’t mean it doesn’t have importance.” Nadia Hotait, a 34-year-old Lebanese multimedia artist and filmmaker who lives in Spain, said that being an Arab was not a problem for her, telling me that she “faced the same obstacles as any young woman artist in Spain, which is to say that there are still more hurdles in just being a woman than there are from my nationality. Much of my work and study has been supported by Spanish institutions and awards, even if the topic I was dealing with was Arabic.” But the Madrid writer Muhsin Al-Ramli saw it differently. “The biggest obstacles and difficulties are due to lack of state support, lack of courage and daring on the part of Spain’s publishing houses, the nepotism in the cultural media and favoritism in the culture in general.” One way or another, rich or poor, artist or farmhand, Muslims are a growing factor in Spain. The poor settle in the job-rich cities, remote towns and agricultural fields along the Mediterranean. The rich own homes in Marbella and park their yachts in Puerto Banus, the glitziest marina on the Costa del Sol.The village of Torregrossa lies flat in the farm country of Catalonia, a nine-century-old town of about 2,200 people. For some time, I had assumed that a branch of my family originated there, given the similarity in the town name and my family name. One day, shortly after my arrival in Barcelona, I traveled the 90 minutes to Torregrossa to find out. An acquaintance in Barcelona had arranged for me to meet Josep M. Puig Vall, the amiable 50ish town mayor. We met in his office in the Ajuntament, which, like most of Torregrossa, was ancient, with shuttered windows, dark stairs and stone walls. He offered coffee and spoke quickly and proudly about his town, where he’d lived all his life. Then, somewhat apologetically, he said that there had never been a Torregrosa in Torregrossa. He could confirm that Torregrosa, my mother’s paternal name, is Catalan but found in many parts of Spain. Perhaps it was my mother’s passion for carnations, flamenco and jamon Iberico. I imagined her maternal bloodlines came from southern Spain, from Seville, or Cordoba, or maybe Madrid and bordering provinces. I arrived in Seville late one night on the train from Malaga. I had been traveling by ferry, autobus and train for over 18 hours after a short overnight visit to Tangier, Morocco, onetime international center of espionage and cinematic setting of forbidden sex and Dionysian poetry. The international jet set, fashion designers, royals, movie stars and writers made their appearances in Tangier. But it has fallen on hard times. The spotlight has turned off. After that trip, Seville seemed miraculous. I checked in at my hotel shortly before midnight, walked down the boulevard Reyes Catolicos, past open restaurants and bars, turned on a side street and spotted a small neighborhood tapas bar called La Azotea, clearly a place that tourists don’t find by chance. I took up a stool at the bar, ordered a glass of dry red, and asked for whatever the kitchen wanted to make me. I looked around the room, an everyday tapas bar on Zaragoza Street with a blackboard listing wines and patrons laughing and sharing plates. Shortly a small bowl was placed in front of me. A delicate piece of delicious grilled or sautéed cod rested on a bed of mashed or puréed potato-like vegetable. The wine was excellent. When I finished, I asked to meet the owner-chef but didn’t have the presence of mind to ask for the recipe. I wrote down the name of the place and paid my bill: eight euros ($9.50). Instantly, from the first hour, Seville for me was all like that, a feast of the senses, the simplicity of daily life. Walking one morning in the Parque de Maria Luisa, I thought of my mother, who loved it, who had its name. Another day, I found the romantic Art Deco bar in the opulent Alfonso XIII hotel, and chatted with new acquaintances while sipping a perfect Negroni. Spain has been a haven for writers and dreamers and wanderers, expats from colder lands. Unlike Mexico, where expatriate Americans tend to concentrate in San Miguel Allende, Mexico City and the Riviera Maya, Americans in Spain are scattered through the peninsula. Sarah Gemba, a Bostonian who fell in love with a Spaniard, moved to Seville years ago and started a travel agency. A fellow New Englander, Lauren Aloise, transplanted herself to Madrid and established food tours. My mother had wanted to move to Madrid and lived with that dream for years but never managed to do it. As a child, I didn’t understand her passion for Spain, why she felt so at home there. But now I know. That came to me again while seated at the outdoor restaurant Mariatrifulca, off the Triana Bridge over the Guadalquivir River in Seville. I noticed a face at a nearby table. It was the image of my grandmother, my mother’s mother, her aquiline nose, large deep-set dark eyes, thin lips, high cheekbones, dark hair pulled back in a bun. It was startling, but over the days I spent in Seville, I picked out other familiar faces, and I wondered if way back we had been related. One evening after dinner at Duo Tapas, an outdoor spot on a busy plaza, a couple of acquaintances and I walked leisurely around the Barrio Santa Cruz, the gem of Seville’s intricate casco antiguo, a nest of elegant two-story homes of pale colors and decorative grillwork butting cobblestone streets. It was near midnight, not late by Spanish standards. Strollers lolled under the soft lights of street lamps, bars spilled over with patrons. Minutes later we were climbing the three flights of stairs to the rooftop bar of the EME hotel. It was packed. Taped music blared from speakers. I found myself bouncing to an old hit whose name escaped me. More friends of friends joined in. There were drinks, introductions, stories. Beams of pinkish light bathed the majestic 16th century Catedral de Santa Maria de la Sede, the world’s largest Gothic church, built on the site of the 12th-century Almohad mosque with its minaret, La Giralda, towering beside it, symbol of the interlocked cultures of Spain. I couldn’t take my eyes off the great Catedral and La Giralda, images I had carried in my mind much of my life.Days later I was on the fast train to Madrid, and as we rolled past olive groves and barren hills, the land getting dryer, the hills more stark, the landscape harder, I was thinking about the whitewashed towns of Andalusia. For a long time I had wanted to live in a place where the sun was broiling and the sea came limpid and soft to the shore. I wanted that blanched earth, those bleached buildings, and the geraniums blooming crimson in the sun. Next, Atocha train station, Madrid, pedazo de la tierra en que naci. Home.Luisita Lopez Torregrosa is a professor at Fordham University and a former editor at The New York Times. She last wrote about Mexico City for Travel.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byIF YOU GOA guide to restaurants, hotels and sites in Barcelona, Seville, Granada and Malaga.By Luisita Lopez TorregrosaDaily rates, shown in euros and dollars, may change seasonally. At the current exchange rate $1 equals .90 euros.BarcelonaHotel Casa Fuster, one of Barcelona’s classiest hotels, is housed in a 1908-11 Modernista mansion. Check out the romantic Café Vienese and the rooftop terrace and pool with spectacular views. Rooms from 262 euros. Passeig de Gracia 132; hotelcasafuster.com.Casa Gracia, a high-design hostel with a cool atmosphere, has a DJ-driven bar and quirky common spaces. Rooms from 103 euros. Passeig de Gracia 116; casagraciabcn.com.Granada Hotel Hospes Palacio de Los Patos is widely regarded as the best hotel in Granada. Housed in a classic Unesco-protected manor that features a grand staircase, an Arabian garden and the Roman Emperor spa. Rooms from 200 euros. Solarillo de Gracia 1; hospes.com. Hotel Zaguan del Darro, in the historic Muslim quarter Albayzin, is a 16th century house with 13 different rooms, some looking out over the Rio Darro, close to the Alhambra. Rooms from 55 euros. Carrera del Darro 23; hotelzaguan.com. MalagaGran Hotel Miramar, a palatial estate looking over the Mediterranean, evokes Nazarid Moorish architecture with ornate and delicate designs. Rooms from 310 euros. Paseo de Reding 22; granhotelmiramarmalaga.com/enMolino Lario, at the entrance to the hyperkinetic casco antiguo (old city), has comfortable contemporary rooms, soothing décor, and a terrific staff. Small shuttered balconies look out to the bay and to the grand Cathedral. Rooms from 130 euros. Calle Molina Lario 20-22; hotelmolinalario.com.SevilleHotel Alfonso XIII, created in 1928 and renovated in 2012, is among the most luxurious hotels in Europe. It features classic Moorish Andalusian architecture with a glassed-in courtyard restaurant, glazed tiles and terra-cotta brick. Enjoy a cocktail at the jazzy Bar Americano. Rooms from 312 euros. Calle San Fernando 2; hotel-alfonsoxiii-seville.com. Hotel Casa 1800, an idyllic inn in the heart of the Casco Viejo’s Barrio Santa Cruz, offers great service, a warm atmosphere and elegant suites. Rooms from 195 euros. Calle Rodrigo Caro 6; hotelcasa1800sevilla.com.BarcelonaTickets, one of the most sought-after reservations in the restaurant world, is the new culinary success of Ferran Adrià, who built a gastronomic revolution with his El Bulli. In a quirky space with circus and theater décor, Tickets serves a parade of exceptional dishes that defy description. Dessert is served in a separate room evoking Alice in Wonderland. Book only online two months in advance. Dinner for one (17 tapas plates, dessert tastings and a drink cost 124.85 euros. Avinguda Parallel 179. elbarriadria.com.Cervecería Catalana draws a sophisticated morning-to-late-night crowd to its wide selection of hot tapas, salads and sausages, excellent beer and wine. It has a bustling and entertaining atmosphere smack in the middle of the splendid L’Eixample neighborhood. Two tapas and a mug of beer, 12.50 euros. Carrer de Mallorca 236; phone 93 216 03 68. GranadaCarmela Restaurante specializes in Mediterranean cuisine with Andalusian traditions in a small dining room overlooking a popular corner of the old city. A dinner of bacalao (cod) mozarabe, a pionono dessert (bananas) and one glass of wine, 31.70 euros. Calle Colcha 13; restaurantecarmela.com.Bodegas Castaneda, popular with tourists and locals, the bustling Castaneda is the tapas bar to end all tapas bars. Longtime waiters call out orders, slide through the crowd, and manage to serve hundreds of people quickly and nicely. Go early and expect to wait for a table. No reservations accepted. A dinner of fabulous berenjenas rellenas (stuffed eggplant), a slice of quiche, and one beer, 7 euros. Calle Almineceros, off famous Calle Elvira. No phone. MalagaEl Refectorium, enclosed in glass windows in a contemporary setting, is far from the familiar tapas bars of the casco antiguo. It’s informal but serves an elegant dinner in a restful dining room. A terrific sirloin cooked perfectly to order and a glass of exquisite Ribera come to 30.80 euros. Postigo de los Abades 4; phone 952 60 23 89.El Piyayo, famous for its pescaitos fritos (fried fish), serves up typical tapas fare including manchego cheese to go with robust red wine. Dinner for one, 10 euros. Calle Granada 36; entreplatos.es. SevilleLa Azotea, a popular neighborhood tapas bar, offers a welcoming ambience, artfully presented plates and excellent wines. Dinner for one with wine, around 10 euros. Azotea has four branches in Seville. My favorite is on Calle Zaragoza 5; phone 955 11 67 48.Mariatrifulca, a historic gastrobar with a view of the Guadalquivir River at the end of the Triana bridge, offers a rich menu of seafood, beef, salads. Their croquettes, lobster salad and arroz negro (black rice) are memorable. Dinner for three with wine, 90 euros. Puente de Triana, Plaza del Altozano n1; mariatrifulca.comZelai stands out among the countless tapas bars and cerveserias in the Casco Viejo with fabulous cod over black linguine. Dinner for one, around 10 euros. Calle Albareda 22; phone 954 229 992. In Spain, everything.Dozens of travel guides provide maps and details about Spain’s monuments, castles, fortresses, cathedrals and museums. Lonely Planet publishes reliable and current guides with detailed maps, lists of everything, rates and costs, and sections on history, culture and the arts.You should purchase sightseeing tickets in advance online. Group tour tickets to the Sagrada Familia in Barcelona start at $25. Private tours cost more. For example, private tours to the Mezquita, in Cordoba, will run $200. The Alhambra offers similar rates and a variety of tours.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCheck InThe Hotel Californian features Moroccan-inspired design and Mediterranean dishes at its fine dining restaurant.By Sheila MarikarFrom $360 Opened in September, the 121-room Hotel Californian is a gateway to a revived Santa Barbara waterfront. It’s also a do-over: one of its three buildings sits on the site of the original Hotel Californian, which was destroyed, two weeks after opening, by a 1925 earthquake. The property changed hands and fell into disrepair in the 1990s. In 2011, a new owner acquired the hotel, kept the four-story facade, which offers sweeping views of Santa Barbara and the Pacific Ocean, and reimagined everything else. A Moroccan design scheme by the Hollywood interior decorator Martin Lawrence Bullard differentiates Hotel Californian from the hacienda-style resorts that dot the Southern California coast. The property’s lawn and plaza provide prime venues for sunbathing and people watching, and the city is returning to normal after wildfires and mudslides wreaked havoc on the region. The hotel’s three buildings cluster around the corner of State and Mason Streets. Walk one block west and you’ll reach the beach, Fisherman’s Wharf and a jogging and biking path that hugs the shore. Two blocks north of the hotel is the Funk Zone, Santa Barbara’s burgeoning arts district with galleries, restaurants, and more than 20 wine-tasting rooms. The Santa Barbara Amtrak station is a seven-minute walk from the hotel and offers direct service to and from Los Angeles (generally a two and a half-hour ride). Most rooms at the Hotel Californian come with one king bed; my mother and I, visiting midweek in November, were able to reserve one of the few double queen rooms with a view. It wasn’t the best — those go to the suites that face the beach — but our spacious third-floor room had a veranda with armchairs from which to watch ducks on a greenish creek. The interior was lavishly decorated with oil-rubbed bronze lamps and patterned tile — the hotel imported more than one million pieces from Morocco — but some accents, like the brass snakes above the bed, verged on garish. USB ports by the beds offered an easy way to charge devices; other in-room gadgetry proved more difficult. The Nespresso coffee machine was maddeningly difficult to master, even though I use a similar model at home, and ejected every other espresso capsule without dispensing anything.  Laser-cut panels framed the shower, furthering the Moroccan theme, and while the shower stall was large enough, given the considerable floor space, the lack of a bathtub was curious. The double sinks and marble countertops left plenty of space for our toiletries. The best part of the bathroom: the plush, microfiber bathrobes by the Italian manufacturer La Bottega. Only one of the hotel’s buildings has a lobby staffed 24/7 (ours was unmanned after dark; key cards unlocked the door to the street). Every room has a flat-screen television, and the hotel provides complimentary Wi-Fi, bottles of water and Nespresso capsules. A small gym on the ground floor of the Californian building has up-to-date machines and can be accessed anytime with a key card, and a pool, firepit and pool loungers line the fourth floor rooftop. There are also lounge areas in the ground floor, Turkish-themed spa. Rendered in Moroccan blue, it offers an array of treatments.  The executive chef Alexander La Motte, who previously worked at Thomas Keller’s Napa Valley landmark, the French Laundry and his New York mainstay, Per Se, elevates beach-adjacent dining throughout the property. The airy, market-style cafe Goat Tree offers inspired breakfast entrees such as shakshuka, a Middle Eastern dish of baked eggs. For dinner, a finer dining restaurant, Blackbird, serves artfully plated riffs on Mediterranean fare, like figs with za’atar and burrata. The hotel’s room service menu offers a more standard assortment of burgers, salads and sandwiches. A trendy upgrade of the standard California coastal resort, the property straddles the line between downtown hot spot and beachside getaway. With a wide variety of amenities and things to eat, time here is best spent outside the room.Hotel Californian, 36 State Street, Santa Barbara, Calif., the hotelcalifornian.com    AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byAfter Hurricane Maria, parts of the Puerto Rican capital are back in business, including many hotels and restaurants. Tourism is down but the scene can be lively.By Paola SingerHurricane Maria's devastating effects on Puerto Rico, along with the political face-offs and logistical problems that ensued, have been widely reported. There are still important problems to address. But it seems that San Juan, the capital, is starting to regain its stride as a travel destination.I first came to San Juan in the late ’80s, when my stepfather was transferred here for work. My most vivid memories of that time include swimming in the ocean at night during St. John’s Eve (one of Puerto Rico’s biggest festivals), developing a serious crush on the shaggy-haired members of the band Poison, and experiencing Hurricane Hugo, which ripped into the island on Sept. 19, 1989, and was considered the worst disaster in 50 years. We spent the night of the storm with a family that lived in a sturdy old house about a mile away from the coast (our apartment was practically on the sand). While I realized we were properly sheltered, the furious rattle of the wind against the home’s metal shutters left me cold with fear. I didn’t know that surviving the brunt of a hurricane is only part of the ordeal, and the days that followed were not difficult enough to make me think otherwise. Brushing my teeth with bottled water and reading magazines by flashlight for a couple of weeks felt more like an adventure than a hardship. I was just a kid — and so, it turns out, was Hugo.I left San Juan after graduating from high school, but I come back every year to visit my mother and stepfather, who are still living here as retirees. When I learned that Maria would make landfall as a possible Category 5 hurricane, memories of Hugo came flooding back, especially the eerie rattle of those shutters. Texting with my mother on the evening of Sept. 20, I felt irrationally worried that she would be scared during the storm, not guessing that the scariest part would come later. Maria’s impact was brutal: bridges crumbled, street signs toppled over, trees were stripped bare, and practically every building suffered some sort of damage, from minor flooding to structural deterioration. Worst of all, the island’s aging power grid was wrecked, causing prolonged blackouts. Recent reports indicate that about 1.5 million Puerto Ricans, particularly those living in small towns and rural areas, are still without electricity. I booked a flight to San Juan earlier this month, somewhat unsure of what to expect. As the airplane began its descent, the city looked unchanged, its odd mix of high rises and strip malls still surrounded by emerald-green vegetation and turquoise waters. And on the ground, I saw bruises but mostly recovery and a strong willingness to get on with life.San Juan’s hotels, which were largely occupied by military and Federal Emergency Management Agency personnel after the hurricane, are welcoming travelers again. On a recent afternoon, the beachfront Condado Vanderbilt, an Art Deco-style hotel founded by Frederick William Vanderbilt in 1919 and fully renovated in 2014, hummed with activity. A quartet was getting ready to play Latin jazz by the lobby’s Martini Bar, and dinner service was underway at the elegant 1919 Restaurant, whose chef, Juan José Cuevas, is helping local farmers restore their crops. La Concha Resort and San Juan Marriott Resort, also perched on the beaches of tourist-friendly Condado, are operating as usual. In Isla Verde, another popular oceanfront neighborhood, choices include the Intercontinental San Juan and the Water Beach Club Hotel. And in cobblestoned Old San Juan, Hotel El Convento, a boutique lodging set in a refurbished 17th-century convent, is looking as picturesque as ever. Only a handful of properties remain closed. “I believe San Juan has a bright outlook as a destination, especially as we continue to make it known that we’re back and ready to welcome tourists,” said Peter Hopgood, the vice president of sales and marketing for International Hospitality Enterprises, which manages six hotels in the metro area.As for restaurants, closures seem to be the exception rather than the rule, although many establishments are dealing with issues like disrupted food supplies and diminished activity. “We’re not yet seeing the same number of travelers as before Maria,” said Martín Louzao, a chef and an owner of Cincosentidos, a hospitality group that runs four restaurants. “Almost 70 percent of our business depended on them, so we’ve had to be nimble and adapt.” For now, the industry is sustained by Puerto Ricans, who may have limited spending power but are exceptionally fond of eating out. Their gregarious spirit is palpable in Santurce, a laid-back dining district anchored by a square known as La Placita, where scores of small bars blasting salsa tunes draw nighttime crowds. The neighborhood is also home to one of San Juan’s best restaurants, Jose Enrique, run by the chef of the same name who pioneered the local farm-to-table movement. Another noteworthy destination in Santurce is Lote 23, an Instagram-ready, open-air food court that offers everything from locally sourced roasted pork to Asian noodles. In Condado, Mr. Louzao’s Cocina Abierta, a casual restaurant with an eclectic menu of global staples, is still packed on weekend nights. And nearby Sabrina continues to serve a highly rated Sunday brunch. “Tourism is vital to Puerto Rico’s full recovery, and the best way to support the island is by continuing to visit, stay at hotels, eat at restaurants, and buy from local businesses,” said Carla Campos Vida, the interim executive director of the Puerto Rico Tourism Company. The agency’s website, See Puerto Rico, has updates on open attractions.   AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesVirgilio Martinez, who runs the beloved Lima restaurant Central, has opened Mil, which sits 11,706 feet above sea level.By Abbie KozolchykTaking destination dining to new heights, a celebrated Peruvian chef has just hung out his shingle 11,706 feet above sea level, where the entirety of his street address is “ascending 500 meters from the Archaeological Complex of Moray.” Yet despite the enigmatic coordinates, and the fact that the nearest villages are all but concealed from the outside world, every taxista within a 100-mile radius will soon know these back roads by heart. There is, after all, no concealing the resident chef: Virgilio Martinez, who also runs Central, the nine-year-old Lima institution that currently ranks fifth on the closely watched World’s 50 Best Restaurants list. While he’s unassuming in the extreme, the 40-year-old has already left a distinct footprint with his new Andean outpost, Mil, which opened at the end of February.  Having formed a co-op of sorts with the tiny nearby farming communities of Kacllaraccay and Mullaka’s-Misminay he’s aiming to chronicle and revive ancient local ingredients and food practices that might otherwise be lost to time. Among others in his merry band of preservationists are his wife Pía León, an acclaimed chef in her own right; his sister Malena Martinez, head of the group’s native ingredient-cataloging operation; and Francesco D’Angelo Piaggio, the staff anthropologist and community outreach consigliere who has the best backstory of the bunch: When he was still working on his thesis in a nearby rural community, his mother saw the Virgilio Martinez episode of “Chef’s Table” on Netflix and insisted her son do the same, given the gentlemen’s eerily simpatico sensibilities. A series of emails and a job at Mil soon followed. The result of the group’s efforts is unlike anything else in my restaurant-going experience: Lunch (there is no dinner service as of yet) consisted of eight courses, a gustatory grand tour of altitudinous ecosystems, each stop an opportunity to use age-old ingredients and techniques to arrestingly modern effect. Our first “moment” (as they call courses at Mil) was entitled Preservation, a nod to the local practice of preserving potatoes during the harvest. “The technique involves exposing potatoes to cold water flow, then sunlight, to freeze-dry them,” Malena Martinez explained. But rather than serve the resulting traditional chuño as is, her brother grates, rehydrates, cooks — and once again dehydrates it — until an amazingly airy, diaphanous chip emerges. And once that crisp meets the accompanying uchucuta — a heady blend of herbs, chili and corn — you’ll be ruined for all other chips and dips. Other standout moments included Andean Forest, with its Hogwarts-evoking “lupinous legumes” in an extra-bright (flavor- and color-wise) leche de tigre; Diversity of Corn, the alternately creamy and crunchy components of which add up to something “like a muesli,” according to Mr. Martinez; and Extreme Altitude, our intro to cushuro, or, as one young server proudly proclaimed, “colonies of bacterias” — palate-pleasing, blue-green spheres plucked from Andean lake water. The drink pairings were equally and deliciously high-concept, ranging from a pampa anise-spiked smoked lettuce infusion to a citrusy kiwicha milk (we stuck with nonalcoholic because of the altitude).Standing at the restaurant’s front door after the meal for one last look at the Inca ruins just outside, we could hardly disagree with Mr. Martinez’s assessment of his new neighborhood: “For me, this is the best place to eat, to get ingredients — and to meet people.” Mil, 500 meters (one-third of a mile) above the Archaeological Complex of Moray; milcentro.pe/en/. Lunch for two, without drinks and tip, is 947 soles (about $290) for the eight-course tasting menu.Advertisement

      Compiled by JUSTIN SABLICH

JAN. 2, 2018

How savvy a traveler are you? Here are a few questions, culled from recent articles in our Travel Tips collection, to test your travel smarts. Even if you don’t know the answers, you might learn something.
If you pay for the newer Clear screening program, you can become a member of T.S.A. Precheck at a discounted rate.TrueFalseWhen traveling with children, it’s best to loosen up on the rules a bit, according to Henley Vazquez, the chief executive and co-founder of Passported, an online travel company that specializes in luxury family travel.TrueFalseIf you come across bargain airfare for 2018, there’s no need to rush booking, as destinations with low prices tend to remain affordable for long periods of time, according to Adam Goldstein, Hipmunk’s chief executive.TrueFalseThe best meal of the day to have at farmers’ markets, according to the chef Alain Ducasse, is:BreakfastLunchDinnerFor an affordable vacation to Australia, you should consider:Not driving.Tour using public transportation.Find a rental rather than a hotel.All of the above.More than half the people taking trips with Intrepid Travel, about 75,000 people a year, are now going solo.TrueFalseIf you’re at a ski resort and you do not ski, Nancy Cutter, the president of Court Travel, recommends:Forcing yourself to learn how to ski, because you will probably love it.Look to see if the resort offers a photo safari or cooking classes.Just relax, especially if there’s a spa.The second and third answers.All of the above.Because of a severe drought, tourists should avoid Cape Town, South Africa.TrueFalseAdvertisement

      Compiled by JUSTIN SABLICH

MARCH 7, 2018

How savvy a traveler are you? Here are a few questions, culled from recent articles in our Travel Tips collection, to test your travel smarts. Even if you don’t know the answers, you might learn something.
Related Article
Some hotels are now offering discounts and other perks to guests who are willing to forgo housekeeping altogether.TrueFalseWhich of the following are ways to save money on a trip to Las Vegas?Avoid visiting during citywide conventions.Avoid visiting in July and August because the city’s hot weather brings in more crowds.Avoid popular restaurants during breakfast time.All of the above.Some popular sunscreen brands may be bad for the environment.TrueFalseWhile many gestures are universally understood, there are exceptions. Which of the following are generally true when it comes to body language in some foreign countries?In many of the countries in the Balkans, nodding means “no.”In many of the countries in the Balkans, shaking your head means “yes.”In some countries, including Russia, locals don’t smile at people they don’t know.The first and third answers.All of the above.If you’re considering a trip to Europe, waiting until June is likely to save you money.TrueFalseThe following are effective ways to stay fit while on a vacation:Create your own walking tour.Start your day with a mini workout.Choose things to do that involve being active.All of the above.When traveling to China, it’s a good idea to have cash on hand.TrueFalseIf what you want to eat is not on your room service menu, you should consider:Writing a letter of complaint so the item is available on your next visit.Ordering off the menu anyway.Accepting your fate and ordering something on the menu.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HOURSThis multicultural hub in the highlands of southern Mexico is known for its mild climate, rich culinary and craft traditions, and complex history. By Freda MoonEven as strong earthquakes have shaken the region, the centuries-old city of Oaxaca remains largely unrattled. In the shadow of Monte Albán, the hilltop capital of the Zapotec civilization, this multicultural hub in the highlands of southern Mexico was once a quiet regional center. In recent years, the city has been transformed, for better or worse, as bohemian expats and artists have been drawn to its mild, semitropical climate, sturdy Spanish colonial architecture, rich culinary and craft traditions and thrilling art scene. Galleries and boutique hotels, upscale restaurants and trendy mezcalerias have opened in dizzying succession. Increasingly worldly, it remains a place where Mexico’s perilous and complex history reveals itself in ways both beautiful and brutal.Opened in 2011, the Centro Cultural San Pablo is housed in a former 16th-century Dominican convent and set around a tiled patio etched with bright green moss. The beautifully restored center has multiple exhibition and performance spaces, including one in the Rosary Chapel, and showcases everything from Oaxacan crafts — ornately carved alebrijes (whimsical wooden statues), indigenous textiles and traditional black pottery — to pop art, photography, string quartet performances and even the odd adults-only marionette show. The complex also has a cafe, an indoor children’s play area, a research library and a terrace restaurant popular with local bigwigs in natty business suits, which makes for excellent people watching. A block east of San Pablo, in a storefront behind a pumpkin-colored facade, Cabuche is a festive restaurant serving reverential interpretations of street food and market staples: huaraches Menonita, edible tablets of sandal-shaped masa topped with tasajo (dried salted beef); Oaxacan string cheese and purslane (130 pesos, or about $7); and deeply flavorful soups, ranging from classic pozoles (choose between the red, green or white version, starting at 60 pesos) and a fiery shrimp caldo called levantamuertos (translation: raises the dead, 130 pesos). Sample the daily selection of guisados (25 pesos) — the miscellaneous stews that traditionally fill street tacos — like huitlacoche (corn fungus), potato with chile de agua (a light green pepper popular in the region) and rajas (strips of mild poblano pepper) with cheese. Specials, including house-made craft beer (dark and amber) and pulque (fermented sap from the maguey plant) flavored with celery, mango or oats, are advertised in multicolor chalk around the art-filled, two-room dining room.Completed in 1909, one year before the Mexican Revolution, the grand Macedonio Alcalá Theater took six years to build. A baroque Renaissance-inspired facade topped by a green dome with an interior painted with portraits of artists and writers, the theater is among the most unusual buildings in Oaxaca’s Spanish Colonial city center. The striking structure hosts everything from operas and Latin American art house films to the Oaxacan symphony orchestra and book festivals. Drop by the ticket office to view the event calendar and request a tour of the century-old building.Eating pizza in a city revered for its regional Mexican food may seem like sacrilege. But the exceptional pies at two-year-old La Matatena are a worthwhile diversion. The mom-and-pop restaurant serves thin-crust pizza ranging from the traditional (pepperoni or margarita) to distinctly Mexican combinations like Oaxacan chorizo and roasted poblano chilies or chapulines (grasshoppers) and tomatoes. The 10-inch version (starting at 100 pesos) makes an excellent evening snack for two (vegan and gluten-free options are also available). Other offerings include Argentine-style empanadas (60 pesos) and mezcal from the mezcal distillery of the indigenous collective Pro Arte Ayuuk (125 pesos for a tasting of four one-ounce pours). Head to La Santísima Flor de Lúpulo (The Holiest Hop Flower), a nanobrewery that crafts potent, regionally inspired beers — still something of a novelty in Mexico — 50 gallons at a time on a four-tap rotation (90 pesos for a three-beer flight). The brewery’s kitchen, shared with the deli next door, makes a mean hamburger, and is also open until 1 a.m. for late-night hamburguesa cravings. A stone courtyard set with multicolored Acapulco chairs and equipped with an excellent in-house bakery, Pan-Am serves croissants stuffed with spiced Oaxacan chocolate, cream cheese and blackberries, or ham and cheese (25 pesos) — and a full menu of brunch dishes, including a spectacular chilaquiles topped with organic eggs from “happy chickens” (85 pesos) and comforting molletes (house-made bread spread with refried beans and melted cheese and served with pico de gallo salsa, 72 pesos). Stray from the pricey boutiques and souvenir shops lining the streets around Plaza Santo Domingo’s tourist district and seek out the graffitied workshop and showroom of Miku Meko Atelier, which sells traditional and contemporary textiles and doubles as a community space, offering classes in everything from backstrap weaving to button-making. Guibani Artesanal does one thing (and does it well): weaves colorful, artful housewares and furniture, including the Acapulco chair, from bright vinyl cording. For keepsakes that can fit in a suitcase, consider a lidded tortilla basket or a set of funky coasters. The sprawling new six-room popular art marketplace, Andares del Arte Popular, offers expertly made traditional crafts — everything from black ceramics to woven rebozos to pressed tin mirrors and ornaments — at responsible prices.Among Oaxaca’s new restaurants, Mesón Jalatlaco stands out. An airy covered patio with unfinished wooden floors and sleek Scandinavian-style dining tables and chairs, Mesón Jalatlaco is really two separate restaurants: Graciela, which specializes in seafood, and De Brasa Dura, which serves grilled meats ranging from a duck carnitas torta (180 pesos) to beef tongue in molé sauce (280 pesos). The coastal offerings include subtle, flavorful ceviches in four styles, including a squid ink, chorizo and peanuts version, and another with tomatillo, cucumber, celery and serrano chilies. All styles come with your choice of seafood (fish, octopus, oyster, sea snail or shrimp) and in three sizes, starting at 80 pesos for a small. Mesón Jalatlaco is also home to a wine shop and the craft brewery Casa Cervecera Tierra Blanca, which has its own tasting room, for those who want to sample beers without dining in.With its crumbling earthen facade and cavelike interior — dark and cluttered with barrel upon barrel and shelf upon shelf of unbranded bottles of mezcal — the Unión de Palenqueros de Oaxaca is nothing like the slick mezcalerias that have multiplied in Oaxaca in recent years. Instead, this storefront bottle shop sells its mezcal in repurposed Coca-Cola bottles with peeling labels. But what the Unión de Palenqueros mezcal lacks in stylish packaging or a swanky tasting room, it makes up for in a range of varietals — from cuishe to tobalá to pechuga — with prices so low (starting at 50 pesos a bottle) it would be easy to dismiss their product as swill. It’s not.A six-table cupcake of a restaurant, with pastel pink and mint-green geometric shapes painted on its tables and paper flags strung across its ceiling, Casa Taviche is a casual spot with an outrageously affordable 75-peso menu del dia (three-course set menu). Served from 1 p.m. to 10 p.m., the menu includes three handwritten options for each of the first two courses — entradas (starters) and platos fuertes (entrees) — along with the restaurant’s choice of dessert and agua fresca. The options change daily, but include sophisticated dishes like a spicy pale green chile de agua stuffed with shredded chicken. Afterward, head to Casa Estambul, the mod art space and restaurant with wild, brightly colored murals across its walls, and a glowing, bright pink bar for a cocktail (try the Estambul Old Fashioned, which uses mezcal in place of whiskey, 100 pesos) and a glimpse of Oaxaca’s youthful night life. The chef behind the most celebrated restaurant in Mexico — Enrique Olvera of Mexico City’s Pujol, which is routinely listed among the best restaurants in the world — opened his first Oaxaca restaurant, Criollo, on an unassuming, out-of-the-way stretch of Avenida de la Independencia in 2016. The open-air dining area abuts an expansive cactus garden with an open comal (a wood-fired griddle) and chickens and rabbits roaming the grounds. While Criollo’s dinner service is among the city’s most extravagant, its weekend brunch is an a la carte affair with modest prices. These midday meals, while exceptionally well-crafted, veer more traditional than the cooking for which Mr. Olvera is best known. Think mole enchiladas with organic chicken, cream and cheese (99 pesos) or market-style quesadillas with herbed guacamole (92 pesos). Head to the Museo del Ferrocarril Mexicano del Sur and Oaxaca Children’s Museum. These twin institutions (both free), based in a renovated train depot and historic freight train cars, feature exhibits devoted to Oaxacan history, street-art-style murals on the rusted metal walls of once-abandoned box cars, a children’s library and a sprawling children’s museum with arts and crafts, a demonstration farm and an impressive playground that includes an in-ground trampoline. On your way back to the centro, stop at Basílica de Nuestra Señora de la Soledad, where Sundays are bustling with families and children in their elaborate Sunday best. Jardín Sócrates, the tiled patio outside the 1690 cathedral, has a half dozen or so ice cream vendors selling dozens of exotic flavors, from rose petal to tequila to star fruit for 30 pesos. The boutique hotel of one of Oaxaca’s most celebrated restaurants, seven-room Hotel Casa Oaxaca (García Vigil 407; 52-951-514-4173; casaoaxaca.com.mx) is surprisingly tranquil for its location in the city’s busy center. The backyard is planted with bougainvillea and cactus, with a swimming pool and a temescal, or sweathouse, which is available to non-guests for an hourly fee. Rooms start at $167. No children under 12.The second location of the El Diablo y la Sandia (Boca del Monte, corner of Tinoco and Palacios; 52-951-207-7096; eldiabloylasandia.com), which goes by Boca del Monte or Mouth of the Mountain, is an artful, yet family-friendly and affordable, bed-and-breakfast with single rooms starting at $80.If you do plan a trip to Oaxaca check out these suggestions on what to pack from our Wirecutter team.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 Places to go in 2018We received over 13,000 applications for our first-of-its-kind job: a traveler who will go to each and every place on this year’s Places to Go list. It sounded like a dream job to many: one that would take a traveler to all 52 destinations on this year’s Places to Go list. We received over 13,000 applications from an amazing variety of people, from a father-daughter team to a best-selling author. (We heard all about the submission process in a Q. and A. with Monica Drake, then the Travel editor.) Above is a look at some of those applicants. We will announce the winner, along with the full list of destinations, later this week. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerEight tips to help keep your travel expenses nominal and your wallet fat this year.By Lucas PetersonLast year may have been a disappointing Dumpster fire in countless ways, but it was a great year for travel deals — saving money has never been easier or more accessible to more people. Looking forward to 2018, there’s no reason to think it should be any different. Here are eight tips to help keep your travel expenses nominal and your wallet fat.Deals on flights go live and then are snapped up so quickly that it’s practically a full-time job keeping track of them. According to Matthew Kepnes of the website Nomadic Matt, one of the best ways to stay on top of the latest deals is to sign up for the many deal newsletters that catalog the best travel bargains — he specifically recommends those from the websites Scott’s Cheap Flights, The Flight Deal and Secret Flying.AARP and AAA have been around since 1958 and 1902. Yet despite the tens of millions of members between them, they’re somehow overlooked as great resources for discounted flights, hotels, rental cars and many other travel-related expenses.AARP has its own travel portal powered by Expedia, which offers members 10 percent discounts on certain hotels and 25 percent off some car rentals, among other benefits. Membership — which was once reserved for the 50-plus set but is now open to anyone 18 and over — costs $16 annually, but there’s currently a deal for $12 for your first year when you choose to auto-renew your membership. It’ll be a few years before I’m ready to join AARP, so in the meantime, I belong to AAA. A regular membership (cost varies by state) gets you the roadside assistance the organization is famous for, as well as discounts on hotels and rental cars. A basic membership also includes $100,000 in travel accident coverage when you book your trip through AAA. An additional fun hidden benefit to membership is that they will handle certain D.M.V. transactions for you, like registration renewal and transfer of vehicle ownership.Hurricanes Maria and Irma caused devastation in the Caribbean that continues to affect the daily lives of residents. Rather than stay away, though, I would argue that tourists should consider visiting those places that have been hurt by natural disasters. Getting a good deal in Napa Valley (which suffered its own setbacks this year because of wildfires) or the Caribbean isn’t cynical — it’s helping a region that needs money to get back on its feet.“Travelers who visit the parts of the Caribbean that were hit by Hurricanes Irma and Maria will see various stages of the rebuild/recover effort,” Hugh Riley of the Caribbean Tourism Organization wrote in an email. “Some islands will be fully up to speed and ready for the winter; others, only partially so.” (As of now, many Caribbean destinations are fully operational.)Carefully research your destination before going, but don’t hesitate to jump on a good deal. I recently found deals to Christiansted, St. Croix, on select dates in February with round-trip flight from New York City and seven nights lodging for under $750 per person, taxes included. Deals to Puerto Rico (which is in various stages of recovery, although tourist spots in San Juan are largely back in action) are even better: You can score seven nights at the boutique Dreamcatcher hotel in San Juan with nonstop flight from Kennedy Airport for around $625 per person, taxes included, during select dates in February.We’ve all been there: JetBlue had a flash sale two days ago but you didn’t find out about it until it was over. This is where Google Alerts can help — the customizable alerts, delivered to your inbox or RSS feed, are a great way to get the upper hand on sales on flights, hotels, and more. You can customize the alerts to arrive daily, weekly or as they happen.Play around with combinations of words and figure out what works for you — an alert for “flight flash sale” to keep up on airline sales, for example, or “laptop discount” if you’re looking for a deal on a new computer. The best part is that there’s really no downside to setting a few alerts. If, after a few days, you find they’re not sending you useful information, you can tweak them or eliminate them entirely.Having Global Entry and/or TSA PreCheck is a must for frequent travelers to ease the way through those long security lines. But why pay for it? A number of credit cards out there will cover the fee ($100 for Global Entry, $85 for PreCheck; Global Entry includes the PreCheck benefit) with miles or points or, better still, cover the cost entirely by way of a statement credit.The Altitude Reserve Visa Infinite card from U.S. Bank offers up to a $100 credit every four years for Global Entry or PreCheck. Among other cards that tout the same benefit are the Chase Sapphire Reserve card, the American Express Platinum card and the Citi Prestige card (which offers the credit every five years instead of every four years). Make your online shopping work for you by using shopping portals — sites that get referral bonuses from retailers and then pass on some of those savings. Let’s say you want a new pair of boots for a coming trip, and you plan to purchase them from Shoes.com. By making the purchase through a shopping portal like Ebates, you could get a big chunk of that purchase refunded to you; as of this writing, Ebates is offering 12 percent cash back on purchases from Shoes.com. Money you earn through the portal is sent to you via check or PayPal.Most of the major bank and credit card companies have their own shopping portals, too. Discover Deals is currently offering 5 percent off purchases made in the Apple Store — why not get $150 back on that $3,000 laptop purchase? Use sites like CashbackMonitor.com to track which portals are running the best deals.A.T.M. fees can mount up quickly when you’re traveling. Fortunately, there are options. The Citibank Account Package will waive A.T.M. fees when you maintain an average $10,000 monthly balance. And Chase’s Premier Plus Checking will waive fees up to four times per month when you maintain a $15,000 monthly balance.The king of vanquishing A.T.M. fees, however, remains Charles Schwab Bank and its High Yield Investor Checking account. The account requires no minimum to open, charges zero fees regardless of account balance and offers unlimited rebates on A.T.M. fees worldwide. The catch: It has to be linked to a Schwab brokerage account.There’s no silver lining to the massive Equifax data breach this year that exposed the data of 145 million Americans to potential hacking and identity theft, which cost Americans $16 billion last year alone. Protecting yourself after a security lapse of that magnitude is tricky. You’re entitled to a free copy of your credit report every year from each of the three major (Experian, Equifax, TransUnion) credit bureaus — make it a habit to check every so often for suspicious activity. While Equifax is now offering freezes and locks on your credit file, it is also pushing free enrollment (through January) in its TrustedID Premier credit monitoring service.It may seem a little perverse, however, to hand the keys right back over to the person who just totaled the car, so to speak. If you’d rather not use Equifax’s credit monitoring, sites like WalletHub and Credit Karma offer free services.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 Places to goFor the 13th year, the Travel section presents its annual 52 Places to Go issue. You will likely have some questions: How did the No. 1 spot get there? What’s the deal with those looped videos in the online version? And why is my favorite spot not on the list? Here are some frequently asked questions about how we chose our 52 Places to Go in 2018. What made New Orleans the top choice? In a year that seemed particularly traumatic for many around the world, we look to a place where centuries of trauma have yielded something magical. New Orleans is unlike any other city in the world, largely thanks to its ability to synthesize that history — and the myriad populations that participated in it — into a place full of joy and wonder. New Orleans is also turning 300 this year, so there’s no better time to celebrate that history, whether it be through anniversary events, food, music, art or simply wandering this amazing city. What is special about the list online? Last year’s list featured about a dozen 360 videos. This year, you’ll find a series of short, looped videos shot by photographers in places as disparate as Cambodia, Germany and Japan. We also had our staff photographer Josh Haner head to New Orleans to capture video shot with a camera attached to what is called a gimbal, which steadies the image, as well as a drone camera, which he flew over the city. “There’s a certain elation that overtakes you when walking with a second line” — a traditional type of brass band parade — “in New Orleans,” Mr. Haner said. “I found myself dancing while filming and was grateful for the gimbal so my bouncing wasn’t too noticeable.”The drone presented its own challenges. “Trying to find a location free from people to fly a drone over in Louisiana is difficult,” he said, “but if you wake up in time for sunrise over the French Quarter, the streets are largely empty — a rare quiet walking below the lush balconies and colorful facades of this historic district.”What else are you doing this year that’s special?For the first time, we’ve hired a 52 Places Traveler, who will go to each and every place on the list in the coming year. She is Jada Yuan, who comes to us from New York magazine and you can read more about her here. She heads to New Orleans first, and then … well, everywhere. How do you start the process of selecting the list?We ask our regular contributors, many of whom live overseas or roam the globe, for ideas. We get hundreds of them and pare things down from there.What are you looking for in those ideas?First, why now? That is, why is this the year to go to a particular place? We also aim for a geographic and thematic diversity. And we look for a mix of destinations both well-known and off the beaten path. (That means we often exclude the very obvious spots; even though cities like London, Paris and Tokyo are always exciting, they didn’t make this year’s list.)How do you narrow it down to the final list?A marathon-length meeting, in which we discuss each idea. We get pretty punchy toward the end but are always happy with the final list.My favorite destination didn’t make the list. Why not?The 52 places we select are, of course, just the start. There are thousands of wonderful destinations to consider. Use the #52Places2018 hashtag on Instagram to suggest yours.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byQ & AThe island made a mark with Bond films but also has had roles as California and Congo. The author Peter Polack offers some ideas for what to see.By Elaine GlusacIncluding the James Bond thriller “Live and Let Die” in 1973 and the Disney comedy “Cool Runnings” in 1993, Jamaica has starred in hundreds of films. The Caribbean island has also doubled for other exotic locales, including French Guiana in 1973’s “Papillon,” Congo in “Dark of the Sun” in 1968 and California in 1994’s “Legends of the Fall.” The new book “Jamaica, the Land of Film,” by the island-born author Peter Polack, catalogs many major international film productions shot on the island, producing memorable scenes, including that of Ursula Andress emerging from the sea in a white bikini in 1962’s “Dr. No.” The book highlights shooting locations that often coincide with beauty spots beloved by tourists. The following are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Polack.How did Jamaica develop a film industry? What was the appeal?It started way back in the early 1900s. The most famous movie was “A Daughter of the Gods,” a Fox production that was made in 1916. They came down to Kingston and sank $1 million to produce a Middle Eastern movie. Jamaicans woke up one morning to find camels walking through the streets of Kingston. Film producers loved Jamaica. The people are very literate. They are relatively sophisticated and this became more important when sound came in because you had to be absolutely quiet on the set and Jamaicans were very disciplined in that regard. We have experienced crew. We are very close to the U.S. mainland. And we have perfect weather. Some film directors and cinematographers will tell you about the light in Jamaica, how beautiful it is. You can have extended production days in good weather with experienced people and a government that’s willing to help you. It’s not like shooting a movie in the boondocks.What are your favorite film settings?My favorite is also the favorite of the filmmakers — Portland, which is in the eastern parish of Jamaica. It is lush. It is beautiful. It has beaches; it has rivers. Its capital, Port Antonio, is a playground for Hollywood stars since World War II.What are great movie locales to visit?There’s actually a Jamaica Land of Film tour in Montego Bay [licensed by Mr. Polack] that can take you to various locations. In “Papillon,” they constructed the prison camp in Falmouth, which is a major cruise ship port now. If you go to Portland, the famous location is Frenchman’s Cove, which had several movies shot there. With “Dr. No,” Ocho Rios’s Dunn’s River Falls played a part in it. In Kingston, you can go to the Liguanea Club and that’s where the English agent in “Dr. No” was assassinated by the three blind mice, which were three guys in white suits who pretended to be blind.What was the most important film made in Jamaica?“Dr. No” really set the stage. “Dr. No” was the first in the James Bond franchise. It was shot in 1962 just as we were getting independence. It was a major production with major international stars and it really put us on the road. But you have to view it against a background of 40 to 50 years before when filmmakers were coming to Jamaica and shooting movies.Is Jamaica typecast as a honeymoon set?Two genres work well: thrillers and romance. That is evidenced by a sequence of spy thrillers, the most recent was “Knight and Day” in 2010 with Tom Cruise. If you are shooting spy thrillers throughout urban centers in Europe and North America, respectfully, they don’t have a lot of exotic aspect to it. But you can have a floatplane land off Frenchman’s Cove with Cameron Diaz. That’s what Jamaica can provide, a very beautiful locale that will give any thriller or romance an edge.Sounds like visitors should follow the directors to Portland.With the improvement of infrastructure, you have a lot of people who come to Ocho Rios and drive to Port Antonio for a day. Even in Jamaica, you’ll find a lot of Jamaicans who come to Portland especially for a weekend. There is no greater compliment than that the people of the country love it as much as visitors and go there.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byA visit to the volcano during an eruption was unforgettable: Heat, flying slag and a fortunate escape.By Stephen S. HallIf you’re lucky enough in your lifetime to do so, you should climb a volcano. If you’re really lucky, you should do so when it is (mildly) erupting, so that you can witness one of nature’s most awesome spectacles at close quarters. And if you’re a little foolhardy and a lot lucky, you might find yourself on top of a volcano during a serious eruption, which, when you think about the volatile and violent grandeur of such an event, will leave you feeling grateful that the whims of nature let you live to see another day.Last spring’s eruption of Mount Etna, which routed a party of BBC journalists and tourists with bombs of red-hot lava (their panicked flight recorded on film and dutifully fire-hosed on the internet), reminded me of an earlier expedition — similarly exhilarating, but with better luck.In the summer of 1977, Mount Etna entered a mild phase of eruption. I was living in Rome at the time. I had made a promise to myself during an earlier visit to Sicily that if Etna ever erupted while I was still in Italy, I would drop everything, jump on the next plane to Catania, and get as close to the eruption as I could. I was 26 years old and although I had no clue that I would eventually embark on a career in science writing, I rushed headlong into this adventure with an athlete’s conviction of physical invincibility and a twentysomething’s faith in improvisation. The following day, after an early morning flight, I found myself in Catania, staring up into a Mediterranean sky, Homeric in the brilliance of its blue — except for that little patch of sky near the top of the 10,808-foot volcano, marked by a smudge of gray.Like most of the things I did in those days, I didn’t have a plan. I took a bus from the airport to the city (its local architecture, fashioned from dark blocks of Etna’s extruded lava stone, can only be described as brooding), dumped my things in a cheap pensione, and caught the first bus to the Rifugio Sapienza. This refuge, at about 6,000 feet on the lower slopes of the volcano, serves as a lodge during — believe it — ski season, when Etna’s summit typically wears a crown of snow. As I walked across the parking lot, contemplating the suddenly dubious idea of setting off on a hike up the volcano in a pair of threadbare Adidas sneakers, I happened upon a group of journalists from the Italian television network RAI. A guide from Etna was about to drive them up to the site of the eruption in a vehicle adapted to the rugged, plantless terrain of the volcano.“Would you like to come along with us?” the guide asked.If chance favors the prepared mind, this was an example of proximity favoring fortune. “Certo!” I said, leaping into the back seat.The jeep bucked and heaved like a bronco as it slowly made its way up the so-called road. In the distance, we could make out puffs of dark smoke smudging the blue sky: the location of the active cone. This slow ascent through Etna’s wasteland gave me time to mentally tip my hat to the 19th-century British travel writer Augustus Hare. Hare had traipsed up and down a few volcanoes in his time, including in Sicily, and his shrewd eye discerned that the lava fields of Etna were not in fact the canonical black, but rather a black-brown. They say you never know how good another writer is until they write about something you know. I looked out upon jagged fields of unrelieved rock, extending in every direction — all of it precisely that black-brown hue.As we neared the active cone, the guide stopped the vehicle, and we went the rest of the way on foot. The first thing that impressed was not the sight but the sound. You don’t usually have an opportunity to hear the planet exhale, especially when it has a bad cough. Ahead of each eruption of slag, there was a deep — I mean seismically, rock-rattle deep — rumble of a cough.Wump-wump.You could hear it, feel it through your shoes, sense the unworldly sound waves graze against the goose bumps even then rising on your skin. After a delay of a second or two, a molten blast of slag rose halfheartedly into the air (100 feet? no one wanted to get close enough to measure accurately), faintly glowing on the way up, cooling to dark gray as it fell back to earth in a clatter of igneous hail. Nobody brought a thermometer, either, but ejecta of that sort can easily start its skyward journey at about 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit, which would have burned a pretty good hole through my shirt — and right down to bone.Because this was Italy, there were, of course, a few moments of comic Fellini-esque relief. The fastidious Italian TV crew, bent on extracting every bit of seismic drama, had a cameraman focused on one very slowly advancing tongue of lava while the sound engineer lowered his boom mike over its leading edge, capturing every crick-crick-crick of the lava as it fell over itself, advancing at about an inch an hour. If there’s anything more boring than watching grass grow, it may be filming rock as it cools.But that wasn’t the only part of the show. Just beneath our feet, visible through those potholes in the newly cooled lava, you could see a river of incandescent liquid rock flowing at a more inexorable clip. Repeat: liquid rock, in full purgatorial glow, inches below your feet. It was like peering into an alternative world of everyday physics, staring backward into a geologically embryonic time. The heat was palpable. Our guide — reprising, I’m sure, a parlor trick he had performed many times — dipped a piece of split wood into the river of lava. It did not catch fire; it exploded instantly, combustion on steroids.“Impressionante!” exclaimed the RAI cameraman.“Accidenti!” cried the sound man. (Only in Italian does it take 10 syllables to say “Wow!” and “Damn!”)Twenty-somethings don’t typically pay much attention to danger; I was no different. I stood at the lip of one of those potholes, marveling at the sheer improbability of rock become fluid, and thrilling to be so close to it. At one point, I almost got too close — I stumbled on a sharp rock, lost my balance and fell close to one of the potholes. Happy to say, I stuck the landing; if I hadn’t, it is neither hyperbole nor metaphor to say I could have been toast. The guide shouted “Careful!” I won’t say the soles of my old shoes melted, but there was an odd-yet-familiar smell in the air, like the odor of spilled food in an oven that is warming up.The moment passed. I didn’t really consider until later that the thin shell of cooling lava on which I stood could perhaps have cracked under my weight, or been suddenly weakened by a superblast of heat from below, or that the nearby mouth of the eruption could have unexpectedly gone ballistic, hurling red-hot bombs of lava down upon us (last spring, tourists were struck by superheated fragments of rock that exploded when lava contacted snow). I did not consider any of those things. I was grateful to come right up to the lip of the planet, a glimpse of Earth as a work in progress, something we usually see only in National Geographic or on the Discovery Channel. I got to feel the heat, and hear the belch of eruption, and feel, a few steps removed, the volcanic spasms of the planet remaking itself — something it has done pretty well for 4.5 billion years, largely out of view from our prying and imprudent eyes.And I’m grateful to have walked away intact. When you sidle up to the edge of nature, you cross into a zone of proximal admiration; you also cross into the land of probabilistic danger. Red-hot ordnance falls out of a clear blue sky; the thin platform of lava gives way; majestic seas become the drowning wave; the beautiful stillness of the storm becomes the shredding motion of the tornado; the exhilaration of altitude crosses into anoxia.I crave the thrill of admiring nature in the raw; it reminds us that we live on a planet. But, as I began to understand on Mount Etna, I never forget the luck.Stephen S. Hall, whose most recent book is “Wisdom: From Philosophy to Neuroscience,” received the AAAS Kavli Science Journalism award in 2016 for magazine writing.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCarry OnThe television star always takes two pairs of glasses, a Metallica T-shirt and her drumsticks (for practicing).By Nell McShane WulfhartThe actor Joy Bryant, originally from New York, now lives in Los Angeles where she filmed the television series “Parenthood” for six years. Her next role is as a public defender in the fourth season of “Ballers,” which has its premiere in August on HBO.Ms. Bryant’s favorite vacation spots are Jamaica and Kauai. “I love island life, man! I’m on island time.” When she travels to Jamaica, though, she doesn’t do much. “I eat a lot of ackee and saltfish, and chill. I don’t do anything, just eat Jamaican food. I haven’t been in a few years but I’m looking to go back soon. I love the people, the music. In the Bronx I grew up with a lot of West Indians, a lot of Jamaicans and Puerto Ricans, and I have such a love for all things Jamaican from those early years.”She loves Hawaii, too. “I’ve been to the Big Island and Kauai. I love them both. I don’t get in the water a lot. I can catch waves from time to time, if it’s under the optimal circumstances and I don’t have to work too hard for it. I just love being outside and the beauty of the islands.” Her most recent vacation was in Utah. “My husband and I snowboard and ski and we spend as much time as we can out there in the winter time. We have a place out in Eden, near Powder Mountain and that’s the mountain that we favor out there. Our place is not even a 10-minute ride down the mountain. It’s our getaway spot.”Here’s what she packs on every trip.Drumsticks“I travel with my blue sparkly drumsticks because I never know when I’m going to get a chance to play. I’ve been taking lessons for a couple of years. I used to travel with a practice pad, too, but then my teacher said I could just practice on pillows.”Jacket with pockets“I always wear some kind of military-inspired jacket because I like to have my stuff really handy. Having a jacket that has four or five pockets means I can hold my phones. I have two — I have a legit Blackberry, an old-timey Blackberry that you’ll pry from my cold dead hands. It still works. And my Samsung that I use for social media, taking notes, photo and art apps. So I’ve got the Blackberry in my right pocket, the Samsung in my left, cash in the top right and a classic iPod in the top left. I buy music and I like having access to it and not having to have a Wi-Fi connection. I’ve been on an obsessive Radiohead kick recently, so I’ve been rocking out to that.”Metallica T-shirt“I lifted it from my husband. It’s a vintage ‘ … And Justice for All’ T-shirt that mysteriously shrunk in the wash. I don’t know how that happened but it shrunk to my size. It’s mine now.”Tea“I always have a bag of assorted teas. I have ginger tea, peppermint, Smooth Move because you know when you’re traveling, things sometimes don’t move as smoothly as you’d like them to. I have a tea for every occasion. I’ve become really obsessed with Zhena’s Gypsy Rose black tea with rose petals. This is my life: drumsticks and rose tea. I’m 42. I’m, like, sipping rose tea in my Metallica shirt with my blue drumsticks.”Glasses“I always have two pairs of glasses. I have my reading glasses and then the glasses that can see into the future. They’re called progressive glasses, where you see far away, you see midrange, and you can read through the bottom. They’re my omniscient glasses because I see everything. I can read your mind. I can read signs from miles away. They’re my bionic glasses.”Book“Even if I don’t read it, I always come armed with a book. The thing I’m excited to read next is the graphic novel “Kindred,” which is based on Octavia Butler’s novel. That’s my new travel companion.”Totem“I have a little Buddha, maybe three inches tall, that I travel with when I’m getting on a plane or going far from home. My friend Brian gave it to me in 2008 in Denver — we were in town for the Democratic convention. I call it the perfect Buddha because it’s the perfect little size. I’m not Buddhist but it’s a little reminder of friendship and love and home and peace.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsNorway is an affordable destination for budget travelers eager to score luxurious digs and once-in-a-lifetime experiences without breaking the bank.By Shivani VoraScandinavia can be one of the most expensive regions in the world to visit, according to Kelly Brennan, a travel adviser at the New York City travel company Indagare. However, Norway — a country with a bustling capital (Oslo), an unspoiled countryside and stunning fjords — is the exception. “Norway is a great choice for travelers on a limited budget who want a luxury experience, because it’s still up-and-coming in popularity,” Ms. Brennan said. She also offered some tips on how to enjoy a luxury vacation in Norway without emptying your wallet in the process.The best hotels in Norway are a bargain compared with other countries in Scandinavia and other global tourist destinations. Luxury properties like the Storfjord Hotel, which is the best place to stay to explore the fjords and the charming town of Alesund, have rates starting at $200 a night. “Upscale tourism is still new to Norway so travelers don’t have to break the bank to enjoy high-end accommodations,” Ms. Brennan said. Many of Norway’s best activities are offered as small group experiences. Consider gathering a small group and booking a sailboat tour in the fjords, going dog-sledding and ice-fishing in Tromso, or enjoying a boat tour complete with a prawn buffet and cocktails in Oslo. Ms. Brennan encourages travelers to book these instead of springing for private tours because they’re often 75 percent cheaper and are equally enjoyable when shared with others. Learn more about available group excursions through your hotel’s concierge, an online search or through a local tourist office. Whether it’s spending the night in a 150-year-old restored lighthouse in Alesund, seeing the Northern Lights by car or another unique excursion, Ms. Brennan said that special, intimate activities are the ones worth booking privately. She noted that it’s not going to cost travelers more than a few hundred dollars per person to book for an individual or a couple. “Many private activities are so reasonably priced that most travelers can afford to splurge on one or two,” she said. While Oslo receives very little sunlight in the winter, the season is a great time to visit the city because hotel rates and prices for airline tickets and tours are at their lowest. Ms. Brennan said that travelers will also be rewarded with a lively atmosphere. During the coldest months, restaurants offer sheepskin wool blankets and space heaters so patrons can dine outside; outdoor movies play in the downtown area; and locals crowd the bars and warm up with mulled wine. Many of Norway’s iconic landmarks are outdoor sites that are free to see. They include the magnificent Geiranger Fjord, the Trollstigen, a serpentine mountain road, and National Tourist Routes, a collection of scenic highways throughout the country that are dotted with marked spots where drivers can stop and take in the views. The country also happens to be a paradise for driving, Ms. Brennan explained. “Car rentals are affordable, driving around is easy, and if you get lost, most Norwegians speak English,” she said. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsRoom service has a reputation for being overpriced and under-seasoned. Here are a few techniques to make sure your room service meals are worth your money and appetite.By Shivani VoraRoom service is often the last refuge of business travelers, and an overpriced, under-seasoned option for travelers without many options. According to Martyn Nail, the executive chef of Claridge’s hotel in London and author of the recently released “Claridge’s: The Cookbook,” “the food you get isn’t necessarily a reflection of who prepared it,” he said. “There’s an art to ordering room service.” He has a few tried and tested ways to make sure every room service meal is a good one. If Mr. Nail isn’t in a rush, he requests that his meal is delivered in courses because the food tastes fresher and the dining experience feels more special and leisurely. Surprisingly, most hotel kitchens have no problem fulfilling this request. “I don’t like the idea of my entree getting cold while I have my starter, and if I’m having ice cream for dessert, it’s going to be melted by the time I get to it,” he said.  Consider how well a dish will travel before you order it. Many hotel kitchens are in the basement while your room might be on a high floor, which means that your meal could take up to 10 minutes to reach you after it leaves the kitchen, and that’s not including any other room service deliveries along the way. While hot items are usually delivered in a hot box, they can still arrive lukewarm. Soups are the exception and tend to stay hot. Also, if you see a soufflé on the menu, don’t bother ordering it. Mr. Nail said that it will be a pancake by the time it reaches you. Club sandwiches and Caesar salads, on the other hand, travel especially well. If there’s a regional dish or specialty on the menu, however, go for it. Mr. Nail said that these local specialties have been some of his best meals on the road. Don’t be afraid to order off the menu, Mr. Nail said. “Hotel kitchens tend to have a wide variety of ingredients on hand, and if the chefs have time, they are happy to make you what you want,” he said. Just be reasonable and ask politely, and you’ll have great results.If you’re craving a specific dish, such as chicken potpie or meatloaf, ask for it but with a caveat: give advance notice, preferably 12 hours, if you want a labor-intensive dish or something particularly special. Pick up the phone and speak to someone to place your order, even if you have the option to do it electronically through a tablet, app or your in-room television. Mr. Nail said that your order taker is your guide through the menu and can share suggestions such as side dishes to pair with your entree that you may not have thought of. Some of those options may be upsells, but talking to a real person is the only way to hear the daily specials, or ask about options that may not be included in the menu. The option isn’t available in your average, economy hotel with a chain restaurant attached, but if there’s a destination restaurant or one related to a well-known chef, you may be surprised. Ask if the restaurant has a sommelier, first, and then if you can speak to them. Most luxury hotels have one, and they’re not there just to help in the restaurant or at the bar. “If you want a good glass of wine, a creative cocktail or another spirit to go along with your meal, ask for the sommelier to give you a call to discuss your options,” Mr. Nail said. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCarry OnSpare nails, a Fendi tote and candy lips (it’s the sugar).By Nell McShane Wulfhart Television personality, producer, entrepreneur and former model Tyra Banks has a lengthy resume, but is probably best known these days for instructing aspiring models to “smize” (smile with their eyes) on “America’s Next Top Model,” a fashion reality TV series she created and hosts. It’s currently in its 24th season. Her book “Perfect Is Boring: 10 Things My Crazy, Fierce Mama Taught Me About Beauty, Booty, and Being a Boss” will be published in April.While Ms. Banks mostly travels for work, she describes herself as “a master at tacking on pleasure,” commonly adding on vacation days to weeks of intensive shooting abroad. “America’s Next Top Model” has taken contestants around the world, but her favorite was Morocco. “What I love about Marrakesh is the people, and the earth, and the architecture are like the same color. It’s just that beautiful terracotta color and it just all blends, it’s just beautiful. The whole town is like a makeup base foundation,” she said.She describes herself as obsessed with hotels, even going so far as to model her own bedroom after a room in the Four Seasons New York. “I used to stay there when I was a Victoria’s Secret model, actually, and I studied that room. I don’t think I took pictures back then, but I talked to the interior designer, and I made it as close to that Four Seasons as possible, including the bathtub that fills up in like 60 seconds.” Here’s what she can’t travel without.Candy Lips“I’m obsessed with Dylan’s Candy Bar, and so I travel with the candy lips because sometimes I get a little motion sick when the plane is taking off or landing, or in the car, if I’m on my darn phone in the car. For some reason sugar kind of pulls me out of my motion sickness.”Her Son’s Toy“It’s like a little blanket connected to a giraffe head, and I cuddle with that and I get funky with it and I sleep with it, and I put it in my armpit and all that. I have two of them so they’re in rotation, so I travel and get it funky and then I come back and I give it to him, and I’m like ‘That was mommy!’ and he grabs it and smells it. I know that sounds gross, but there’s always one with me and always one with him, and you know, children really connect to their parents’ scent, so I make sure that it’s on me when I’m on the plane and stuff like that. And then when I come home, I just take the one he had and give him that one, so he immediately has mommy’s smell again.”Ellen DeGeneres Sneakers“So when I’m traveling, I don’t wear high heel boots anymore. I used to be like, ‘Oh my gosh, the paparazzi might meet me at the airport when I land so I have to look cute.’ I ain’t got time for cute now, my feet are hurting! So I wear sneakers, but Ellen DeGeneres has the cutest sneakers. And they have animals on them, it’s hard to explain, but they have an etching of a dog or a cat, peeking off the sides of the shoes. They are so cute. It’s a way to have a sneaker, and you know, like a little whimsy and humor with it.” Spare Nails“I’m now into press-on nails. I used to be into gels and sitting in the chair forever and getting your nails done, but they are so good. They don’t look like they did back in the day. They look like you sat in the chair for an hour and a half. But I have to bring extra nails and glue in my purse for the emergency when you’re putting your bag up in your overhead and a nail pops off. And I was like, ‘I will not be caught out here with a nail missing.’ I’m not a prissy type of girl, but even that can look a little busted, and so, you know, I have them in my purse with the extra glue and I pop ‘em on. You don’t want to get caught out there looking crazy.”Fendi Tote“It’s a blue leather Fendi tote, and I think it’s called the ‘Monster Bag.’ My agent, Nancy, got it for me because it has eyes on it, and when you unzip the zipper on front, the inside is red, so it looks like a mouth. But she calls it a ‘smizing bag,’ because it looks like the eyes are smizing.” Advertisement

      By SHIVANI VORA

MARCH 1, 2018

AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPassengers around the world have faced disruptions. Here’s what you should know if you have an Air France ticket.By Shivani VoraUPDATE: Air France has announced that the strike has ended. Thousands of Air France passengers all over the world faced disruptions to their itineraries today, following a labor strike involving the carrier’s pilots, cabin crew and ground staff. According to a representative from Air France’s office in Paris, 28 percent of its employees went on strike on today, which forced the airline to cancel 25 percent of its flights scheduled for the day. Long-haul flights are the most affected: the airline plans to operate only 50 percent of those scheduled to depart from Paris. However, Air France will still operate 75 percent of its medium-haul flights to and from Charles de Gaulle Airport and 85 percent of its short-haul flights.“I know of many Air France passengers who have had to rearrange their itineraries by leaving a day earlier or later or have had to reschedule their trips all together,” said Henry Harteveldt, a travel industry analyst and the founder of Atmosphere Research Group. he said. Mr. Harteveldt also said that Air France is one of the largest European carriers to Africa, and fliers with Air France tickets to and from the continent may find themselves stranded.To add confusion to an already aggravating situation, Michael Holtz, the owner of SmartFlyer, a global travel consultancy specializing in airlines, said that Air France has several code share partners such as Delta Air Lines, Korean Air and Aeromexico. This could potentially mean that passengers who have purchased their tickets through those airlines may be scheduled to fly on a plane operated by Air France. “Your ticket could say Delta, but if you’re flying out of Paris or another city where Air France operates, you might actually be scheduled to take an Air France plane and find yourself grounded,” Mr. Holtz said. “Conversely, if you bought an Air France ticket, you could be flying on a plane operated by one of its partners and not at all be impacted by the strike.” (Travelers can find a list of Air France’s partner airlines on its site.)What should Air France’s customers do to avoid being affected by the strike, and what are they entitled to if it has already affected them?For one, the carrier is recommending that its fliers with reservations today postpone their trips or change their tickets at no extra cost. Passengers can reschedule their flights up to Feb. 27 free of charge. They also have the option to receive a voucher for the value of their ticket on Air France or KLM, which will be valid for one year. They can also cancel their flights and receive a full refund. Ticket holders can do so by going to their reservation information on the company's site or by calling 800-240-260 from France and 33 1 57 02 10 58 from abroad. In addition, the airline has an “AF Connect” service, which informs its customers in 13 languages about any disruptions to their itineraries. To receive notifications from AF Connect, fliers should update their contact details in their reservation file on the company’s site.But Air France’s passengers also have legal rights, according to Justin T. Green, a lawyer at the New York City law firm Kreindler & Kreindler who specializes in aviation law. “Under European Union law, passengers whose flights are delayed or canceled are entitled to compensation,” he said. The compensation for delays varies from 250 to 600 euros (about $310 to $740), depending on the length of the delay. For flights that are canceled, passengers are entitled to meals, local transportation and hotel accommodations, if necessary.Mr. Green said that travelers can file for compensation by filling out a form available on Air France’s site. “You’re entitled to this compensation unless the airline can prove that the delay was caused by circumstances out of its control such as strikes,” Mr. Green said. “In this instance, however, in my opinion, Air France would have a hard time proving that it couldn’t have avoided this strike.” Air France had no comment regarding Mr. Green's statement. If there’s any good news to report about the strike, both Mr. Holtz and Mr. Harteveldt say that it’s likely to be short-lived. “Airline strikes in Europe are common and usually last a day, but the impact from them can last for several days,” Mr. Harteveldt said.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCARRY ONThe fashion designer always brings a camera, hydrating spray and a “weird” medallion.By Nell McShane WulfhartBritish TV host, model and fashion designer Alexa Chung has made a career out of her dynamic sense of style. She’s currently creative director of her eponymous fashion label, alexachung.Ms. Chung lived in New York for seven years before moving back to England in 2016 to start her business. She’s a frequent traveler and Paris is one of her favorite places. She has an affinity for one hotel there. “A year ago, I went to stay in Le Bristol. There’s this particular attic room and it has a straight shot to the Eiffel Tower, and it’s so beautiful and cottage-y and gorgeous, and when you’re in there, it just doesn’t look real. Like, if it was in a movie, you’d be like, ‘That’s a bit much.’ About two years ago, I’d lost my favorite shirt and I would always go on about it — but I opened the cupboard this stay, and they’d kept my shirt from two years ago, waiting for me to revisit. I thought, that was great service. So, Le Bristol, hat’s off, you’ll always be my favorite hotel. That, and they have a pet cat.”She calls Tokyo “the best place ever. It’s such a strange cultural shock when you get there, because everything looks so different. I always have regrets whenever I go there because you walk into a shop and it’s like being inundated with so much strangeness, but you can’t pick out a single item to buy. And then when you get home you’re like, even if I had just bought that weird fried egg magnet, that would have been cool to have with me now.” Here’s what she packs on every trip.Medallion“A friend recently gave me this weird, gold, circular disc on a string, which is meant to be something that stops what he calls ‘the information.’ He’s German. He said, ‘You have to wear this on the plane, it stops the information from interfering with you.’ I don’t really know what that means, but I like it as a lucky medallion to wear on the plane. My understanding is there’s loads of sound waves and all kinds of weird stuff going on, especially as you walk through security, so I think it’s meant to sort of not disrupt, whatever, your internal organs or something. I have no idea.”Hydrating spray“I got one from Whole Foods actually. It’s like a rose water and glycerin mix, and it’s a nice thing to spray around. But you have to hope that your neighbor enjoys rose, otherwise it’s very selfish and vicious, filling the air up with perfume that they don’t enjoy.”Camera“I feel like I’m lucky enough to have quite an exciting life and I’ve always liked to have a camera. Firstly, because I like taking pictures and I love photography, but also just for memories because things move so fast. Now I’m glad I’ve got this document of places I’ve been, and people I was with, and these moments. So I try to bring a camera to capture life in case I forget parts of it. It’s a Contax T2. It’s basically stuck to the hip of every hipster, so nothing original there.”Clothes for every occasion“I get to go to a lot of different types of things, so I always pack some kind of events dress, just in case. Not necessarily a dress, but something a bit fancier because I’ve definitely been caught short in the past. And if I don’t pack dungarees [overalls], I’ll miss them by day four. It’s a very strange comfort blanket, an item I’ve become attached to. Basically, I travel so much that I have a couple of suitcases, and one’s always by the front door, half-packed from the last time I went away. So that means I’ll get to L.A. in August, when all I need really are ballet flats and some sandals, and I’ll open my case, and I’ll have knee-high boots and some winter parka jacket. But I think that’s what makes some quite interesting sartorial choices. You know, you’ve got to deal with what you’ve got, and limitations really help breed creativity, as they say.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byUpdateHow do these networks stack up against each other, and what does it cost to take advantage of their perks?By Shivani VoraWhy would travelers ever plan a vacation on their own when their money will go a lot further with the help of a travel agent? At a time when booking trips online seems to be the norm, it’s a message that several travel networks, each with their own group of travel agents, are increasingly pushing. With more than 16,000 agents globally, Virtuoso is one of the largest networks. That scale can benefit the traveler: Book a trip with a Virtuoso agent, said Albert Herrera, the company’s senior vice president of global product partnerships, and you will get hotel perks such as free breakfast, room upgrades and spa treatments; these extras are worth up to $450 a property. “If you’re staying at three hotels on one trip, you’re looking at more than $1,300 of amenities that you’re not paying for,” he said.Signature Travel Network has more than 7,000 agents. Ignacio Maza, the company’s executive vice president, said that the network’s agents can get clients benefits valued at up to $500 at hotels; on cruises, more than $1,000.Smaller networks also offer amenities for their clients: Andrew Harper Travel, for example, began in the 1970s as a hotel review company but expanded around 15 years ago to offer travel planning services; currently, the company has around 20 agents.How do these networks stack up against each other, and what does it cost travelers, if anything, to take advantage of their perks? Here is a breakdown of some of the top networks. HOW TO FIND AN AGENT signaturetravelnetwork.comNUMBER OF AFFILIATED HOTELS More than 1,030, both large chains and boutique properties; the collection includes four- and five-star hotels. THE COST Signature doesn’t charge a membership fee to use its agents, but some charge fees of up to several hundred dollars.CRUISES? Yes, 30 lines. Benefits vary by sailing, but could include onboard credits, prepaid gratuities and shore excursions. Also, on a select 200 a year, travelers get a private guide and driver for a day at selected ports — a perk valued at up to $900, according to Mr. Maza.HOTEL PERKS Up to $500 of amenities at hotels, including daily breakfast for two, an extra amenity such as a $100 dining credit, room upgrades and early check-in and checkout, when available. Some properties, like the Ritz Paris, offer additional benefits including round-trip airport transfers. HOW TO FIND AN AGENT virtuoso.com/advisorsNUMBER OF AFFILIATED HOTELS More than 1,250 luxury hotels, both large chains and boutique properties; 900 of those can be booked through virtuoso.com.THE COST Virtuoso doesn’t charge a membership fee to use its agents, but some charge trip-planning fees; depending on the complexity of the trip, fees can range from $50 to several hundred dollars.CRUISES? Yes, 31 lines, with more than 500 select sailings a year. Travelers get an $800 credit to use one of three ways: onboard, for a private car and driver at a port of their choice, or for a tailor-made excursion.HOTEL PERKS Up to $450 of amenities at hotels, including daily breakfast for two, room upgrades (either guaranteed at the time of booking or on a space available basis) and early check-in and late checkout, when available. All affiliated hotels also offer extras for their Virtuoso guests which vary by property. Examples include a six-course dinner at Casa Gangotena in Quito, Ecuador and a horse-drawn carriage tour with a stay at Alpaga Megève in Megève, France.HOW TO FIND AN AGENT ensembletravel.comNUMBER OF AFFILIATED HOTELS Around 700, both large chains and boutique properties; the collection includes four- and five-star hotels.THE COST Ensemble doesn’t charge a membership fee to use agents, but some charge trip-planning fees. CRUISES? Yes, 26 lines. On more than 1,500 select cruises a year, travelers receive various benefits such as room upgrades, onboard credits and shore excursions.HOTEL PERKS Benefits vary by property, but could include room upgrades, daily breakfast, spa treatments, and food and wine welcome baskets. The Raffles Makati in the Philippines, for example, offers daily breakfast, afternoon tea, evening cocktails and 50-minute massages for two.HOW TO FIND AN AGENT AmexTravel.comNUMBER OF AFFILIATED HOTELS More than 1,000 affiliated luxury properties.THE COST Several network benefits are exclusively for American Express Platinum and Centurion cardholders — the annual fee for a Platinum card is $550. (The company doesn’t reveal the cost of the Centurion card.) In addition, some agents charge small trip-planning fees.CRUISES? Yes, 15 lines. On sailings of five nights or more, travelers receive an onboard credit of between $100 to $300.HOTEL PERKS The average value of benefits travelers receive at each hotel is $550, according to Tom Stein, the vice president of American Express Travel. These include a space-available room upgrade, daily breakfast for two, noon check-in, when available, and a guaranteed 4 p.m. checkout, as well as an additional amenity that varies by property — examples include a spa treatment, a meal or a bottle of wine.HOW TO FIND AN AGENT andrewharper.comNUMBER OF AFFILIATED HOTELS 500. The majority are 40 rooms or less.THE COST $395 a year. In addition, advisers charge a $250 “commitment” fee which is applied to the cost of the trip once travelers book.CRUISES? Yes, around a dozen lines. Travelers receive $100 onboard credit on every sailing.HOTEL PERKS Benefits include daily breakfast, room upgrades upon availability or at the time of booking and an additional amenity valued at $100 that varies by property — examples include a dining credit or a cooking class.Advertisement
Explorer By                     
SANJAY SURANA

FEB. 28, 2018
In the middle of the 1900s, the northwestern Malaysian town of Ipoh was the world’s largest producer of tin and its booming success showed.Informally described by locals as the “town that tin built,” Ipoh grew from a sleepy village in the valley of the Kinta River to a hotbed of cabarets, night life and conspicuous consumption, a city fueled by the fortunes of the Chinese-mining towkays (bosses). But the collapse of tin prices in the 1980s curbed the city’s rise and soon Ipoh faded, existing primarily as a pleasant place to retire (the surrounding limestone karst mountains are beautiful and the resulting hard water is claimed to make food taste better), or as an eating stop for travelers shuttling between the mountain region of Cameron Highlands to the east and the island of Penang to the northwest.But Ipoh, Malaysia’s third most populous city, and one largely unknown outside of Southeast Asia, is staging a comeback to become the country’s hippest destination. The city’s fortunes began to improve in 2004 when the water theme park Lost World of Tambun opened, backed by the Malaysian conglomerate Sunway Group (its founder and chairman Jeffrey Cheah Fook Ling was born close to Ipoh). More recently, in 2014, the Lithuanian artist Ernest Zacharevic, as he had done in Penang’s Georgetown, placed his imprimatur on the city by beautifying old buildings with a series of murals. But perhaps the greatest change — one propelled by homegrown talent — has been the boom in hip cafes over the last few years.Ipoh, now, is roaring back in style.The city, the capital of Perak state, has a core that is relatively compact, with roads largely plotted in a grid system — planners redrafted the town after parts of it were destroyed in a sweeping fire in 1892 — so it’s easily walkable. (Be prepared to sweat; year-round daytime temperatures hover around a humid 90 degrees). It also has a number of pretty shop-house and heritage buildings around the Old Town, like the Railway Museum playfully referred to by the British during the colonial era as the Taj Mahal of Ipoh.thailandmalaysiaPenangperakMalaysiaIpohKuala Lumpurindonesia400 milesLost World of Tambun1 MILEZakka LoftIpoh RailwayStationAeon MallKinta CityTea Coffee GameDetail belowIpohThumbs CafeChokodokM Boutique Hotelold townPatisserieBoutiQuePlan BBurps & GigglesSekepingKong HengArtisanHandmade BreadIpohJalan Sultan YussufFEB. 26, 2018
The catalyst for Ipoh’s new tilt was arguably the Sekeping Kong Heng hotel. Opened six years ago, it took the peeling bones of a hostel once used by performers at a Cantonese opera and updated the interiors with glass and steel; the effect is remarkable, modern and yet artfully dilapidated, a sensitive reimagining of a storied, decrepit space. The hotel opened on Kong Heng Square in the city’s Old Town, and was soon followed by other newcomers nearby, such as the cafe Burps & Giggles. Offering a simple menu of bar food — burgers, pizza, fish and chips — its most appealing aspect is the almost hallucinatory interior, with junk furniture, mismatched furnishings, haphazardly cobbled-together lamps and the centerpiece mural of a woman with curly red hair who seems lost in thought. It was a novel concept for a town more famous for bare-bones restaurants serving food like ayam tauge (cold chicken with beansprouts) and nasi kandar, a rice with honeyed chicken and curry sauce, locally known as nasi ganja for its addictive qualities and ability to put the diner to sleep.>>Other businesses followed. Patisserie BoutiQue opened on the street called Jalan Sultan Yussuf with a menu of salads, soups, sandwiches, pasta and excellent desserts (the tiramisù has dense mascarpone and a strong kick of Baileys Irish Cream), and an interior with whitewashed exposed brick walls, white subway tiles, poured concrete floors and a soundtrack of old French songs.Around the corner, Plan B is a contemporary restaurant with a high ceiling, giant windows and tile floors. The menu is international but pays homage to Malay ingredients; the spaghetti agli olio features bunga kantan (torch ginger flower), the pungent, floral plant used in the Southeast Asian dishes rojak and laksa, lending the Italian classic an Asian flavor profile.AdvertisementCafes continue to open in the town’s colonnaded shophouses, tucked between established businesses like silk shops, watch repairers and travel agents.AdvertisementChokodok (Malay for banana fritter) has accommodations above its intriguing, tumbledown, reggae-themed restaurant. Opened by two brothers who had spent some time in the islands off the coast of Peninsular Malaysia, it has tree trunks as decorations, the flotsam and jetsam of a beach shack, and music that’s consistently reggae. A former orphanage on the eastern fringe of central Ipoh transformed into Thumbs Café, an eclectically furnished restaurant specializing in Malay dishes.M Boutique, a hotel that mixes the rustic, industrial and whimsical, became the city’s most high-style property in an area rife with used-car showrooms. When it opened “this concept was not available here,” said Joey Chong, a sales executive for the hotel. “Lots of youngsters come from Kuala Lumpur [two hours away by car or train] for the cafe hopping. It’s much easier to get around here than in K.L.”But the trend isn’t confined to central Ipoh. A number of cool joints have sprung up in Ipoh Gardens East, a commercial and residential area near the Aeon Mall. Tea Coffee Game opened among a drab row of businesses and office buildings. It has bright interiors, Ikea furniture, and there’s a utilitarian feel to it, but its conceit is the games found throughout — traditional board games like checkers and ludo as well as a video console.“We have games to make the place different, to help people revisit their childhood, bring them good memories for when the food is served,” Chung Kok Heung, a science lecturer at a local university and a co-owner, told me one evening. “A few years ago most youngsters here moved to other countries, but now people are coming back because they like the food, the environment, the slower lifestyle.”Its menu, as I found often in this new breed of restaurants, focuses on Western food and includes a pretty salad served in a Mason jar, full of crisp green and purple cabbage, peppers, carrots, cherry tomatoes, and served with smooth sesame dressing. A big draw here is the all-day breakfast, with up to seven items like bacon, grilled tomatoes, eggs and hash browns, costing only 19 Malaysian ringgits (about $5). Nearby, Zakka Loft has colorful curtains; a sky mural with the words “Do You Have a Dream?”; a wall unit full of knitted soft toys (it offers workshops on how to make them); and fabulous iced fruit drinks.These places are free from hipster posturing and have an easygoing ambience.Of all the cafes and restaurants I visited, one stood out. Classically trained chef Sam Lau left Ipoh in his early 20s to work in kitchens around Asia and Europe, returning to his hometown after 16 years. “I came back to my country and couldn’t find good bread,” he lamented. Thus began a mission; for two years he sold bread from his bicycle outside the restaurant Plan B.In December 2016 he opened Artisan Handmade Bread in an old shop-house near Kong Heng Square, where he works in a small open kitchen behind the bread counter. “I am up at 3 a.m. every day, baking bread, running the kitchen. Ipoh people are old-fashioned, they like value for money.” The excellent food is a steal — the set-lunch menu (he closes for the day at 4 p.m.) includes soup, a main dish, an amuse bouche, dessert and lemon iced tea, for 28 ringgits.Despite his background and training, Mr. Lau avoided opening a formal-dining restaurant. “The young generation doesn’t want fine dining. It wants good food and casual. I want to provide good honest food cooked right in front of you, bistronomy style. And I also want to educate locals on what goes into commercial bread and artisan bread.” His bread is outstanding, fibrous and supple, and justly anchors the menu — generous chunks served with the mixed vegetable soups, thick slices bookending the grilled sandwiches.“Lots of youngsters leave here to come back, they want to share what they learned from overseas and show something new to Ipoh,” Mr. Lau said.AdvertisementIpoh is all the richer for it.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2018, on Page TR10 of the New York edition with the headline: Cafes Help a City Reinvent Itself.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byCARRY-ONHe always brings melatonin gummy bears, moisturizer and a “goofy” necklace.By Nell McShane WulfhartThe comedian Lewis Black, known for his abrasive, expletive-laden style of stand-up, appears regularly on late night talk shows and has released 12 comedy albums. His latest, “Lewis Black — Black to the Future,” was released last fall.Mr. Black travels the country doing as many as 200 shows a year, so he has become obsessed with finding direct flights — “All I care about are direct flights. My life is devoted to direct flights” — and even arranges his travel so that he’s leaving his New York apartment to get to Newark airport at low-traffic times. “Between 11 and 12 in the afternoon, that’s the window. Plus, usually, traffic in the airport, too, has gone down at that point.” When on the road, he also spends considerable time on the tour bus. “If I have two weeks back-to-back out west, or you know, in the middle of the country, then it makes sense that I don’t get off the bus. So I’ll spend two or three days on the bus traveling to the next set of shows.” He’s written most of his three books on buses in between shows and recommends it for anyone trying to write. “Yeah, but on a tour bus. A Greyhound, it’s not going to happen. You’re going to kill yourself after 12 hours.”Here’s what he takes on every trip.Melatonin gummy bears“I got advice from a military friend who travels a lot and has wackier hours than I do, and they suggested melatonin gummy bears. I find that nothing else can give you a leg up on relaxing. But you don’t do two of them, you do four or five of them. Probably doctors will say I’m wrong, but it does work.”Marijuana edibles“I’m not doing this to get high, I’m doing this to go to sleep. But boy, some of those edibles I have done to try to go to sleep and I’m like, oh no I’m going to sit here and review everything. Once a guy on my tour bus said, ‘Let’s take a little of this and it’ll knock us out.’ But we were up all night and I went through every relationship I’ve ever had, every one, and how I failed, and what was my fault, and it was exhausting. Eventually, I fell asleep but it was mostly because I had run out of relationships.”Neti pot“I bring a neti pot. How sad is that? I’ve always had kind of a sinus-y problem, and flying doesn’t help that at all. You know, it dries you the hell out. Essentially what you’re doing, you’re breathing the filth, essentially. The longer you’re on a plane, the more filth you’re breathing.”Necklace“I wear this goofy thing around my neck that somebody gave me, that supposedly sucks up negative energy. Big bad thoughts get sucked into that. Why not? I don’t know if I believe in it but it was free.”Moisturizer“What it does is provide you with some sense of a regimen. People ask, ‘How do you travel that much?’ Well, you provide yourself with a daily routine. So, if you’re doing the routine in your house, you do it on the road. It helps you maintain a distance between you and the howling that is the void.” The Week“I bring a bunch of The Weeks with me, usually three or four. I use them to catch up if I’ve missed anything over the past month. They’re really good at summarizing news. They also have a bunch of really funny pieces, you know, unusual stuff that’s occurred throughout the United States — congressmen or local representatives who say things that are so beyond appalling that you wonder how these people are in office. Or is there not a psychological unit in the area? And then I use some of that on stage to kind of give a sense to my audience that there is a level of lunacy that continues to go on in this country, and part of it is that we listen to people, who really, we shouldn’t be listening to because something’s wrong with them. And they need to see — we have a big mental health problem and a lot of it is represented by a lot of people in government. I keep saying, the largest outpatient clinic in the world is Congress.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCheck InThe Nobis Hotel Copenhagen is visually stunning, with a marble lobby and airy guest rooms.By Ingrid K. Williams From 2,400 Danish kroner (about $394). Opened in September 2017, the Nobis Hotel Copenhagen is a stylish 77-room property in a landmark neoclassical building from 1903 that formerly housed the Royal Danish Conservatory of Music. Handsomely renovated interiors were designed by the in-demand Swedish firm Wingardhs, known for mixing materials — concrete, marble, oak, leather — with furnishings both midcentury and modern. The result is a visually stunning mash-up of styles, from the concrete reception desk in the polished marble lobby to the grand central staircase with ornate moldings and a glittering cascade of pendant lamps. This is also the first international property from Sweden’s Nobis Hospitality Group, which has earned acclaim for its buzzy boutique hotels in and around Stockholm. Next to the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek art museum and a block away from Tivoli Gardens, the hotel is less than 10 minutes on foot from Copenhagen’s Central Station.  After check-in, a receptionist escorted me to my Superior room, the cheapest category, and provided detailed instructions on how to control the lights and temperature. Located on the ground floor, a half-flight up from street level, the airy room had chevron oak floors, greenish-gray walls, a custom desk and wardrobe along one wall, and a steel four-poster bed with crisp white sheets and a firm king-size Dux mattress. A large arched window with a deep niche faced a busy road — noisy at night but an inviting perch for people watching. In typical Scandinavian style, the restrained décor incorporated a few eye-catching accents, including a modern, mobile-like ceiling lamp and a lounge chair designed in 1950 by Hans Wegner. What the bathroom lacked in space, it made up for in drama. Tiled floor-to-ceiling in beautiful dark-gray Bardiglio marble, the compact room had a large round heated mirror that remained fog-free even when steam billowed from the adjacent, glass-enclosed shower stall (there was no bathtub). Generously sized bath products from the cult Swedish perfume house Byredo — in the rich Bal d’Afrique scent — were arrayed on a polished countertop. One hiccup: the unfortunate placement of a heated towel rack behind the toilet resulted in a scalded shoulder. A sauna and a small fitness room were located in the basement, the latter with weights and a few cardio machines (during my rainy stay, the single treadmill was in perpetual use). There’s also a fleet of cherry-red bikes guests can rent (for a fee) to properly explore this cycling-centric city. Valet and limousine services can be arranged. Wi-Fi is fast and free.  From the lobby, the elegant central staircase descends to Restaurant Niels, located in a somewhat hidden glass-walled annex with navy floors, blush-pink banquettes and amber pendant lamps. Though service was uneven, the restaurant offered an excellent breakfast buffet (from 295 kroner; included in my rate), including hearty loaves of Danish rye, poached eggs with tender greens, halved avocados drizzled with spice mix, and thick curls of cured salmon. In the evening, menus focus on seasonal Nordic products — Norwegian scallops, Danish lobster, hay cheese — while cocktails and a bar menu are served in a nearby bar nook. A limited menu is available for room service. A good-looking splurge suited to the design connoisseur who values a comfortable, central location and can overlook the occasional choice to favor form over function.  Nobis Hotel Copenhagen, Niels Brocks Gade 1, Copenhagen; nobishotel.dk.  AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HoursThe New Zealand city is laid-back and outdoorsy, but its sophistication shines in its expanding art scene, thriving fashion industry and a new generation of chefs embracing native ingredients. By Elaine GlusacThe construction cranes that pierce the Auckland skyline are a visual indication of the growth New Zealand’s largest city is experiencing. Close to one-third of New Zealand’s estimated 4.5 million population lives in Auckland, a geographically blessed — and traffic-cursed — city spread over at least 50 volcanic cones on a North Island neck of land between two large harbors. The emerging Wynyard Quarter on the western waterfront is home to a new theater, a park where movies are projected onto the side of a former cement silo in the Southern Hemisphere summer and several restaurants. Auckland’s personality, like New Zealand’s, is laid-back and outdoorsy, but its sophistication shines in its expanding art scene, thriving fashion industry and a new generation of chefs embracing native ingredients.Through its ground-level galleries devoted to contemporary New Zealand art, the Auckland Art Gallery (free for New Zealanders; 20 New Zealand dollars, or about $14.50 for international adults) is a great place to get a feel for national concerns and the influence of the indigenous Maori culture on visual art. The lace-like paper panels, entitled “Milk and Honey,” commissioned from the artist Lonnie Hutchinson that explore the exploitation of indigenous women are particularly powerful. Wander upstairs under space-potato sculptures by the artist Judy Darragh suspended in the atrium, part of a 2011 expansion, to an older wing of the building where a series of portraits by the painter Charles F. Goldie, done in the early 20th century, lovingly capture detailed images of his tattooed Maori subjects. Take a walk on Auckland’s counter cultural side along Karangahape Road, known locally as K Road. Near the city’s oldest cemetery, a string of music shops, cheap clothing dealers and craft stores mingle with bars and restaurants over several blocks. Wander into the vintage shopping mall St. Kevins Arcade to browse the retro wares, from the secondhand bookstore Green Dolphin, focusing on children’s books, to vintage-inspired dresses from Rita Sue Clothing. Before opening their innovative restaurant Pasture in 2016, the chef Ed Verner and his wife Laura Verner, who manages the wine list, spent a year gathering elderflowers to steep in vermouth, pickling spruce leaves, brining wild fennel and aging butter so it tastes like Camembert. Now just 20 diners at a time can try that butter with their house-made sourdough, a side dish to a set menu of five to six small, seasonal and astonishing courses (160 to 180 dollars). Mr. Verner makes ample use of an open fire for torching leeks and smoking everything from quince to duck. Menus highlight the bounty of New Zealand with an emphasis on vegetables. The drinks pairings — alcoholic (85 dollars) and nonalcoholic (75 dollars) — are as original as the food, and might include an intentionally oxidized rosé. You’ll make no decisions about what to eat or drink, but you’ll be in hands so passionate that if you express a love of the eel broth, the couple might offer to package up an extra serving to take home. New Zealand is known for its Great Walks, nine stunning long-distance trails that span the geographic breadth of the country from coastlines to mountains. These lie far beyond the city, but the new Coast to Coast Walkway in Auckland takes a similarly comprehensive approach to trekking across town. The roughly 10-mile route goes from the Waitemata Harbor downtown south across the isthmus to Manukau Harbor, stringing together a series of parks. Pick a portion to get a sense of the hilly volcanic topography and the locals’ love of nature from the vast Auckland Domain to verdant Mount Eden, the city’s tallest peak at roughly 640 feet, and One Tree Hill, another stamina-testing summit. Devoted to the story of New Zealand from geology to politics, the Auckland War Memorial Museum holds treasures obscured by its title, namely the vast collection of indigenous Maori art works and crafts. It’s currently in the early phases of a 20-year plan to update the galleries, layout and access, but its rich collections remain on view, including more than 1,000 pieces of Maori treasures known as “taonga.” These include full-size buildings, a war canoe and everyday objects such as fish hooks, all intricately carved. Arrive in time to purchase your ticket for the 11 a.m. Maori song and dance performance which brings the culture enshrined in the exhibition halls to life (museum admission is 25 dollars, or 45 dollars, including the show).The city estimates that one in four Auckland residents owns a boat, and seemingly four in four are sailing fans — particularly after the Kiwi team won the most recent America’s Cup race versus the American team so decisively. The America’s Cup Sailing experience from the tour company Explore Group (180 dollars) allows amateurs to feel the thrill of a heeling 80-foot boat and the grind of raising the sails on two-hour trips in Waitemata Harbor. The fleet includes a 2003 vintage boat that served as a practice ship for Team New Zealand long before the twin-hulled, hydrofoil catamarans of present-day racing came along. But the older model still provides plenty of speed and the crew encourages all passengers to steer and crank on the grinders to adjust the sails throughout the trip.The 16-acre waterfront development Britomart, wedged between the harbor and the Central Business District, or C.B.D., mixes historic and new buildings that are rapidly filling with upscale tenants. A strong contingent of them wave the Kiwi flag for fashion, including boutiques from local designers such as Karen Walker, known for refining street styles in ruffle-edge dresses and cropped stovepipe pants; Trelise Cooper, whose dresses combine bohemian silhouettes with glam touches; and Kathryn Wilson, a women’s shoemaker with a taste for embellishment. Men get equal attention at Zambesi Store which makes progressive fashion for both sexes, and the spirited World which supplements its inventory of colorful, avant-garde looks with boutique beauty brands.Chic cafes spill into the streets that web the Britomart district, offering convenient respite. The new Amano scales up farm-to-table and nose-to-tail cooking to serve sizable crowds in a former warehouse with rough plaster walls and exposed beams. An open kitchen spans the space, making theater of chefs cutting fresh pasta or roasting chicken. The menu champions New Zealand ingredients from Kaipara oysters (4 dollars each), to grilled lamb chops (34 dollars). Down the street, the similarly seasonal Ortolana offers fewer but no-less-sophisticated choices — try kingfish crudo (20 dollars) and pasta with clams (29 dollars) — plus superb people-watching from the patio or the conservatory indoors.The developing Wynyard Quarter on Auckland’s western waterfront, reached by footbridge across Viaduct Harbor, can seem like a warren of construction fencing. But the Auckland Theater Company, among the nation’s most acclaimed troupes, already calls it home with the ASB Waterfront Theater, opened in 2016. The 672-seat theater and its spacious lobby, including a cafe, offers exposure to Auckland’s enthusiastic arts patrons as well as New Zealand playwrights such as Roger Hall and Briar Grace-Smith in comedic and thoughtful productions tucked between crowd-pleasing musicals and dramatic classics.From the Wynyard Quarter to the C.B.D., it’s easy to make a progressive dessert and nightcap crawl on foot. In the Wynyard, the waterfront patio at the North Park Restaurant and Bar, decorated like a vintage sea shack, is a fitting locale for a white and dark chocolate brownie (13.90 dollars). Across Viaduct Harbor, try to snag a seat on the packed patio of Soul Bar and Bistro for ginger crème brûlée (16 dollars) and a barrel-aged negroni (18 dollars). Order your nightcap neat at the Jefferson, a moody club which stocks 600 global varieties of whiskey, tucked away in the alley-like Fort Lane. Coffee-crazed New Zealand is a country where you can find a barista at a rural gas station. Espresso bars seem stationed on every corner in Auckland, but when it comes to caffeine and the accompanying breakfast it’s worth the trek to the inner-city suburb of Ponsonby to rub elbows with the flat-white sippers seated at communal tables in Orphans Kitchen. The 40-seat restaurant offers unusual dishes that might include spicy peanut butter and carrot kimchi on toast (8 dollars) and poached eggs with anchovy on sourdough (17 dollars). It’s about a block away from the bustling Ponsonby Central, a green market and restaurant hive where you can pick up that spicy peanut butter and other New Zealand comestibles to take home.Auckland can hardly be considered frenzied, but for an extra dose of tranquillity hop the ferry to Waiheke Island, where culture meets nature over 35 square miles of scalloped beaches, vineyard-planted hillsides and welcoming art galleries. Departing from Auckland’s downtown waterfront, Fullers offers regular 40-minute ferry rides to the island (38 dollars round trip, or 48 dollars with an island bus pass). One of the newer wineries, Batch Winery, will even send a bus to the ferry. After tasting its bright sparkling wine and smooth pinot gris (tastings, 15 dollars), hit the boutique-filled town of Oneroa to indulge in local bivalves at the breezy Oyster Inn, a nautically themed boutique hotel with a second-floor restaurant where patrons linger at tables on the balcony in view of the sea.Auckland’s top boutique hotel, the 25-room Hotel DeBrett downtown, has changed hands several times since opening in 1925, but its intimate, wood-paneled House Bar has been a popular gathering spot for decades. Colorful, striped, New Zealand wool rugs accent uniquely decorated rooms upstairs. Doubles from 350 dollars, including breakfast and a welcome drink. 2 High Street, hoteldebrett.com. Airbnb offers great value in Auckland where a shortage of hotel rooms has inspired a hotel construction boom. For example, the one-bedroom listed as a Luxury Bohemian City Apartment is in a historic building on Queen Street, downtown’s main street, with high ceilings, an efficiency kitchen and plenty of plants. The apartment costs around 136 dollars a night. https://www.airbnb.com/rooms/15119807If you do plan a trip to Auckland, check out these suggestions on what to pack from our Wirecutter team. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesThe cuisine at JuneBaby, which opened in the spring of 2017, is at once homey and familiar, yet refined and upscale — and offers a history lesson of sorts.By Catherine M. AllchinWho would have guessed that the hottest new Southern restaurant in the country is in a quiet residential neighborhood in Seattle? Or that it would score a James Beard award nomination for best new restaurant and that its fried chicken would sell out by 6 p.m. on Sundays?The location is the first of many surprises at JuneBaby, the second restaurant from the chef Edouardo Jordan. His first, Salare, brought him recognition for the rigor and sophistication he acquired at culinary school and stints at the French Laundry, Per Se and the Herbfarm. “It showcased my talent as a chef, not as a chef of color,” he said.With JuneBaby, however, he wanted to get personal. The Florida native reminisced about eating chitterlings, oxtail, okra and barbecue as a child. “I wanted to make what my mother and grandmother cooked.” (The restaurant’s name was a nickname for his father, who taught him to cook over wood.) The cuisine at JuneBaby, which opened in the spring of 2017, is at once homey and familiar, yet refined and upscale. But it also incorporates one of the primary advantages of restaurants in the Pacific Northwest: fresh local ingredients, which are carefully sourced. Sausages, pickles, ferments, hot sauces, ice creams and sodas are all made in-house. Even the smoke — an essential element of Mr. Jordan’s food — is crafted for each dish, with different sorts of wood used. While not wildly expensive, prices reflect that level of thought and quality.“Why shouldn’t Southern food be elevated?” Mr. Jordan said. “I’m trying to give a history lesson.” Mr. Jordan noted that during American slavery, workers ate field food while, at the same time, slave cooks prepared fancy dinners for plantation owners and visiting dignitaries. At JuneBaby, he presents both aspects of the era — by offering hoe cakes, grits and pig intestines, as well as artisan pork loin and heirloom ingredients — and focuses on the African roots of Southern cuisine. During a recent visit, we started with cocktails inspired by poems by Langston Hughes — mine was called Fire-Caught: “She fell, fire-caught, into the flame.” (The bar menu also features moonshine and classic Southern drinks.) We devoured charred okra with peanuts and strips of fried pig ears over pecan butter and honey — the dance of sweet and salty was seductive in both starters. A side of applewood-smoked carrots, served atop collard greens and tahini sauce, could have been a pleasing entree of its own.After a bit of a wait (the restaurant was hopping, even early that weekday evening), the mains arrived. A bright ring of shrimp bisque surrounded semolina-crusted catfish on a mound of Geechie Boy grits from South Carolina. Pork loin from local Carlton Farms was brined then grilled, accompanied by grilled leek halves and cabbage that had been charred and braised. For dessert, we enjoyed the decadent Kentucky chocolate cake with blackberry jam and a frozen strawberry-lime “flip” (the chef used to make them with Kool-Aid but now uses fresh fruit). Flipping it out of the paper cup and eating it by hand, like Mr. Jordan used to do in his youth, probably would have worked better than using a big spoon.Intense flavors — smoky, charred, sweet, salty, nutty, spicy — fused together in an outstanding meal that evoked images of the American South and Africa. It may have been the tastiest history lesson ever.JuneBaby, 2122 NE 65th Street; 206-257-4470; junebabyseattle.com. An average meal for two, without drinks or tip, is about $80.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerAn unparalleled economic powerhouse and megacity of 24 million people, the Chinese city was a frugal challenge. But it can be done (plenty of delicious dumplings helped). By Lucas PetersonSuperlatives are everywhere in Shanghai. I forked over my 50 yuan (about $7.90) and boarded the maglev train departing from Pudong International Airport. My understanding was that this was a high-speed train, like the one I’d recently taken from Chengdu to Xian. I didn’t realize that, operating by a giant set of magnets that caused it to levitate over the track (hence the name, maglev), it was the fastest commercially operating train in the world. After leaving precisely on time, our speed began to build. And build. Soon, we were screaming through a blur of new housing developments and farmland at 268 miles per hour as we made our way from the Pacific coast to the heart of Shanghai. The ride, while not exactly smooth — you feel the speed — was exhilarating. I stepped off 19 miles and a few minutes later at Longyang Road, slightly dazed.Despite this high-tech arrival system, Shanghai is, in a way, a late bloomer. Cities like Beijing and Xian have been political and commercial powerhouses for centuries. Heading into the 19th century, Shanghai was a modest trading port that exploded after being “opened” to the world by Western imperialism. What became known as the Paris of the East laid the groundwork for what Shanghai is today: an unparalleled economic powerhouse and megacity of 24 million people. Packed with luxury brands and overrun with shiny Bentleys and Audis, it’s also impossibly expensive — kryptonite for a penny-pincher like me. Luckily, I was able to spend a four-day weekend there denting, but not breaking, the bank.You can start saving money by staying on the fringes of the city center, where rooms at the Peninsula can run $900 per night. I settled on the Jinjiang Metropolo Hotel Classiq Shanghai, just north of the Huangpu River in Hongkou, and paid 576 yuan per night, about $90, for a perfectly comfortable “Extreme Sassy” double room. (The hotel has since been rebranded as the Golden Tulip Bund New Asia. Things move fast in Shanghai.) After the rush of the maglev train, getting there on the subway felt like a mere crawl. Still, it was relatively efficient and definitely cheap — expect to pay between 3 and 5 yuan for a one-way journey. And the location near Tiantong Road was ideal — I could either hop directly on the subway or take a short walk over the Suzhou River into the Huangpu District, giving me easy access to the Number 2 subway line, one of the two main underground east-west thoroughfares in the city. It’s also just a few minutes’ walk to the Bund, the famous waterfront area where old European banking and trading houses gaze over the river at the new, towering financial centers of Pudong. China is platitudinously described as a compelling mix of ancient and modern — but in Shanghai, there’s ample reason.Walking in Shanghai, though, can be an adventure. As you might expect from a city of more than 20 million people, it’s constant and not-always-controlled chaos. Still, between the nonstop dodging of cars and motorbikes, it’s fairly doable — and a great way to work up an appetite. And while Shanghai itself is high-priced (a cold brew and pizza slice at the world’s largest Starbucks will set you back $20), true Shanghainese cuisine happens to favor the frugal, in the form of one of my favorite types of food: dumplings.The first dumpling to get to know is the xiao long bao, or soup dumpling, a regional specialty that’s long been popular in the States. The steamed dumplings, usually filled with pork or crab meat, have delicate, nearly translucent skins — but not too thin that they might break, losing the valuable liquid inside.My first of many great xiao long bao came from Papa Chan’s Shanghai Dumplings, a fairly sizable restaurant on Sichuan Middle Road. Around late morning, I noticed a mob of people forming in the lobby and decided to join them. I was glad I did — while I ended up mistakenly getting four orders of dumplings (10 yuan each) instead of one order of four dumplings (my Chinese is a little rusty), they were perfectly petite and bite-size, and exploding with porky soup flavor. I’d snarfed down a dozen before I’d even gotten wind of the sizzling jian bao — a thicker, doughier fried dumpling — down the street. At Lao Sheng Xing, another quick casual midday hot spot, a man wielding two pairs of industrial pliers poured a steady stream of grease out of a wide, shallow pan. The two dozen or so golden brown dumplings, stuffed with beef and chopped vegetables, bubbled and sputtered. I ordered three big fried dumplings, each about the size of a baseball, for a total of 9 yuan. The drill at most of these places is the same: Order at the counter and hand your receipt to a server or, in this case, the guy making the dumplings. Grab your food, an available seat and enjoy.Other quality dumpling houses abound, and special mention should go to Ling Long Fang for its casual, appealingly dingy atmosphere and excellent xiao long bao (16 yuan a dozen) — which you can see being made while you wait. The real M.V.P. of Shanghai dumplings, though, is the sheng jian bao. At the intersection of steamed bun, fried pot sticker and soup dumpling, you’ll find the sheng jian bao (not to be confused with the regular jian bao mentioned above). They are fried in a shallow pan, then steamed, and finished off with a smattering of scallions and sesame seeds. They also drench the palate with hot juice upon the initial bite.You can get your fix at Da Hu Chun, a warm and homey storefront with shared tables and four pork-filled dumplings for 7 yuan. Of nearly as good quality are the ones at Yang’s Dumplings, a popular chain — get the sheng jian bao stuffed with shrimp (four for 18 yuan). The best I had, though, were during a two-hour morning food tour I purchased through Lost Plate, a food tour outfitter (300 yuan, includes food). Our guide, Nick, started us off at Xiahai Miao (Under the Sea), a Buddhist temple with an adjacent vegetarian restaurant (the Eight Treasure Noodles were quite good), then walked us through the former Jewish Ghetto, where 20,000 refugees lived during World War II.Winding our way through the nongtang (old-fashioned alleyways) passing humble apartment blocks with European-style balconies, we ended up near the intersection of Dongyuhang and Anguo Roads, where I found the sheng jian bao of my dreams in a small storefront. They were fluffy on top, crunchy on the bottom and filled with savory, fatty juice. They were included in the price of the tour, but would have cost just 6 yuan for an order of four. While I was beguiled by the food of Shanghai (as you might be able to tell), I was equally smitten with the numerous historical, artistic and musical options the city has to offer. After the tour ended, I went to the nearby Shanghai Jewish Refugees Museum (20 yuan), which elucidates the history of Jewish refugees in Shanghai, highlighting in particular the lives of Jakob Rosenfeld, an Austrian doctor who fought with the People’s Liberation Army, and Ho Feng Shan, a diplomat sometimes called the Chinese Schindler for issuing visas against orders.Elsewhere, the M50 Art Industry Park is a huge arts community set in a prewar textile manufacturing complex. Most of the dozens upon dozens of galleries are free to browse — including the Chenglin Art Gallery, home to the playful and colorful paintings of Chenglin Huang — though a handful charge admission. I also stopped in at the gallery of Bu Bai Liao, who happily showed me several of his rock ‘n’ roll-inspired portraits. Mr. Bu said he enjoyed M50, but added that communal gallery life has a downside: “I think artists need the freedom to communicate with other people.”One of the most entertaining galleries is island6, home of the Shanghai-based art collective Liu Dao. It draws heavily from technology in its pieces, with plenty of video game references and an inevitable tongue-in-cheek critique of capitalism. A work called “Cheongsam Kingdom” featured a painting of a classic automobile superimposed over a looped video of a young woman in traditional dress behind the wheel, blowing LED smoke through a cigarette.The M97 Gallery on Changping Road is smaller, more intimate and free — and is easy to miss if you’re not looking for it. I was interested by a macabre, slightly disturbing multimedia installation called “The Theater of Apparitions,” by Roger Ballen, as well as work that involved the beautiful layering of Chinese calligraphy and traditional darkroom techniques by Sun Yanchu. Another worthwhile art destination — in the southeast corner of the city center and marginally harder to get to — is the state-run Power Station of Art, formerly the Nanshi Power Plant. Admission is free, but I paid an additional 50 yuan to see the special exhibition dedicated to the Italian design collective Superstudio (through March 11). The concept of a government-supervised contemporary art museum is intriguing, to say the least, and it’s interesting to see how Chinese artists navigate the boundaries of harsh censorship.The music in Shanghai is as compelling as its art, and I saw a number of live music shows over the course of my stay. Jazz is one popular import, and I headed out one night to watch the smoking-hot Ulysses Owens Jr. Quartet at Jazz at Lincoln Center Shanghai — yes, that Lincoln Center. The club was swank and intimate, and the music as good as any you’ll see in New York City. A highlight was the vocalist Alicia Olatuja joining for a sultry rendition of Michael Jackson’s “Human Nature.” Tickets (180 yuan) were reasonable, though the servers didn’t care much for the fact that I passed on ordering dinner and had only a Qingdao beer (55 yuan). On a different end of the spectrum was a Leonard Bernstein retrospective I attended at the Shanghai Symphony Orchestra, founded in 1879 as the Shanghai Public Band and billed as Asia’s oldest orchestra. The conductor, Zhang Jiemin, exhibited masterful control, and she led the orchestra through a program that included the overture to “Candide” (one of my favorites), as well as Bernstein’s “Jeremiah” symphony. The 80-yuan tickets were sold out when I went to the box office, so I took the next best at 180 yuan. (Upon arriving at the symphony hall, for what it’s worth, I noticed plenty of scalpers looking to unload tickets.)On my last day, I indulged a touristic whim and headed to the observation deck at the top of the Shanghai Tower (180 yuan). There are a number of interesting things about the building itself — an innovative rain-collecting system reduces water consumption by 25 percent, for example — which helped make up for the hazy, less-than-stellar view at the top. At 2,073 feet tall, it’s the second-tallest building in the world, behind the Burj Khalifa. As if sensing impending disappointment, our elevator operator proudly pointed out that the elevator we were riding, at 45 m.p.h., was in fact the fastest in the world. In Shanghai, the competitive fire always burns.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPursuits“Here, cider is not just an alcoholic beverage. It’s a way of life.”By Jason WilsonNo one really tells you what to do when you first arrive at a sagardotegi, or traditional Basque cider house, especially if you don’t speak Basque. You’re simply given a glass, led to one of the long wooden tables in a vast room, and immediately served a plate of chorizo, followed by a cod omelet. It’s left up to you to figure out how to get a drink.My brother, Tyler, and I learned this on our first night in Astigarraga, 15 minutes southeast of San Sebastián, which happens to be the cider capital of Spanish Basque Country. In this town of just under 6,000 people, there are an astonishing 19 cider houses. We were spending several days here in late January, at the start of the traditional cider season that runs through April. With Spanish-style ciders becoming more popular among American cider makers and cider enthusiasts, I wanted to see what they tasted like at the source.At Garziategi, a sagardotegi in a big stone barn on the outskirts of town, we learned that when a guy with a bucket yells “txotx!” (pronounced “CHOACH”) that means he’s about to open the tap on one of dozens of huge 13,000-liter barrels, shooting out a thin stream of cider. You’re supposed to stand up from your meal, get in line, and hold your glass at just the right angle to catch a few fingers of cider from that hissing stream. You drink the small amount in your glass and then follow the cidermaker to the next barrel. Thinking it was a free for all, my first faux pas was coming at the stream from the wrong side and essentially butting in line. Then, I couldn’t quite figure out how to hold my glass so that the cider hit at the right angle, to “break” the liquid and create foam. Thankfully, the crowd at the Basque cider house was very forgiving. A kind white-haired man in a sweater, whose group was eating next to us, showed me the ropes, hopping up and waving me along with him at the next shout of “txotx!”We eventually learned on our cider house tour that advice was forthcoming if you sought it out. At a modern cider house in the town center, called Zapiain, a hand-painted mural of “don’ts” was on the wall: Don’t cut in line; don’t fill your glass all the way up; don’t sit on the barrels. Tyler grasped the technique much quicker than I did.“Here, take it here, at an angle,” said Igór, our tour guide at Petritegi, another sagardotegi just down the road from Garziategi (the suffix “tegi” means “place of”). I did as Igór said, allowing the stream to hit the very rim of my glass, spraying a little bit on the floor, just as the locals do. (I got the hang of it on my fourth glass.) Some older sagardotegi actually have worn grooves in the cement floors from years of streaming cider. The point, Igór told us, was to make sure the cider has good txinparta, or foam; if the cider is healthy, that foam should dissipate quickly. The cider in the glass disappears quickly too. The flavors are funky, crisp and acidic, and usually bone dry — nothing like the cloying, over-carbonated ciders you too often find on tap in the United States. In late January, Astigarraga was still relatively mellow. But as txotx season rolls on, more than 15,000 cider enthusiasts can crowd into the town’s cider houses each weekend. Txotx season follows the apple harvest of September and October, then fermentation of the cider in early winter. In fact, in late January, some of the barrels might not be fully finished fermenting. “The cider in the barrel is still evolving,” Igór said. “If you come back in two months and taste the same barrel, it will have evolved.” In Basque Country, most cider is made by spontaneous fermentation and no added commercial yeast, similar to natural winemaking. Once the season ends in April, whatever is left in the barrel is bottled.The annual ritual harkens back to an era when cidermakers would invite clients, perhaps innkeepers, restaurateurs or the famed gastronomic societies of San Sebastián, to taste and choose which casks they wanted to purchase. “Here, cider is not just an alcoholic beverage,” Igór said. “It’s a way of life.” Petritegi, for instance, dates to 1526.Over the years, a meal became part of the ritual. Every cider house serves the same basic menu for 30 euros: chorizo; cod omelet; roasted cod with green peppers; thick, medium-rare chuleta steak; Basque cheese (such as Idiazabal) served with walnuts and quince paste. And all the cider you can drink. The cider house ritual is just one of many Basque Country cultural touchstones that make this autonomous coastal region a very different place than the rest of Spain. “Twenty years ago, there wasn’t chairs,” Igór said. “The food was just served in the middle of the table.” While Petritegi did indeed offer chairs — and a beautiful hake in garlic and oil as an alternative to the cod — we were served roughly the same menu in all seven cider houses we visited, and we stood and ate in three of them. In Astigarraga, a sleepy but pleasant town, we took a lovely, steep and tiring hike up to an old church that had been a stop on the ancient Camino de Santiago pilgrimage. As we wandered past orchards overlooking the bay of San Sebastián, our guide, Ainize, told us stories of the Basque golden age. In the 16th century, Basque ships were built around the cider barrels, and each sailor drank up to three liters of cider per day to fend off scurvy. The result, according to lore, was that the Basque fishermen and whale hunters were the healthiest and most renowned on the sea, fishing far from their home waters. Their range was so famous that, only two years ago, the remote West Fjords of Iceland repealed a 400-year-old law that ordered the murder of any Basque visitor on sight. “The 16th century was the golden age of cider, but cidermaking is much older than that,” Ainize said. “The original meaning of txotx, in our language, is ‘to speak’. Now it’s an invitation to drink cider.”As we descended back into the town square, Ainize pointed out the local pelota court, where a traditional handball game is played. Many believe this sport originated with the ancient Greeks. We also saw huge stones with handles that are used for lifting and carrying in yet another Basque sport. The day before, we’d drank cider with a woman named Olatz who told us, “I carry a stone of 550 kilos with eight women.” She added, with a laugh: “We have our own sports here.”At Petritegi, Igór took us through the orchards where we learned about Basque varieties of apples like Goikoetxe, Moko, Txalaka, Gezamina and Urtebi — a far cry from Granny Smith and Golden Delicious. A Basque cider can be made from more than 100 varieties — some bitter, some acidic, some sweet — and 40 to 50 might be blended in single cider. We were told that one kilo of apples will make one bottle. We were also told by a number of people that apples are sometimes trucked in from Normandy or Galicia to keep up with demand.In the town center, Sidería Bereziartua operates a tasting room, and so we booked a tasting. “Cider is deep in our culture,” said Mikel, our pourer. “We don’t even know when we started making it.” Ciders using the official denomination of origin, Euskal Sagardoa, created in 2016, must be made entirely from Basque apples. When he poured Bereziartua’s Euskal Sagardoa, Mikel said, “If you want to take one bottle, drink this one.” Then he poured a cider with a Gorenak label, one that can use foreign apples in the blend — but must adhere to strict standards and be approved by official tasters. “If you want to drink three bottles, you take this one,” he said. Buying bottles at the cider houses in Basque Country is relatively inexpensive. I never saw one priced above 10 euros (about $12), and most were under 5 euros.On our last evening, we went to Lizeaga, a sagardotegi in a 16th-century farmhouse that’s next to Garziategi. Earlier, our stone-carrying friend Olatz had described the house as “the real txotx.” Our reservation at one of the long table was marked with a long baguette. There were no chairs. After the opening plate of chorizo, we strolled into the barrel room. Gabriel, the cider maker, was opening the ancient taps with what looked like pliers. Gabriel went from cask to cask, and we followed along, dashing back into the dining room in between for the omelet, the cod, the steak.After the eighth or ninth (or 10th?) txotx, and after some debating of technique with my brother, I thought I had finally gotten the catch down like a true Basque. But on the next txotx, when I put my glass under the stream, Gabriel gently corrected my form: “No, no,” he said, “have the cider hit here.” Well, no matter. Soon enough he tapped another barrel, and there was another chance to learn.The cider museum Sagardoaren Lurraldea (Kale Nagusia, 48, Astigarraga; sagardoarenlurraldea.eus/en), is a great resource, with tastings and hiking tours. Visitors can also book advanced reservations for any of 21 local cider houses on the museum website.WHERE TO DRINK AND EATCider houses in Basque Country get crowded during the cider season, which runs from late January through April, so reservations for dinner or lunch are recommended. Some recommended cider houses in Astigarraga to visit during txotx season:Zapiain, Kale Nagusia 96; zapiain.eus/en/ Garziategi, Martutene Pasealekua 139; gartziategi.com/en/ Lizeaga,  Paseo de Martutene, 139: lizeaga.eus/en/lizeaga/Petritegi, Petritegi Bidea; petritegi.com/en. Offers tastings and tours, as well as lunch and dinner.In Hernani, a 20-minute walk from Astigarraga:Zelaia, Martindegi Auzoa; www.zelaia.es/enWHERE TO STAYPensión Txingurri Donostia Ibilbidea, Astigarraga; pensiontxingurri.com/es/pension-txingurri-astigarragaAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCHASING THE DEALFlights from companies like JetSuite, Blade and JetSmarter can turn out to be reasonably priced, especially for groups. Here’s how it works.By Shivani VoraAs Rachel Raymond from West Orange, N.J., tells it, the day last August when she flew on a private jet ranks as one of the most unreal experiences of her life. Ms. Raymond, and her husband, Daniel, along with their three children, took a flight in a seven-seat jet, a Cessna Citation III, complete with two pilots and a well-stocked bar, from Westchester County Airport, in White Plains, N.Y., to upstate Saratoga Springs. The Raymonds had decided to take an impromptu trip to Lake George because they had found a last-minute deal where they could fly on that route for only $500.“Daniel and I have always fantasized about flying private, but it’s a luxury that we never thought that we would be able to pay for,” Ms. Raymond said.The charter was a “SuiteDeal” from the private jet company JetSuite. These last-minute deals for one-way private jet charters within the United State cost between $500 and $2,000, and the money the Raymonds paid was comfortably within their budget.JetSuite is one of several private aviation companies attempting to make private jet flying accessible to travelers who aren’t part of the billionaire or even millionaire set. In many cases, these companies such as Blade and JetSmarter, are able to offer flights at appealing prices because the trips are shared with a small group of other passengers. While this may not be private flying in the vein of having an entire plane to yourself, travelers fly in and out of small, private airports where they usually don’t have to deal with the Transportation Security Administration and can arrive just five to 15 minutes before their departure time.The Raymond’s $500 trip is a more extreme example of how little flights on private jets can cost, but industry experts say that a trip on one today is less expensive than it ever has been in the past.Steve Wooster, the managing director of services and air operations for the luxury travel network Virtuoso, said that the proliferation of private jet brands has led to these lower prices. “There are many more suppliers than there ever used to be, and competition means prices have dropped,” he said. “Private jet flying is now open to a diversity of passengers, not just C.E.O.’s.”According to Virtuoso’s research, the average price for a private jet flight declined 13 percent from 2014 to 2016.Are these lower prices the reason more Americans are chartering planes? Virtuoso’s statistics indicate that the number of private charter trips increased by 10 percent from 2014 to 2016, and statistics from the research company Euromonitor show that the number of passengers in the United States who chartered planes increased from 4.88 million in 2013 to 5.32 million in 2016 (this number excludes helicopter charters).JetSmarter, around since 2013, is an example of a player in the private aviation space selling shared flights. The company operates on a membership model: Fliers pay a minimum of $15,000 a year and book seats on already scheduled flights through the JetSmarter app, which lists more than 150 domestic and international trips a day. Trips under three hours are included in the cost of the membership while longer ones are an average of $300 a person, according to Sergey Petrossov, the company’s chief executive officer; most flights have an average of eight to 10 passengers.Members who want to set their own schedule can create a flight and post it to JetSmarter’s app so that other interested members can buy seats for the route and help reduce the cost of the charter; if all the seats on the plane sell, the member who created the flight flies for free. These crowdsourced trips usually top out at $2,000 a person, a fraction of the $8,000 or more per hour it can cost for a traditional charter. “My goal is to make private jet flying less elitist,” Mr. Petrossov said.Blade, which doesn’t require membership, also sells flights, but only from December through mid-March and on one route, between Westchester County Airport (with or without a helicopter transfer from Manhattan) and its own terminal in Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport. From $1,285 each way, fliers travel on a Bombardier commercial jet retrofitted with 16 seats and receive an array of amenities such as catered meals from Dean & Deluca as well as iPad Pros loaded with first-run movies; they also get accommodations for the weekend at Faena Miami, a luxury beachfront hotel. The Miami route made its debut two years ago and has been so popular, said company founder Rob Wiesenthal, that this season, the flights will be offered four days a week, instead of the two days that they previously were. Paul Cappuccio, who lives in Greenwich, Conn., and is the general counsel for Time Warner, flew to Miami on Blade most weekends last winter and plans to do the same this year. “It’s such a relaxed way to fly, an elegant experience and so hassle-free,” he said. While not necessarily budget-friendly, Mr. Cappuccio said that Blade hits the sweet spot on price. “It’s not all that much more than a full-fare first-class ticket, but a small fraction of what it would cost to fly on a chartered private jet,” he said.But for travelers who only want their own chartered plane without having to pay an exorbitant price, there are options like JetSuite’s “SuiteDeals.” The company’s primary business is private jet charters for hourly rates of between $4,000 and $7,000 while “SuiteDeals” are sales of flights called empty legs — routes that jets are scheduled to fly on without any passengers.Meredith Broder, an adviser with the Villanova, Pa., travel company Avenue Two Travel, said that empty leg flights have changed the private jet game. “Rather than have the plane fly empty, air companies or private jet brokers try to sell that route at a discount,” she said. “This strategy helps with fuel costs and puts private jet flying within reach to people who wouldn’t normally be able to afford this luxury and convenience.”Ms. Broder frequently books private jets for clients and gets a weekly list from several private jet companies of empty leg availability for the coming week (other agents specializing in private jet travel also get similar lists). Recent flights included an $8,500 trip from Naples to Cleveland on a Beechjet 400A, a plane that seats seven people, and a $6,500 trip from Scottsdale, Ariz., to Colorado Springs on a Learjet 45XR, accommodating eight fliers.Empty legs are inexpensive because fliers usually don’t have a choice in the route, but some travel agents can find favorable rates for customized charters, too.Ms. Broder booked a jet charter this March from New Jersey to Las Vegas for her client Steven Michaels, an entrepreneur from Cherry Hill, N.J., and seven of his friends. The trip was in celebration of several of the men turning 50, and the group wanted an extravagant getaway. First-class tickets worked out to close to $2,000 a person round trip, while chartering an eight-seat Citation III jet was $3,500 each. When presented with both options, Mr. Michaels said that going private was a no-brainer. “The journey was like paying for a high-end tour or excursion and ended up being one of the most fun parts of the trip,” he said.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 places to go 2018Hotels, cruises, airports and tour operators are making wellness a priority.By Shivani VoraWhat aspect of the travel industry won’t wellness touch in 2018? Perhaps none. From hotels and cruises to airports, airlines, safaris and group tours, wellness promises to be everywhere in the world of travel. Five years ago wellness on the road meant heading to a destination spa to embark on a specific program such as weight loss or staying at a hotel with a nice gym; more recently, the concept has evolved to include all categories of travel, and encompasses overall physical and emotional health.The data to support the rising interest in wellness travel abounds. According to the Global Wellness Institute, a nonprofit organization for the wellness industry, the wellness travel market grew to $563 billion in 2015 from $489 billion in 2013, and is expected to grow another 43 percent to $808 billion between 2015 and 2020. Travelers made 691 million trips with a wellness component, such as healthy eating or fitness, in 2015, 104.4 million more than in 2013. In addition, in 2016, the luxury travel network Virtuoso launched Virtuoso Wellness, a portfolio of 42 hotels and cruise lines. The company’s sales for these wellness partners (Rosa Alpina, in Italy’s Dolomites Mountains, and Uniworld River Cruises are examples) were up 20 percent last year compared with sales for the company’s other suppliers, which increased nine percent.Beth McGroarty, the research director for the Global Wellness Institute, said that the profusion of wellness programs in travel has redefined the purpose of a vacation.“Vacations used to be associated with excess. You would have lavish meals, drink a lot and party,” she said. “In today’s high-stress world, however, people are desperate for rejuvenation and are prioritizing wellness when they have time off.” Leisure travelers looking to partake in a little — or a lot of — self-care are spoiled for choice, particularly in the hotel space where many of the big brands are incorporating wellness into guest rooms.Westin Hotels & Resorts has a growing roster of properties, including ones in Melbourne and Milan, that will feature WestinWorkout rooms, accommodations where guests have the choice of either an in-room treadmill or stationary bike. In December, Four Seasons Hotel Los Angeles at Beverly Hills introduced seven wellness rooms in partnership with the wellness real estate company Delos. The amenities include toiletries from the beauty brand Lather that are made with natural ingredients, air purification systems that reduce allergens and promote restful sleep, showers with dechlorinators, and healthy in-room dining menus created in collaboration with the Cleveland Clinic.A night’s stay in a wellness room starts at $600 —$50 more than regular room rates — and the hotel’s general manager, Michael Newcombe, said that the demand for them has been notable. “Our regular clients asked us to bring wellness into the privacy of their rooms, and these new accommodations were our answer,” he said.Cruises, too, are increasingly embracing wellness, especially by offering health-focused voyages: The adventure cruise line Linblad Expeditions, for one, in partnership with the exercise and spa brand Exhale, began a series of three- and four-day well-being trips (starting prices from $1,990 a person) in December around Mexico’s Baja Peninsula. Guests on the journeys choose from activities like kayaking around the Baja coastline, snorkeling with sea lions and classes led by an Exhale instructor like power yoga and high intensity interval training. Some travel companies are also offering more itineraries with wellness themes. Intrepid Travel will run 50 wellness-focused group trips this year, compared with 20 in 2017. One addition is the 12-day Golden Triangle: Yoga & Bollywood Edition (from $1,258 a person) in India that includes three days in the city of Rishikesh to practice yoga on the banks of the Ganges. Intrepid has more wellness trips this year, according to the company’s travel director, Leigh Barnes, because the number of travelers who booked them increased significantly in 2017 — in the United States alone, the jump was 88 percent from 2016.“We’re seeing that travelers who traditionally wanted to indulge on a vacation are now searching for trips that help them maintain their personal wellness,” Mr. Barnes said.In the air travel space, both airlines and airports are stepping up their efforts in numerous ways toward keeping travelers healthy.Singapore Airlines, for instance, recently introduced Deliciously Wholesome, in-flight meals that were designed with the help of a nutritionist and are rich in complex carbohydrates, lean proteins and fiber. The dishes vary by class, but as an example, economy passengers can expect quinoa with ratatouille and chickpeas, and Oriental-style steamed fish. Delta Air Lines offers guided meditation at its Asanda Spa Lounges in its Sky Clubs at John F. Kennedy International Airport and Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. Called Deepak Chopra Dream Weaver, the service can be booked for either 30 or 50 minutes, at a cost of $30 and $50 respectively, and is a light-and-sound experience in which fliers sit in a zero gravity chair and listen to a meditation led by Dr. Chopra. Delta’s service is limited to those who have access to Sky Clubs, but all travelers flying through Denver International Airport have the option of practicing meditation and yoga: Since last November, the airport’s Concourse A has been home to Yoga on the Fly, a studio with five 60-square-foot rooms that offer iPads loaded with yoga and meditation sessions; fliers interested in trying a session can rent these rooms in increments of 15 minutes (the cost is $1 per minute).Avery Westlund, the company’s co-founder and a certified yoga instructor, said she came up with the idea for Yoga on the Fly because her frequent travels left her physically and emotionally exhausted. “Travel can be a grind, and yoga and meditation are simple and efficient ways to alleviate the stress,” she said. The company expects to open locations at two more airports in the United States by early 2018. Airports are a setting where travelers at least have the option to walk as a way to squeeze in some exercise, but traditional safari trips usually involve morning and evening game drives and few opportunities for activity. Now, some safari outfitters are breaking the same-old mold by giving travelers ways to keep fit. The luxury company Micato Safaris provides its clients with a yoga mat, free weights and a jump rope. Runs through the bush in Kenya with Maasai warriors can also be arranged. And then there’s a new 10-day private running safari in Kenya (from $7,850 a person), where travelers visit the high-altitude destinations of Eldoret and Iten to meet and train with elite runners. “Our clients were telling us that they didn’t want to sacrifice their workouts while they were on vacation,” said Melissa Hordych, the company’s general manager. “We’ve tried to help them by giving them creative and fun ways to move.” AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by5 placesBelfast’s lively city center is a compact pedestrian-friendly area where the shopping gems are independently owned establishments. By Shivani VoraWhen locals in Belfast, in Northern Ireland, want to go shopping, they head to the lively city center, a compact pedestrian friendly area with modern buildings and stately structures from mostly the Victorian and Edwardian eras. Although there are international retail chains such as Zara and H&M, the neighborhood’s gems are the independently owned establishments. Visitors can discover these shops selling goods from the United Kingdom and Irish brands as they stroll along the wide lanes and often charming side streets.The owner of this more than two decade-old tiny jewelry store, Sean Harden, named it after his niece and sources his pieces — which are made mostly of semiprecious materials — from United Kingdom designers. He favors an aesthetic that’s simple yet chic such as a trio of sterling silver bangles and a rose gold plated ring with a swirl pattern. And for men, there are cuff links, rings, bracelets and necklaces, too. Prices from 10 pounds (about $14).10 Queen’s Arcade; laurenmayonline.comAlthough the merchandise in this quarter-century-old women’s clothing store, which carries pieces from United Kingdom designers, includes vintage-inspired pants, skirts and T-shirts, the large and diverse selection of dresses is impressive. Casual sundresses, flirty party dresses and full-length gowns are part of the mix, and there’s new stock for sale every week. All the pieces are more classic than trendy and are likely to become wardrobe staples. Prices from 45 pounds.19-21 Lombard Street; libertybluebelfast.co.ukOpen since 1897, this sprawling deli calls itself as “an Aladdin’s cave of culinary delights,” and the description is more than fitting. Shoppers will be bombarded by epicurean treasures from around the world including smoked meats, teas and coffees, spreads, oils, cakes and more. Be sure to check out the products under the deli’s own label, especially the chutneys and jams — the sweet chili jam, made with habanero peppers, is a best-seller. Prices from 2 pounds.5-6 Fountain Centre, College Street; sawersbelfast.comBelfast has a flourishing community of artists, and this 3,000 square-foot store spread over three levels is a place to appreciate and buy the creations of about 80 local artists, a mix of both established and up and coming names. Finds include candles, photography prints, cards, woodwork, ceramics and T-shirts; the store also has studio spaces where resident artists work, and shoppers are welcome to visit. Prices from 1 pound.60-62 Ann Street; studiosouk.comThis airy space opened in 2007 and both displays and sells crafts. The handmade items are the work of local designers and artists, who are part of the nonprofit Craft & Design Collective, which supports he arts in Northern Ireland. Among the goods for sale are handwoven textiles, colorful pottery, hand dyed shawls, silk scarves, blown glass vases and sterling silver jewelry for both men and women. Prices from 2 pounds.A7, the Fountain Centre, College Street; craftanddesigncollective.comAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPolitics, Picasso and female artists will be the subjects of shows in the coming year.By Jessica Colley ClarkeTravelers seeking inspiration for 2018 trips may want to consider art exhibitions and cultural festivals.At the National Museum of Women in the Arts in Washington, D.C., notable exhibitions include “Women House” (March 9 to May 28), which explores the role of women in American culture through photography, video, sculptures and large-scale installations, and “Heavy Metal — Women to Watch 2018” (June 28 to Sept. 16), a showcase of contemporary female artists who work with metal.To see a different side of Picasso’s work, plan a trip to the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art in Humlebaek, Denmark. The exhibition “Picasso Ceramics” (Feb. 1 to May 27) includes 150 ceramics that reflect an experimental stage of the artist’s career as he worked with new materials and glazes to create a range of sculptural pieces.Politics is the topic of a coming exhibition at SITE Santa Fe in New Mexico. In “Luke Dubois: A More Perfect Union” (Jan. 19 to April 4), democracy and elections are under the microscope. The most commonly used words in 43 State of the Union addresses are at the heart of a work called “Hindsight is Always 20.20.”The desire to travel is the subject of a coming exhibition at the Alte Nationalgalerie in Berlin. “Wanderlust” (May 10 to Sept. 16) features works from a range of international artists, including Paul Gauguin, Caspar David Friedrich, Auguste Renoir and Gustave Courbet.Cultural festivals also offer compelling reasons to plan a trip. At the Battle of the Oranges in Ivrea, Italy (Feb. 11 to 13), the main squares of the city are transformed into a colorful battleground for throwing oranges. The classical dances of India are the center of the Khajuraho Dance Festival (Feb. 25 to March 3), held in an open-air auditorium at the Khajuraho Group of Monuments in Madhya Pradesh, India.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTrendingJust because the Olympics are over doesn’t mean you have to give up your curling obsession. Here’s how to get into the sport, or stay involved.By Elaine GlusacExcept for bonspiel regulars, curling seems only to break into popular consciousness once every four years, with the arrival of the Winter Olympic Games. This year, the sport that resembles shuffleboard on ice has popped up at a broad array of venues, from urban rooftop bars to remote frozen lakes, giving laypeople a last wintertime chance to hurl the stones through March. Here’s how to get on the ice.In Jackson Hole, Wyo., Snake River Brewing installed a curling sheet in its slopes-facing front yard this winter. The microbrewery’s director of operations, Chris Erickson, built the 24-foot-long ice sheet by hand and even shaped the stones that patrons can push down the alley (in one direction only; the sheet isn’t long enough for two targets or “houses” as they are called). Patrons can play for free.A number of resorts in northern climes also offer curling, including the American Club Resort in Kohler, Wis., about 60 miles north of Milwaukee. The resort has a curling rink in its courtyard, available to groups by reservation but free to guests on Friday and Saturday afternoons. In Quebec, the Fairmont Le Château Montebello is offering a “Go Canada Package” to get guests into the Olympic spirit, with rooms from 150 Canadian dollars (about $115) and access to its curling sheet as well as its ice skating rink and cross-country ski trails.Among the more unique locales for curling is the rooftop bar at the Gwen, a Luxury Collection Hotel in Chicago. The ice is synthetic, the rink is seven feet shorter than regulation sheets and the stones have ball bearings on the bottom to help them glide, but the facsimile has transformed the fifth-floor terrace into an outdoor attraction in an unlikely season (admission is $25 a person, including 30 minutes of curling time and a cocktail; smaller stones are available for children).“Our winters can be dreary and there isn’t always a lot to do,” said Marcus Cornelious, the director of sales and marketing for the Gwen. “With a cocktail, everyone seems to want to try their hand at curling.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFootstepsFor nearly 15 years, the poets Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Robert Browning lived under the spell of this elegant Renaissance capital — and the mark they left remains.By Ann MahThey were an unlikely couple: he a young writer, dashing and ambitious, she a highly lauded poet six years his senior, a middle-aged invalid whose father kept her housebound. But when Robert Browning sent Elizabeth Barrett a fan letter in January 1845 — “I love your verses with all my heart, dear Miss Barrett,” he gushed — he ignited a romance that defied not only her weak constitution, but also her controlling father’s prohibition of marriage, as well as the conventions of Victorian England. After a 20-month courtship — conducted mainly within the sickroom that she hardly ever left — the pair married secretly and ran away, escaping the forbidding chill of London for a city that could feed their poetic souls with warmth and beauty. They moved to Florence.For nearly 15 years, the Brownings lived under the spell of this elegant Renaissance capital. Inspired by its magnificent architecture and piazzas, embraced by its artistic expatriate community, they produced some of their most famous works — including Browning’s “Men and Women,” and Barrett Browning’s “Aurora Leigh” — and this period is widely considered the most productive of their lives. But more than 150 years after Elizabeth Barrett Browning’s death ended the couple’s Florentine idyll, the pair seems largely forgotten by their muse, overshadowed by Dante, Michelangelo’s David and the city’s other treasures. There is no doubt that Florence left a mark on the Brownings. But during a visit last May, I set out to discover whether the Brownings had left their mark on Florence.Even in the 19th century, Florence was a popular tourist destination, particularly for upper-crust Victorians who, continuing the previous century’s tradition of the Grand Tour, flocked here to enhance their knowledge of art and the classics. Indeed, the city’s touristy reputation initially deterred the Brownings — freshly arrived from England, they lingered for months in Pisa, planning only a brief stop in Florence before heading to Rome. But when they arrived in Florence in 1847, they found themselves captured by the city’s sublime beauty. “Florence holds us with a glittering eye; there’s a charm cast round us, and we can’t get away,” Elizabeth wrote in a letter to a friend. After a few false starts, the couple (along with Elizabeth’s loyal lady’s maid, Wilson, and dog, Flush) settled “six paces from the Piazza Pitti” in a grand suite of rooms they called Casa Guidi. “I am very happy — happier and happier,” wrote Elizabeth in one of her many letters. Tuscany’s temperate climate suited her frail health — and Italy’s reasonable prices suited both poets’ slim pocketbooks (which were even slimmer after Elizabeth’s father, furious at her marriage, disowned her). They quickly made friends within a large community of English-speaking artists and writers who had moved to the city for similar reasons. Armed with a reprint of an antique map, I set out to find some of the Anglo-Florentine haunts of the Brownings and their set. At first glance, the city’s center — its magnificent, well-manicured architecture shining with eternal beauty — appeared untouched since the Renaissance. But the particular establishments I sought, once popular among the Brownings and their set, had long ago disappeared. At Piazza Santa Trinita, I gazed at the Palazzo Bartolini Salembeni, a majestic structure that once housed the Hotel du Nord, popular among well-heeled travelers; today the building is privately owned, its doors firmly shut and bolted. On the elegant shopping street, Via de’ Tornabuoni, I looked for the ornate, gilded interiors of the Gran Caffé Doney — a British favorite featured in the Franco Zeffirelli film “Tea with Mussolini” — but instead found a boutique hotel. Even the British Consulate had vanished; I later learned that it closed in 2011, shuttered after 500 years of diplomatic presence in Florence. At the massive Palazzo Strozzi, I did find the Gabinetto Vieusseux, a private lending library frequented by Robert where, for a hefty membership fee, he read English periodicals and exchanged ideas with other expatriates. But the institute moved to its current location only several decades ago, and the collection is open to visitors solely by appointment. I crossed to the other side of the Arno, pausing to admire the statues on the Ponte Santa Trinita. The river sparkled before me, edged with pastel-colored Renaissance buildings, the gaptoothed, medieval clock tower of the Palazzo Vecchio looming above jagged red rooftops. It occurred to me that here, in this “most beautiful of cities devised by man,” as Elizabeth once described it, perhaps the luster of the Brownings had simply faded — and compared to all this, whose wouldn’t? Still endeavoring to retrace their daily footsteps, I entered the Boboli Gardens from a side gate on Via Romana. Their rent at Casa Guidi included free admission to these manicured grounds of the Palazzo Pitti, and the couple often came here with their son, Pen, a beloved only child who was born in Florence in 1849 after Elizabeth had suffered two miscarriages (childhood illness, combined with a lifelong morphine addiction, compounded her health problems). Lined with clipped hedges, dotted with elaborate grottos and serene reflecting pools, the formal gardens seemed like an odd place for a child to frolic. Then again, Pen was surely no ordinary child, dressed by his mother to resemble a Renaissance prince, with embroidered blouses, velvet trousers, and long curls flowing under wide-brimmed hats, as was the fashion among the Anglo-Florentine coterie. Back on the Via Romana, I turned toward the Casa Guidi, only a few steps away. Sweeping across the first floor of a 15th-century palazzo, the Brownings’ former apartment is today owned by Eton College, which maintains it as a museum, open three days a week from April to November; the Landmark Trust, a British nonprofit organization, also manages it as a holiday rental. Inside the imposing, high-ceilinged rooms I gazed at décor replicated from the Brownings’ era, including stiff Victorian furniture, drawing room walls of sea-foam green and heavy red curtains. Elizabeth’s desk stands in the center of the drawing room, facing a bank of tall windows. In this spot, she wrote some of her finest work, including “Casa Guidi Windows,” a book-length poem inspired by the pageantry unfolding on the street below. On Sept. 12, 1847 — the Brownings’ first wedding anniversary — the couple watched 40,000 people parade past their windows in an enormous political demonstration heralding the Risorgimento, the movement for Italian unification. The crowd’s “joy and exultation,” “the white handkerchiefs fluttering like doves,” the banners reading “Liberty,” “The Union of Italy,” and “the Memory of the Martyrs,” so deeply affected Elizabeth that she wrote “Casa Guidi Windows” in passionate support of the Italian struggle for liberty: For the heart of man beat higherthat day in Florenceflooding all her streets And piazzas with a tumult and desire …. How we gazedfrom Casa Guidi windows while, in trains of orderly procession — banners raised,And intermittent bursts ofmartial strains Which died upon the shout, as if amazed By gladness beyond music —they passed on! Though the poem has been largely overlooked by the English literary canon, for Italians it became an anthem, and Elizabeth their champion. Her passionate support of the Italian cause was considered crucial to the movement’s success. “She was so famous among Italian intellectuals and patriots,” said Elena Capolino, the curator at Casa Guidi. “She did so much for unification. Even today Elizabeth Barrett Browning is considered the poet of the Risorgimento.” Alas, Elizabeth never witnessed Italy’s unification, which wasn’t fully realized until 1871. She succumbed to a final illness in 1861 — “we believe it was tuberculosis,” Ms. Capolino said — and died at Casa Guidi. (Modern scholars have posited that she suffered and died from a rare muscle disorder.) On the day of her funeral, the shops lining the Brownings’ street, Via Maggio, were closed in her honor. Her coffin was carried through the city to the Protestant Cemetery of Florence, which is known as the English cemetery. She is buried there, her tomb a striking marble sarcophagus designed by Lord Frederic Leighton, the famed English artist. Shortly after her death, a grieving Robert left Florence, never to return. On the exterior wall of Casa Guidi, a plaque honors “Elisabetta Barret Browning / Who in her woman’s heart reconciled / a scholar’s learning and a poet’s spirit / And whose poems forged a golden ring / between Italy and England,” placed there in 1861 by a “grateful Florence.” It was just one small sign in a bustling city. But it was a sign, nevertheless, that Florence has not forgotten the Brownings after all.The Brownings’ home is now a museum, Casa Guidi (Piazza San Felice, 8), open Monday, Wednesday and Friday, from 3 to 6 p.m., April to November. The apartment is also available for short-term holiday rental through the Landmark Trust. Steps away from Casa Guidi, the Brownings probably entered the manicured Boboli Gardens (Via Romana, 37/a) of the Pitti Palace via a side gate, the Annalena entrance, at Via Romana, 37/a. Though the Brownings most likely frequented Florence’s English pharmacy, which has long ago disappeared, they may also have visited Officina Profumo Farmaceutica di Santa Maria Novella (Via della Scala, 16), a renowned perfumery and apothecary, which dates to 1612. The sumptuous interiors feature gilt-edged paneling and 14th-century frescoes; the almond hand cream was a favorite souvenir of Victorian tourists. The Brownings had tiny appetites and unusual eating habits — one biography of the couple claims they were once seen sharing a squab. They subsisted largely on coffee, bread, chestnuts and grapes — all of which are available at Mercato di Sant’Ambrogio (Piazza Lorenzo Ghiberti), a lively food market. Though it dates to the 19th century, the poets most likely did not shop here; Elizabeth’s lady’s maid, Wilson, bargained for her. “Flush,” by Virginia Woolf, tells the story of the Brownings as portrayed through the biography of Elizabeth’s beloved cocker spaniel. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealWhether you love to ski or not, these hotels and resorts offer plenty of activities to help you enjoy the season in comfort and style.By Sarah AmandolareLittle compares with the rush of downhill skiing, but for travelers seeking something different this season, hotels and tour providers offer plenty of other ways to experience the winter scenery. An eight-day Winter Tatra Adventure with Intrepid Travel features snowshoeing in Poland’s Tatra Mountains, a designated Unesco Biosphere Reserve that extends into neighboring Slovakia. A kulig, or traditional sleigh ride, with stops along the way for grilled sausages, is also included, along with Polish cooking lessons in Krakow, accommodations and some meals. All departures this year are 15 percent off if you book in January (from $1,054, with promo code 53298). Prefer something over the top? An Alpine Couples Package at The Alpina Gstaad in the Swiss resort town of Gstaad includes a private helicopter ride to Refuge L’Espace, a small restaurant perched in the Alps with panoramic views of snowcapped Glacier 3000. The two-night package for two, available through March 17, also offers junior suite accommodations, a horse-drawn carriage or husky-drawn sleigh ride around the nearby village of Launen, a couples hammam (or Turkish bath) treatment in the on-site spa, exclusive use of the hotel’s private cinema for an evening, and a five-course tasting menu at Sommet, the hotel’s Michelin-starred restaurant (from about $5,300). Snow itself is something of a luxury in Switzerland and Austria, where 50 and 70 percent of slopes have snow-manufacturing capabilities because of inconsistent weather. But the snow-making process has environmental repercussions, prompting Britain-based Responsible Travel to drop itineraries that might contribute to the problem. Through early March, the tour company offers a seven-day snowshoeing holiday into the spruce and pine forests of Finland’s remote Kainuu region near the Russian border, where natural snowfall is a good bet. The small-group tour (maximum 13 people) includes accommodations in wilderness cabins, all meals, nightly sauna use, an English-speaking guide and airport transfers (from $1,062). Alternatively, a four-day Yukon Dog Sledding Holiday in Canada is also available through mid-April, and includes transfers from Whitehorse, accommodations, all meals, mushing instructions, and use of sleds and winter boots (from $1,037).Jackson Hole, Wyo., which saw its deepest snow on record last winter, offers access to a wealth of outdoor winter pursuits well beyond cross-country and Nordic skiing. At Snake River Sporting Club, an approximately 800-acre private community located 25 miles south of downtown Jackson, a Three-Day Discovery Package includes activities such as snow biking, ice skating and tubing. Accommodations are for two people in either a tiny home-style Discovery Village Unit (from $600) or a Sporting Cabin (from $750) set just before old-growth forest. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerOne of the oldest cities in China proved to be one of the less expensive trips our columnist has taken in the past year.By Lucas PetersonTravelers eventually face the predicament of a destination that is utterly defined by one particular attraction — the Pyramids outside Cairo or the Taj Mahal in Agra, for example. The question is less “Should I see this attraction?” and more “How could I possibly not see this attraction?” But any lingering doubts I had about visiting the famed Terracotta Army, built by Emperor Qin Shihuang in the 3rd century B.C., soon dissipated when I entered the main excavation site. The life-size, chalky-gray warriors were meticulously detailed and demonstrated a stunning, almost overwhelming show of force — exactly, I’m sure, the impression the emperor wished to make.But Xian, the north-central Chinese city whose name means “western peace,” is much more than its collection of warriors. It’s one of the oldest cities in China: It has seen the likes of Marco Polo during his Silk Road journey, and been home to Buddhist sutras brought from India by Xuanzang, a monk whose journey inspired one of the greatest works of Chinese literature, “Journey to the West.” Xian was also one of the first Chinese cities introduced to Islam, and its Muslim Quarter, located in the city center, is now one of the city’s most thriving tourist areas. I had a fantastic time in the ancient city during a recent four-night excursion. It’s also one of the less expensive trips I’ve taken in the past year.One of the biggest costs? Getting there. But even that was cheap, not to mention enjoyable — my one-way ticket on a high-speed train from Chengdu to Xian cost 283 yuan, about $45. If you’re looking to take a 17-hour sleeper train, you can do that for about half the cost. A couple of tips: Get to the train station 30 minutes before you think you need to. There’s considerable security getting into the station and the trains leave precisely on time (I very nearly missed mine). Travelchinaguide.com has the best interface I’ve seen for buying Chinese train tickets online; alternatively, you can ask for help at your hotel.The journey through the countryside at 150 miles per hour took a little more than four hours. There was a notable juxtaposition of approaching Xian — a city with centuries-old 40-foot high city walls and a literal moat — in such an advanced and modern way. I emerged into the subfreezing temperatures at the North Railway Station and hopped on the subway (less than a decade old and in great shape) into the heart of the city (one-way ticket, 4 yuan), in search of the lodgings I had booked on Hostelworld.com.I can’t always do youth hostels — I’m generally too old and grumpy to be hanging around in bunk beds comparing dry shampoos with a bunch of early-20s Australian backpackers. But every now and then I stay in one, and I’m reminded that they usually, when chosen carefully, provide for a great experience, especially for the price point.That’s precisely what happened at Han Tang Inn, a homey and friendly hostel on narrow street, a quick walk from the Zhonglou (“Bell Tower”) subway station. For those on an extreme budget, $6-per-night beds in six-person shared rooms are available. I decided to “splurge,” booking a private room on the second floor with its own bathroom — at 139 yuan per night, a little more than $20, I was happy with my decision.Like all good hostels, the inn provided plenty of cushy space, a decent selection of snacks and drinks for sale, good-enough Wi-Fi, and free in-house activities like mah-jongg and calligraphy lessons. Most importantly, it gives you a built-in crew of new friends and acquaintances — perfect for exploring and checking new places out.And in my case, it gave me an easy and affordable way to check out the Terracotta Army at the Emperor Qin Shihuang’s Mausoleum Site Museum. I don’t typically like aligning myself with tour groups, but for excursions out of town (the excavation site is about an hour east of Xian), I recommend it. Unless you’re particularly facile with Chinese, arranging solo day-trips can be difficult or costly. Instead, I paid the hostel 238 yuan and joined a 10-person group one morning on a minibus out of town.“The emperor’s Chinese name was Qin Shihuang. We also called him Ying Zheng,” explained Jia Jia, our friendly and assertive tour guide, who punctuated many of her pronouncements with a definitive “hmph.” She continued: “Emperor was a good emperor. But he was also ruthless. And he was very crazy.” The emperor, she said, while achieving the unification of China and creating the great clay army, also had a fondness for torturing his subjects and a taste for mercury, thinking it was the secret to everlasting life (it was, in fact, the opposite). There were three excavation locations at the museum, and we saved the biggest and best for last. The vast, final dig site held hundreds of soldiers, lined up in a majestic and slightly eerie show of force: infantrymen, archers, even a few horses. I was surprised when Jia Jia told us that while Qin Shihuang created around 8,000 life-size soldiers to protect him in the afterlife, only 2,000 or so have been unearthed and reassembled since local farmers made the discovery in 1974 (and only a portion of those are on public display at any given time). Many, many decades of painstaking work remain. Admission to the site, should you choose to go on your own, is 150 yuan, or 120 during the winter off-season.I was able to do most of my exploration of Xian solo, though, thanks to the compactness of the city center. I recommend making a quick stop at the Bell and Drum Towers, which closely resemble each other and are both located in the heart of the city. Tickets to each will cost 35 yuan, or you can buy a combo ticket for 50 yuan. The pagoda-like structures, with their distinctive upward-tilting eaves, are quite regal and majestic, and beautifully illuminated during the evening. They were constructed within years of each other during the 14th century by the Hongwu Emperor of the Ming dynasty — the Bell Tower rang to mark the beginning the day; the Drum Tower, its end.Another duo of complementary sights is the Giant Wild Goose and Small Wild Goose Pagodas, both south of the city walls. The larger of the two is one of Xian’s most famous structures, a sandy-colored Tang dynasty pavilion constructed in 652 A.D. to house sutras and icons brought from India by the Buddhist monk Xuanzang. The seven-story pagoda occupies the spacious and peaceful grounds of Dacien Si (Mercy Temple), which costs 50 yuan to access.Meandering around the temple grounds on a chilly day, I saw men and women lighting incense and worshiping at Sakyamuni, the main hall of the monastery. From there I entered the pagoda (this requires a separate 20-yuan ticket) and climbed the nearly 250 wooden stairs leading to the top. Created to protect the 657 volumes of Buddhist scriptures Xuanzang brought back, the pagoda yields another benefit: the views from the top are excellent, if slightly hindered by smog.(Air quality is a problem throughout China, and asthmatics and those with delicate respiratory systems should take particular notice. The government is testing measures to stem the problem in different cities, including Xian, which is experimenting with building-sized air purification towers.)To the northwest is the Small Wild Goose Pagoda (built in 707, it’s slightly younger), and while the pagoda itself is currently being restored, the area is worth visiting for a couple of reasons. The Studio of Chinese Calligraphy and Painting, in addition to traditional artwork, has a small museum dedicated to Mao Zedong that I found to be more honest and critical than I expected. It cites the “lost generation of the Cultural Revolution” and the era’s “disastrous blow on traditional Chinese culture.” A friendly employee at the shop directed me to the spacious, modern Xian Museum (free admission), which has diverse array of installations: contemporary paintings from the Taklamakan Desert region, relics from the Tang and Sui Dynasties, and, in the basement, an exhibition detailing the history of Xian.Don’t forget that the city’s ancient walls are an attraction in and of themselves. Accessible in different locations around the city, I found it easiest to enter by the main southern gate (Yongning), the most elaborate and ornate of the entrances. Tickets are 50 yuan, but I was able to score a half-off discount by showing my high-speed rail ticket from Chengdu. The ambitious can rent a bicycle on the parapets — 45 yuan for three hours — and bike the approximately 8.5 miles around the entire wall. (Given the subfreezing temperatures and poor air quality, I decided to just walk the walls for a while. I wasn’t disappointed — the views were good, and provided a nice vantage point of much of the surrounding area.)Convenient to Yongning gate, on Shuyuanmen Pedestrian Street, is Zui Chang An, the first of many outstanding restaurants in the city I sampled. I’ve done my share of eating in the world, and I’ll say that Xian has some of the tastiest and most accessible regional cuisine of any country I’ve visited. At Zui Chang An, you can get a very good version of a Shaanxi specialty called hulu ji, or calabash chicken. Steamed or stewed (or both, in some cases) and then fried and served inside of a gourd, this whole chicken (68 yuan) has tender, fall-apart meat that went well with a side of spicy, numbing cucumber seedlings (22 yuan).Getting a good breakfast near my hostel was no challenge once I discovered Ma Lao’s Diced Meat Spicy Soup, a small shop on West 1st Road. I went one morning with a fellow traveler in search of a peppery bowl of hu la tang, or hot, peppery soup, and found a long line of locals — always a good sign. The thick, tangy broth, filled with mushrooms and bamboo shoots, positively made my hair stand on end with its sharp, black pepper flavor. Along with a side of flatbread, brimming with herbs and onions, it made a for a filling and eye-opening breakfast. Two bowls and bread cost just 17 yuan.The Muslim Quarter, which begins roughly at the Drum Tower and extends north and west through a considerable swath of the city, is certainly geared toward tourists but is worth walking around for its frenetic energy, brightly lit signs that would give Vegas a run for its money, and, naturally, its tasty street food. Beiyuanmen Street, which extends northward from the Drum Tower, was a natural place to start an impromptu food tour, and I launched my exploration from there.Dodging bicycles, a crush of pedestrians, and the occasional pedicab, I wound my way through the barrage of colorful LED lights and street hawkers selling pomegranate juice, chunks of durian and roujiamo, a sandwich stuffed with chipped beef and hot, spicy oil (15 yuan). My favorite snack was a juicy stuffed pancake called xianbing, which was full of diced beef and fresh chives (10 yuan). In the hectic Muslim Quarter, your best strategy is to relax and go with the flow: The different foods and sheer variety of choice can overwhelm, but not once was I disappointed. Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCHECK INThe LondonHouse Chicago and The Robey immerse guests in the architectural history of early-20th-century Chicago, with a bonus of sweeping rooftop panoramas.By John L. DormanFor generations, Chicago has been a storied architectural laboratory, boasting designs from Frank Lloyd Wright to I.M. Pei. In the early 20th century, countless buildings, many of them clad in brick or Indiana limestone, served as pillars of the Midwestern economy. Now, the city features a growing number of former commercial buildings that have been repurposed as hotels, including the LondonHouse Chicago in the Loop and The Robey in the Wicker Park neighborhood. The building renovations have revealed intricate design details and created rooftop spaces that allow hotel guests to enjoy the vistas that continue to define Chicago.From $149.Designed by the prominent Chicago architect Alfred S. Alschuler, the London Guarantee and Accident Building was constructed on the site of Fort Dearborn in 1923. The building, once home to the namesake insurance company, as well as the London House, a famous jazz club, now houses the LondonHouse Chicago, which opened in June 2016 after a lengthy renovation. The 452-room hotel, part of Hilton’s upscale Curio Collection, is located in the original Beaux-Arts building, along with a 22-story glass addition that was built during the renovation. On the first floor, the meticulously restored gold-lacquered ceiling in the rotunda and hallway reaffirms the building’s ornate history. The bar in the second-floor lobby offers a daily tea service, high-backed, plush chairs that seem right out of a film adaptation of “Alice in Wonderland,” and a nice lower-level view of Marina City, the 1960s-era apartment and retail complex. There is a tri-level rooftop, with indoor and outdoor space; the latter features views of the Chicago River and Lake Michigan, along with a 23rd floor cupola that is available for private events.Situated in the northernmost fringe of the Loop, the hotel is an excellent base for exploring some of the city’s top attractions, including the Art Institute of Chicago, Millennium Park and the Riverwalk. The DuSable Bridge, only a few steps from the hotel, takes you to Michigan Avenue’s Magnificent Mile. There are multiple ways to reach the hotel. I took the El, the train system, from Chicago O’Hare International Airport to the Loop, which took about 45 minutes.My eighth-floor vista king room had an attractive view of the river, the Wrigley Building and Tribune Tower, one of the most striking Gothic skyscrapers ever constructed. The wood paneling around the room was appealing, along with the framed pictures evoking a Jazz Age sensibility. The Wi-Fi is complimentary—it worked well—and a higher-speed option is available at an additional cost. Each room comes with a minifridge and Nespresso coffee maker.A frosted sliding door revealed a marble-clad sink, with a modern, glass-enclosed shower (there was no bathtub). There were an array of Malin+Goetz products, including rum bar soap and cilantro hair conditioner, along with a generous amount of towels.Almost immediately after its opening, the rooftop bar became a hot Chicago destination, which means you may struggle to get the attention of a bartender during peak times. The outdoor terrace is open year-round, while the rooftop bar is only operational as the weather permits. Try the Roaring 20’s, a strawberry and jasmine tea preserve with champagne ($16), and take in the view, anchored by Lake Michigan. The cupola is a popular place for wedding proposals. With a nod to the 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition, the names of the fair’s architects and designers like Frederick Law Olmsted and Francis Davis Millet adorn the wall and ceiling frames leading to the fourth-floor spa and fitness center.Between LH on 21, the indoor bar and restaurant space, and LH on 22, the 22nd floor rooftop, there is a range of food options. The morning of my departure, I opted for in-room dining, ordering the outstanding blueberry pancakes and bacon. Recent selections include the toasted grapefruit and a waffle with powdered sugar, berries and anglaise.The LondonHouse Chicago gives guests a classy, upbeat experience in the heart of the city. If you love great views and proximity to the waterfront, you’ll appreciate the hotel even more.LondonHouse Chicago, 85 East Wacker Drive; londonhousechicago.com.From $135.For longtime Chicagoans, the building that now houses The Robey was known as Northwest Tower. The Art Deco building, one of the first skyscrapers built outside of the Loop, opened in 1929 and was geared toward professionals with offices for doctors and lawyers. In the 1980s, the building acquired another nickname, the Coyote Building, as its spire and towering flagpole were said to favor a baying coyote. By the late 2000s, the building had been dilapidated for some time, despite the gentrification of Wicker Park. In 2014, approval was granted to Grupo Habita, the Mexico-based boutique hotel operator, for a hotel conversion, and in late 2016, The Robey opened its doors. The 89-room hotel, a member of Design Hotels, draws in guests with its revolving wooden door, dark green marble and stately brass elevator doors on the first floor. An adjacent building was previously a sister property featuring shared and private hotel rooms and was renamed Robey Hall last year; it now offers only private rooms.The Robey, with its triangular flatiron shape, sits at one of the most well-trafficked locations in Wicker Park, near the intersection of Damen, Milwaukee and North Avenues. The Damen El station, on the Blue Line, is roughly half a block away from the hotel, and offers an easy ride to and from O’Hare, along with quick access to the rest of the city. The area has an array of restaurants, vinyl record stores, bars and bike shops. Big Star, the bustling Mexican restaurant and a neighborhood fixture, is close to the hotel.I stayed in an upper-floor corner suite, which offered an unobstructed view of Wicker Park and the Chicago skyline. I was so taken by the landscape that it took me almost 15 minutes to start unpacking. The wooden floors evoked an era of old-school craftsmanship. With the touch of several buttons near the comfortable king bed, I was able to raise and lower the blinds for each window and dim the lights. The minibar was neatly hidden behind a large cabinet door.The corner suite bathroom contained two separate sinks, both outfitted with Le Labo soaps, lotions and bath products. It was by far one of the most spacious bathrooms I’ve used at a hotel. The shower floor was slightly elevated, which prevented water from leaking onto the bathroom floor, which can be an issue at many hotels (there was no bathtub).The Robey has a cozy second-floor lounge where food is available. My recommendation is to enjoy a tea and a banana nut muffin in the morning and a glass of wine later in the day. The Cabana Club, on top of the Robey Hall building on the sixth floor and open from May through September, gives off urban charm, with its rooftop pool and bar, proximity to the passing El trains and city views. The Up Room, the intimate 13th-floor rooftop cocktail lounge, has both an indoor space and an outdoor terrace. Try the Oaxacan on Broken Glass cocktail, with Banhez mezcal, lime cordial, chile liqueur and bitters ($15) and relax in a chair overlooking the skyline. Both spaces are very busy in the summer, so I appreciated the fact that the Cabana Club and the Up Room have earlier hours specifically for hotel guests before they are open to the public.The Café Robey, on the first floor, is open for brunch and dinner, with modern American fare from the executive chef Kevin McAllister. Selections range from the breakfast salad, with kale, walnuts, beets and goat cheese ($14) to the pan-roasted striped bass, with couscous, olives, dried apricots, yogurt and harissa ($23).With Wicker Park as an anchor, my experience at The Robey was exceptional. As you watch the sunset from the rooftop, you will likely want to stay for an extra night, or an extra week.The Robey, 2018 West North Avenue; therobey.com.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HoursThe city’s treasures lie just below the surface: world-class restaurants, Brazil-class music and an ever-ebullient arts scene.By Seth KugelChaotically refined, verdantly concrete, intimately gargantuan: The most populous metropolis in South America was but a middling coffee city until the mid-20th century, when an influx of northeastern migrants set off a growth spurt that shows no sign of stopping. With seemingly infinite skyscrapers nearly blocking out the sun (when its famously overcast skies don’t do it first), visitors don’t always take to the city instantly. But its treasures lie below the surface: world-class restaurants, Brazil-class music and an ever-ebullient arts scene, from alternative theaters to sparkling new museums. And though Paulistanos are often stereotyped as harried and overworked, that’s only compared to other Brazilians; compared to most megacity dwellers they are downright easygoing. Meanwhile, there’s ever more to see, as the slow-cooker of progress — or is it gentrification? — regenerates the once-abandoned historic center, block by block. But downtown is still no hipster paradise. It’s as vibrant and culturally alive as it is gritty and pickpockety, enough so that many wealthy residents stick to greener, wealthier areas. Visitors, of course, can take in the best of both. (Note: The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is advising Americans headed for São Paulo to be vaccinated for yellow fever first.)Friday afternoon is the perfect time to explore the old center, when it is still humming with office workers streaming in and out of modest shops and restaurants. Plot out your destinations on a paper map beforehand, as cellphone-gazers attract skilled pickpockets. But then stop worrying. Wander from the free galleries of Centro Cultural Banco do Brasil to the Monastery of São Bento, and then find espresso and Portuguese pastry at ultratraditional Casa Mathilde. Head into the Sesc 24 de Maio, a brand new, ballyhooed, mostly public high-rise cultural center whose highlights include an art gallery and top-floor cafe. (For members, it’s the rooftop pool.) For bargain shopping, take a cab or Uber over to Rua José Paulino in Bom Retiro, where Brazilian confecções — clothing (not candy) manufacturers — run true factory outlets, selling wares that would otherwise find their way, with jacked-up prices, to stores around the country.If cooking is an art form, then the mind-bending dishes that Jefferson Rueda coaxes from pig parts is a porcine symphony. A Casa do Porco (The House of Pig) Bar may be the least kosher, least halal restaurant in Brazil, but just about everyone else loves it. The pig de resistance is torresmo com goiabada, an appetizer that is less hors d’oeuvre than chef d’oeuvre: Cubes of luscious pork crackling attached to tender meat by a layer of fat are topped with a squiggle of guava paste. It’s appetizer, dessert and dietary sin all in one: dry and sweet and creamy. The affordable tasting menu (around 100 reais, or about $31) is a no-brainer, and a thoughtful new vegetarian version mimics the porky one. No reservations accepted, which is why you’re getting there at 6 p.m.: Otherwise you might spend your evening waiting for a table. For overlapping periods of the early 20th century, the ornate palacete (little palace) downtown at the corner of Rua Direita and Rua Quintina Bocaiuva housed a beloved musical instrument store, the Record radio network and Irmãos Vitale, a renowned music publisher. The cobblestone intersection became known as Music Corner, but the musical tradition died about when downtown did. That changed in 2017, when Casa de Francisca moved from the genteel Jardim Paulista neighborhood to the second floor, bringing a cultural jolt to a still rough and tumble area. Reserve a table for an eclectic lineup of Brazilian bands, which play on a circular stage in a teal-green space that recalls Old Havana. The classiness extends to the bar and kitchen — cocktail sensibilities came to São Paulo late, but you wouldn’t know it from the top-notch old-fashioned (35 reais). You can’t really claim to have visited São Paulo if you haven’t treated yourself to a pastel de feira, rectangular dough pockets with your choice of a near infinite varieties of fillings — escarole, chicken and catupiry cheese, “pizza” — rapid-fried on the spot at stands that anchor just about every farmer’s market in the city. Doesn’t sound like breakfast? Don’t tell that to those packing the tables, downing them with a pico de gallo-like “vinagrete” in between gulps of just-pressed sugar cane juice laced with pineapple or ginger. One of the best Saturday morning markets is on Rua Mourato Coelho in Vila Madalena, a hippie-turned-hipster-turned-upscale neighborhood. Post-pastel, wander the stalls, admiring the spices and cheeses and angling for samples of mango, papaya and, if it’s in season, the must-try jabuticaba.For one of the cheapest upscale lunches you’ll ever have, head to the Pintar Materiais Artísticos, an art supply store (you read that right) in the Pompeia neighborhood. In an awkward L-shaped space shoehorned into the shop is Petí Gastronomia, with ever-changing prix fixe menus of “democratized” contemporary cuisine from the lauded chef Victor Dimitrow. But Petí’s real hero may be its accountant: Just 47.50 reais will get you three courses of, say, octopus carpaccio, pork rib with mole poblano, and “cacao four ways” for dessert. Creative drinks come with poems handwritten on their coasters, courtesy of the wait staff. If there’s a line, browse the shelves of art books by or about Latin American artists. São Paulo’s world-renowned street art is everywhere, but most visitors just head to Batman Alley, a traffic-free tangle of passages covered in wildly creative works and surrounded by upscale cafes and galleries in Vila Madalena. A tour with the guide Renato Goes takes you there first, and then to the Outdoor Museum of Urban Art — where works are spray-painted onto the pylons under an elevated subway line — and downtown, where creations cover entire sides of buildings. Don’t be surprised if there’s a detour: Mr. Goes follows São Paulo’s best on Instagram, so you never know when you’ll stop on the side of the highway to admire work done the night before. Booked through Around SP, a three-hour tour is 490 reais and up.When northeastern migrants came to São Paulo last century, they brought their down-home cooking with them: dried meats, a rice and beans dish called baião a dois and tapioca in countless forms. You can find all three at the unpretentiously stylish Fitó, which serves food inspired by the cuisine of Piauí state. Especially worth your stomach real estate is the paçoca, a mix of manioc flour with shredded carne de sol (beef cured for three days, though no longer in the sun as its name implies). A meal for two with drinks will run you around 100 reais.Brazil’s Arab roots run deep — two of São Paulo’s last three mayors are of Lebanese descent — but most families arrived generations ago. Al Janiah is a rare nightspot and restaurant staffed by recent immigrants, largely Syrian refugees. The owner, Hasan Zarif, a native Brazilian born to Palestinian refugee parents, meant the place to be a bar and restaurant but it has morphed into a community center as well, with book launches and Arabic classes. Weekends, though, are all about night life, with live bands and a distinctly underground student vibe. And hummus, incredible hummus. The Palestina Libre cocktail (25 reais) is a delicious mix of anise-flavored arak, zaatar, mild biquino peppers, lime, mint and cachaça. If the cocktail’s (or the bar’s) politics bother you, well, as a sign on the wall reads, “A vida transtorna” — life unsettles, life perplexes, life agitates.Avoid newfangled brunch spots, and have an authentic Sunday morning meal at a padoca, slang for bakery. But a padoca is hardly just a bakery — it’s a full-service restaurant that is also part diner and part deli; every neighborhood has one, just ask around. For the truly local experience, order pão na chapa, buttered and grilled halves of the buns Brazilians call French bread, with a pingado — strong coffee with a little milk — and maybe an astonishingly cheap fresh-squeezed orange juice. There’s no shame in taking a dive into the pastries behind the counter (not literally, though you’ll be tempted) or ordering an omelet. Just don’t call it brunch. On Sundays, Paulista Avenue is closed to traffic and taken over by pedestrians and cyclists. You could entertain yourself wandering from political demonstration to street performer to craft vendor to Beatles cover band, but even better is to culture hop among the institutions lining the city’s main drag. There’s the brutalist Museu de Arte de São Paulo and the shiny new Japan House, but the highlight these days is IMS Paulista, a new branch of the Instituto Moreira Salles, where wide-ranging, innovative exhibitions appeal equally to art aficionados and those who just like looking at pictures. With São Paulo’s limited subway system and clogged highways, nothing is more important than location. Avoid straying too far from Paulista Avenue, where you’ll find plenty of choices. Those seeking an upscale experience will be happy in the leather-upholstered luxury of the Fasano São Paulo, where doubles start around 1,700 reais. Pousadas, or inns, are usually found in smaller towns, but Pousada Ziláh has six rooms in a 1932 house that aches with understated charm, a mere 10-minute walk from the bustle (and subway) of Paulista Avenue. Five of the six have outdoor balconies or terraces, and start at 345 reais. To be closer to the downtown excitement, a good budget choice is 155 Hotel near skateboarder-filled, alternative theater-bordered Praça Roosevelt. Doubles start at 150 reais.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byHeads upA designer thrift store aficionado in search of distinctly French fashion explores the luxury resale shops hidden away on side streets in Paris.By Amy Tara KochIn nearly three decades of visiting Paris, a highlight of my sojourns is shopping for the sort of Franco-distinct fashions impossible to find at home. Over the years, the proliferation of chain stores in Paris (and easy access to French luxury brands at home) has made finding unique pieces a challenge.So, on a recent trip, when I noticed a secondhand shop filled with high-end designer jackets, bags, boots and jewelry — many from defunct Parisian ready-to-wear brands, I was thrilled. While paying for my haul (a cashmere blazer by Angelo Tarlazzi and vintage fur stole), I learned that there were dozens of others, a network of resale shops catering to Frenchwomen’s exacting taste and passion for a deal. As a longtime designer resale and thrift store aficionado, I find few things more satisfying than tracking down accouterments that whisper “Fabriqué à Paris” — without paying retail. Thus began my deep dive into the City of Light’s lively dépôt-vente scene: upscale thrift shops that traffic specifically in luxury goods.While tourists fork out euros on Avenue Montaigne, the ritzy shopping pocket bordered by Avenue des Champs-Élysées, the Seine and the five-star Hôtel Plaza Athénée, savvy Parisians hunt down “gently used” Chanel, Yves Saint Laurent, Hermes, Givenchy, Louis Vuitton and under-the-radar French brands at designer resale boutiques tucked throughout the city. This is no dive-for-treasures-in-the- trash thrift shop scenario. Les dépôts-ventes (which translates to “deposit and sale”) are airy and efficiently organized: rows of leather jackets, tuxedos, blazers, silk blouses, cashmere sweaters, fur and cocktail dresses beckoning from hangers; vitrines piled with jewelry, wallets, sunglasses and, of course, scarves. As for prices, the resale value of top drawer luxury products is a fraction of the original sticker price.Think Balenciaga for the cost of Zara. Many pieces are consigned after being worn just once; some still have original price tags inciting heart palpitations in thrift-obsessed clientele. Unlike a traditional retail environment, prices are not set in stone. Don’t be afraid to negotiate, especially if buying a few things.The 16th arrondissement, with its wide, leafy avenues and ornate Art Nouveau apartment buildings, is fertile ground for fashion deals, specifically the smaller streets behind fashionable Place du Trocadero. Start at Reciproque, Paris’ largest dépôt-vente, with 5,300 square feet. Here, you’ll shop alongside smartly turned out locals for classic-veering, ready-to-wear evening gowns and a mind-blowing array of scarves. Make sure to hit the basement where more casual pieces (denim, blouses, bathing suits) are stocked. Pay attention to the shoe nook. With vision (new soles and a good cleaning), you can score show-stopping footwear on the cheap. Around the corner is Le Date, a boudoir-evoking jewel box brimming with cocktail frocks, furs, heels and bags displayed on vintage hat boxes. You’ll find the usual suspects: Yves Saint Laurent, Chanel, Hermes. But the more interesting pieces — and better deals — are lesser known French labels like Kyros and Stéphan, as well as quality basics from Lil Pour L’Autre, Joseph and Hotel Particulier.Diagonally across the street, Depot Vente Luxe Paris focuses on of-the-moment fashion, not vintage. The concept? Slashed prices (men’s and women’s) on items that could (give or take a few seasons) be found in the pages of current fashion magazines. Last November, I spotted a Fendi Peekaboo bag, a Saint Laurent Sac de Jour bag, a Balmain biker leather jacket and Men’s Louis Vuitton Icare briefcaseOff the main artery, Rue de Passy, on a cobblestone pedestrian market street, you’ll find Coeur de Luxe, a small shop tricked out like the ultimate French walk-in closet: tuxedo jackets, Céline blouses, Breton striped knits and Chanel tweeds alongside Jean-Claude Jitrois leather, sheared furs by Sylvie Schimmel and no shortage of gold-buckled belts, bags and shoes.Over in the 8th arrondissement, steps from Élysée Palace and behind fashionable Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré, is Valois Vintage where you’ll find a glamorous mash up of au courant and vintage pieces. It’s pricey. But swanky ready-to-wear couture and hard-to-find designer collaborations make it a favorite for magazine editors and women who like to stand out in a crowd.Cross the elegant Beaux-Arts bridge, Pont Alexandre III, to the Rive Gauche past the Esplanade des Invalides, for blink-and-you’ll-miss-it Defile des Marques, a storefront so cluttered that I considered ditching it for a glass of rosé at the corner brasserie. Happily, I didn’t. This small but mighty emporium produced some of my top finds: pristine Yves Saint Laurent and Loulou de la Falaise tuxedos, Akris and Balenciaga trousers and tags-still-on samples from the Riccardo Tisci era at Givenchy. Finding La Marelle is half the fun. It’s in the 2nd arrondissement near the tree-lined alleys of Palais Royal, inside Galerie Vivienne, a Belle Époque, glass-roofed, covered passageway with preserved mosaic floors, half-moon windows and moldings of goddesses and nymphs. On the ground floor are affordable French brands like Sandro and Isabel Marant. Upstairs is where things get interesting. There is an entire wall devoted to Japanese design, a section of made-in-Paris furs, a rack of designer denim and well-priced ready-to-wear.I’m now strutting around Chicago in my (discount) finery, delighted when friends ask the origin of my ensemble. “Oh, this? It’s from a tiny shop in Paris.” AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byIt’s not too late to plan a trip to the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea. Here’s how to score a cheap flight, find a place to stay, and catch the games.By Ann BabeFor me, a Korean-American adopted to the United States the year of South Korea’s first Olympics in 1988, the 2018 encore has been an occasion I’ve long anticipated. Now, three decades later, the Pyeongchang Winter Games are nearly upon us. And my life so far, book ended by Olympics, feels close to coming full circle.The XXIII Winter Games, set among the temple-dotted mountains of South Korea’s northeastern Gangwon Province, will take place February 9 to the 25th. With 102 events, they’re poised to be the most action-packed Winter Olympics to date and feature a number of firsts: history-making attendance by North Korea, the premiere of mixed doubles curling, alpine team skiing, big air snowboarding and mass start speed skating — and maybe even Afghanistan’s debut Winter Olympians.If you’ve been dreaming of spectating, snow-frosted and shivering with glee, like I have, there’s still time. Despite the scant days between now and the opening ceremony, it’s not too late to plan a trip.While the Winter Olympics never attract the same crowds as its splashier warm-weather sibling, the Pyeongchang Games have faced even greater challenges, due in part to their proximity to the peninsula’s demilitarized zone, a mere 40 miles away. To alleviate anxiety, Pyeongchang Organizing Committee spokeswoman Nancy Park said, organizers are working with intelligence agencies, conducting safety drills and communicating with everyone involved. “In Korea, the average Korean isn’t that concerned,” she said. “But for international visitors, we know that it’s a concern, so we try to get out all the information about what it is that we’re doing.”Still, Pyeongchang’s name has proved to be a point of confusion. Even after its capitalization was changed from Pyeongchang to “PyeongChang,” some Koreans worry foreigners could be too afraid to come because they mistake South Korea’s host city for North Korea’s capital. At an Olympic launch event at the United Nations Headquarters Dec. 13, Gangwon Governor Choi Moon-soon stressed, “Pyeongchang is different from Pyongyang. Very different. Please do not confuse.” Round-trip, nonstop flights between the U.S. and Seoul routinely go for well over $1,400. But this winter season, despite the Olympics, they’re a bargain. Travelers coming from New York can still secure direct flights for around $1,150 on Korean Air or Asiana. Connecting flights are less than $1,000 on China Eastern. From Los Angeles, they’re even cheaper, with nonstop on Singapore Airlines as low as $800 and one stop on China Eastern around $570. From Chicago, expect to spend about $1,150 for direct and $900 for connecting.To track down the best deals across airlines and dates, use Google’s ITA Matrix. Seoul is served by two international airports, Incheon (ICN) and Gimpo (GMP). Although Incheon is the bigger and busier of the pair, include both in your search since many East Asian connections do terminate at Gimpo.Authorized Olympic ticket resellers differ based on spectators’ country of residence. For U.S. residents, the Team USA website directs you to CoSport, which offers various ticket combinations, including stand-alone events, multi-event bundles and hotel and events packages. Depending on your sporting interests, the prices vary widely, with qualifier rounds costing much less than medal events. For women’s ice hockey, for example, the preliminaries are as little as $23.44 a ticket, while the gold medal game is $295.03 and up. Some sports, like bobsleigh, skeleton and luge, have completely sold out already. Others, like figure skating, are available on an event-by-event basis, with the most high profile ones snatched up long ago. Sixty percent of tickets have been sold, according to Ms. Park’s estimates, so while plenty still remain, it’s best to order as soon as you can.South Korea’s host city is actually a county, and the venues are scattered between two clusters across three districts. The Mountain Cluster straddles Pyeongchang and Jeongseon counties, while the Coastal Cluster is in adjacent Gangneung district. Among the Mountain Cluster’s venues: Alpensia, home to the biathlon, cross-country skiing and ski jumping events; Phoenix Snow Park, for freestyle skiing and snowboarding; the Olympic Sliding Centre, for bobsleigh, skeleton and luge; and Jeongseon and Yongpyong Alpine centers. This Cluster is also the site of the opening and closing ceremony, at Pyeongchang Olympic Stadium, and the medal ceremonies, at Pyeongchang Olympic Plaza. About 30 miles east in Gangneung, the Coastal Cluster will host the ice sports, including figure skating, speed skating, curling and hockey. When selecting a lodging locale, spectators should consider the cluster they plan to patronize the most. By now, most accommodations near the venues have been booked, so you’ll find better prices if you look farther afield in surrounding cities. For access to the Mountain Cluster, scout westward in Wonju. For the Coastal Cluster, eye Yangyang and Sokcho to the north and Donghae and Samcheok to the south. For assistance (in English, Chinese, Japanese or Korean), you can dial the province’s new 24-hour Olympics Special Call Centre (+82-2-1330), Ms. Park said. “If you give them the dates and your price range, they’ll look for accommodation for you.”The other option is South Korea’s capital. “It really depends on what you want to see. Not everyone wants to see just the competitions,” Ms. Park said. For spectators hoping to do a lot of sightseeing in Seoul, it’s a good idea to set up there and commute into PyeongChang for the Games. Korail’s new high-speed train, the Gyeonggang KTX, makes it simple, departing from three points in Seoul — Seoul Station, Cheongnyangni and Sangbong, and arriving in 90 minutes or less. Seoul accommodations are also likely to be cheaper and easier to come by. When hunting, keep in mind that Seoul Station is closest to the city’s best attractions and night life, but farthest from the Olympics. Cheongnyangni will enjoy the highest frequency of train service. In all three areas, there’s an ample array of hotels, guesthouses and Airbnbs.To take the Gyeonggang KTX from Seoul to the Olympics area, visitors can buy one-way tickets, ranging from KRW 19,900 to 27,600 apiece, economy class. For repeated back-and-forth trips, however, the 5 or 7-day unlimited Pyeongchang Pass makes more financial sense, priced at KRW 168,000 or 195,000, respectively. The purchase deadline is Jan. 31. Visit the Korail site to buy one, and be sure to reserve your seats so you’re not left standing. During the Games, the Gyeonggang KTX will travel from Seoul to Gangneung more than 50 times each day, stopping at six stations along the way, with some trains originating from Incheon airport. Hop off at Jinbu for the Mountain Cluster and Gangneung for the Coastal Cluster. From the stations, transfer to free spectator shuttle buses to reach the venues. The earliest train departs Seoul Station at 6 a.m. and the latest returns from Gangneung at 1 a.m., meaning it’s entirely possible to catch a late-night event and make it back to Seoul the same evening. (Know, though, that the subway stops running around midnight.) For spectators staying north or south of Gangneung, get to the Games by express bus or taxi.For more options, and details on sights and sounds once you’re in Pyeongchang, check out the official Pyeongchang 2018 mobile apps. They’re free for the iPhone and for Android devices, and include event calendars, details on the games themselves, and information for visitors. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe 52 Places TravelerDid our 52 Places Traveler love Disney Springs, Fla.? No. But she did love that other people love it.By Jada Yuan“I’d like to make you what’s called a gris-gris. It’s a good-luck charm for all your travels,” said Meraux Dantes, a magician who had just walked over to me in Disney Springs, Fla. In short order, he’d have me bend a fork with my mind. This, it became clear, was his job. (Gris-gris originated in West Africa and are often worn as amulets or embedded in the entryway of a house to protect against theft.) We were inside a “dive” called Jock Lindsey’s Hangar Bar, and I was drinking a Cool-Headed Monkey, a watermelon punch served in a commemorative mug meant to evoke that scene in “Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom” where our heroes are served monkey brains. Lindsey is Jones’s daredevil pilot, and is featured in a scene involving his pet snake, Reggie, that only die-hard fans remember. Yet Walt Disney “Imagineers” created an entire bar and restaurant devoted to him. [READ MORE: On a Disney Cruise, It’s a Stressful World (After All)]Disney Springs, too, is born from the heads of the Imagineers. According to official lore, a cattle rancher stumbled upon its titular body of water (really more like a still river) in what is now Lake Buena Vista, outside Orlando, in the mid-1800s. But the cattle rancher never existed, the springs are man-made, and the “retail, dining, and entertainment district” (as corporate literature calls it) is effectively only five years old. This is actually Disney’s fourth attempt since 1975 to create a hub of retail shops and restaurants separate from its theme parks, and the first one that seems to be a real success. The best known was called Downtown Disney. A cluster of comedy and nightclubs known as Pleasure Island shut down in 2008, with the buildings repurposed or bulldozed. Despite its proximity to and association with Disney World, the essentials of Disney Springs are that it’s free to enter, it’s essentially a fancy pedestrian mall, and there’s not a costumed character or roller coaster in sight. (Though visitors can pay to take a hot-air balloon ride, try out a Star Wars-themed “hyper-reality” experience; or take a tour in a vintage car that drives on land and water.) Which is all to say it’s for adults: Las Vegas on a Lake, a relaxation paradise for resort-goers and locals alike, open until 2 a.m. — on weekends. Its main draw is restaurants from celebrity chefs like Rick Bayless, Art Smith and Masaharu Morimoto (check out the last one for the jellyfish-like light fixtures alone) — with new openings from José Andrés, Tony Mantuano and Wolfgang Puck coming this year. The Times named it No. 41 on its 52 Places to Go in 2018 list, which is where I come in, mouse ears and all, as the reporter charged with visiting every place on the list in one year. Did I love it? No. But I did love that other people love it. Here are my highs and lows.Over the course of three nights, in addition to Meraux, I saw a juggler, street musicians, burlesque dancers and drummers from Zambia and South Africa on a hospitality exchange program with Animal Kingdom Lodge. (All performers are selected by talent search and well compensated, no tips requested.) But for my money, the highlight was catching a glimpse of Eddy Maserati, a local legend and retired lawyer and insurance broker. Mr. Maserati, originally from Positano, Italy, is known for dancing his heart out on public boardwalks around town; when I saw him, he wore a bedazzled Brazil soccer jersey and gold sneakers. More than its high-profile restaurants, what makes Disney Springs worth a trip is the chance to feed off the energy of adults who make it a priority to keep their inner kids alive and well. I felt immediate secondary joy talking to Adrienne LeBlanc, a diabetes care specialist who comes down from South Carolina eight to 10 times a year, has a Disney-devoted Instagram, and was decked out in a Mickey Mouse sweatshirt and black-and-white Mickey Mouse combat boots. “Usually we’d be in bed right now! Let’s be real, Disney is for adults, not for kids!” she said, as burlesque dancers sashayed before us at The Edison, a new 1920s-themed nightclub that goes adults-only at 10 p.m. on weekends. If I had time I would have gone “drinking around the world” at Epcot with her and Sascha Vinson, whom I met coming back from doing just that. Ms. Vinson, a realty office manager, lives an hour away, but had been to Disney Springs three weekends that month. “Disney is literally the happiest place on Earth,” she said. “There’s nothing but good vibes.” Though it does seem that the vibes are better if you go with girlfriends in the know. As a child of the Southwest, I’ve been to Disneyland in Anaheim, Calif., twice, but never to Disney World. So, “I’m going to Disney World!” became a kind of mantra of this trip for me. By the time I got to Florida, though, stress and logistical needs had won out. I had three days in Orlando to get ready for two months in South America. That included setting up a new phone, buying new luggage, sending home my old luggage and trying to get a yellow fever shot in the midst of a yellow fever vaccine shortage. I was finding that sometimes this trip gets in the way of itself. I had my heart set on staying at the Animal Kingdom Lodge or Polynesian Village inside Disney World, but both were sold out (word to the Disney-wise: plan way, way ahead). So I instead headed to Holiday Inn Resort Orlando Suites - Waterpark. It was considerably cheaper (though beware the daily resort and parking fees) and I laughed and laughed when I found out that their standard room, even for a solo traveler, is a 2-bedroom suite with a set of bunk beds. Every morning, I got to walk out of my luxuriously huge room and watch delighted kids flowing down the spirals of a massive orange and yellow water slide right out my window. I’d rebook in a second.Disney World is set up for two types of people: annual pass holders who come in groups to drink and be merry (see the “Adults who love Disney” section above), and families who have been planning their trip for months, even years. I wanted to ride Animal Kingdom’s “Avatar Flight of Passage,” eat a churro and pay whatever I needed to do that, and fast. My experience, instead: 30 minutes of waiting in line at guest services to try to give them money because the box office was closed; giving up and moving to another guest relations line just inside the park; and encountering an aghast attendant who demanded I rat out the name of the “cast member” who had let me onto park grounds (I didn’t) and then refused to speak to me until I went back outside the entrance to the slow-moving line I had just left. I opted to not wait around again to spend $120 to go to another park and possibly get yelled at again. I thought if I couldn’t get into Animal Kingdom, I could at least go to the Animal Kingdom Lodge. There, I spotted a pair of white mouse ears with a veil attached bouncing though the buffet line. They belonged to Jhi-eun Gu, 24, of Cranford, N.J., who was happy to tell me how she had just gotten engaged that evening to Dave Mulewski, 28. They met at a party while both playing in the orchestra at Montclair State University (she plays violin, he plays upright and electric bass), and have been together for five years. Mr. Mulewski told me he popped the question in front of Animal Kingdom’s signature Tree of Life, which was lit up in a million colors, and a cast member ran to get them the ears they were wearing. “I asked Jhi’s mom for permission, of course,” he told me. “Though we are millennials, I still have respect for the tradition and it was the right thing to do.”By far the best food experience in Central Florida for me, and maybe of the entire trip so far, was the Mi Parrillita Peruvian food truck on the side of the W. Irlo Bronson Memorial Highway in Kissimmee. Carlo Chavez of Peru and Evelyn Parada of Guatemala wake up at 7 a.m. for their day jobs cleaning vacation houses, then work till 1 a.m. sating Disney workers coming off their shifts. Even they find time to go to Disney once in a while. “Animal Kingdom, that’s my party!” Mr. Chavez told me, serving up piping hot lomo saltado and salchipapas from the interior of his tiny truck. At least someone got in. Jada Yuan will be traveling to every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Her next dispatch will be from Trinidad and St. Lucia in the Caribbean. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.Previous dispatches:1: New Orleans2: Chattanooga, Tenn.3. Montgomery, Ala.   AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCheck InThe Bullitt Hotel, named for the actor’s famous film, offers comfortable rooms, artist’s lectures and a rooftop bar. No car chases, though.By Lynn Freehill-MayeFrom $139Northern Ireland’s — and perhaps the world’s — sole Steve McQueen-themed hotel was opened by the Beannchor Group (which also owns Belfast’s opulent Merchant Hotel) in October 2016 with 43 rooms. Last October it opened a rooftop garden terrace and bar, and in December 2017 added 31 additional rooms. Named for the late star’s car-chasing 1968 detective thriller of that title, the hotel calls itself no-frills, but the design is fun and stylish. Visitors liked the theme so much that soon after its opening, two older women tried to swipe a six-foot canvas of McQueen smoking a cigarette behind aviator shades. The near-heist generated publicity for the new hotel as the Not-So-Great Escape, but the desk clerks who checked me in swore it had been a true crime, not a stunt.As Belfast has settled into two decades of post-conflict peace, the Cathedral Quarter where the Bullitt is situated has emerged as one of the city’s most vibrant neighborhoods, with restaurants, hotels, shops, and edgy street art. The hotel is also a doable stroll from the riverfront and blockbuster Titanic Museum, as well as some of Belfast’s most character-saturated pubs.Bullitt rooms are named in three sizes: “Dinky,” Comfy” and “Roomy.” Slate-gray paint and a full-wall mural of “Bullitt” stars Steve McQueen and Jacqueline Bisset dominated our mid-sized and indeed comfortable room. Playful touches include the warning “Faceplant!” printed on the double-paned windows (which didn’t keep the childhood friend with me from bonking her head trying to see the space-themed “Intrepid Traveler” art installation outside). Replacing a closet was a bright red wire rack with a few hooks and hangers, along with a simple luggage rack, desk, TV and a tiny metal shelf for the remote. No iron was provided, but a basic model was delivered within two minutes of asking.White square tile on the walls and gray square tile on the floor, the bathroom was all business. Toiletries bcreated for the hotel were provided in a tart Irish nettle scent. An oversize rainfall showerhead was mounted high; and while the water temperature could have gone hotter, the warming towel rack was nice on a cool Belfast day.The Bullitt offers a calendar that includes events like knitting classes, literary readings and running-club jaunts. When we walked into the attractive courtyard, an artist’s lecture was happening as part of the Belfast Photo Festival. There was no in-room minibar, but supplies for hot beverages were fairly well-stocked: Dragonfly teas, Lyons instant coffee, fair-trade hot cocoa and mugs with “Hello Brewtiful” on the bottom, plus fresh milk in the tiny fridge. Basic black loaner umbrellas proved handy for Northern Ireland’s ever-threatening rain.The hotel has two happening lobby bars, one for coffee and the other for cocktails, along with a separate ski-themed bar, Baltic, that was closed during our visit, and the rooftop bar called Babel. Its restaurant, Taylor & Clay, serves meat-and-potatoes fare like a Wagyu sirloin that arrived tougher than expected; the side of creamy root veggies and peas, which subbed for fries, swiped the show. Breakfast is served at Taylor & Clay and the hotel also plays up its free Grub to Go bags, which include fruit, yogurt and granola. Preferring a hot meal, I called room service, which arrived 18 minutes later. My server said delivery was “definitely not” often ordered, and since the sourdough toast and poached eggs (about $3 each) cost less than the delivery charge (around $9), I could appreciate why.The Bullitt has a good time with its king-of-’60s-cool muse, and as Belfast re-emerges, guests who want fun with no frills are set up to play, too.The Bullitt Hotel; 40a Church Lane, Belfast; bullitthotel.comAdvertisementThe Isle of Youth — which has been both a Communist Utopian getaway and home to a brutal prison that housed Castro for a time — is a world apart, even by Cuban standards.Sunrise on the shores of La Isla de la Juventud, or the Isle of Youth.CreditFederico Rios Escobar for The New York TimesSupported byBy Tony PerrottetThere’s nothing like a total absence of safety measures to add a little excitement to a historical site. Within an hour of landing on La Isla de la Juventud, the Isle of Youth, I was clambering through an underground tunnel in the Presidio Modelo, or Model Prison, Cuba’s most dreaded pre-revolutionary prison, using my iPhone as a torch and trying not to slip on wooden planks and rubble. After squeezing up a rusty spiral staircase, I emerged atop a tower at the center of an enormous circular cell building that resembled a tropical Colosseum, where a single guard would once monitor more than 1,000 prisoners at a time. The scale was bewildering — it was one of four 1931 jail structures in the Model Prison, rising like sinister missile silos, with a mess hall at their center. Just as bewildering: the fact that nobody would stop me climbing five stories without handrails into cells with a 50-foot drop onto concrete. (One can only marvel at Cuban liability laws, or the lack thereof.) The whiff of danger helped bring the disturbing past of the Presidio, which functioned from the late 1920s to 1967, to vivid life. A small museum was filled with startling photos of the prison’s brutal inner life, when it was run by wild convict gangs with weapons crafted from iron spikes and nails. But the most striking sight of all came when I entered the former hospital ward, which in the 1950s was reserved for political prisoners. Posted on a wall was a mug shot of its most notorious inmate, Fidel Castro — without a beard. Like the few other visitors to the Presidio that day, I had to stop and stare at the clean-shaven, well-fed features of Prisoner 3859, who, instead of his famous Old Testament whiskers, sported a scraggly pencil mustache. It was a sudden step back into a barely remembered Cuba, when Fidel was not yet “Fidel.” Today, the image of the hirsute Castro in military khakis is so ingrained in the popular imagination that he seems to have sprung ready-made onto the world stage when the revolution succeeded in 1959. But almost nobody had heard of him six years earlier, in 1953, when, as a 27-year-old lawyer, he began his rebellious career with an attack on a military barracks in the city of Santiago. Castro had hoped this would spark an uprising around Cuba, but it failed dismally. Many of his 160 or so followers were tortured and executed and most of the rest hunted down. He was given a 15-year sentence and sent with 25 compañeros to La Isla.It was in this prison, improbably enough, that the Cuban revolution was effectively planned. The dictator Fulgencio Batista made the mistake of placing all the conspirators together in the hospital wing, and they proceeded to treat it as a revolutionary boot camp, congregating for daily lessons on politics and conducting secret communications with supporters around Cuba. “What a fantastic school this prison is!” Castro wrote gleefully in a letter. “From here I’m able to finish forging my vision of the world …" After four months, he was removed to solitary, but even there he kept in touch with his men using messages written in lemon juice that were smuggled in cigars or mashed potatoes. He also secretly wrote a tract called “La Historia Me Absolverá” (“History Will Absolve Me”), a recreation of his trial defense speech that was spirited page by page to Havana and published as a rousing call to arms. By the time popular opinion led to the men’s release in 1955, after serving less than two years of their sentences, the once-disorganized rebel group had become a coherent political cell, with a support network and a clear plan for a guerrilla war.The Presidio was closed a few years after Castro’s victory in 1959, and is now maintained as a shrine to the revolution’s early struggle, with photos of each prisoner over his bed. It’s a tribute to the resilience of the young rebels who — whatever their later faults once they took power — took on the brutal Batista dictatorship at great personal risk. The aura of idealism becomes particularly poignant today, as Cuba’s revolutionary dream has become as battered as the corrugated iron ceiling of the Presidio itself — its gaping views of the sky letting in the beating sun, the tropical rain and chirping green parrots.As I discovered over the next three days, almost every corner of Isle of Youth — or simply La Isla, as it is referred to by residents — hides an equally eccentric saga. Located off the south coast of the main island, the largest of the nation’s 4,000-odd offshore cays and islands, it has been specializing in oddity ever since Christopher Columbus weighed anchor here to find provisions on his second voyage in 1494 and was mystified by its monstrous crocodiles and raucous bird life. Soon after, pirates hid in its coves, making it an inspiration for Robert Louis Stevenson’s “Treasure Island.” The stories become even more outlandish in the 20th century. Following the Spanish-American War, the Isle of Pines (as it was then known) became an American territory in the early 1900s, and settlers with names like Chuck and Martha dug citrus orchards in townships called McKinley, Columbia and San Francisco Heights. It was on its return to Cuba in 1924 that the island entered its Devil’s Island phase, with the Model Prison built as a rare example of the notorious Panopticon — in which myriad inmates could be watched by a single guard — conceived by the 18th-century British philosopher Jeremy Bentham. Then, at the height of the revolution in 1978, Castro returned to the island as Maximum Leader and declared that it would become a unique Communist education center, where high school students from Third World countries could study in a sun-kissed paradise. Today, La Isla is embarking on yet another reinvention — as an ecotourism destination. A few entrepreneurs are making modest attempts to lure foreign travelers and their hard currency to its pristine beaches and offshore coral reefs, which are among the best preserved in the Caribbean. “What’s important to marine life is scale, and Cuba is so big,” said David E. Guggenheim, an American marine biologist who founded a nonprofit called Ocean Doctor, who I first met in Havana during a conference on marine protection. “Size matters! Reefs need large integrated ecosystems to survive.” Cuba is unique in the Western Hemisphere for its near-total lack of coastal development, he explained. Since the collapse of the U.S.S.R. in 1991, Cuban farmers have had no access to pesticides or fertilizers, so there is none of the chemical flow-off that can devastate marine life. “Farmers on the Isle of Youth have been forced to practice organic agriculture,” Mr. Guggenheim said. “Most of them don’t even have tractors. It’s amazing that such a thing is possible in the 21st century.”Still, it’s an uphill battle to attract travelers, since La Isla is today so obscure that even most Cubans know nothing about it. I had only the haziest idea of what I might find there when I turned up at the Havana airport before dawn to catch a propeller plane. A half-hour later, we were banking over the comma-shaped island and landing at its only town, Nueva Gerona. I was relieved to find that La Isla had lost none of its oddity: We were met at the tiny airport by a nurse in white uniform who screened us all for fevers.While it’s no longer true to say that Havana is “stuck in the 1950s,” an argument can be made for La Isla — perhaps the 1850s. There are no streetlights in Nueva Gerona, no buildings taller than two stories, and almost the only traffic is horse-and-buggy. On its sleepy pedestrian boulevard, the main cultural attraction is a map of Cuba made from rusty horseshoes. At dusk, teenagers make out in the Park of the Heroic Guerrilla, while older couples promenade arm in arm and take romantic carriage rides holding hands. After dark, everyone converges on the boulevard to hear live salsa and dance, the only concession to the 21st century being a decent sound system.I checked into a casa particular, a private guesthouse, a cozy home decorated with ceramic fish and boasting a sunny billiards room. It was run by a voluble woman named Diami, who whipped up fortifying breakfasts of sweet black coffee, farm eggs and chunks of mango, the most succulent of the tropical fruits that grow like weeds on the fertile island. (“We call these American mangoes because they are plump and red,” she deadpanned.) The islanders spoke with cheery resignation about being forgotten by the world. “We suffer from double insularity,” a wiry, chain-smoking poet named Tony Ramírez said excitedly, when I met him at one of the few restaurants, El Galeón (which, as its name suggests, was shaped like a galleon). “We feel very far from the rest of Cuba, which is already cut off from the world.” Tony drew inspiration for his writing from being in un mundo aparte, a world apart, he said, but worried about the island’s vulnerability: “Communications are a problem. One puff of wind, let alone a cyclone, and we’re on our own.”Clearly, nobody comes to La Isla for the night life: By 9 p.m., Gerona was a ghost town. The next morning, I was ready to sally forth into the countryside, but there were only two jeeps for hire, I learned, and both were broken. Luckily, I found a taxi driver named Ray drowsing by the plaza in his battered blue Lada. Soon we were chugging along empty, palm-fringed roads past limestone protrusions called mogotes — the same sensuous rock formations that has turned the Cuban province of Pinar del Río into a busy tourist destination, but here stand solitary and unseen. Marble is quarried from their flanks in such great quantities that many peasant huts have the polished stone for their floors.On this island of broken dreams, the ruins of the revolutionary schools of the 1980s litter the landscape like giant Lego blocks. Castro traveled here to personally inaugurate the idealistic education program in 1978 and change the name of the Isle of Pines to Isle of Youth — which has a Communist Utopian ring but also evokes the mad quest of Ponce de León for the Fountain of Youth. (Confusingly, islanders are still called Pineros in Cuba.) Within a decade there were 61 schools on the island serving 35,000 students, mostly from Africa. After the Soviet Union crumbled, funding was cut and the students vanished as if they had never been here. A 2008 hurricane did the rest by gutting the schools. Although most of the Soviet-style structures are in poetic decay, three still function for locals. We called in at Escuela No. 8, the Clara Zetkin School, named after a German Marxist theorist and now filled with island children. The walls are still decorated with a Cold War mural, the Cuban version of “if you see something, say something”: A giant eye hovers over a map of the island with an illustrated list of dangers that pupils should report, including “enemy aircraft,” “enemy parachutists” and “dead animals.” But the most unexpected historical site is a peaceful field only a few miles from town. El Cementerio Americano, the American Cemetery, is the last ghostly reminder of the quarter century when the United States ran La Isla as a virtual colony. After the Spanish-American War of 1898, Cuba was put under United States military rule until 1902; in the treaties that followed, ownership of the Isle of Youth was left so vague that American companies bought up most of the arable land and opened it to settlers. To the fury of Cuban patriots, farmers from Iowa and California moved here assuming it would become an official part of the United States. (One pamphlet pushing for full annexation was called: “The Isle of Pines: American or What?”) Tourists traveled from New York to loll by its mineral pools; the poet Hart Crane stayed one summer and was fascinated to experience a hurricane, which inspired the poem “Eternity.” When Congress reluctantly gave La Isla back to Cuba in 1924, most settlers left in disappointment, but those who stayed are buried in the American Cemetery. I strolled with the bemused taxista Ray through the lonely field in golden light, reading names from overgrown gravestones — one shaped like a tree trunk — and pausing at a gazebo until the mosquitoes drove us out. It was time to head to the island’s wild south, a jigsaw of protected landscapes informally called the Siguanea Nature Reserve where caves are filled with pre-Colombian carvings, sea turtles lounge by the beaches and reptiles bask in the swamps. My plan was to visit the evocatively named village of Cocodrilo (crocodile) with Dr. Guggenheim, who since 2015 has worked with a local group there called Red Alerta to protect its pristine coral reefs. It is a singular Cuban-American joint venture. His Washington-based N.G.O., Ocean Doctor, provides equipment and trains villagers to work as guides instead of fishing illegally — a standard ecotourism model in other parts of the world, but a radical departure in Cuba, where the economy is still mostly state-run and grass-roots activism is discouraged. “As fearful as we are of thousands of Americans going down to Cuba and recreating the mass tourism model that destroyed much of the Caribbean,” he told me in Nueva Gerona, “tourism has to be part of the solution.” (Because it is research-based, the Red Alerta program has been unaffected by recent changes to travel for American citizens, but visits have to be arranged through an authorized travel agency or Ocean Doctor.)But La Isla has not shaken off its Cold War past. The Cuban military monitors the various southern nature reserves, and we soon discovered that the whole area had been declared off-limits — no explanation given. The word on the street in Nueva Gerona was that the military was conducting antidrug sweeps along the coast. True or not, there would be no Cocodrilo for us. Time for Plan B. We decided to head to El Colony, the island’s only real hotel, which had the misfortune to open the week before the revolution in 1959, and somehow managed to survive the following decades on the dribble of tourism to Cuba, mostly from the Eastern bloc. At the small marina there, we hired a boat to take us to the reserve’s limits.Soon we were motoring south with a dive master and a cook. Our first mission was to snorkel off a popular beach called Punto Francés, where two years ago Dr. Guggenheim had seen intact expanses of elkhorn coral, a barometer of reef health. Even an amateur like me could tell that all was not well below the waves. “That is a wonderful example of a reef that is 90 percent dead,” Dr. Guggenheim said with a sigh, as we dried off back on board. There had been some bleaching from climate change, he explained, but the main culprit was overfishing, which led to the coral being slowly covered in slimy green algae. “We treat fish like crops to be harvested,” he said, “but they have important jobs to do in the ecosystem. One of them is grazing on algae, which keeps reefs clean.”Things improved radically when we dove to a remote site named El Reino de la Sahara, the King of the Sahara. Rays of sunlight burst down on reefs that were surging with life like underwater cities, including brilliantly colored sea fans and flamingo tongues. A moray eel patrolled the shallows and there were expanses of thriving elkhorn coral. “That reef was 90 percent healthy, or better,” Dr. Guggenheim rejoiced. “But Cuba is in the balance. It could go either way. The good thing is that it has the legal protection,” he added, noting that 25 percent of Cuba’s waters are protected — a higher percentage than the United States, he said (Castro promoted marine protection after he met Jacques Cousteau in the 1980s and became an avid scuba diver). “But it doesn’t have enforcement.”As we motored back to El Colony, Dr. Guggenheim stared out at the sea meditatively. Even in this pristine location, we can only imagine what the Caribbean must have been like when the first Europeans saw it, he mused. “Only three percent of sea turtles are left today. But when Columbus arrived on his fourth expedition, his son wrote that they saw turtles in such vast numbers that they covered the sea.’ Man, I would like to have seen that.”All over La Isla, conversation always returned to Castro, the larger-than-life figure who had been its most notorious (if unwilling) resident, and whose grand plans in the 1970s created its golden age as a tropical youth camp. In one private restaurant, La Casa de Toti, the eponymous owner, known only as Toti, told me how his grandfather was sent to the Model Prison for murder and met Castro there in the 1950s. Along with many other inmates, he was freed a few months after the guerrillas rode into Havana in early 1959. “So my grandfather was always a big fan of Socialism,” he said with a wry laugh.The air of melancholy left by so many vanished dreams was present even when I decided to climb a remote mountain known as La Loma on my final morning, to get a glimpse of the island’s hard-to-visit south. To get there, I went to meet a farmer-turned-guide Arcadio Castro (no relation), who wore a tattered T-shirt and lived in a marble-floor shack roamed by livestock and piled high with home-bottled mango pulp. A summer heat wave was descending: By 9 a.m., it was already 95 degrees and 100 percent humidity when Arcadio started hacking the overgrown trail with his rusted machete. Yellow butterflies flitted around us as he fondly remembered the day Fidel Castro visited his high school in 1978. The children were all astonished to see the Maximum Leader bounce a basketball up the stairs to their playground and sink it without effort. (He had been a sports champ in his youth.) In the heyday of the revolution in the 1980s, Arcadio had also served in the Cuban army in Angola and he reminisced about the monstrous bugs he found in Africa. As we climbed, there were glimpses between the palms trees of empty green plains leading to distant mogotes. By the time we reached the summit, sweat was pouring from us in streams and I was half delirious. The view to the southern nature reserves turned out to be entirely overgrown; Arcadio admitted that he hadn’t taken anyone up here in months. I didn’t mind. It was oddly comforting to see these remote heights being reclaimed by the wild. The island’s man-made hopes have been repeatedly dashed, but hopefully nature will prove resilient.Getting ThereThere are twice daily flights to the Isle of Youth from Havana on Cubana (cubana.cu), the national airline, but they can book up way in advance. Allow a night in Havana before and after the flight in case of cancellations. New travel restrictions imposed by the Trump administration mean that American citizens traveling as tourists should go through an authorized travel agent to ensure compliance (although travel does not need to be in a group, and 12 other categories of travel, such as educational or professional research, are unaffected). Flights and tours can be booked through an international agency such as Cuba Travel Network (cubatravelnetwork.com) or the United States-based Cuba Educational Travel (cubaeducationaltravel.com). On the ground, the best island agency is Ecotur (53-46-32710; reservas.ij@occ.ecotur.tur.cu). Ocean Doctor is expecting to offer educational tours to the wild southern coast in spring (oceandoctor.org/cuba-travel-program/#upcoming; around $5,000 for seven- to 10-day trips.)Where to Stay l Colony (rates start at $63 for a single person with half board, hotelelcolony.com/en/) is a good base for divers but quite removed from other attractions — and being state-run, has wretched food. Far more satisfying is to stay in one of the casas particulares, private guesthouses, in the town of Nueva Gerona and make day trips. I stayed in the quaint and comfortable Villa Gerona, run by the feisty Diami, (53-4631-2962, villagerona.com; rooms starting at $23). Others can be found on Cuba Junky (cuba-junky.com).Where to EatThe best restaurants on the island are the Buena Vista (Calle 39 #2416A, 53-5503-2666), which has a patio overlooking the Boulevard, and the private paladar Casa de Toti (Calle 3ra #401 near the Presidio Modelo, 53-5277-5565).Tony Perrottet, the author of “Pagan Holiday,” is working on a book about the Cuban guerrilla war.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCultured TravelerBy Jennifer MosesIf New Orleans is an aging beauty queen drunk on the fumes of her glorious past, Plaquemines Parish, to the southeast, is plain old sloshed — not to mention saturated, striated, slivered and surrounded by water. And no wonder: The peninsula that comprises most of the parish was born many years ago, when the Mississippi River shifted, creating a sliver of land melding into its extensive wetlands.Even on the peninsula itself, things aren’t so solid, not with the Mississippi chugging down its middle at approximately the equivalent of 166 semitrailers of water a second, and the Gulf — flat, blue-brown and dotted with oil rigs — on both its eastern and western flanks. Route 23, the main road in and out, gets you just past Venice, the peninsula’s last town. Go a bit farther on Tidewater Road and you come to the sign that tells you that you have reached the “Gateway to the Gulf,” or “the southernmost point in Louisiana.”If you want to go to the very end, where the river spills out in three different channels (called passes), you have to do it by boat. I did it years ago, albeit on a cruise ship. But on a cruise ship, you don’t really think about how strange the landscape is as the river churns its way to the rim of the continent, where the land is barely land at all, but rather, mere fingers of earth, clumps of marsh, mosquitoes and mist.But when I took the same trip by car, paralleling the river until it could be paralleled no more, I got a fuller view, as if looking at the same picture from both sides of a negative.Despite the immense ships floating by on the far side of the seemingly endless levee, Plaquemines appears to be like many other rural Louisiana parishes: dotted with churches, convenience stores, trailer homes surrounded by tender green fields, sprays of yellow wildflowers, live oaks covered with Spanish moss, vegetable gardens. In the town of Belle Chasse (not far from New Orleans,) there’s Woodlands Trail and Park, a recreational greenway of forested wetlands filled with palmetto and cypress — lovely, yes, but similar in many ways to other such woodlands in the state.So too, there are antebellum plantations, including a handful of privately owned plantation homes in various states of repair (or not). In Braithewaite, Stella Plantation opened in 2012 as an events venue. Woodland Plantation, in West Pointe à la Hache, was built in the 1830s and was for decades dedicated to the propagation of sugar cane and the trading of slaves. It is now operating as a bed-and-breakfast, with five separate buildings for guests, including a raised Creole cottage with numerous guest rooms.Farther on is Fort Jackson, completed in 1832 to defend New Orleans. During the Civil War, it was under Union naval fire for 12 days. It fell on April 28, 1862, after which Union forces captured New Orleans and used the fort as a prison.It’s now a National Historic Landmark and the only one of three historic local forts that — despite having been badly damaged by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, before being re-soaked by Isaac — can be visited by the casual traveler. Dragonflies play in the rushes growing in the fort’s moat, and along the rim, which you can walk or drive along on a series of pathways, you can see that the fort is shaped like a five-pointed snowflake.There are two other forts in the neighborhood. Fort St. Philip is on the river’s east bank, but as it’s privately owned and accessible only by boat or helicopter, it’s a bit hard to visit. Likewise, the circa 1700 site of Fort De La Boulaye — built by early French explorers and now situated on Highway 39, not far from New Orleans — is on private property, and there isn’t much left to see despite its importance to Louisiana’s first European settlers.Plaquemines is an enchanted place, beloved by nature lovers and sportsmen alike, but given its fragility, how long it will remain a place at all — in the sense of a location that signifies firm land — is anyone’s guess. Even so, from its earliest days as a European foothold on the new continent, and on through hurricanes, wars, epidemics and social and economic upheavals, the region hung on. Then the 1927 Mississippi River flood came along, and when the powers-that-be in New Orleans realized that the flood would most likely inundate the entire city unless drastic steps were taken, they dynamited the levee some 13 miles below the city, sparing the Big Easy by funneling the floodwaters into Plaquemines, and, in the process, devastating it. Randy Newman recounted the disaster in his song “Louisiana,” which goes, in part: “The river rose all day, the river rose all night / Some people got lost in the flood / Some people got away all right.”What Mr. Newman doesn’t sing about is how, in the aftermath of the flood, the Army Corps of Engineers was authorized to do what it had to do to prevent future catastrophes, the upshot being that it changed the course of nature, which in turn set in motion a cycle of increasingly more ruinous storms, followed by increasingly more expensive, if unavoidably temporary, fixes.To understand the predicament that Plaquemines is in, you have to go back to prehistory, during which, for thousands of years, the river flooded regularly. Along with flooding, it frequently changed course to find the fastest route to the sea. Because that’s what rivers, left to themselves, do: They flip and flop around, creating river deltas and vast watery networks. These two behaviors — flooding and rerouting — created rich deep loam (as in the Mississippi Delta), and built both the barrier islands and the landmass of South Louisiana itself.It’s a complex story with many moving parts (and many books devoted to explaining it, including the masterful “Rising Tide: The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How It Changed America,” by John M. Barry).But the gist of all this is that after 1928, the river was forced into a vast continuum of regulated levees and straightened, the idea being that the levees would prevent flooding, and the straightening would accommodate shipping. But with the levees keeping the water in, natural land-and-barrier-island-building came to a stop; with the waters rushing on at a faster pace (without natural twists and turns to slow it), silt began to collect in inconvenient places, such as in shipping channels, including in Plaquemines, where the Army Corps regularly dredges.Faster-moving water also means that the river may be more insistent than it would otherwise be about where it wants to go as it wends its way to its final home in the Gulf. Because where it wants to go isn’t where it now goes (past the “big bend” at Baton Rouge, east toward New Orleans, and finally through Plaquemines Parish), but rather, straight down the Atchafalaya River and from there past the town of Morgan City (home of an annual petroleum and shrimp festival) and finally into the Gulf.But since the forces of industry, trade and human settlement demand that the river remain where it is, the Corps built a collective of enormous and costly structures — most notably, the Old River Control Structure and the Morganza Spillway — in order to prevent the Atchafalaya from “capturing” and rerouting the Mississippi.But the more the river is tamed and contained, the more the surrounding land sinks — crunching down to ever-thinner layers of earth as, deprived of the natural replenishment of regular flooding, it dries out like an old, brittle sponge. Hence, while New Orleans is, on average, one or two feet below sea level, Plaquemines is literally six feet under.It’s both weird and fragile, this place, which may even be one of the reasons people keep coming here — for its swamp tours (by kayak, air boat and small motorboats), its cypress and tupelo forests, and its wildlife: turtles, bright green frogs, snakes, gators and, of course, its birds. Birds, birds, everywhere, including an abundance of water fowl — snow geese, mottled duck, mallards, shovelers, green-winged teal, pintails, white-fronted geese, not to mention white egrets, blue herons, bald eagles, ibis, pelicans, flycatchers, osprey, kites, falcons, buntings, sandpipers, hummingbirds and gulls. You float under ancient trees, past cypress knees and plants that look like they’ve been there since the time of the dinosaurs.In point of fact, and despite the ubiquity of petrochemical all-stars like Chevron and Baker Hughes, much of the parish is designated as a wildlife refuge, including Breton Island, which, together with the Chandeleur Islands and other barrier islands, comprise the Breton National Wildlife Refuge.Its enthusiasts claim that the fishing in and around Plaquemines is the best anywhere — tuna, dolphin, wahoo, whale shark and marlin in the deep blue seas; redfish, flounder and speckled trout closer in. You can fish in fresh water, salt water, on and offshore. There is fly-fishing, bayou- and swamp-fishing. There are nine marinas and hundreds (if not thousands) of charters and guides. Ducks abound, too, which is why many of the fishing-tour operators also arrange duck-hunting excursions.Me, I neither hunt nor fish, but I do eat, and by the time I pulled into the Venice Marina, with its houseboats and elevated, brightly colored “camps” (small cottages), many available as rentals, it was well past noon. I was hungry. It was a quiet day, too windy to venture out. The boats moored in the marina danced on the current. I stumbled into Crawgator’s Bar & Grill — so far as I could tell, the marina’s sole restaurant — sat on the deck and devoured a platter of fried fish, sweet potato fries and toast, which was served to me by a young woman who, not surprisingly, couldn’t have been nicer or more polite. But that’s South Louisiana for you — the people are warm and friendly, the food is fabulous, and though the whole place could be washed away in a hurricane season or two, it sure as heck knows how to live.Jennifer Moses is a writer and painter, and the author of “Visiting Hours,” a novel-in-stories set in Louisiana.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe 52 Places TravelerDespite some transformative growing pains, the city may well be one of the most pleasant and livable ones in the United States.By Jada Yuan“You’ve arrived! GIG CITY: Home of the Nation’s Fastest Internet” is the rather unsexy city slogan greeting visitors upon their arrival at the tiny airport in Chattanooga, Tenn. “Gig” refers to the status that Chatt (or Cha or the Nooga, depending on whom you ask) earned in 2010 as the first municipality in the United States to offer one gigabit fiber-optic internet speed to its citizens, and 10 gigabit to businesses that will pay premium prices. That clunky claim to fame has lured many a start-up to the Innovation District in its revitalized downtown. It was also a major factor in earning the city the No. 25 spot on the 52 Places to Go in 2018 list (I’m visiting every destination this year), even if it doesn’t quite sing on a postcard. When a city’s major selling points are its internet speed and its wood-fired Choo Choo train (a phenomenon in 1880), plus a couple of new hotels, it’s hard to imagine what its character might be. With a midsize population of about 177,000, Chattanooga sits right across the Tennessee border from Georgia, so close that one easily crosses state lines driving around — though the Confederate flags I saw flying high seemed to be concentrated on the Georgia side. Alabama and North Carolina aren’t far, either. “It’s hard not to feel like you’re on the margins when you live in a market like this,” said Tim Kelly, a local business mogul and chairman of the city’s popular amateur soccer club, which has drawn as many as 18,000 spectators a game. Atlanta, he explained, is a constant brain drain, and Nashville, as the state capital, gets the bulk of the government’s attention and funding. “We’re a little insecure about our sense of place, but I think that makes us that much more intense about it when we find it. Localism and local consciousness are really strong.”What I found over a five-day stay may well be one of the most pleasant and livable cities in America. (That is, once the freezing late-January winds that threatened to blow my car off the road had died down. “I wish you were here in the summer! You’re missing everything!” was a refrain I heard about 15 times a day.) Because Chattanooga is nestled into the ridge-and-valley portion of the Appalachian Mountains and oriented around the Tennessee River, the outdoors — in particular hang gliding, mountain biking, hiking, rock climbing, paddle boarding and kayaking — seem to be a way of life. Locals joke that Chacos, those hiking sandals that strap to your feet, are the city’s official shoe. In winter, people just wear them with socks. I, of course, bought a pair. A 15-minute drive from downtown, for example, will take you to the top of Lookout Mountain, and its wonderful free park, Sunset Rock, rich in Civil War history. Hikes in the area lead past rifle pits where Confederate soldiers tracked the movement of Union troops on the ground, and then sent out word via communications stations on nearby Signal Mountain. Now, students from the University of Tennessee and canoodling couples of all sexual orientations come nightly to sit on cliffs and watch the Tennessee River Valley turn shades of red and pink. After a hectic first week on the job in New Orleans, I felt an immediate sense of relief as I drove into town and immediately onto a tranquil brick road stretch of Chattanooga’s Main Street lit up with strings of white lights. Every corner I turned seemed to have an interesting bar, including the impossibly narrow Pickle Barrel; Stir, where bartenders climb ladders to reach top-shelf liquor; and the Flying Squirrel Bar, an eternal hot spot that has a lit-up wooden boat hanging from its ceiling. One actionable upside of being Gig City is that, according to Kelly Shaughnessy, a real estate agent and model I met, the dating scene is pretty good: “Fiber-optics brought start-ups and start-ups brought hipsters, so everywhere you go are 20- to 35-year-olds who are not married, making apps.” My first hotel, The Dwell, is the city’s only boutique offering and an Art Deco gem. Seija Ojanpera, the owner, spent four months combing vintage shops, Etsy and eBay to find its period-authentic décor, which, along with the colorful patterned wallpaper, is different in every room. “I think it’s important for Chattanooga to have interesting places to go that don’t feel like airport lounges,” she told me. The breakfast room and bar often contain more locals than visitors. I also stayed in the town’s new Westin (nice enough, but didn’t blow me away) and the Choo Choo Hotel, which is far from luxurious, but worth it just because the check-in desk is in the train’s old terminal waiting room, and the rooms are in actual Pullman train cars. Those not in need of lodging can have a similar experience in the newly opened American Draft, the country’s first pour-your-own-beer bar in a refurbished train car. Most striking, though, is the city’s civic life. A phrase that comes up constantly is “The Chattanooga Way”: a reference to a cooperative get-it-done spirit that includes infusions of private foundation money making revitalization possible. Public art is impressive and everywhere, from the Sculpture Fields at Montague Park to “The Blue Trees,” an ecologically themed installation consisting of rows of trees that the artist Konstantin Dimopoulos has painted a non-harmful ultramarine blue to bring attention to deforestation. Upon my arrival, Farron Kilburn, who studies inequities in nursing at the University of Tennessee, invited me to a potluck at her home in the city’s hip North Shore. There, I met a chunk of the city’s diverse sector of artists and community activists including Josiah Golson, who just published an illustrated poetry book called “The Souls of Free Folk” (partly inspired by W.E.B. DuBois), and Rondell Crier, an artist and youth mentor, who moved to Chatt from New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, and has never felt compelled to move back.The next night, I joined them for a big group dinner at Taconooga, one of the city’s many Mexican restaurants. (The Guatemalan population is also significant and growing.) During the day, one particularly helpful local, Stephanie Hays — a self-described “boomerang” who has lived in China and India and moved back because she loves the city — treated me to one of the free walking tours she gives in her spare time. I came knowing no one and felt like I’d left with a friend group. Of course, there’s another side to the techification of cities like Chatt. It was on Ms. Hays’s tour, while visiting The Passage, an interactive riverfront monument to the Trail of Tears, designed by descendants of Cherokees who were forcibly removed from the area, that I glimpsed the tensions that come from rapid growth. Robert Stoudemire, a fisherman, told me he’s felt left behind in a city that’s experiencing what’s known as “reverse of flight,” in which legacy black families are moving to the suburbs to make way for new arrivals who can pay higher rents. Chattanooga has the seventh-fastest-growing rent in the nation and a poverty rate well above the national average. A 2016 study shows that its local banks are rejecting black families for home loans at an alarmingly high rate compared with white and Latino families. (The two main local banks approved just one conventional home loan each for a black family in the four years between 2011 and 2014.)“They should’ve left it like it is instead of building all these houses, destroying everything, keeping people from fishing down here,” Mr. Stoudemire said. “They just done messed this world up.” Still, he said, “I’ve been here all my life, ain’t going nowhere till the man take me.” Elsewhere downtown, one high-tech building stands across from a once-grand hotel that’s been turned into government housing. A Chilean nonprofit worker I met at the potluck, Daniela Peterson, said that she spent her first year in Chatt riding the bus to work, “and people acted like I was a prostitute, because there’s no one else who’s waiting on the corner.” (In a 2012 Brookings Institute study, the city ranked lowest in the country in access to public transportation.) There are also certain spots of the booming Southside area where the stench from a Pilgrim’s Pride chicken-processing plant on Market Street is downright offensive. As a city in mid-transformation, Chattanooga seems to be going through its awkward phase, somewhere between trying out vegetarianism and applying for college. Every time I go to a new place, I play a game where I ask myself if I could live there rather than New York City. The answer is usually no, but Chattanooga surprised me. For all its contradictions, every day I was there, I liked the city more: the views, the people, the phenomenal coffee shops — even the internet, which proved to be life-changing (in 40 minutes I uploaded 1,000 photos that had been stuck in my queue for days). “If you stay around, you’ll move down here,” Gene Faulkner, a retired 89-year-old cemetery owner, said when we spoke near his wife’s grave. “We invite all you Yankees, baby! Bring your money. Stay down in Dixie. You cross the Mason-Dixon line, you’ll never go back.” Jada Yuan will be traveling to each and every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Her next dispatch will be from Montgomery, Ala. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesMost new farmers face an uphill battle, but Cloverdale’s were at a Colorado elevation of 6,695 feet. That challenge has been conquered.By Kathryn O’Shea-EvansWhen Patrick Ayres first saw the condemned 1918 house that would eventually be home to Cloverdale, he didn’t dare go in. The 31-year-old former executive sous chef of Canlis in Seattle had moved home to Steamboat Springs, Colo., to raise his kids and envisioned opening a restaurant that would cement the state on the culinary map. This place didn’t even have a functioning roof. “It was a disaster, falling apart,” he said. But other options in Steamboat were bland as stale soda crackers, so Mr. Ayres and his wife, Kaylee, ended up buying it, along with a 10.5-acre homestead that sits five miles away. Cloverdale Restaurant and Farm opened in July 2017, featuring a five- and a 10- to 14-course tasting menu. “Tasting menus are a way for us to be constantly creative, even in the middle of service,” Mr. Ayres said. They feature an array of produce, 90 percent of which is grown on the farm, with help from a master gardener; each member of the restaurant staff tends the crops at least once a week. Most new farmers face an uphill battle, but Cloverdale’s were at an elevation of 6,695 feet. Last summer, consecutive frosts in June, July and August throttled the summer squash and bush beans. The solution — installing four 75-foot low tunnels alongside their greenhouse — has worked. The restaurant is outstanding. We opted for the five-course menu at our recent dinner, though the second I tried the first dish — a savory parsnip panna cotta topped with a crumbly layer made from baked molasses and rye wheat berries, then studded with tender radish and carrot pickles cut into perfect moons — I wished I had gone for the longer option. A creamy sunchoke and chestnut soup buoyed seared striped bass, sprinkled with crispy shaved sunchoke chips. Lamb cooked sous vide was light, not gamy, served with fried sweetbreads and grilled preserved eggplants that left a faint whiff of wildfire on the plate.Before dessert — an edible Piet Mondrian painting of ceylon ice cream atop a trifecta of apple syrups — a barista arrived with saucers of Steamboat-roasted coffee beans and tea leaves to choose from arranged on a gleaming tray. Cocktails are no less carefully considered; the Mr. Tally Man — a frothy blend of pineapple rum, yellow chartreuse and crème de cacao topped with spiced banana and tonka bean-flavored whipped cream, nutmeg and a candied blood orange slice — tasted like egg nog that had smartened up and moved to Kauai.The once-condemned house is now on the Steamboat Springs Resister of Historic Places, with its original windows and hardwood floors intact. Church pews from Denver were remade into a central round table; the bill is delivered in a custom cigarette case bearing a golden bee, a nod to the farm’s hives. “When I first told my friends what I was doing, everyone thought I was a crazy person, which is fine, because I am,” Mr. Ayres said. “Now they say ‘I can’t believe you did this.’” Cloverdale Restaurant and Farm, 207 9th Street; cloverdalerestaurant.com. Dinner for two, without drinks and tip, is $130 for the five-course tasting menu, or $270 for the 10- to 14-course tasting menu.  AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by5 placesNashville’s Wedgewood-Houston neighborhood was long a run-down part of town. After creative types moved into the area, trendy restaurants, galleries, distilleries and other business have followed.By Shivani VoraThere’s a spark of energy that shows no sign of slowing down in Nashville’s Wedgewood- Houston neighborhood. Situated a few blocks south of the city’s downtown, the area was long a run-down part of town with warehouses, factories and garages. Today, artists, musicians and other creative types are moving into shiny modern condominiums and homes. Just as local real estate developers have been attracted by the inexpensive land and prime location, entrepreneurs have been lured in for these same reasons, too, and are opening restaurants, distilleries, art galleries and other businesses that draw crowds from all over town. Once a jam factory, now a bar and restaurant: the front area of this airy, two-year-old space is home to a bar cum lounge with mismatched couches and chairs with deep cushions. The cocktails are innovative, the spirit list is long, and an oversize plate of decadent nachos is the sole dining option. Hidden behind a sliding, metal door, however, is an intimate 24-seat restaurant where diners choose from a grid style menu to design their dream five-course dinner; entrees change weekly but emphasize local ingredients in eclectic New American dishes. One of the city's pricier restaurants, a meal is a splurge but delicious and the vibe is worth it. Alcoholic drinks at the bar start at $12, a dinner for two with a glass of wine each is about $180.434 Houston Street, bastionnashville.comHoused in a former truck repair shop, this spacious bakery opened three years ago and is always jammed with locals who come to treat themselves to the brown sugar and cornmeal cherry scones, pecan bars and lemon madeleines. But the most popular indulgence by far is the croissant baked with ham, cheese and whole grain mustard; the breads, such as the French style baguette and rye raisin loaf, are tasty too. There’s also a cafe area where lunch and weekend brunch are served. Baked goods start at $3.516 Hagan Street, dozen-nashville.comBig bucks aren’t necessary to buy a piece of high-caliber contemporary American art: that’s the premise of this light flooded art gallery with soaring wood ceilings, which the seasoned art gallerist David Lusk opened in a former truck mechanic business in 2014. In fact, it was this venue from the Memphis-based gallerist that helped generate interest in the neighborhood. Mr. Lusk’s collection includes paintings, photographs and sculptures, and he takes pride in having a close relationship with the close to three dozen artists he sells. Several Nashville natives are part of the mix, including Kit Reuther, who is known for her abstract paintings and sculptures in muted tones. Prices from $500.516 Hagan Street, davidluskgallery.comBruce Boeko, a former forensic scientist, is behind this sleek two-year-old distillery, which is sheathed in steel and glass. Coming here is an immersion into the art of hand crafted spirits: patrons can smell the grains brewing which are used in the whisky, gin and other tipples and also have the opportunity to witness the fermentation and distillation process firsthand with a tour of the production room. The Naked Biscuit Sorghum, a slightly sweet drink made with sorghum, is the best-seller, and the space has a cast concrete bar where customers can imbibe. Cocktails start at $7.514 Hagan Street, nashvillecraft.comThis Nashville establishment is more than a half-century-old but a relative newcomer to the neighborhood. The music store, which opened here in 2013, features an expansive collection of handmade guitars and mandolins as well as hard-to-find vintage guitars. Don’t play the guitar? Not a problem. The instruments are each pieces of art in their own right with rich stories, and the knowledgeable staff is more than happy to share their history with anyone who’s interested. Guitars from $300.434 Houston Street, Suite 131, cottenmusic.comAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTest RunStomp Sessions, a new app created by former professional extreme sports athletes, helps link up skaters and riders with athletes for lessons.By Nick CorasanitiFor the past month, Julia Mancuso, the former Olympic skier and multiple medal winner, was perched high in the Pyeongchang mountains for NBC, offering her analysis for the millions tuned into the network’s coverage. But in March, Ms. Mancuso will be back on the mountain, offering tips and insight in private ski and snowboard sessions. The secret to unlocking these seemingly exclusive and in-demand insights from the top pros of the sport? It’s through a newly launched app called Stomp Sessions.Created by former professional extreme sport athletes, Stomp Sessions works like Uber or on-demand delivery apps: simply open it at any of their current locations — ski and snowboard at Squaw Valley, Calif., and skateboard at municipal parks in San Clemente, Truckee and Oceanside, Calif., with more locations and surfing and mountain biking coming soon — see what pros are available for the time desired, click “book,” and then ride or skate with a pro.For skateboarding, the session options run the gamut of skill levels. Pros like Ryan Sheckler and Chris Cole, former X-Games competitors, as well as locally sponsored skatepark heroes offer both group and private sessions.For snowboarding and skiing, the options are slightly more limited, and exclude beginners (that’s the domain of mountain-run schools). There are, however, three tiers of pros offered: “Gold” is for gold medalists at either the Olympics or X-Games or Street League (Mr. Sheckler for skating and Jamie Anderson for snowboarding, for example), silver is athletes who have competed in those contests, and bronze is for athletes with professional sponsorships.I found myself in need of some help recently after looking down at the pink imprint of my face in the snow in Squaw Valley, evidence of a slightly bloodied nose from a fairly gnarly wipeout. It was my second full day trying out snowboarding after a life of surfing and skiing, and while I had the basics down, I clearly needed a quick lesson, but was too late for the intensive, full-day sessions offered at the ski resort. I wanted a quick blitz of tips and demos from a pro. Fortunately, Stomp had a tent hawking the app, and so I downloaded it. After quickly making a profile, I booked an hour with Ryan Williams, a former X-Games medalist and one of the company’s founders, who was ready to go within five minutes of my desired start time of 10:20 a.m. Once on the mountain, Mr. Williams started the app’s timer to signal our session had started; the app keeps a running clock, so the lesson can go for any amount of time past one hour, and then the rate is automatically prorated.He quickly dispensed some handy tips that made my life easier (dig a ledge with your board so you can strap in while standing up), demonstrated proper form and then fixed my carving (“think of the edge more like a butter knife”). It was exactly the kind of lesson I was looking for.One major bonus was that the app has a built in media-upload function; as Ryan was coaching me, he was also filming through the app. After the session, he uploaded photos and videos, accessible through the app, so I could see what I could correct or improve upon (or, in my case, post an Instagram of me carving and then falling head first).Mr. Williams told me that the idea for the app came to him while he was working on some of his own tricks at a skatepark, and had a fellow skater ask him for a few tips on landing a 720 rotation.“It dawned on me, just seeing how many pro athletes were in the park, both the snowboard park and the skateboard park,” he said. “They of course have busy schedules, but if we could create a program similar to Uber or Airbnb where they could manage their own schedule, what an awesome opportunity.”Getting tips, tricks and guidance from a pro on a world-class ski resort isn’t cheap. My run with Mr. Williams cost me about $250 for an hour, which are comparable with the Squaw private lesson rate of $539 for a half day. Bigger name pros like Chas Guldemond or Ms. Anderson would cost more, around $499 an hour. But the draw of Stomp, in addition to the pros, is flexibility: It let me just choose an hour, and I could start any time I wanted, and go for as long as I wanted, and focus on exactly what I wanted.Skateboarding lessons and pro sessions offers cheaper and more varied options starting around $80 per hour. And the app is loaded with dozens of tip videos from pros like Mr. Cole showing how to pull off simple jumps and complex flips.An app like this could seem disruptive to the lucrative ski schools run by world class mountains like Squaw Valley. But the resort has embraced Stomp as a partner through a revenue sharing agreement. (Plus, anyone using Stomp still needs a Squaw Valley lift ticket — pros and amateurs alike.)For the athletes, the draw is twofold: many view their role as ambassadors of growing sports, and the app allows the opportunity to spread their knowledge. But Stomp also brought many of the top names, like Ms. Anderson, into the company as advisers, so they also have a part ownership stake in its success.The app is still in its nascent stages. There are two planned weekends left for ski and snowboard pro sessions at Squaw Valley on March 17 and 18 and April 7 and 8. For skateboarding, the lessons around Truckee and Oceanside are fairly regular, with more cities on both coasts set to open soon. Mr. Williams said they require at least six pros to sign up for a location before they flip the switch in the app for a locale.“I have a way of breaking down tricks in a specific manner and people have always said, ‘hey you should def do something with that skill you have of breaking down tricks into little bitty pieces an explaining them to people’,” said Chris Cole, the pro skateboarder. “And I was just waiting for the right application to do it.”Nick Corasaniti is a digital correspondent, covering the messaging that powers political campaigns, from media to advertising to technology.  He also helped conceive of, develop and launch First Draft, the political newsletter and online news source.
 @NYTnickc•Facebook @NYTnickc•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byQ&AJay Stein explains why the hotel group known for luxury properties in places like New York is expanding to smaller cities in the United States and beyond. By John L. DormanThe luxury hotel market, once concentrated in only the largest cities, has surged over the last decade. Jay Stein, the chief executive at the Dream Hotel Group, has taken advantage of the demand, shining a light on a company that helped cultivate one of the most popular trends in modern upscale lodging.“We started the rooftop bar craze,” Mr. Stein said, referring to the 2003 opening of the former Ava Lounge at the Dream Midtown that brought a certain hipness to the usual outdoor drinks scene. “There were others that started to catch on, but we’ve been an early player with luxury boutique hotels.”The company, which includes the Chatwal New York and Time Hotels, currently operates 18 properties. There are plans for 30 additional hotels internationally over the next four years, from a Dream hotel in Belize to boutique-oriented Unscripted hotels in Birmingham, England, and Tulum, Mexico.Below are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Stein in Manhattan.How has Dream influenced the growth within the New York luxury market? What changes have you seen in this market over the last five years?In the 1960s and 70s, a lot of hotels were boxy and didn’t differentiate themselves. That wouldn’t work today. The increased competition in the New York market over the last few years, with new hotels like the Baccarat Hotel, has forced everyone to look at what they’re doing and really perform everything well. There is more of a hip, cool trend at many hotels, blending lifestyle and luxury.With the growth of boutique hotels, what factors are considered when determining how a Dream property would fit into a particular market, especially midsize cities?We analyze profitability and perform our own research to see if a market is viable. In places like Durham, N.C., and Nashville, there is a demand for more lifestyle hotels, which would have not have been the case a decade ago. People are a lot more exposed to the world than they used to be. The Dream Downtown New York hotel opened in the former National Maritime Union Building, a 1960s-era concrete structure with porthole windows and a glass-bottomed pool that sits over the lobby. What went into creating and preserving the property?The building (355 West 16th Street) had some challenges since it was inside the block, to the east of the Maritime Hotel. I met with Handel Architects and we took a look at the building, adding a second tower, new porthole windows and a volleyball area with sand. The stainless steel cladding defines the exterior of the building.You’re planning to open two hotels in the Dominican Republic. Are you looking at other parts of the region?The Caribbean is a new market for us, and Belize is one of the fastest growing tourist areas in the region. We have plans for two new hotels in Belize, an Unscripted hotel in late 2018 and a Dream hotel in 2020.What has been your most memorable hotel opening?At the Dream Downtown, we were painting the baseboards minutes before the opening. We were hosting a hospitality conference, so we were committed to opening on time. The hotel has 315 rooms and there were about 300 industry professionals at the conference, and we pulled it off.When you visualize an ideal vacation, what comes to mind? Do you have a favorite destination?Winter in the Green Mountains of Vermont is my favorite. I’m an avid skier, and seeing the covered bridges and mountains near Sugarbush [Resort], Jay Peak, Stowe and Killington is great. Going out to a hot tub with three feet of snow is the ultimate vacation.You recently opened the first Unscripted hotel, Unscripted Durham, in North Carolina. The property, a former 1960s-era motor lodge, was turned into a 74-room boutique hotel. What is your vision for the Unscripted brand?We’re focused on secondary and tertiary markets where there aren’t a lot of boutique options and where we can offer a great lifestyle product. Roughly 10 miles from downtown Austin, we’re planning a hotel that will be attached to a live music venue.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealBy Jessica Colley ClarkeA range of activities that allow female travelers to connect are being offered free of charge at hotels in celebration of International Women’s Day, on March 8. At hotels both American and international, fees are being waived for female guests to participate in activities like clay pigeon shooting, golf lessons, snorkeling and cocktail mixing classes. At the Barnsley Resort in Georgia, 60 miles northwest of Atlanta, female guests can choose between a free 90-minute small group clay pigeon shooting clinic (normally $75 per person) or a one-hour golf lesson at the Fazio Course with a focus on putting and driving (a $50 value per person). A complimentary sunset sail excursion is available at El Mangroove, a boutique hotel in Costa Rica. The three-hour sail (normally $99 per person) will include snorkeling off Panama Beach and sunset views plus complimentary wine and snacks. In-room hammocks provide a cozy place to keep the relaxation going after the sail. Women interested in learning to make the perfect margarita can sign up for a free two-hour class (normally $80) at the Marriott Cancun Resort. This outdoor afternoon class will include a cocktail mixing lesson with a hands-on component for making your own margarita. Elsewhere in Mexico, at the Marriott Puerto Vallarta Resort & Spa, Audrey Formisano, the hotel’s tequila sommelier, will lead a free tequila tasting (normally $26 per person). The tasting will include four different samples — including a tequila that the hotel produces with agave grown on-site — each paired with a snack. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getaway A look at what’s ahead, from new airport security procedures to new airline routes and rules for those so-called smart bags.By Stephanie RosenbloomThe year ahead is shaping up to be one of more change for travelers, with new airport security procedures and identification requirements, airline routes and airports, high-speed trains; and the reopening of more hotels in the Caribbean after a brutal hurricane season. Below, a preview. In 2017, the Transportation Security Administration announced that it would begin rolling out stronger screening procedures for electronics larger than a cellphone. For years, laptop computers have had to be removed from bags for screening, but now the new measures require that all electronics larger than a cellphone — like e-readers, noise-canceling headphones and hand-held game consoles — also be placed in a separate bin. The procedures are already in place at some airport checkpoints, where they were being tested, and will be expanded to all airports and checkpoints nationwide by the spring of 2018. (The new measures do not apply to passengers in T.S.A. PreCheck lanes for travelers enrolled in the expedited government security program.)Beginning Jan. 22, if you have a driver’s license or identification card issued by a state that is not compliant with the minimum security standards in what’s known as the Real ID Act, you must have an alternative form of identification in order to fly domestically. You can see if your state is compliant or has been approved for an extension, in which case you can keep using your current license (for now) at Dhs.gov/real-id. For instance, Texas and Vermont are among the states that are compliant; California, Pennsylvania, New York and Louisiana have extensions. A list of alternative acceptable forms of identification — like a United States passport or a Department of Homeland Security trusted traveler card (such as Global Entry, Nexus, Sentri or Fast) — is at Tsa.gov/travel/security-screening/identification. New routes are coming for spring and summer travel.Beginning in April, United Airlines will offer year-round service to Wilmington International Airport in North Carolina from O’Hare International Airport in Chicago, as well as from Washington Dulles International Airport. The airline will also fly to Elmira/Corning Regional Airport in New York from Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey. There will be new routes between Los Angeles and Oregon, and Denver and Florida, too. From June 7, those wishing to visit the nation’s national parks will have more options, with seasonal service between O’Hare International Airport in Chicago and Fresno Yosemite International Airport in California; and Los Angeles International Airport and Glacier Park International Airport and Missoula International Airport, both in Montana. In October, United plans to begin service between San Francisco and Faa’a International Airport in Tahiti, which the company said will make it the only United States carrier offering nonstop service there from the mainland United States. JetBlue said that beginning May 3 it will increase its presence in New England, with nonstop service between Worcester Regional Airport in Massachusetts and John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York, becoming the only commercial airline to serve Worcester. On that same day, JetBlue also plans to begin nonstop service between Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport and Boston Logan International Airport.American Airlines is homing in on Canada, adding service from its hub in Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport to Vancouver International Airport beginning May 4. Seasonal service to Calgary International Airport from O’Hare begins June 7. There will be more flights from the east coast of the United States to eastern Canada as well, including Toronto, Ottawa and Quebec City. Also in June, Delta Air Lines will offer new nonstop service between Mineta San Jose International Airport in California and John F. Kennedy Airport in New York.Looking for a deal? Norwegian Air, the low-cost, long-haul carrier, is planning 11 new trans-Atlantic routes for 2018, including service from John F. Kennedy International Airport to Amsterdam Airport Schiphol in the Netherlands (beginning May 7) and to Madrid-Barajas Airport in Spain (beginning July 18). There will also be service from Los Angeles International Airport to Milan (beginning June 18) and Madrid (beginning July 16).When deciding what to pack, you may need to think twice about so-called smart bags that allow travelers to do things like charge their portable electronic devices and lock the bag remotely. Beginning Jan. 15, major airlines, including American, Delta, United, Hawaiian and Alaska will no longer accept smart bags with lithium-ion batteries unless the batteries can be removed on site. Why? Because, as Delta put it, the batteries have the potential to overheat and start a fire during flight. So if you’re planning to travel with a smart bag, be sure you know how to remove the battery before leaving home. In addition to new airport rules, the year ahead will also bring new airports. Relations between the United States and Turkey may be strained, but a state-of-the-art airport, Istanbul New Airport (yes, that’s what it’s called), is slated to be completed in 2018 and will become the primary gateway to the city. And in Israel, Eilat City Airport and Ovda Airport, the entry points for the country’s popular southern resort town of Eilat, will be replaced by the new Ramon International Airport. In Paris, Airbnb announced that, beginning in January 2018, it will cap the number of days each year that hosts can rent out dwellings in neighborhoods in central Paris — the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Arrondissements — to comply with the country’s limit (120 days a year, according to Reuters) on short-term home rentals. Airbnb has already tested the cap in other major cities like London. For tourists, that could mean a more competitive rental market in Paris’s most popular arrondissements, so be sure to book early.In Israel, a new high-speed train connecting Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, slated to open in April, will be the country’s first electric railway line. The Israel Ministry of Tourism said the new train will take 28 minutes between the cities, down from the current 80 minutes it takes by bus. In the Caribbean, where the recovery continues for hard-hit islands, some major hotels are planning to reopen in 2018, including the Four Seasons Anguilla and CuisinArt Golf Resort and Spa in Anguilla. Check individual hotel websites for updates.Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe 52 Places TravelerThe Alabama city has a complicated history, heavy with racial tensions. But it’s also a powerful place, and a friendly one for travelers. By Jada YuanDriving by the Alabama State Capitol building in Montgomery, Michelle Browder, an African-American activist and founder of the I Am More Than... youth mentorship nonprofit, pointed out a looming bronze statue of Jefferson Davis, the first and only president of the Confederacy. It has a position of prominence right out front, as does a commemorative plaque on the marble steps marking the exact spot where he stood taking his oath of office in 1861. A state holiday recognizes his birthday. Farther down the Capitol lawn, Ms. Browder said, was a similar statue heralding Dr. J. Marion Sims, but I didn’t recognize the name, and she wouldn’t elaborate. “You’re going to have to do your homework on that one,” she said, “because my blood pressure goes up when I talk about him.” Ms. Browder wore red cat-eye glasses, an Army-green jacket, and a T-shirt bearing the words “Dream Destroyed” and the face of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., who began leading the Montgomery Bus Boycott in 1955 from the basement of a Baptist church just 440 feet from those Capitol steps. The vehicle she was careening through downtown, often parking akimbo on sidewalks or in the middle of the street, was a six-seat electric cart, from which she leads More Than Tours — explorations of a city that has been both the site of systemic oppression of her fellow African-Americans and the birthplace of the civil rights movement. Within about 10 seconds, she’d risked that blood pressure spike to tell me about Sims. “He’s known as the father of modern gynecology,” she said. “He enslaved black women and he used them as experiments.” Specifically, he visited unimaginable tortures on 12 slave women, without anesthesia, under the belief that black people felt less than whites. “We are starting an initiative,” she said, “because we would like to see the mothers of gynecology erected beside him to give more to the story.” The “we” she refers to is a group she’s organized called Friends of Anarcha, after a woman who endured 30 of Sims’s vaginal surgeries before he declared her a success.Montgomery was my third stop on an insane yearlong mission I’ve undertaken to visit every spot on The Times’ 52 Places to Go in 2018 list, and I was eager to find out why the city had snagged the No. 49 slot. By the end of four days, I’d come to believe it should have ranked higher. As a tourist destination, Montgomery is — how shall I put this — heavy. In the same afternoon, visitors can see the Rosa Parks Museum, built at the site of her 1955 arrest for refusing to give up her seat to a white person, and the first White House of the Confederacy, a National Historic Landmark. (Ms. Browder is a descendant of Aurelia Browder, a woman who faced a similar arrest eight months before Parks, and who was the lead plaintiff in the 1956 lawsuit, Browder v. Gayle, that ended the bus boycott.) The city is also undeniably relevant right now, with a deep commitment to confronting its past (and often present) of racism, at a time when white supremacism has re-entered the national conversation in a major way. Daily, I found myself moved to tears by any number of tales of brutality or hardship, and the strength it took to tell them. Even the trees that line the streets, dripping with Spanish moss like bearded old men, seem embedded with pain. I’d arrived in MGM, as residents call it, less than two months after national news outlets had swarmed its streets to document the contentious Senate race in which Doug Jones, a Democrat, defeated Roy S. Moore, the Republican who had been accused of harassing and assaulting teenage girls. “His office is right there!” Ms. Browder said, pointing to the windows of Mr. Moore’s Foundation for Moral Law, in a building that once housed the bank that funded the Confederacy. What really ought to bump Montgomery up the 52 Places list is the National Memorial for Peace and Justice that the Equal Justice Initiative, a human rights legal nonprofit, is scheduled to open on April 26. (Update: It is about to open and we have a robust report.) Inspired by the memorials that Germany, Rwanda and South Africa have built to the atrocities of their own pasts, it pays tribute to the approximately 4,400 black victims of lynching by white mobs in the United States from 1877 to 1950, and is the country’s first comprehensive memorial to racial terrorism. The six-acre site and an accompanying museum that aims to link slavery to mass incarceration were under construction when I visited, but plans show it will consist of 800 rectangular, oxidized steel columns, each representing a particular county in the Deep South and Midwest, and bearing the names of the men, women and children killed there. While the columns will appear at first glance to touch the ground, the floor of the memorial will actually slope downward as visitors walk through it, allowing for the columns to hang over them, like bodies. The Initiative’s project is in many ways a companion piece to the work that the Southern Poverty Law Center, the nation’s top legal advocate for victims of hate crimes, began in Montgomery with the Civil Rights Memorial in 1989. The memorial, designed by Maya Lin, consists of a stone table overflowing with water, bearing the names of 40 people who were murdered while doing things as simple as registering black people to vote. (A Civil Rights Memorial Center was added in 2005.)Upon first impression, even with a county population of 230,000, Montgomery seems far too quaint and conservative to be home to two of the country’s most influential, progressive nonprofits fighting racial bias. Its airport has a single baggage claim and the rental car area is dotted with wooden rocking chairs, for an extra dose of Southern charm. I spent 20 minutes answering emails before walking outside and found myself the only person left on the premises, other than three bored-seeming policemen trading stories on the sidewalk. “You need a taxi, ma’am?” one of them asked. “He just left, so it’s going to be 15 or 20 minutes.” “Now, where’s my taxi driver?” the officer mumbled to himself, then got on the radio: “Nick, there’s a lady waiting for you.” It took me a minute to absorb what I was hearing, but yes, apparently there was only one taxi driver working in Montgomery on Super Bowl Sunday. I’d encountered a similar peculiarity earlier that morning, when I’d made a last minute online reservation at a lovely bed-and-breakfast, Red Bluff Cottage, only to receive a distressed call from the owner, Bonnie Ponstein, wondering what time, exactly, I was planning to arrive. She, her husband and their usual housekeeper would all be at church. That evening, I went to the city’s historic downtown for an informal tour with an enterprising Lyft driver, Marcus McNeal. We stood talking in the middle of those cobblestone streets for what must have been 30 minutes before another car, or even another person, came by. “You could shoot a cannon down Dexter Avenue” — downtown’s main drag — “and not hit a person on a Sunday,” Barry Ponstein, Bonnie’s husband told me later. “Everyone’s at church.”The one person we did meet out and about, actually, was Brother Ricky Segers, whom we found deep into a nightly ritual he’s kept up for three years, of kneeling in front of a tiny souvenir American flag he’s planted on the Capitol grounds to ask Jesus for more “godly” leaders in this country. He feels as though Roy Moore was “mistreated” and Robert E. Lee was a hero. Still, he and Mr. McNeal, the Lyft driver, who is black and at least half his age, have known each other for a while now and seem to get along great. “It’s interesting to me, too,” said Mr. McNeal of their friendliness. He’s 24, hopes to open a chain of 24-hour coffee shops for workaholics, and comes from what he described as abject poverty. The car he drove me in belongs to his mother, who has been pulling double shifts as a nurse’s assistant to pay for their heating bill that had gone from $80 to $480 during a cold spell that preceded my visit. “My mom is 62 years old and she makes $8 an hour, and that’s the most she’s ever made,” he said. Their all-wood house has too much dry rot for them to install insulation, and they haven’t been able to afford replacing the bathroom sink that fell out of their wall. “It’s O.K.,” he said. “Poverty is a mind-set. If you change your mind-set, you’re going to come out of it eventually.” Later, he declared, “Come back and see me when I have my Bentley.” The ad hoc tour Mr. McNeal took me on had been refreshingly frank. He drove straight to a historical placard describing the bustling slave markets that had been held at Court Square, the city’s central roundabout. I asked Mr. McNeal why it didn’t have more central placement in the square and he just laughed: “What else are they going to do? It’s not like they can build an auction platform here. That would really piss some people off!” When I mentioned to him that multiple people had suggested I eat at Central, an upscale Southern food restaurant in downtown’s tiny revitalized commercial district, he joked, “Central is so expensive, you’d be better off buying a restaurant and opening and stocking the kitchen yourself.” We went to Applebee’s instead, and gorged on spinach and artichoke dip. I did end up at Central on another night, and it was indeed quite good — part of a growing culinary scene that will include gourmet offerings at the renovated Kress on Dexter building downtown, which opens in April. The former block-wide department store, built in 1929, will host rotating pop-up markets devoted to local artists — and has been engaged in incredibly responsible historical preservation, which has included donating bricks made by enslaved people to EJI — as well as keep its old “Whites Only” and “Colored Only” signs on display for posterity. I’m also a fan of the coffee shops Prevail Union and Cafe Louisa, as well as bar standouts like Leroy Lounge, a dive with a terrific selection of wines and craft beers, and Aviator Bar, covered in airplane-themed kitsch — inspired by the Wright Brothers, who started the country’s first civilian flight school outside Montgomery. I met a group of black culinary students there one night who not only knew the city’s history but said it fueled their ambitions. “We’re in a bar on the road that was used to bring people to be auctioned off,” said Steven McIntyre, who interns as a line cook at the highly regarded restaurant Vintage Year, “and the fact that we are here today, just hanging out, enjoying life, it’s incredible. Not super long ago, we would not be chilling here. This would not be chill.” My best culinary experiences, though, came by way of cabdrivers I’d met. Nick Alloway, that lone Sunday driver, sent me to Mrs. B’s Home Cooking, a yellow-painted soul food restaurant a few minutes west of downtown that serves up a different featured meat every day. Blocks north of the Capitol building is Davis Cafe, an even older family-run soul food joint that’s the haunt of Hillard Wright, a King’s Airport shuttle driver with a salt-and-pepper mustache, a gruff baritone voice and a leather rancher’s hat that never left his head. He spent a whole afternoon showing me his version of the city he’s lived in all of his 66 years. State senators were crowded into every vinyl booth. My plate overflowing with collard greens, creamed corn, peas and okra, turkey dressing, yams and cornbread cost around $6. Following the spirit of the locals I had met, I tried to absorb as much history as I could in four days: The Dexter Parsonage Museum, where Dr. King lived in the 1950s; the F. Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald Museum in the home where their marriage dissolved; Hank Williams’s grave in the Oakwood Annex Cemetery. What stuck with me more than any of those, though, were the three hours I spent with Mr. Wright, engaging in his favorite pastime of driving around and looking at old houses. He’d introduce each neighborhood with factoids about its legal, and later, de facto, segregation status. Entering the “old money” neighborhood of Old Cloverdale, for example, he pointed out, “if you’ll notice, you don’t see any black folks living in there.” I did notice. Mr. Wright, though, is not bitter. He has built for himself a quiet life of hunting and fishing, driving around for money and minding his own business. “Even through the segregation and hatred,” he said, “Montgomery, I wouldn’t trade it. I’ve been here my whole life and I’ve enjoyed every day.” This year, the city will erect its first statue to Dr. King, in front of the Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church where he used to preach near the Capitol. The statues of J. Marion Sims and Jefferson Davis, erected in 1939 and 1940, will be in view, too. Alabama will remain one of two states that celebrate the King and Lee birthdays in a combined holiday. This is how change seems to come in Montgomery: messy and long overdue. Still, how wonderful to see progress in action.Jada Yuan will be traveling to every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Her next dispatch will be from Disney Springs, Fla. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCheck InThe Pulitzer Amsterdam celebrates its past but has a flair for modern touches. Don’t miss the bar — or the boat tour.By Alyson KruegerFrom 295 euros a night (about $362)This 225-room hotel is comprised of 25 connecting canal houses built by wealthy merchants and aristocrats 400 years ago during the Dutch Golden Age. The five-star hotel was originally owned by Peter Pulitzer, whose grandfather Joseph established the Pulitzer Prizes. It had a head-to-toe refurbishment in 2016 and is now a social hot spot. The public spaces — the bar, the courtyard garden, the restaurant — are full of good-looking locals and tourists. The hotel owners care deeply about its past, and there are reminders of it everywhere. The venues are named after historical characters, and signs in guest rooms tell you who lived there throughout the centuries.The Pulitzer Amsterdam is nestled between two of the city’s peaceful canals. My room overlooked a waterway and had a private balcony for watching the riverboats and bikers. Big tourist attractions like the Anne Frank House and the Rijksmuseum are a few minutes away, and colorful signs by the elevator suggest nearby sites to visit. The hotel is in the Nine Streets, a neighborhood full of quirky shops, bars and cafes. You can buy anything from old violins to vintage clothes to bow ties just outside the hotel.In the Pulitzer Amsterdam, no two rooms are the same. I stayed in an airy, modern room with floor-to-ceiling windows, pastel-colored furniture, and a chandelier. The room had so many amenities, I kept discovering more in drawers and closets throughout my stay. There was local coffee and tea, a sewing and shoe shining kit, branded stationery, even complimentary stroopwafels (the popular cookie). There wasn’t the one thing I really wanted: a full-length mirror. And I never received turndown service, which I expected at a five-star hotel.The bathroom was spacious and new (the countertops looked as if they had never been used). There was a deep bath tub and a rain shower with great pressure. The shampoo, conditioner and shower gel was made for the Pulitzer Amsterdam by upscale New York City perfumery Le Labo. I liked the products but would have liked them to be local.The hotel has a two-story gym with up-to-date equipment, a library, an outdoor garden with four swings, even an in-house flower shop. The best amenity by far is the concierge team, which has extensive local knowledge. After check-in a concierge will walk you to your room and give you an overview of the hotel and recommendations about what you should do during your time in Amsterdam. I emailed the team when I was walking around the city with a question, and they responded within minutes.The hotel has exclusive walking and canal boat tours for its guests. The latter takes place on a classic salon boat from 1909 — the captain said that Winston Churchill rode on it in 1946 — and it has polished teak and brass, marble, leather, even carpeting. It’s worth staying in the hotel just for this. The captain handed me a glass of wine and took me and the other guests on a lively and informative water tour of the city. He knew everything from where John Adams lived when he was an ambassador to the Netherlands to where Justin Bieber likes to party when he’s in town. It felt like a steal for 38 euros a person.Jansz is an airy, elegant restaurant. The menu is eclectic and combines specialties from countries across Europe. For an extra charge (29.50 euros per person), hotel guests can have breakfast here. You get to choose a hot dish off the menu as well as help yourself to a buffet of fruits, cheeses and danishes. The soft music in the background and the abundance of light made it a cheerful and relaxing place to start the day. For dinner I sat at the hotel’s bar, The Pulitzer, which looks like it belongs in the 1930s with wood paneling, deep couches and tables tucked in secret corners. The attentive bartender made me a pineapple old-fashioned, a signature drink, and recommended snacks to order. I was surprised by how friendly the place was; I chatted with locals and other travelers and stayed out longer than I had anticipated.The hotel is still in its early stages, and it will be interesting to see if it can keep up its allure. For now, though, it’s a bold place with character, great service, and fun and unexpected touches. Staying there exposed me to different sides of Amsterdam’s culture, history, charm and people than I would have otherwise seen.Pulitzer Amsterdam; Prinsengracht 315 — 331, 1016 GZ Amsterdam; pulitzeramsterdam.comAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byheads upLong synonymous with carbo-phobia and anti-gluten mania, greater Los Angeles has become an unlikely bakery and bread haven. By Rebecca Flint MarxThe Los Angeles area, for all of its culinary diversity, has not historically been thought of as a haven for bread lovers. While it’s true that Nancy Silverton’s pioneering La Brea Bakery has produced artisan loaves since 1989, the area, rightly or wrongly, has a deeply entrenched reputation as a place where gluten fears to tread.“I can remember a time when L.A. was the heart of darkness, the no-carb central,” said Zack Hall, the owner of Clark Street Bread. “But we’re also a city that has great pride in food and restaurants and really cares about high-quality ingredients.”Clark Street, which Mr. Hall founded in 2014 and operates out of a stall in downtown’s Grand Central Market, is one of several bakeries that have helped greater Los Angeles emerge over the past few years as an unlikely bread paradise. In kitchens from Venice to Pasadena, bakers are milling their own flour, experimenting with wild yeasts, fermentation, and ancient grains, and turning out loaves that rival those in New York or San Francisco. And outsiders have taken note: this summer, San Francisco’s vaunted Tartine Manufactory will open an Arts District outpost.“There’s definitely a generation of people who went through really good training and then trained each other,” said Roxana Jullapat. She and her husband, Daniel Mattern, are the baker and chef, respectively, behind Friends & Family, an airy Thai Town spot that opened in 2016. Ms. Jullapat’s sprouted-wheat sandwich bread is one of the menu’s highlights; another is her rye chocolate cookie. The availability of different grains, a relatively new development in the growing heirloom grain movement, “has totally changed the game” for Los Angeles bakers, Ms. Jullapat said. Last spring and fall, over the course of two crawls through the new crop of bakeries in the Los Angeles area, I encountered loaves as distinct as the bakers that produce them. In Venice, I found Anton Steiner’s excellent sourdough toast and Nutella croissants at Superba Food + Bread, an industrial chic bakery-restaurant that opened in 2014. About a mile away, I inhaled hemp-nori whole wheat bread at Gjusta, the sprawling four-year-old bakery-deli-cafe co-owned by the local chef Travis Lett, and then walked three blocks to Rose Cafe, a Venice institution that was revamped in 2015 with a menu by Jason Neroni (formerly of Superba); the lavender-hued polenta loaf was a high point of my trip.Heading east, I stopped at Culver City’s Lodge Bread, a three-year-old establishment whose owners, Alexander Phaneuf and Or Amsalam, leaven their whole grain breads with a slowly fermenting sourdough starter (as opposed to commercial active yeast). Four smallish slices of their muscular seeded rye, served with gravlax and whitefish salad, kept me full for hours.The gospel of whole grains and long fermentation (which, among other things, breaks down gluten) has been effective in converting many gluten-phobic customers, said Andy Kadin, the baker behind Bub & Grandma’s: “Without jumping down their throat, we say, ‘maybe it’s not a problem — maybe it’s white flour or bread from the supermarket, which isn’t bread at all.’”Mr. Kadin, a former advertising copywriter and creative director, began baking bread out of his home in 2014; most of his impeccable loaves are naturally leavened, and his whole-grain flours come from Grist & Toll, a Pasadena flour mill. Mr. Kadin moved into a wholesale bakery in Silver Lake in February; you can find his breads at the Hollywood Farmers Market and restaurants throughout town. For a time, Mr. Kadin baked out of Mr. Hall’s Clark Street Bread space. Like Mr. Kadin, Mr. Hall — a former musician — uses natural leavening and locally sourced and milled grains; his country loaf is the stuff that failed Paleo diets are made of. And like Mr. Kadin, Mr. Hall is expanding: this spring, he’ll open an Echo Park bakery and cafe.In Pasadena, you can see how grains are milled at Grist & Toll, which in 2013 became the first urban flour mill to open in greater Los Angeles in a century. At its retail shop, the owner Nan Kohler spends much of her time explaining to customers the importance of regional grains and fresh flour; education, she said, is necessary “to disrupt a huge commercial industry.”If you’re in Pasadena, stop by Seed Bakery, where Joseph Abrakjian mills his own flour and ferments his dough for as long as 24 hours. As I enjoyed Seed’s grilled eggplant sandwich on rustic country bread, I thought of what Ran Zimon, the owner of the six-year-old Arts District bakery Bread Lounge, had told me. “When I opened, I was worried,” he said. “There was always some kind of diet running around and I thought maybe people just don’t want to eat bread in L.A. But I realized they do. People like to eat what tastes good.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesAt his new restaurant Folklore, the chef Damian D’Silva continues to celebrate so-called heritage food — and is perhaps starting a few traditions of his own. By Cheryl Lu-Lien TanSingapore is a country of countless hawker stalls and beloved mom-and-pop restaurants that serve up excellent renditions of local dishes. So when its notoriously discerning eaters pack into a chic hotel lobby to seek out traditional fare, take note. On a recent weeknight at Folklore, at the Destination Singapore Beach Road hotel, table after table was filled with locals tucking into dishes like pork belly braised in tamarind gravy and eggplant sambal. The cuisine here is Singapore’s so-called heritage food — and the chef behind it, Damian D’Silva, is something of an evangelist on the matter. “Our heritage food is dead or dying — a lot of the dishes that I used to eat as a kid, today, they’re no longer available,” said Mr. D’Silva, who learned to cook as a child by watching his grandparents whip up Peranakan (descendants of Chinese immigrants to the Malay Peninsula) and Eurasian classics at the stove. “It’s very important to keep them alive.”Mr. D’Silva, who ran the kitchens at various restaurants in Singapore before opening Folklore last July, has amassed a loyal following. In 2008, when he took a break from restaurants to offer Peranakan dishes and Western fare like his signature anchovy pasta in a tiny coffee shop stall, the well-heeled followed, pulling up in pricey cars for takeout or sitting on a stool to sweat over a Wagyu steak.Standouts at Folklore include singgang, a Eurasian wolf herring dish, and the must-try fried rice, which stars the deliciously rich chocolate-like insides of buah keluak, a Southeast Asian nutlike fruit. There are also standards done well, including chap chye, a Peranakan dish of vegetables and glass noodles cooked in pork and prawn stock. Perhaps more interesting, however, is Mr. D’Silva’s foray into the more obscure. His plan is to change the menu every few months to add dishes that he said are increasingly rare — for example, kai fan, rice topped with Chinese sausage, roast pork and shredded chicken, with chicken stock poured over it right before serving. “It’s a very simple dish, but when you put hot soup on it, all those flavors seep into the rice,” said Mr. D’Silva, calling it “soul food that the laborers would eat” in the 1960s at hawker stalls in the country’s bustling quays. And around Singapore’s major holidays — Chinese New Year, and Hindu Diwali (or Deepavali, as Singaporeans call it), Muslim Hari Raya — Mr. D’Silva is adding dishes from those culinary traditions. In the weeks around Christmas, for example, the chef served up debal, a fiery curry made with ham, roast pork and spare ribs. The dish — which Singapore’s Eurasian families traditionally have made on Boxing Day — is their way of using up Christmas leftovers.The desserts are memorable, including Mr. D’Silva’s Peranakan cakes, which would rival those of many old Singaporean bakeries. Some Western twists pop up — palm sugar syrup, used in many local desserts, came drizzled over panna cotta, and the kueh bengkah (a grated tapioca cake) appeared with a scoop of vanilla ice cream, which initially alarmed my parents, who both remarked, “You don’t eat it with ice cream!” But perhaps Mr. D’Silva is starting some new traditions of his own. After a few bites, my parents pronounced the ice cream a delightful addition.Folklore, Destination Singapore Beach Road, 700 Beach Road, Level 2; parkhotelgroup.com/en/destinationbeachroad/folklore. An average dinner for two, minus drinks and tip, is 50 Singapore dollars (about $40). AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe 52 Places TravelerOur new columnist — chosen (out of 13,000 applicants) to visit all of the spots on our 52 Places list — finds plenty to celebrate in New Orleans, including fierce pride and a spirit of forgiveness.By Jada YuanOut of 13,000 applicants for our 52 Places Traveler job — for a journalist to go to each and every place on our 52 Places to Go in 2018 list — we chose Jada Yuan. This is her first dispatch. Her next dispatch will be from Chattanooga, Tenn. Follow her trip at nytimes.com/column/the-52-places-traveler and follow her on Instagram @alphajada.On my first trip to New Orleans, eight years ago, I bought a new pair of sneakers. By the end of a week I had danced in the streets so much I’d worn holes through the bottoms of each of them, straight through to my socks. That, more than Mardi Gras or Jazz Fest or oak trees or gumbo, is my indelible image of the city: The only place in the world where I’ve had such a good time that the shoes melted right off my feet. I’m not a kismet kind of person, but recently I found those sneakers again, on the eve of a trip back to New Orleans that is the start of a complete 180-degree turn in my life. I had just gotten my dream job as the lucky writer who gets to spend the next year traveling to every destination on The New York Times’s annual 52 Places to Go list — and New Orleans happened to be both No. 1 on the list and the first stop of the trip. It’s a thrilling opportunity, and I’ve been a wreck. I had to quit my job as staff writer at New York magazine, where I’ve worked since college; box up my entire apartment; and pack for a year on the road. I’m pretty sure I was crying when I found those sneakers, because I cried a lot that week. And yet I felt calmer than I had in months. Amid the chaos, it was as if a welcoming committee from the very city where I was starting this adventure had arrived in my living room and handed me a Sazerac: “You got this, girl.” Tourists can get a bad rap among locals, but we have history with the places we go to and love, too. I’ve spent maybe two months, cumulatively, exploring New Orleans. When I landed at the airport for this most recent visit, I already had a hotel that felt like home (The Columns), a least-favorite popular food (sorry, po’ boy fans), a local institution I recommend to all new visitors (Backstreet Cultural Museum in Tremé) and a favorite leather bar in the French Quarter for getting a cheap 11 a.m. to-go Bloody Mary (Rawhide2010 — though the graphic S&M playing on the TV screens at all times probably isn’t for everyone). My view of the city is in no way a comprehensive one, but it was molded by my tastes (and by the Anne Rice-loving friend from Brooklyn who introduced me to the city). That’s something that the obsessive reporter in me is going to have to come to terms with, as does any traveler to some degree: Try to do everything and you’ll wind up missing the most magical parts of being far from home.“New Orleans is a feeling,” Angelika Joseph, a singer for the city’s only all-female brass band, The Pinettes, told me while chilling on a sidewalk after a show. “It’s your grandmother’s cooking,” Ms. Joseph, who is known as Jelly, went on. “It’s music, it’s fun, it’s food, it’s partying, it’s a parade all the time.” That feeling turns 300 this year, which marks the anniversary of when Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville founded the French Quarter. From the sense I got on the ground, though, the tricentennial ranks pretty far below Mardi Gras as a thing the city is excited about. Already on St. Charles Avenue, where I was staying, ladders were set up for the purpose of viewing parades that were two weeks out, and strings of beads from years past were dripping off every oak tree like moss. “We’re so cool, even our trees have bling,” I overheard someone say. Many people I talked to didn’t even know the 300th was happening. “Should I be excited about it? I guess I’m part of this 300 years celebration in that I was born and raised here, and I’m 54, so of that 300 years I’ve got half a century,” said Curtis Walker, an Uber driver who loves music and recommends the late-night club Seal’s Class Act. “I mean, I’m not getting no money from it. But maybe I’ll get a lot of rides.” Still, 300 years is a significant milestone for a city that often seems to be at risk of sinking into the sea. That it was so very nearly lost 12 years ago during Hurricane Katrina — or that there’s another one coming — is not lost on residents, who defend their home turf with fierce pride. I experienced that pride a bit when I wrote something offhand on Twitter about how locals were ending conversations by telling me to “be safe,” and that I got the impression that no one walked around after dark. It was a badly worded tweet, though not entirely off base. People were indeed telling me to be safe. New Orleans has a notorious violent crime rate, one that predominantly affects black men, but that sometimes spills over to tourists and residents. (Solo women travelers, as always, should exercise extra caution, no matter the outcry of locals.) But the city also has, I’ve learned, a very forgiving spirit. The same people who sent me angry messages had turned warm within minutes. One woman I met at the Pinettes show, Renee Lapeyrolerie, wrote me, “Badly worded, not a crime, just a sin lol enjoy the rest of your stay,” and then advised me to put my phone in a zip-lock bag in case it rained.The city is certainly in the midst of a post-Katrina upswing, with plenty of new dining and drinking spots (the St. Roch food market, Latitude 29, for instance), but there are still boarded-up houses in many neighborhoods and a kind of lingering sadness about the hurricane’s most lasting impact, which was a loss of community. Almost every New Orleans native I met told me about friends and family who fled flooded homes and have yet to be able to return. Among residents’ other regular complaints are the roads, which often seem to be more pothole than concrete, and the water quality, which had much of the city on a “boil water” advisory (including for bathing) due to frozen pipes just days before I arrived. At the satirical Krewe du Vieux, the first major parade of Mardi Gras season, most floats were rebukes of the Sewerage & Water Board, whose failure to maintain drainage pumps resulted in damaging floods this summer. (Other targets were President Trump and the celebrity chef John Besh, who stepped down from his local restaurant empire in the wake of sexual misconduct accusations.)What is thriving is the arts scene. There are, of course, world-class art museums, the slavery-themed Whitney Plantation Museum, and the international arts fair Prospect 4 (which ends on Feb. 25), not to mention the wig artists at Fifi Mahony’s in the Quarter. But it’s school-level performing arts where the most exciting work is taking place. I got a chance to visit ReNEW Cultural Arts Academy, a public arts magnet middle school in Irish Channel, as their marching band got ready for Mardi Gras. They were as impressive as any professional musicians you’ll find on Frenchmen Street. “A lot of these kids, their parents weren’t in a band because of the migration to other states,” said Tenell Moore, the band director. “So we’re building new ‘bandheads,’ what we refer to them in New Orleans. We’re pushing hard to get it back.”It’s working. Out in the Seventh Ward at a booming local spot called Bullet’s Sports Bar, with no other businesses in sight, the Pinettes played to a packed Friday night house that included the New Orleans funk legend Mac Rebennack, better known as Dr. John. “My friend said, ‘Come out and hang out with some sisters,’ and I couldn’t believe how many white people are here. I was like, ‘I’m going home!’” he said. “Forget it, the Pinettes are the real deal. Overlooked way too long in New Orleans, maybe because they’re women.”The group was formed at St. Mary’s Academy, an all-female high school, and in 2013 won the Street Kings brass band competition. (Event organizers had to take a marker and cross out “Kings” and write in “Queens.”) Natasha Harris, the saxophonist, told me that none of them are full-time musicians: “We all have families, we all have jobs, we’re college-educated women, but we do this because it’s our passion.” They often have to perform without their full roster because there aren’t enough women instrumentalists around to act as substitutes for members who can’t make certain gigs. “Our hope,” Ms. Harris said, “is that middle school girls will come up and continue their passion, or that women will see us and realize it’s never too late. Pick that horn back up, keep it going.” Elsewhere, on St. Claude Avenue, I met another group of women at a nonprofit called Dancing Grounds who are trying to spread the empowering message of twerking. Jazz Johnson, who teaches a class called Twerk Party, moved back after years of dancing professionally in New York City, because she wanted be a corrective for a school system that stopped nurturing the arts after Katrina. “The kids, a lot of the ones I work with, they’re failing and all they keep doing is drilling them and giving them tests,” she said. “You take out the arts, it’s like, where’s the passion?” The city’s true currency, though, will always be its people, and while this may sound like lazy reporting, I found no better way to meet New Orleans natives than by riding in Lyfts and Ubers. In a predominantly service economy, ride sharing has become one of the most desirable jobs. “When Uber came to town, I fell in love with it,” Curtis Walker said. He had worked as a cook in a hospital (the city’s other thriving industry) and after a week of driving had doubled his take-home pay. He quit immediately. In contrast to New York, every person I said hello to on the street not only said hello back, but also stopped and wanted to talk for a while: “All right, Miss Jada. Be safe.” One evening, walking in the Garden District, I happened upon George Kapowich, a white retired college professor, having a chat on his porch with Alfred W. Wesley, Jr., a black retired gardener who used to work for him. “One of the things that every newcomer says when they come here is, ‘Everybody talks to everybody here,” Mr. Kapowich said. “Race, age — none of that matters.” “True dat!” Mr. Wesley said. “You’ve been knowing me 35 years. Serious!” Another day, I went to the historically black neighborhood of Tremé and came upon Marion Colbert sitting on a bench by her door. Known as Miss Mary, she turns 90 in July and told me that every year the neighborhood throws her a birthday party in the street. “I can’t walk like I did no more. I got diabetes, arthritis and glaucoma, but I’m happy,” she said. “I can still see and talk to people. I don’t need millions.” Every once in a while, she would call out, “You have a nice day, honey,” to whomever happened to be passing by. “Thank you, have a beautiful day,” one woman replied. “Oh, it is,” Ms. Colbert replied. The night of Krewe du Vieux, I got to take one of my Lyft drivers, Michael J. Hill, to an after-party at The Pearl, a kitschy underground event space in the Marigny district filled with all manner of odd objects, including a sculpture of a full-size ostrich. Mr. Hill, who “just made 50,” as he put it, is a traveling barber when he’s not driving share rides, and wanted to pick me up on his tandem bicycle, until it got two flats on the way to the parade. He walked into the party and made quick friends with a woman wearing nothing but a clear shower curtain and a thong, plus other costumed folk, almost all of whom were white. “You’re learning about New Orleans,” he told me. “I’m learning about this for the first time!” Then he had to go home, because the next day was Sunday and he’s a church elder. Right before I left for New Orleans, my father, a Chinese scientist who lives in New Mexico, where I grew up, emailed me scanned pages from a guidebook called “Roadfood” by Jane and Michael Stern. It included definitions of terms like jambalaya and étoufeé, just in case I didn’t know what they were. It was a very “my dad” kind of thing to do. My whole life, he’s listened to zydeco music and tried to perfect cooking catfish. He introduced me to the 1986 thriller “The Big Easy,” when I was far too young for it. This month, he told me he’s never been to New Orleans, which broke my heart. He works hard, has rarely had a vacation longer than 10 days, and just never made the time. My new dream is to take him once my crazy year is complete. I won’t be bringing those sneakers, though. I threw them out. Jada Yuan is the 52 Places Traveler columnist, traveling to each and every place on our 52 Places to Go in 2018 list. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPersonal JourneysHotels, shops, bars, restaurants — dogs are welcomed warmly just about everywhere. For Pip (a.k.a. Pierre), the prancing was never better.By Susan Saiter Sullivan and N. R. KleinfieldThe idea of bringing Pip along on our vacation to France was so we would blend in. Of course we were thinking of him, too. Pip is our dog, a runaway rat terrier we adopted from a shelter. He has leftover anxiety from his past life and we worried that he would be stressed out in a kennel. But we admit that we had a selfish reason. We wanted to experience France more as temporary residents than obvious tourists.The French cherish dogs. Their high, uncompromising regard for them is pretty much world legend. Dogs are a mainstay of French public life. Almost everywhere the French go, dogs go. When you leave your house, you take your wallet, your keys, your dog.So our notion was that Pip would bestow French cred on us, inspire the French to view us almost as indigenous: a couple of locals. A dog, we figured, could offset a lot of inevitable touristy behavior on our part. (As for language skills, Susan is fluent enough to get through a French dinner party if the discussion doesn’t get too rarefied, while N.R. is still trying to recall his high school lessons.) There was an issue. While Pip presents a sweet disposition around people (except, for some reason, anyone wearing red sneakers), he barks indiscriminately at other dogs. Lack of confidence, we’ve surmised, a small guy’s bluff. We didn’t want to lead him into restaurants and stores and start rumbles that would cause the French unnecessary emotional trauma.Thus we prepared. We purchased a gizmo known as an anti-bark collar. The way it worked: Whenever he barked, he would be sprayed in the face with citronella. It helped somewhat, but we felt bad when he scratched his neck in our elevator and got sprayed. So we enrolled him in a six-session Canine Good Citizen class at the Southampton Animal Shelter in Hampton Bays, N.Y. Unexpectedly, the one dog he was tranquil around was a pit bull named Bundles. Great, but how many pit bulls were we likely to encounter on the Champs-Élysées? As summer wore on, Pip got better. He did not get perfect.There was one other ticklish issue. Pronounced in French, “Pip” translates poorly, to a word vastly inappropriate for proper public discourse. It would be awkward to yell out breezily while on a congested street, “Pip. Pip. Pip.” It is not unknown for the French to call dogs names like Marceau or Quesnel or Xarles. For his time on French soil, Susan suggested Pip should just become Pierre. Our trip was to Paris for a week, then a few days in Bordeaux, winding up back in Paris. We chose September, when vacationing Parisians would have replenished the city and be ready to greet people who fit in smoothly. Like us and Pip. Pip strutted onto our Air France plane as if he did this every day, while we toted the canine carrier he was supposed to occupy. To ride in the cabin on Air France, a dog plus carrier must not exceed 17 pounds. Pip made it by ounces, but, then, no one weighed him. He was also required to have a microchip and rabies vaccination, plus the U.S.D.A. needed to sign off on a health certificate. The vet gave us anti-anxiety pills, but Pip nodded off at the first hum of the engines. When he awoke, we were in Paris.At our hotel, the Regina near the Tuileries Garden, the staff was as exceedingly polite to Pip, now traveling as Pierre, as they were to us. A bed and dishes for him were already in the room.A high number of French hotels, including the swankiest, accept dogs. Some impose a fee, as ours did, and allow only small dogs, while any size goes at others. There are hotels that furnish personalized dog tags inscribed with the hotel contact information. One offers a “team of butlers” to take pets for “a special journey.” We didn’t tell Pierre about that one.Light seeped from the day when we went out to catch the pulse of Paris. The streets echoed with car and motorcycle engines. We stopped at a cafe and attached Pierre’s leash to a chair. He plopped down, content to watch the churn of traffic and flurry of passing humanity. Then a Yorkshire sauntered by and Pierre nearly flipped over the table. The fellow diners seemed to find that cute.During subsequent outings, we meandered along the picturesque Seine. We admired the fountains with water sprouting from improbable places at Place de Concorde. Pierre adapted amazingly. He was alert and curious, knowing from the different smells, sights, language and street sounds that this was a foreign country. Nothing intimidated him — except the swooshing sound of our hotel’s old-fashioned revolving doors. It became obvious that in Paris, with a dog, you are regarded warmly as a fellow dog-lover or, conversely, not noticed because it’s commonplace. A dog makes you seem local. One afternoon, in fact, we encountered a Frenchwoman walking two small dogs, and she stopped to chat thinking we lived in the neighborhood.To make a birthday celebration memorable, we asked a French friend to call some plush restaurants to check if they minded dogs. He seemed amused that we found this necessary, but humored us. In every instance, the translated reply was, “Your dog is welcome.” One went so far as to say, “It would be our pleasure,” as if we would be doing them a big favor. We weren’t fully prepared, though, for the one we picked, the starchy kind that makes you terrified to even glance at the wrong fork, let alone allows an animal to pass beneath its gold-leaf entrance. Pierre had more composure than we did, prancing in as if he were royalty.At a more relaxed place, where a glass of wine was a mere 5 euros, the waiter assured us that he enjoys serving dogs: “We bring them a bowl of water and mix in a little whiskey.” A French issue of some concern is dog deposits. For a while, motorized pooper scoopers used to vacuum them up. That ended some years ago — cost pressures. Now you’re supposed to handle the job yourself or fines can reach hundreds of euros. We packed plenty of plastic bags — Susan’s last Zumba class, instead of granola bars, happened to offer free dispensers full of them — and did our part. Yet it was clear that many French dog owners think otherwise, or else they don’t go to Zumba. Possibly it had to do with a French superstition that stepping in dog poop with your left foot brings good luck. We understood that dogs can ride the Metro, but to make sure we asked a booth attendant. Uncertain, she ushered us to a giant board containing what seemed like thousands of Metro regulations. Scrolling down with her finger, she found the “les chiens, les animaux” section. Turns out if your dog fits inside a bag, he’s good to go. Bigger dogs need a child-fare ticket. About the barking. He got better, even with so much public presence, but we had to regularly remind him and carry a tremendous amount of treats to divert him.The good thing is, French dog owners found his behavior comical. Apparently their attitude is that it is much better to have a dog that barks a lot than to not have a dog at all.We went out with Pierre to a perfume shop, because you have to do that in Paris. The chatty man working there, presumably seeking to bond with us, mentioned that a French friend travels back and forth to the United States with her cat. Then he began telling us an extremely elaborate story about the history of a new perfume line and we needed to get going. We stopped at a jammed clothing store, where Pierre embarrassed himself by barking at a dog that turned out to be himself in the mirror.On another day, we drifted into a top art gallery in the Marais district. Pierre seemed as intrigued as we were by a conceptual sculpture that was basically a cluster of large rocks. Or maybe it struck him as a convenient place to lift his leg. It was definitely time to leave really fast.One evening, we met a French friend for drinks. She found it unremarkable that we were with a dog at a bar full of business people and in-the-know Parisians. Before we had even ordered, the waiter set down a dish of water for Pierre. He was especially pleased that the waiter remembered his favorite snack to go with his drink: peanuts.Paris doesn’t accept dogs everywhere humans go, like museums. So Pierre had to miss the Musée de l’Armée, the Musée des Arts Decoratifs and the Louvre. When we had a phone problem, he did tag along to the Apple store in the Louvre Carousel. The limber technician helping us got a kick out of an American dog named Pierre. He waved over several fellow technicians, who clustered around Pierre and fussed over him. We got spectacular service. Though supermarkets dislike dogs thumping around, when we visited a small one for some snacks the manager said to just tie him up in the front. When we finished shopping, Pierre was cozied up to an Italian man with a florid face and getting a great neck rub.Oddly, dogs are also banned from most Paris parks. Some of the glorious ones, though, like the Tuileries and the Luxembourg Gardens, have designated sections. We noticed pickier ones that besides dogs, forbid drinking alcohol, smoking, kicking soccer balls and visiting during a thunderstorm.Sifting for things to do one languid day, we read that on the outskirts of Paris is one of the world’s oldest pet cemeteries, Cimetière des Chiens et Autres Animaux Domestiques, dating to 1899. Rin Tin Tin, who, yes indeed, was French, is buried there. Thinking it over, we decided it didn’t seem like something we wanted Pierre to see.Some say the real France lies in the more leisurely and traditional provinces, and so we went to find out. Pip slept through the two-hour, high-speed train trip to Bordeaux, the stately ancient port city southwest of Paris. What attracted us was its cultural history, which traces back not only to its conquest by Caesar Augustus, but to cave-dwellers, its reputation as a gourmet center and, of course, the wine.It turned out Bordeaux was also brimming with dogs, about one for every four residents. It’s even home to a very old French breed, the Dogue de Bordeaux, a hefty mastiff that was the drooling co-star of the Tom Hanks movie “Turner and Hooch.”Our hotel, the Intercontinental, presented Pierre with a bed and the town provided plentiful “Sac-O-Mat” stations for dispensing with “chien déjections.” The parks were canine, as well as human, strolling grounds. One afternoon, we appropriately had lunch at Le Chien de Pavlov, a bistro on one of the medieval side streets. Maxime Rosselin, the convivial, bespectacled patron, stopped by our table. His docile French bulldog, Denise, was the picture of contentment perched on a sofa between the dining room and bar, where tables were higher. These satisfied those with larger dogs.Pierre, demonstrating insufficient deference, noticed Denise and began barking. Denise simply ignored him.“Ever any barroom scuffles? Canine, that is?” we asked.“Never,” he said.Actually, he added, Denise is beneficial for business. “She’s very good with our favorite customers,” he said. “One often takes Denise for a little walk.” On a welcome sun-splashed day after a string of moist ones, we visited the impressive Miroir d’Eau reflecting pool, then crossed the Pont de Pierre, the bridge demanded by Napoleon. We read that he fell overboard while on a ship during his escape from Elba. He couldn’t swim and, sure enough, a Newfoundland saved him. For our waning days in Paris, we stayed on the Left Bank at the Hotel Duc de Saint Simon in the St. Germain-des-Prés district. Pierre got to sample fresh neighborhoods like the Latin Quarter, with its curvy streets. Sometimes you have to draw practical limits, so we didn’t take him with us to the opera. Anyway, his toe pads were a bit scuffed from covering countless French kilometers. We rubbed Vaseline on them and let him rest.Taking our last wistful stroll along the Rue des Peres, Pierre’s tiny-dog prance seemed all the more confident. He sniffed for discarded fragments of croque-monsieurs. People saturated him with endearing smiles, reached to pet him. Pierre had risen to the challenge and applied his training to a novel situation. We found that our bond with him tightened. We took Pip to France so we would be accepted, and we were. At the same time, the French took Pip into their hearts. Pip took the French into his. Susan Saiter Sullivan is a journalist and novelist who recently completed a novel set in the Hamptons.N. R. Kleinfield, a former long-time member of The Times’s Metro staff, is a freelance writer and the author of eight books.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCheck InThe Bristol Harbour Hotel & Spa is in the Old City but its design (and cuisine) is definitely modern.By Ratha TepDoubles from 165 pounds (about $233)The 42-room, four-story Bristol Harbour Hotel & Spa provides a dose of 21st century chic to Bristol’s Old City and its stately Victorian and Georgian facades. The British-based Harbour Hotels has turned two ornate bank buildings, including one inspired by a 16th century Venetian library, into stylish accommodations (it opened in late 2016). Public spaces now burst with vibrant colors and exuberant modern design set against a backdrop of curving stone walls and intricately carved friezes that are more than a century old.The property is in the heart of the cobblestoned Old City just opposite St. Nicholas Market and its bustling glass-covered arcade, along with lots of restaurants, bars and night life. Most of Bristol’s main attractions are within a 20-minute stroll, including the massive ocean liner-turned experiential museum S.S. Great Britain, the local history museum M Shed, the Wills Memorial Building, and two works of street art from the city’s most notorious son, Banksy.We had booked a Superior Double, the lowest tier available, but got upgraded to a Deluxe Double, the next tier up. At 323 square feet (32 square feet more than a Superior), it was surprisingly roomy. The comfy king-size bed had a tall tufted headboard, and was topped with a fluffy white duvet, a tan and gray coverlet and plenty of pillows. Matte gold reading lamps flanked the bed, as did a wooden writing desk and nightstand. There was a burnt orange velvet sofa at the foot of the bed, as well as a brown leather armchair with a seat cushion upholstered in a bold floral-patterned fabric. The complimentary gin and sherry, in mouth-blown glass decanters, along with crystal glasses, were a nice touch. But despite a double-set of windows and heavily lined drapes, we could still hear the faint bass beat of a nearby club going late into the night.The bathroom, entered by a set of double doors, was amply sized, with a bathtub and separate, spacious stall with a rainfall showerhead. There was an extra-wide sink and plenty of marble counter space. Numerous thick white towels hung from a heated rack, and plush white bathrobes were also provided. High-end toiletries by the White Company were scented with notes of rose and jasmine.Situated in the former bank vaults underground, the hotel’s small spa offers a hydrotherapy pool, sauna and steam room, free for guests, while treatments such as hot stone massage, are extra. The next-door gym is well-equipped with treadmills, exercise bikes, weight machines — and an original bank vault door.The lobby-level restaurant, the Jetty, is decorated in shades of blue, a reference to both Bristol blue glass, once produced throughout the city — it forms a decorative border around the room’s extra-large windows — and the sea, which inspires much of the menu. Addictive, lightly floured cockle “popcorn” arrived hot and crisp in a miniature copper pan, and lobster bisque topped a creamy cheese soufflé. The stylish Gold Bar served creative cocktails like the Clear and Breezy, a fizzy, zesty twist on the classic Dark ‘n’ Stormy. Our lush breakfast, ordered up to our room, included delicious grilled kippers with caper beurre noisette, and toast accompanied by butter served in a scallop shell and a selection of Wilkin & Sons jam and honey. Unfortunately, it took an agonizing 50 minutes to arrive.The Bristol Harbour Hotel & Spa offers plush accommodations and high-gloss design in an Old World setting, conveniently located near many of the city’s main attractions. Just make sure to bring earplugs.Bristol Harbour Hotel & Spa, 55 Corn Street, Bristol, England. bristol-harbour-hotel.co.ukAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTRENDINGEvents include a chocolate festival in Italy, a pepper celebration in France and a chef showcase in the Caribbean.By Shivani VoraThere are plenty of tasty reasons to let your appetite determine your destination this year. From festivals celebrating familiar foods to those where you can try more unusual ones, and events where both culinary world superstars and lesser-known chefs cook for the crowds, traveling in the coming year promises to be a palate-pleasing proposition.Perugia, in Italy’s Umbria region, will host the 25th edition of Eurochocolate (Oct. 19 to 28), an event that draws a million people over the course of 10 days. Visitors can try chocolates from more than 100 European producers and also sample chocolate-based desserts prepared by notable pastry chefs, who serve crepes, cookies, cakes and ice cream. The Espelette Pepper Festival (October) in Espelette, France, situated in the picturesque Basque countryside, is turning 50 this year, and celebrates the end of the espelette pepper harvest. There’s a market where local purveyors sell the pepper as well as other regional products, and restaurants throughout the town have special menus showcasing it. Australia has no shortage of food festivals, but the second annual Taste of Kakadu (May 18 to 27), in Kakadu National Park in the Northern Territory, may be the most adventurous. Festivalgoers can discover the bush cuisine that the aboriginal people have eaten for more than 65,000 years — there’s emu, chorizo, barramundi, magpie goose and more. The scheduled group bush walks are the ideal antidote to all the eating. The Melton Mowbray Food Festival (October) in Leicestershire, England, is happening for the 15th time this year in the namesake’s town historic livestock market. Here, close to 200 purveyors proffer tastes of the region’s top food and drinks, including pork pies, cheeses, fudge and ales. There’s also a street food area where Sri Lankan, Singaporean and other varieties of Asian food can be had.Travelers looking for an excuse for a beach getaway might consider the four-day Caribbean Food & Wine Festival (early November) on Providenciales island in Turks and Caicos. The event, now in its eighth running, pairs celebrity chefs such as Christina Tosi from Momofuku Milk Bar, and Tiffany Derry from “Top Chef” with local talents — the teams work together to create regional dishes like cracked conch and coconut shrimp, which visitors can try at dinners and daytime tastings at venues throughout the island. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe fatal crash of a flight in Costa Rica has prompted questions about how to assess the reliability of charter services. Here’s how to investigate.By Christine NegroniMeryl Block Weissman was returning to New York from Costa Rica on New Year’s Eve when she heard that 10 American tourists and two pilots had been killed in the crash of a Nature Air charter flight at the Pacific coast town of Punta Islita. Just days earlier, she, her extended family and others on a group tour were scheduled to fly the same airline. But Nature Air made a last-minute change and “instead of three, two-engine planes the group would be put on four, single-engine Cessna planes,” Ms. Block Weissman said. Concerned about the unexpected switch, their tour guide canceled their plans to fly and had them travel by bus and boat instead.Ms. Block Weissman said that she was “disappointed not to see the rain forest from the air,” but when she learned about the tragedy days later, she wondered if there was anything she could do to judge the safety of a foreign air charter. “We want the people in the back seat to know there is a resource to get information,” said Art Dawley, the chief executive of Wyvern, which assesses air charter services for corporate flight departments, frequent users of private aviation and more recently, ordinary travelers who do not usually take charters like Ms. Block Weissman. For $49, Wyvern provides a report that includes the charter company’s insurance information, maintenance and pilot reports and an audit of the company’s safety systems (if available) so travelers can know “the airline has done everything it can to be sure is has managed risk to the industry standard,” Mr. Dawley said. Cincinnati-based Arg/us, which also audits the safety practices of participating air charter companies, gives travelers access to similar information through an online query called TripCheq. The fee is $150.But many people are booked on charters through cruise lines or tour operators and they may take the safety of the airline for granted, said Brian Alexander, an aviation attorney. “People believe air operators are totally checked out and connected to and insured by the cruise ships or tour people,” he said, but that is not always the case. Mr. Alexander said that travelers on charters they have not booked themselves should always ask the cruise line, “What have you done to assure yourself this is a safe and experienced operation?” Air travel has never been safer than it was in the year just past with just two fatal accidents among commercial airlines worldwide. Still, risk varies by region. The Middle East and North Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean and the Commonwealth of Independent States in Eurasia have the highest accident rates; between 2.8 and 5.8 accidents per million flights. That’s three to five times the rate in North Asia and North America, according to statistics compiled by the International Air Transport Association.(Authorities in Costa Rica have since grounded Nature Air while two government agencies conduct an investigation. The decision to shutter the domestic and regional airline came after the General Directorate of Civil Aviation said that staffing was so low it could not safely carry out its flight schedule.)Many factors contribute to the disparity including how pilots, mechanics, ground personnel and air traffic controllers are hired and trained, how airplanes are maintained and the state of the runways, radar, weather forecasting and communication systems. Governmental oversight is critical, safety specialists said.As a former air accident investigator and the author of two books on the subject, I am often told by people that they assume regulation is the same around the world, but that is not the case. “Oversight can be anywhere from pretty good in the U.S. and Europe while in many other places it’s a crapshoot,” Mr. Alexander said. Travelers need to keep safety in perspective. A government not controlling hazards in aviation is probably equally lax on other modes of public transport. Statistically speaking, long distance commercial aviation is safer than driving or any other form of transportation, according to the I.A.T.A.Here, some ideas for checking out air charter services.Inspect the facility Aviation requires attention to detail and an aversion to hazards. Consider it a warning if you arrive at the airport and the appearance of the company, the airplane or the flight crew doesn’t seem professional. Michele Markarian, the director of strategic accounts for the website Air Charter Guide and an experienced traveler, once walked away from a flight she had booked because the airplane didn’t look up to snuff. Allow extra time Travelers may be tempted to set aside their worries if rushing to the next destination. Having extra time to find an alternative will alleviate the pressure of getting on a plane you don’t feel comfortable about. Check references Call the company and ask for references. Trip Advisor also has an airline review page, and a Twitter search using a hashtag with the airline name can also be illuminating. Already there? Frank Craven of Air Charter Guide recommends asking locals for their opinion by saying, “‘I’m about to fly with ABC, what’s their reputation?’ They might tell you, ‘My drunk uncle is one of the pilots.’ So asking for information is good.”What does the United States government think? The Federal Aviation Administration’s online International Aviation Safety Assessment contains a list of countries that meet international aviation safety and oversight standards. The list is comprehensive but only includes countries whose airlines are permitted to fly to the United States. See the paperwork There are three documents that all charter airlines ought to be able to show you, according to Wyvern’s Mr. Dawley: its air operations certificate, its insurance certificate and the pilots’ qualifications — all should be available at the airline office.Network protection Any domestic or regional carrier, including those that offer charter flights that are associated with an airline alliance like Oneworld or Star Alliance, will have to pass a safety audit; if it has an intercarrier ticketing arrangement, the major carrier, is responsible for auditing their operations, according to John Darbo, a retired safety manager for a United States airline who is now a private safety consultant. Recently, I.A.T.A. started a review process for small planes. The few companies participating can be found online. Google it Aviation’s thriving online community makes it possible to find out nearly everything you want to know about airplanes. The Air Charter Guide offers information about planes, pilots, operators and a glossary of terms. Expect to pay Keeping up with regulations, the cost of fuel, training and keeping pilots and mechanics proficient means charter flights will be expensive. “You get what you pay for,” Ms. Markarian said. “A good charter with excellent service, top-notch and good crews is not cheap.”  Christine Negroni is the author of “The Crash Detectives” (Penguin Books).AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBy Lucas PetersonI remember my first night in Costa Rica, and the color of the sunset. I had an entire beach nearly to myself, and swatted the occasional sandfly as I watched bruised grays and yellows stretching across the horizon, pinks popping vividly, in part thanks to the lack of any visible electric light from the shore. I would spend those next few days in late March snorkeling in limpid, blue waters, hiking in Corcovado National Park, and riding around on the back of a motorbike in one of the more splendid, unspoiled places I’d ever visited.The airport in Drake Bay, on the southwestern coast, consisted of a small shack next to a long strip of asphalt. I had arrived by small aircraft, a single-propeller Cessna operated by Sansa Airlines. It was the same type of plane that crashed this past New Year’s Eve outside of Punta Islita Airport, killing 10 Americans. Air fatalities, while rare, are always sobering. And the tragedy of this crash is particularly difficult to reconcile with the remarkable beauty of Costa Rica — a place American tourists have embraced as one of the world’s top eco-travel destinations, and one that I wouldn’t hesitate to return to.Of the roughly 2.7 million tourists who visit Costa Rica annually, 40 percent are from the United States. This is largely because of the country’s extraordinary wildlife, rain forests, and cloud forests, but also its stability within a historically volatile area. Costa Rica has been an uninterrupted democracy since the late 1940s in a region marred by political and economic turmoil. Its G.D.P. has grown at an average of nearly 5 percent since 1992, well ahead of other countries in the region. And the country is now practically synonymous with sustainable tourism and eco-tourism, having abolished its standing military following the Costa Rican Civil War in 1948 and funneled some of that money into developing social and environmental conservation programs.That success manifests itself in great national pride — a calm assurance that I witnessed throughout my visit. “You’re in Costa Rica now, relax!” my snorkeling guide, Gustavo, advised a seasick German woman in our group. The immediate friendliness and warmth of Ticos, as Costa Ricans call themselves, allow visitors to easily get back to nature and experience the Costa Rican concept of “pura vida,” or pure life, that is the unofficial national motto and a phrase you’ll hear daily while in the country. “It’s no problem — pura vida,” said my host, Edu, when his car had a flat tire and he plopped me on the back of a motorbike to rush me to my tour of the national park. From Rio Drake Farm, where I stayed for $54 per night, to the Drake Bay Getaway Resort, where there are $700 per night bungalows, there are price points and levels of luxury for every traveler.Protected parks and reserves comprise over 25 percent of the country’s territory, and practically all of its coastline (Pacific and Caribbean) is protected and earmarked as public property where no development is allowed. That and its variety of landscapes, fauna and flora (while only 0.03 percent of the earth’s surface, Costa Rica has about 6 percent of the world’s biodiversity) make it a particularly attractive destination for adventure-seeking tourists.In addition to the magnificent forests, volcanoes, and biodiversity (22,000 species of butterfly alone, according to my park guide), Costa Rica is one of the easiest and most fun places in the world to get exercise, even for people like me who weren’t exactly athletes growing up. I found myself going on hikes, snorkeling, swimming, and traversing rickety bridges in the rain forest without thinking much about it — it’s just what you do when you’re in Costa Rica. And there’s even more I didn’t take advantage of. There’s fishing, white water rafting, zip-lining — almost anything you could want to do — affordably priced and condensed into a compact, spark plug of a country.To reach some of the country’s more out-of-the-way regions, like Drake Bay or Punta Islita, smaller, turboprop aircraft are used for their versatility and ability to access places large jets can’t. (Driving is also an option, but has its own dangers. It can also add significant time to a trip: To reach Drake Bay from San José would take about six hours.) Whereas the main runway at the country’s main airport, Juan Santamaría, exceeds 9,800 feet, runways at the smaller regional airstrips are commonly under 330 feet in length. And are small aircraft more dangerous than commercial jets? Yes. But not, I would argue, to the point that you should pass on the chance to see what Costa Rica has to offer. Statistics from the National Transportation Safety Board state that in 2015, there were zero U.S. fatalities involving air carriers — large, commercial aircraft carrying cargo or passengers. There were 28 fatalities involving small (fewer than 10 seats) commuter and on-demand carriers. Finally, there were 378 fatalities classified under general aviation — an umbrella term that encompasses everything from light-sport aircraft and turboprops to hot air balloons.There was no safer time to travel by plane than 2017, according to To70, a Dutch consulting firm. There were no fatalities involving commercial jets and 13 that resulted from crashes of turboprop planes. (President Trump even managed to take unwarranted credit for the extraordinary statistic.) Not included in the survey, however, because they did not make the weight threshold, were two New Year’s Eve crashes involving small planes: A seaplane crash near Sydney that killed six, and the crash outside Punta Islita that killed 12. World travel involves a constant internal risk-reward mental calculus: Is it safe to visit this country? Do I approach this friendly-looking stranger? Should I explore down this street? The answer, most of the time, is yes. But the calculus can get thrown out of whack when there’s a fatal air crash in Costa Rica, a mosque attack in Egypt or a shooting at a Parisian concert hall.No traveler, no matter how experienced, is immune to fear. Reading about the recent accident made me reflect on my time in Costa Rica and, specifically, that flight by Cessna to Drake Bay. I particularly remember my boarding pass: a numbered, laminated card that the airline reused. After we’d all been seated, the pilots said hello and crawled over us to reach their seats in the front of the plane. The low-altitude flight was brief, noisy and uneventful. But I also remember views — of the beaches near Dominical, Uvita and Ojochal, and of the lush, green canopy of Corcovado National Park as we approached by boat. I remember the kindness of my hosts in Drake Bay, Edu and Sabrina, as well as the friendly locals who cooked me a fish dinner one night at a small cantina down the road. And, of course, the spider monkeys, puffer fish, coatis and caracara birds that manage to, in relative harmony, tolerate the imposition of millions of tourists each year. Experiencing the “pure life” of Costa Rica is a unique experience — it teems with an energy and spirit both infectious and memorable, and I hope to experience it again soon.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HoursBeneath the grit of South Africa’s biggest city, there’s a kinetic urban energy that can be savored in its street art, restaurants, music clubs and markets.By Sarah KhanIn South African parlance, things happen at two speeds: “Just now” — which could be anywhere from 10 minutes to two weeks to who knows when — or “now-now,” which means, well, now. Judging by the pace at which Johannesburg is evolving these days, you need to get there now-now. The City of Gold originated as a dusty mining center; though it might not have the natural majesty of coastal Cape Town in its court, beneath Johannesburg’s grit there’s a kinetic urban energy: Big-money deals are made in the metropolis’s financial hubs and creative collaborations are unveiled in quirky arts-centric enclaves. While travelers en route to places like Kruger National Park or Cape Town and the Winelands have long treated Johannesburg as an in-and-out stop, many are finally discovering that there are plenty of reasons to extend stays and find out what this lively city is all about.Large parts of Johannesburg’s city center can still feel gritty — urban decay led to many companies abandoning downtown in favor of the newer financial hub of Sandton in the 1990s. But while crime remains an issue, recent years have seen locals reclaiming their inner city. Historic neighborhoods are being revitalized at breakneck speeds, luring citizens back to streets lined with iconic architecture, much of which dates to the city’s late-19th- and early-20th-century origins as a gold-rush boomtown. Explore them while on a walking tour with Past Experiences. Depending on which itinerary you spring for, a knowledgeable local guide (some of them are also artists, musicians and historians) might lead you through neighborhoods like Chinatown, Ferreirasdorp, Newtown, Braamfontein or Fordsburg, directing your attention to easy-to-miss landmarks or sharing the inspiration behind vivid street art installations. Stops could include Nelson Mandela’s former office, or a little-known mine-shaft museum 100 feet below the Standard Bank headquarters. Private tours are 100 rand, or about $8.25, for up to three people; scheduled group tours range from 180 to 400 rand.Most of South Africa’s culinary accolades go to restaurants in Cape Town and the Winelands, but Johannesburg chefs have lately been stepping it up in a big way. Case in point: Urbanologi, a stylish restaurant that shares its cavernous, industrial space with the Mad Giant Brewery in the 1 Fox development. There, the chef Jack Coetzee turns out modern, Asian-inspired shared plates like yakitori chicken with chimichurri, venison tataki with sriracha emulsion and kumquat ponzu, and a ginger-heavy take on a classic South African dessert, malva pudding. Plan to spend around 600 rand for two, including house brews. Johannesburg’s music scene is electric — whether you’re into house, rap or indie, you’ll find your niche here, infused with plenty of local flavor. But with jazz greats like Hugh Masekela, Thandi Klaasen and Jonas Gwangwa having started their careers in the city, Johannesburg’s jazz heritage is particularly rich. Head to the Braamfontein district — often called Braamies by locals — to see who’s performing at Orbit, the city’s most important jazz club. Recent acts have included the Linda Sikhakhane Sextet, Vuma Levin, Lu Dlamini; tickets typically range from 100 to 150 rand, depending on the artist.For many, South African history is synonymous with apartheid, the oppressive institutionalized system of white-dominated racial segregation that governed the nation from 1948 to 1991. An 85-rand admission fee to the Apartheid Museum will randomly assign you a blanke (white) or nie-blanke (nonwhite) ticket, and you’ll enter the museum through separate routes depending on your classification. Once inside, visitors tour powerful exhibits on the origins of apartheid, explanations of its divisive laws and photographs and narratives that offer glimpses of life under its constraints. Then take a cab to Constitution Hill: The country’s Constitutional Court was built on an erstwhile jail site (where Nelson and Winnie Mandela, Joe Slovo and Albertina Sisulu all served time). It’s also a museum, and visitors can explore the court, the old fort and jail Number Four, where Gandhi was a prisoner. A one-hour tour is 65 rand. To market, to market — that’s where locals go to eat, drink and unwind on the weekends. Neighbourgoods, an offshoot of a popular Cape Town market, operates every Saturday morning from a parking garage in Braamfontein. Make a quick stop, hopping from stall to stall to pick up dishes like grilled cheese with maple bacon, Korean corn dogs or carrot cake — you can have brunch for around 100 to 150 rand, all the while soaking in live music and fun vibes.Soweto — an acronym for South Western Townships — was formed as a settlement for black South Africans who were forcibly removed from areas designated for whites. It’s now called home by more than a million people, and has counted the likes of Nelson Mandela and Archbishop Desmond Tutu among its past residents. While the sprawling suburb can be overwhelming to navigate, an easy way to explore it is by tuk-tuk. Lebo’s Soweto Backpackers offers two-hour rickshaw tours, and you don’t have to be a guest at the hostel to book a spot; tours are 460 rand, and pick up and drop off can be arranged for an extra cost. The price also includes a buffet lunch after the tour — you might try South Africa’s famous street-food favorite, bunny chow: a loaf of bread stuffed with curry.A stretch of the upscale Rosebank suburb has recently been recast as the Keyes Art Mile, lined with boutiques, galleries and cafes aplenty. Stop by before dinner to browse modern art at galleries like Circa, Everard Read and Whatiftheworld (some close earlier on Saturdays, but you can often make an appointment in advance to visit outside regular hours). There are also cute cafes, like the colorful vintage-Afro-chic Milk Bar and the burger joint BGR, but save your appetite — big dinner plans lie ahead. Ever since its opening in 2016, Marble has been attracting the city’s most discerning diners by the droves. Part of that might be because of a dearth of restaurants of its caliber in the city; but more likely it’s because David Higgs is Johannesburg’s premier chef, and news of his plans to open a temple to meats cooked over an open fire was met with excitement. If you come early enough to the top-floor space in the Trumpet building on the Keyes Art Mile, you can catch sunset views with a cocktail by the bar; afterward, settle in for a feast of sea bass with orange and leek sauce (285 rand), tandoor quail with charred sweet potato chutney, coriander yogurt (215 rand), or the game of the day (options might include blesbok or kudu).More markets! The Maboneng Precinct is one of Johannesburg’s most thriving examples of urban revival; the ever-expanding neighborhood is teeming with galleries, restaurants and boutiques frequented by an eclectic crowd. And come Sunday, the Market on Main is a great place to scrounge for burgers, paella, crepes, and more as well as souvenirs — there are stalls selling clothes, handbags and T-shirts from local designers. For a really cool add-on, book a Picnic in the Sky. Meet in the market at 11 a.m. and collect your picnic basket and blanket from the organizers, then spend half an hour filling your basket with provisions at the stalls, before heading up to the 50th floor of the Carlton Center — the tallest building in Africa — for exactly what the name suggests: a picnic in the sky. Tickets are 250 rand per person, not including whatever food you pick up at the market. The University of the Witwatersrand — Wits, for short — is home to the Wits Art Museum, which is renowned for its collection of African art. Browse works by the likes of South African masters Gerard Sekoto, Walter Battiss, Irma Stern and William Kentridge, as well as emerging talents like Gabrielle Goliath, Nandipha Mntambo and Zander Blom. Admission is free.An eco-friendly spread in the suburb of Melrose — not far from the Melrose Arch shopping development — the Peech Hotel (61 North Street, Melrose; 27-11-537-9797) has 16 rooms clustered around a lush garden. Tribal masks, animal-hide rugs and patterned armchairs add warmth to the hotel’s industrial-chic look. Doubles from 3,350 rand. With Johannesburg’s inner city booming in recent years, the only thing missing was a luxury hotel catering to high-end travelers not keen on staying in the tony suburbs. Last year’s opening of the Hallmark House (54 Siemert Road, New Doornfontein) changed that: The 46-room hotel, which occupies two floors of a building designed by David Adjaye, has stellar skyline views and is close to all the action in the Maboneng Precinct. Doubles from 940 rand.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byheads upThe Peckham neighborhood is on the circuit of art world bigwigs for its combination of art with $1-million price tags and vibrant creative scene. By Grace BanksFor Londoners in the know, the must-do culture activity last summer wasn’t a major exhibition or a West End show. No, it was an art installation commissioned by the arts organization Bold Tendencies — a stairwell of an old car park in Peckham, South East London, painted a bubble gum pink by the London artist Simon Whybray. The pink space was the cultural hit of the year and drew crowds from all over England.“I had no idea it would be this popular,” said Hannah Barry, founder of Bold Tendencies and owner of the gallery, about the installation. The staircase leads to the top of Frank’s Campari bar, one of the city’s most fashionable drinking spots for London’s cool kids and bankers alike.Among the Caribbean grocery stalls selling mango and plantain, pawnbroker shops and acrylic nail salons of Peckham, beats the heart of London’s most dynamic art scene. Far from fringe, the neighborhood is on the circuit of art world bigwigs such as the Tate Modern director Frances Morris, for its combination of art with $1-million price tags and a creative scene that includes craft makers, food and drink.Peckham is now the place Britons go to for counterculture art, with artists, makers and galleries lured to the area by cheap rents and a recently established East London commuter train line connecting the neighborhood to the center of the city. With the recent arrival of the arts space Peckham Levels that puts a premium on creativity within the community by encouraging local artists who were born and raised in South East London to have their studios at this newly opened center, Peckham is set to boom.“Peckham has always been an area where things happened — art schools, squats, parties,” said Rozsa Farkas, director of Arcadia Missa gallery, located under the railway arches in the center of the neighborhood, “but it’s only in recent years that it’s been known for this.”Farkas’s gallery is typical of the area and of its commitment to exhibiting avant-garde art such as the current exhibition Mouth, a video installation that explores gender binaries by New York-based artist Maja Cule as well as exhibitions about marginalized communities, like last summer’s show We Lost Them at Midnight, about lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender culture in London.“There’s a spirit to Peckham that you won’t find anywhere else in London,” said Luds van de Belt, site director of the newly-launched Peckham Levels, a 10-story car park that’s been transformed into a studio block for artists. The enterprise, off the neighborhood’s main street, Rye Lane, offers some of the least expensive artists studio in the area — a 12 square feet studio space rents from £260 to £290 (about $340 to $380) per month. Yearly, 10 studios are offered for monthly rents of just £90 to artists with the lowest incomes.The artist and craft maker Anastasya Martynova, who has a studio at Peckham Levels, sees the area as an integral part of her creative process. “I think art as a whole has a tremendous power to unite people and encourage positivity,” she said, “and Peckham is the creative center of South East London. There is a real feeling of optimism for the future, and lots of raw, creative talent.”The requirements for Peckham Levels membership reflect the neighborhood’s deeply-rooted sense of community. You have to be local and 10 percent of membership fees will go back into neighborhood initiatives. Members also have to commit at least one hour a week to volunteering in local projects.“Growing up in Peckham as a teenager around 2008 I remember it having such a bad reputation,” the painter Sani Sani said. “Friends that lived in other areas were genuinely scared to come around. There were art galleries like the South London Gallery then, but it seemed exclusive and nonaccessible to the locals. I think that the arts scene in Peckham has the power to completely change the perception and the narrative of what Peckham is.”In an expensive city like London, it’s getting harder for creative types and artists to find the space and support they need. But arts spaces in Peckham have all managed to survive through an agreement with Southwark Council, the borough authority Peckham is in, that keeps their rents at about half the market rate.For artists like Mr. Sani, who warily eyes the influx of bankers and high earners in the neighborhood, a cap on rents can only be a good thing.“If we can make it so locals like me can create our art here and be able to afford it,” he said, “maybe Peckham does have a hopeful future ahead.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPURSUITSFrom Coral Gables to Sarasota: orchids, azaleas, bromeliads (and butterflies). By Geraldine FabrikantAlthough many tourists flock to Florida for its glorious palette of white beaches, blue-gray waters and yellow sun, the state is also home to lush and exotic gardens in every shade of green. Some were the dream of horticulturists obsessed with collecting plants from around the world that would flourish in their new home. Others were established by immigrants grateful for the opportunities the United States had afforded them and eager to leave a legacy in their adopted country. Still more gardens were the creations of wealthy transplants who, while wintering in Florida, sought to recreate the gardens they loved elsewhere. With enormous resources they hired some of the nation’s landscape architects to design gardens that are as dazzling as any in the country. Here are six of Florida’s most enticing green oases. An orchid lover’s delight: bucket orchids, sabralia orchids and miniature orchids, a rainbow of colors in their petals. The 15-acre garden, on Sarasota Bay, was established in 1971 as the only botanical garden in the world focused solely on the study of epiphytes, which include many orchid species. (There are 25,000 known types of orchids in the world of which the vast majority are epiphytes: plants that grow on other plants rather than in the soil so that they are closer to the sun.)This garden was once the property of Marie and William Selby (he made his fortune with the Selby Oil and Gas Company, which merged with Texaco in 1948). After Marie Selby died in 1971, leaving the property to the city, a board of directors consulted with experts from New York Botanical Garden and the University of Florida and chose to make the garden distinctive by focusing on epiphytes. Beyond the profusion of yellow, purple, orange and white orchids, the garden offers a collection of bromeliads from pineapples to Spanish moss; a stunning collection of palm trees, from the Puerto Rican Hat Palm to the Haitian Zombie Palm; and a mangrove walkway that borders Sarasota Bay. Selby, taking a page from the New York Botanical Garden, has begun mounting an annual exhibition of art inspired by flowers. Last year it was Marc Chagall’s work that led Selby to replant parts of its gardens with salvia and date palms, evocative of the south of France where the artist did some of his loveliest work. This month, four of Andy Warhol’s silk screens of flowers will form the centerpiece of the Selby exhibit “Warhol: Flowers in the Factory.”900 South Palm Avenue, Sarasota, Fla., selby.org. Open 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. every day except Christmas.The land for Delray Beach’s Morikami Garden was the gift of the Japanese immigrant George Morikami, a successful farmer who in the mid-1970s donated 200 acres to Palm Beach County. That land now features six discrete gardens created by the designer Hoichu Kurisu, whose credits include the Anderson Japanese Gardens in Rockford, Ill. His vision in Florida was inspired by gardens in Japan; each of Morikami’s six gardens reflects a style from a different epoch, beginning with the 9th century. In Mr. Kurisu’s words, which are featured on the park’s website, the intention is for visitors “to lay aside the chaos of a troubled world.” He has accomplished that with the use of small lakes and paths that wind among pine forests, bamboo groves and rock arrangements throughout the gardens.The gardens at Morikami are informed as much by religion as by plant life. With its two landscaped islands joined by a bridge, Morikami’s Shinden Garden was inspired by the gardens that were adapted for the estates of Japanese nobles from Chinese garden design. The Shinden style was popular from the 9th to the 12th century.The park’s Paradise Garden has paths for strolling the perimeters of its two small lakes in a style that recalls gardens that appealed to the new Samurai class of the 13th century. In Morikami’s Early Rock Garden, rocks are set vertically and spaced to suggest a waterfall — an arrangement that reflects the rise of Zen and its asceticism.Karesansui Late Garden features rocks that are artfully placed on expanses of gravel. That style — karesansui means dry landscape — was meant to serve as an aid to meditation from within a temple. 400 Morikami Park Road, Delray Beach, Fla., morikami.org. Open Tuesday through Sunday 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Closed on major holidays. What do towering bamboos, crepe myrtle, jack fruit banyan trees, orange bromeliads and bougainvillea have in common? They all thrive in ecosystems between the 26th parallel north and the 26th parallel south. Specifically, at the Naples Botanical Gardens, where the landscape designers include the Miami-based Raymond Jungles, known for his exuberant tropical gardens. Next to the cool, elegant Lea Asian Garden with a replica of a Javanese temple ruin is the rollicking Kapnick Brazilian Garden: Mr. Jungles’s tribute to his mentor, the celebrated Brazilian landscape architect Roberto Burle Marx, who died in 1994. (Marx was honored during the closing ceremony at the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro in 2016.) The centerpiece of the Brazilian garden is a mosaic by Marx; bromeliads in pink, purple, yellow and orange mirror his colors.The Caribbean Kapnick Garden, designed by Bob Truskowski, has a laid-back vibe: Among the lush mango and banana trees are hammocks, a cottage and a bocce court that help transport you to island time. The Scott Florida Garden is notable for its bougainvillea and a date palm with a triple trunk. Last year the Naples Botanical Gardens, which opened in 2009, became the youngest to win the Garden of Excellence award from the American Public Gardens Association. 4820 Bayshore Drive, Naples, Fla., naplesgarden.org. Open 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. every day except Tuesday, when it opens at 8 a.m.A Dutch immigrant proud of his success in the United States as publisher of Ladies’ Home Journal and 1921 Pulitzer Prize-winning author of “The Americanization of Edward Bok,” Mr. Bok’s American Foundation bought roughly 53 acres in the early 1920s to create a bird sanctuary, then added a carillon tower and gardens. Over the years the property, which opened in 1929, has grown to 300 acres. Its 205-foot-high neo-Gothic Singing Tower dominates the park. Made partially from local stone, the tower houses a 60-bell carillon that is played twice daily. Mr. Bok’s passion for color is evident in the 50 Frederick Law Olmsted Jr.-designed acres that are the core of Bok Tower Gardens. Filled with azaleas, camellias and magnolia, they are particularly lovely in February and March when they are in bloom. Because Bok is farther north than the gardens around Miami and Sarasota, it is cool enough at night for these plants to survive. As a result, the look and feel of Bok is far less tropical than many other gardens in Florida. But these are not the only pleasures of Bok. There also are the Hammock Hollow Children’s Garden and the Edible Garden and Outdoor Kitchen for cooking demonstrations. The Edible Garden is surrounded by peach trees, pomegranate shrubs, fig trees, passion fruit vines and banana trees.The gardens also include acres of palms, oaks and wildflowers that give a visitor a sense of the diversity of Florida’s plant life.To ensure that suburban development does not mar the vistas from Bok, the park has been purchasing adjacent land in recent years. 1151 Tower Boulevard, Lake Wales, Fla., boktowergardens.org. Open 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. all year. The glories of great French and Italian gardens have been recreated at Miami’s Vizcaya, once the home of the International Harvester executive James Deering. Vizcaya’s grounds were the brainchild of Diego Suarez, the landscape architect who began his career in the early 1900s collaborating with Arthur Acton, the English expatriate and art collector, to help restore La Pietra, the Acton villa near Florence. Suarez became enamored of the elaborate stone work, statuary, fountains with soaring sprays and rills that gave Italian gardens of the 18th century both elegance and fantastical whimsy. Vizcaya’s grounds were built on fill that had once been a mangrove swamp, now held back by a retaining wall. On level land Suarez created French-style parterres: formal gardens of neatly trimmed plant beds that are laid out in symmetrical patterns with paths for walking. The Fountain Garden includes a plaza with a fountain from the Italian town of Sutri, which once provided water for its residents. Amid the strangler figs and oaks dripping with Spanish moss, Suarez added a two-story “Secret Garden,” as it is now known, where succulents and cactus flowers bloom in pots built into the stucco walls. 3251 South Miami Avenue, Miami. vizcaya.org. Open 9:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. every day except Tuesday. Closed on Thanksgiving and Christmas.Fairchild, in Coral Gables, has a vast collection of tropical plants that were initially gathered from around the world by David Fairchild, a well-known plant collector. When his friend Robert Montgomery, a retired accountant and also a plant enthusiast, opened the 83-acre park in 1938, it was named for Mr. Fairchild. The garden includes the stunning Lin Lougheed Spiny Forest of Madagascar, named for the art collector and donor. Because Fairchild is at the same latitude as that country, it is able to nurture the spiny octopus trees, swollen baobabs, cactuses and desert roses found on the world’s fourth largest island. Fairchild also has a butterfly conservatory, housed in the Paul and Swanee DiMare Science Village, which includes a metamorphosis laboratory where visitors can watch butterflies emerge from their chrysalises. Twice daily the staff releases butterflies into the conservatory; visitors may find several sitting quietly on their arms. Fairchild’s William F. Whitman Tropical Fruit Pavilion, named for a rare fruit collector and garden benefactor, offers everything from jackfruit vines to miracle fruit. It also boasts mangosteens, a favorite of David Fairchild’s, according to Carl Lewis, the garden’s director. The fruit’s appeal was not lost on Rudyard Kipling, who wrote in 1902: “You’ll know what my riddle means/ When you’ve eaten mangosteens.” 10901 Old Cutler Road, Coral Gables, Fla., fairchildgarden.org. Open 9:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. every day except Christmas.  AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCheck InThe lobby is poured concrete. The rooms have high ceilings. And the terrace has sprawling views of the city.By Michael KaminerRooms start at about 165 Canadian dollars (about $131 at 80 cents to the U.S. dollar).For her first hotel project, the Montreal property developer Marie-Jeanne Rivard wanted to mix the coziness of homestays, the services of a hotel and the downtown feel of loft living. The result, open since last winter, is something new for Montreal: Twenty high-ceilinged, clean-lined rooms equipped like small apartments, complete with top-end appliances, tableware and cutlery. Abstract photomontages of Montreal street life adorn the whitewashed walls. A sleek aesthetic extends through Boxotel’s airy, poured-concrete lobby and to 175B, a subterranean gallery showcasing Quebec and Canadian artists. On Boxotel’s sixth floor, a tiny gym and sauna open to a sprawling outdoor terrace with panoramic downtown views. A reality-TV star in Quebec — she renovates and sells homes on the hit show “Flip a Fille” — Ms. Rivard often checks guests in herself at Boxotel’s tiny front desk, called “The Box Office.”With shabby residential buildings nearby, Boxotel’s block can feel bleak. But its Ontario Street location, a five-minute stroll from buzzy Blvd. St-Laurent to the east and the Quartiers des Spectacles zone of cultural attractions just south, makes Boxotel an ideal home base.All blond wood and white walls, my 390-square-foot Loft King Luxe room, the second-largest category, felt like a chic Montreal pied-à-terre. Meticulously fitted cabinetry hid sleek washer/dryer, dishwasher and refrigerator units from upscale German brand Blomberg; nooks held helpful basics like detergent and dishwashing liquid. The Montreal potter Benoit Daigle supplied the moss-green tableware. Scandinavian-inspired furniture, including a desk and love seat, added pops of color. Working in the room was challenging; the desk lamp was weak, and just two outlets faced the desk. My king bed was firm, and crisp sheets made falling asleep easy. But nonstop street noise punctuated my slumber. A deep-soaking bathtub between the bed and the sliding terrace doors went unused. Clamor aside, it was easy to imagine living in my “box” — as rooms are cheekily called — for an extended stay.The gray-paneled bathroom made me glad to be traveling solo; just a clear pane of glass separates the toilet from the shower. A simple button operates the enormous rain shower head, but kept popping off the wall. A backlit makeup mirror suspended above the compact sink adds a thoughtful touch. Ms. Rivard worked with the Montreal skin-care company Cocooning Love to create aroma-infused bath amenities like hô wood shower gel and lemon-cypress shampoo. Montreal’s beards-and-tattoos set has already made Boxotel’s tiny Café Nomade a favored hangout. A counter with a compact kitchen, the cafe makes picture-perfect cold dishes like yogurt with fresh fruit, chia seeds and local honey ($6.95), and elegantly piled-up sandwiches like the Quebecois ($8) — creamy chicken salad, lettuce and pickles on sourdough. (The menu changes often.) Dense breads and pillowy croissants come from Montreal bakery Arhoma; Café Williams of Sherbrooke, Quebec, supplies beans for superb coffee drinks. From 7 a.m. to 11 p.m., guests can order room service; my Turkish breakfast ($8) and strong brewed coffee ($2) came in about 20 minutes, cheerfully delivered by Café Nomade’s barista and food preparer. A wooden block carried four nutty raisin-bread halves alongside tiny cups of almond butter, honey, and olives, mixed nuts and dates. It was filling and fortifying.Aside from the top-end appliances and kitchen accouterments, amenities are basic: High-speed internet, high-definition TV and a yoga mat rolled up in the entry closet of your “box.” Most rooms have terraces, which make perfect coffee-sipping spots in warm weather. Staffing here is lean, with just three or four T-shirted staffers typically on duty, but they’re courteous and responsive.Even in hotel-saturated Montreal, Boxotel feels fresh. The lack of traditional hotel-style pampering, and a very low staff-to-guest ratio, means the property is best suited to independent travelers. But it’s a terrific way to experience downtown Montreal like a local.Boxotel, 175 Rue Ontario Est, Montreal; boxotel.com.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byUpdateThe Caribbean island is recovering after Hurricane Irma last summer, with many hotels and restaurants back in business.By Shivani VoraThe Caribbean island of St. Martin is on the road to recovery following the severe damage it sustained from last summer’s Hurricane Irma (Hurricane Maria had a minor impact on St. Martin). As a result of the storm, the isle’s two airports, Princess Juliana International Airport and Grand Case International Airport, were temporarily closed to commercial flights; Princess Juliana’s main terminal also suffered structural damage. Many restaurants and stores on both the French and Dutch sides of St. Martin — the island is a dual nation — were forced to close as were most hotels.Frank Comito, the chief executive of the Caribbean Hotel & Tourism Association, an organization that represents businesses in 32 Caribbean destinations, said that St. Martin was one of the most hard-hit Caribbean destinations as a result of Irma.Today, the island is faring better than it was last fall but significant work will be required before it will be able to return to its pre-hurricane condition.Gordon Snow, the managing editor of The Daily Herald, an English-language newspaper on the island, said that many buildings, including several large hotels, saw significant damage because of Hurricane Irma and still need to be reconstructed. “This is my home, and I love it here, but there is a lot of rebuilding to do, and some of it hasn’t even begun yet,” he said. “But this island recovered from Hurricane Luis in 1995, and we will do so again.”The Dutch government is helping with the recovery by providing the island with 550 million euros (about $634 million) in aid.Mr. Snow said that the debris from the storm that littered the roads and beaches has been cleaned up. Kate Richardson, general manager of St. Martin’s tourism office, said that the beaches are as she remembers them as a child. “The beaches are back to their magnificent state, and the roads are litter free,” she said.Both airports are fully operational and run around 60 flights a week from 12 airlines. Princess Juliana, which reopened in October with the one runway it had before the storm, has daily nonstop service to and from the United States including a JetBlue flight to and from John F. Kennedy International Airport and an American Airlines flight to and from Miami International Airport. However, the terminal that sustained structural damage during Irma is still not open; passengers are temporarily being accommodated in tent-like structures. The island’s other airport, Grand Case International Airport, reopened to commercial flights in September; the airport offers daily flights to and from Guadeloupe, Martinique and St. Bart’s and to and from destinations in Europe, Canada and the United States.On St. Martin’s French side, more than 60 restaurants are open for business as are more than a dozen hotels including the Bleu Emeraude, a three-star beachfront property with 11 rooms. The general manager, Frederic Morel, said that the hotel reopened on Dec. 15, and while business was slow over the December holidays and in January, reservations have picked up for February. “More than half of our rooms are booked,” he said.Ms. Richardson said that 300 hotel rooms are currently available to book on the island’s French side; before Irma, that number was 1,700. At least 10 more hotels are scheduled to reopen before the end of the year.On the Dutch side of the island, around 80 percent of the restaurants are open, and 1,600 hotel rooms are available to book, Ms. Richardson said; before the hurricane, 4,115 rooms were available.St. Martin’s Dutch side is known for its more than dozen casinos, and while all closed following Irma, according to Mr. Snow, some have reopened including Jump Up Casino in the town of Philipsburg. Casinos in the hotels, however, have not reopened, including the one at Sonesta Maho Beach Resort, Casino & Spa; the property’s website says it is closed to guests until Aug. 31.But while many hotels throughout the island are still closed, the island’s attractions largely are not, Mr. Snow said. “The catamaran cruises are mostly running and so are the diving and snorkeling excursions,” he said. Rainforest Adventures, a popular eco-adventure attraction with a zip line in Emilio Wilson Park, is also open. Cruises, too, are returning to St. Martin: the cruise port that can accommodate larger ships, St. Maarten’s Port Authority, reopened on Dec. 4; the 930-passenger Viking Sea from Viking cruises was the first ship to sail into the port. The island’s other cruise port, Port de Galisbay, is once again welcoming small vessels; Ms. Richardson said that the port is expecting 42 small cruises this year for a total of 4,500 passengers. In 2017, the port saw 1,624 passengers. Crystal Esprit, a 62-passenger yacht from the luxury cruise line Crystal Cruises, is running weekly itineraries to and from the port until mid-April, said Susan Robison, a company spokeswoman.St. Martin’s government announced a 10-year tourism plan last November, and Ms. Richardson said that the first few years of it are devoted, in part, to hurricane recovery. “We’re going to be focusing on regenerating the island,” she said.Advertisement
Explorer By                     
MICHAEL SNYDER

FEB. 2, 2018
Of the nearly 1,000 registered archaeological sites scattered across the southeast Mexican state of Campeche, Xcalumkín is far from the most impressive. Just over 40 miles northeast of the state capital (also called Campeche), it looks, at first glance, like little more than a few half-excavated hillsides. On the stifling May morning that I visited, the scrubby forest was dry and radioactively bright, baked under a sky the color of a pilot flame. It didn’t take long for this abstraction of a city to come to life. Hills revealed themselves as pyramids. Fields became plazas. A cave opening suddenly in the ground — a tree, like an umbilical cord, growing from its center — became a reservoir.I had come out that morning with Rubí Peniche Lozano, who runs a restaurant called Capuchino in the historic center of Campeche, an extravagantly pretty town on the west of the Yucatán Peninsula. She’d brought along her sister, Ada, a local teacher, and Lirio Suarez Améndola, a former delegate for the National Institute of Anthropology and History, or I.N.A.H.Ms. Suarez walked us through the site, pointing out the hidden mouths of cisterns and offering I.N.A.H.’s best guesses as to what each structure might have been. Xcalumkín, she told us, had likely existed since the beginning of the millennium but, like most settlements in this part of the peninsula, would have flourished between the 8th and 10th centuries, part of a vast network of city-states and vassal towns that made up the classical Maya world. By 950 A.D., that world had all but disappeared.“To make the stucco they used to cover the buildings and pave the roads, they needed charcoal, so imagine how many trees they needed,” she said as we looked down into the reservoir that was now a cave. “They emptied their water sources, cut down all their trees. The temperature raised two degrees. They changed the climate completely.” She sounded almost exasperated. “Lots of people look at the Maya very romantically, that they lived with nature and all that, but it’s not true. They were just like us: human beings.”We had reached Xcalumkín by driving north along the modern highway that connects Campeche to Mérida in the neighboring state of Yucatán, following the route of the Camino Royal, or Royal Road, built for the visit of Mexico’s short-reigning Hapsburg Empress Carlota in the late 19th century. We stopped at Kankí and Acanmul, a pair of ruins that, despite lying just off the highway, receive almost no visitors. In the pretty colonial backwater of Hecelchakán, we ate breakfast at an enormous rotunda-like taco stand in the central plaza, famous enough not to require a name. For four generations and 40 years, the family that runs the place has turned out Campeche’s best cochinita pibil, a dish of adobo-rubbed pork roasted in an underground oven, and relleno negro, an ashy stew of ground turkey and pork stained black with charred chilies. Most days, they run out of cochinita by noon and relleno negro even earlier.AdvertisementThe afternoon would take us to artisan towns like Dzitbalchén, known for its embroidered blouses, and Bécal, where Mexico’s finest panama hats are woven from hair-thin lengths of palm in damp underground caves. The whole day, we didn’t pass a single other traveler. Despite its pastel-hued jewel-box of a capital, its rich archaeological history, a clutch of top-notch hotels and food to compete with anything on the peninsula, Campeche remains mercifully lost to tourism.Campeche’s star attraction should be the ancient Maya city of Calakmul, once the most powerful city-state in the classical Maya world, now an immense archaeological site buried deep in the wild southern jungles of the 2,800-square-mile Calakmul Biosphere Reserve. But while Chichen Itza and Tulum, in the neighboring states of Yucatán and Quintana Roo, attract as many as 5,500 visitors per day, Calakmul draws barely 100. When I came down to Campeche for the first time in February 2017 (a relatively cool, dry month in Mexico’s tropical south) Calakmul is what I came to see.AdvertisementFrom the early 10th century until the late 1920s, when, according to the oral tradition of the local rubber tappers, an American prospector spotted the site from a low-flying plane, Calakmul was lost to time and memory (its presence was officially registered by I.N.A.H. in 1931). For the next 50 years, the rubber tappers working in the forest chipped the narrative glyphs from the city’s monolithic steles, selling the city’s recorded history one piece at a time. Excavations didn’t begin in earnest until the 1980s.To reach Calakmul, I drove four hours down well-paved roads, booby-trapped with ill-marked speed bumps, stopping en route at El Cachimbazo, a seaside restaurant in the town of Champotón, for a lunch of ceviche and Campeche’s unofficial state dish, pan de cazón (layers of tortilla and shredded shark bathed in tomato purée, jauntily capped with a whole habanero).At the entrance to the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve, I dropped my things at a serene eco-lodge called Puerta Calakmul, by far the best hotel in the area (high-season rates start at $175), and crossed the road to see the exquisitely preserved stucco frieze at Balamku, one of many smaller archaeological sites in the area. At sundown, I drove five minutes down the road to watch millions of bats spill from the mouth of a hidden cave and spiral skyward. At dawn the next day, I woke to the call of howler monkeys and drove the last 90 minutes through the park to the site itself.On the way, I picked up my guide, Manuel Pech, who has lived most of his life in the nearby village of Conhuas. He had returned a year before from the capital, where he’d studied biology, “because,” he told me, “I wanted to save the world.” Growing up next to ruins, he seemed to view civilizational collapse as imminent rather than hypothetical.Mr. Pech and I spent well over three hours at Calakmul that morning, wandering among the lost foundations of untold buildings. At the ceremonial center, we climbed a flight of steep stone stairs to the summit of the highest pyramid. Fifteen hundred years ago, kings and priests would have performed their ceremonies here — coronations, perhaps, or sacrifices, though no one knows for sure — looking out over a city of 50,000 people with stucco-paved roads, called sakbe, radiating out from its center.My view was different. Jungle extended infinitely in every direction. To the south, Guatemala. To the north, the horizon undulated like heat. “Those hills out there,” Mr. Pech said, “we don’t know which are just hills and which are pyramids that we haven’t uncovered yet.” The only signs of human life were the peaks of Calakmul’s two other great pyramids bursting through the canopy like mountains through clouds.AdvertisementI left Calakmul the following day and drove east, stopping at Becán, where a series of interconnected plazas and public buildings suggest the shape of quotidian Maya life, and at Chicanná, once Becán’s aristocratic suburb, now another abandoned stone settlement in the forest, where heavily ornamented mansions reveal a world as stratified as our own. At Xpujil — the last of the ruins along the highway, roughly 40 minutes from Puerta Calakmul by car — I turned north along a recently paved two-lane road and through 40 miles of forest, virtually uninterrupted by human settlement. The trees along the roadside were more chartreuse than green. Swarms of butterflies ferried between them like they had places to go.The scenic route took me through languid towns like Dzitbalché and Iturbide, and to beautiful, lonely ruins at Dzibilnocac and Hochob, elaborately carved in an architectural style known today as “Chenes,” which Mr. Suarez would later describe as “Maya Baroque.” About 25 miles before Campeche, I stopped at Edzná, whose carefully reconstructed galleries, pyramids and open plazas rival Calakmul’s in grandeur. A short distance from Hacienda Huayamon — Campeche’s most luxurious hotel, housed in the restored remains of an 18th-century plantation — Edzná is Campeche’s most popular archaeological site. Even still, on the day I visited, there were more iguanas than people. When I reached Campeche that evening, I settled in at the Hacienda Huayamon’s sister hotel, Hacienda Puerta Campeche, just inside the city walls (rates in high season start at $418).Like most haciendas in the Yucatán, Huayamon — a 20-minute drive from the city — was founded in the 18th century (although most of its buildings date to the 19th century) to cultivate and process henequen, a tough fiber made from a variety of agave. Starting in 1870, the buildings that now house Puerta Campeche served as Huayamon’s warehouse and a shop selling everything from imported wines to lentils to rubber from the southern forests. Both are relics of the city’s 19th-century decline, a reminder of where the word decadence comes from.ProgresoGulf ofMexicoMEXICOMérida180Chichén ItzáTulumArea of detail307QUINTANAROOBecán186XpuhilChicannáCalakmul Biosphere ReserveCalakmulBELIZEGUATEMALA80 miles50 milesMEXICOYUCATANBécal261HecelchakánXcalumkínCampecheKankíAcanmulHacienda HuayamonEdznáCAMPECHEChampotónHochobJAN. 29, 2018
By the time henequen had become the Yucatán’s economic mainstay, most trade had shifted away from Campeche to the newly built port of Progreso — or Progress — on the peninsula’s northern coast. For the previous three centuries, Campeche, Mexico’s second-oldest port, had thrived at the periphery of law. Though just two hours from Mexico City by plane, Campeche was, in those days, far from the centers of colonial power and virtually ungovernable. When I met Ms. Peniche’s husband, the local historian Alejandro MacGregor Gonzalez, he told me, “contraband was this city’s glory!”He had asked me to join him for breakfast at a no-frills storefront on the Parque Santa Ana, a charming plaza just outside the city walls. He ordered us ice-cold bottles of sweet black tea and two trancas de lechón, the Taquería del Parque’s specialty. The tea, he explained, combined Campeche’s first colonial cash crop, sugar cane, with black tea that came in on British pirate ships in the 16th century. The trancas were sandwiches of lechón, a Creole roast pork dish from the Caribbean, served on crusty lengths of bread introduced by French corsairs.“That food is very Yucateco,” he said, pointing across the street to Taquería Hecelchakán, which trucks in cochinita from the town of the same name each morning. “This is very Campechano. Our whole culture is mixed!” Elsewhere in Mexico, the word campechano is usually used in the context of food and means just that — mixed — as in a campechano taco, made with meat and sausage, or a campechano ceviche, made with shrimp and octopus and whatever else is on hand.For the rest of the day, Mr. MacGregor showed me around the elegantly restored old quarter center of his hometown and its northern and southern edges, where the peaceful streets give way to mangroves and scruffy urban beaches. He told me about centuries of pirate attacks and the city walls — the last of their kind in Mexico — built to fend them off. He told me how his own ancestors, Scottish privateers, had arrived here in the 17th century via Charleston. We drank beers on the tranquil malecón and watched cormorants dive low over the water. The name Campeche, he explained, derives from the words kaam, meaning mirror, and pech, meaning birds in the near-extinct local dialect of Maya. “Campeche is literally ‘a mirror for the birds!” he said. I’ve never known someone to speak with so many exclamation points.That evening, I walked along quiet cobbled streets past candy-colored houses where old men and women sat out on the sidewalks to play cards and gossip. For dinner, I ate tamales and drank coconut horchata, slushy and sweet as a milkshake, at the open-air Portales de San Martín just outside the old city walls (there are several small restaurants, or antojerías, located in the Portales, all serving more or less the same food). I tried to imagine the city’s bloody, lawless past, but the image wouldn’t materialize. If Campeche today is one of the safest places in Mexico, it’s in part because, Mr. MacGregor told me, “we had 200 years of piracy, fear and violence. We’re not interested in all that now.” Pirates and traders, an empirical fact of a knowable past, seemed more remote and fantastic than a Maya world conjured from stone and dust.AdvertisementI had come back to Campeche, despite warnings about the May heat, to see an archaeological site that Mr. Pech had told me about, not far from Calakmul. His grandfather, he told me, had uncovered it back in 1950 during his youth as a rubber tapper (nearly all the ruins around Calakmul were found this way, though there are no records to confirm these stories). The first archaeologist officially entered the site in 1993, guided by Mr. Pech’s grandfather, and although I.N.A.H. spent a year restoring it in 2001, they soon abandoned it to the forest. They called the place Nadzcaan — Maya for Closer to the Sky.Nadzcaan isn’t technically open to the public, but the only real restriction on getting there is stamina. Set about nine miles back from the road, it’s accessible either on foot, a three-hour hike through the forest, or by motorbike (40 minutes plus a half-hour trudge on a gradual incline). Walking in, we passed iridescent wild turkeys and the fresh tracks of feral pigs. A troop of spider monkeys high up in the trees shook branches to scare us off. Eventually, Nadzcaan emerged coyly from the forest, the 130-foot pyramid at its center dissolving into the trees like the memory of a dream.That night we camped on top of the pyramid. I asked Mr. Pech what the Maya would have used this place for. He dragged a finger across his throat. “Sacrifice probably,” he said, “but we never really know.” The best we can do is guess what this world once looked like and how it all came crashing down.As the sun set, I looked out over the forest. Howler monkeys called from the distance. Cicadas chirred. A blood moon rose slowly into a bank of clouds and emerged, a half-hour later, washed clean. Mr. Pech smiled. “It’s like a mirror,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2018, on Page TR8 of the New York edition with the headline: A Wealth of Pyramids, but More Iguanas Than People.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »AdvertisementSupported byHeads UpPort of Spain is known for its exuberant annual Mardi Gras, but even when the Trinidadian capital is not filled with costumed revelers, it remains home to a vibrant arts scene.By Erin MacLeodNow that the feathers and the sparkles and the high-octane soca music have left the streets of the Trinidadian capital of Port of Spain for another year, what’s left is what is referred to as the feeling of “tabanca.” It’s a post-Carnival malaise that some say is only cured by more bacchanal.Port of Spain may be best known for its exuberant annual Mardi Gras that ended Feb. 13, but even when the Trinidadian capital’s streets are not flooded with costumed revelers, it remains home to a vibrant arts scene.Behind an unassuming middle-class house in the quiet midtown neighborhood of Woodbrook, lies a multifaceted arts center named Alice Yard. The “Yard,” as it is called by locals, is an important hub of contemporary art activity in the city.Soon after walking through its always-open gate on a sunny morning last spring, I met a Scottish artist in residence, Joanna Helfer; a group of people filming boiling sugar as a comment on Trinidad’s colonial past; and others talking and laughing nearby. I complimented one of the women on her jewelry and she immediately showed me an Instagram account for the designer and told me about a range of local pop-up craft fairs where I might find a piece of my own.When neighborhoods like Woodbrook came into being in the 1930s — Nobel Prize-winning writer V.S. Naipaul grew up in the area — the backyards of these houses were where Carnival bands evolved out of community workshops known as “mas camps” (mas being short for masquerade).“Yards have always been part of our narrative, the kind of informal, non-regulated spaces where people have played, lived,” said Christopher Cozier, an artist and co-administrator of Alice Yard, along with the architect Sean Leonard whose grandmother had lived on the property, and the local writer and editor Nicholas Laughlin. Alice Yard is part of an informal network of similar grass-roots arts organizations across the Caribbean, such as Fresh Milk in Barbados and New Local Space in Jamaica. The administrators of Alice Yard also manage an affiliated sister space, Granderson Lab, in Belmont, the city’s first suburb, initially populated by Afro-Trinidadians in the post-Emancipation 1800s. Granderson Lab, housed in a former family-run printery belonging to Mr. Leonard, is now home to projects that include carnival planning and installation art.The post-bacchanal creativity extends to the literary scene in Port of Spain. Since 2010, Caribbean literature has received an elevated platform with the founding of the Bocas Lit Fest. Held annually in April, the festival is free and showcases some of the best writers in the region. Literary stars like the Man Booker Prize-winning author Marlon James and up-and-coming writers speak to small audiences and mingle with attendees at a range of events, including workshops.“It is a community that has changed and radically expanded over the past 10 years,” said Mr. Laughlin, who is the literary festival’s programmer. “It feels like there is a bubbling up of talent. Part of it is that, maybe for the first time, writers don’t have to leave Trinidad to make careers for themselves.”The festival also hosts events like poetry slams, screenings and lectures. And there are monthly literary open-mic sessions held at the Big Black Box, another venue that offers a range of artistic and carnival-related activities.Because Port of Spain is relatively small — it has a population of just over 37,000 — it is, according to Mr. Laughlin, “relatively easy to become connected to people.” When I asked about how to find out about other literary events, he simply suggested taking a trip to Paper Based Books, a local shop that specializes in writing from the region. “Just talk to the person behind the counter,” he said.At the Bocas festival last spring, I admired a performance of moko jumbies, stilt walkers that are a traditional feature of Carnival. They were wearing flowing skirts of fabric and strips of newspaper, all carrying protest signs reflecting social justice and environmental concerns, denoting the political element of traditional “mas.”While taking in the towering costumed characters, I ran into the artist and designer Richard Mark Rawlins. He told me about the 1000mokos project, a group that is working to get more people interested in the practice of stilt-walking. He encouraged me to visit an address just across the street from Alice Yard the following Sunday.Arriving at the park I heard the loud rhythms of soca and witnessed Adrian “Daddy Jumbie” Young, a well-known local expert and instructor in stilt-walking, perform flowing movements on sky-high stilts that seemed like magic. His ease and ability to spin, hop and jump while nine feet off the ground was more superhero than human. I thought there was no way I’d be able to do this.But after an hour of encouragement and instruction and lots of soca music, I made it up on a pair of two-foot stilts and walked around a park. I recalled Mr. Cozier talking about Port of Spain’s yards as spaces where people play. He could have been talking about the city itself.Advertisement

      By ELAINE GLUSAC

FEB. 1, 2018

Don’t equate Orlando with mouse ears and thrill rides: The city is a checkerboard of intriguing neighborhoods filled with galleries, shops and restaurants.
Related Article
Ever since the early 1960s, when Walt Disney chose Central Florida as the location for his most extensive theme park, Walt Disney World, Orlando has been synonymous with mouse ears, thrill rides and daily parades. But most locals readily divulge that fantasy fulfillment has little to do with the real life of urban Orlando. From the downtown region heading north to well-to-do Winter Park, the city is a checkerboard of intriguing neighborhoods filled with historic bungalows, interesting galleries and cafes catering to the creative class. Nature is also a central attraction in the lake-filled city and suburbs that include warm springs preserves and parks with live oak stands. The glass-walled Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts, opened in 2014, has given downtown a cultural bump, while homegrown creative endeavors include a new orchestra devoted to modern classics and unstarched performances.
Explore the map and find things to do in Orlando.
Make the Orlando Museum of Art (admission, $15) your first stop in erasing theme park stereotypes. It holds an engrossing collection of American art, including paintings by Thomas Moran, Georgia O’Keeffe and John Singer Sargent. But its contemporary galleries, featuring digital artworks by artists like Jennifer Steinkamp are, perhaps, most compelling. The museum annually awards the Florida Prize in Contemporary Art; last year’s finalists dealt with issues from social justice to violence in Syria. A new show, “State of Excellence: Treasures from Florida Private Collections,” runs through April 29, and focuses on European and American art.Set design does not begin and end with Disney, as the new Mathers Social Gathering lounge testifies. The downtown speakeasy-style bar resides on the third floor of a 19th-century furniture store. Patrons must find the hidden door in the foyer’s bookshelves to gain entry to the cavernous room with exposed brick walls and beams and conversation areas anchored by tufted leather couches and steamer-trunk coffee tables. Go at happy hour before the club-hoppers flood the place to indulge your design appreciation over a gin-and-cucumber Mathers Fizz ($15) and a bowl of roast fava beans ($8) served on silver platters.Tacos have hijacked the Orlando culinary scene with a string of newcomers from downtown’s Tin & Taco to the bustling Reyes Mezcaleria and the mural-covered Hunger Street Tacos in Winter Park. But if you can only hit one, make it Black Rooster Taqueria. The narrow, elbow-shaped space offers open views into the kitchen where chefs press corn tortillas to order while frying up pork fat, the centerpiece of the menu’s most indulgent taco ($3.50), and searing carne asada ($4). There are also fresh limeade specials, guacamole made to order ($6) and brothy bowls with slow-cooked meat, including pozole verde ($10.50). The limited service system — order at the counter and runners find you with the food — means you may not linger, but you’ll leave satisfied.Follow the creative crowd to whatever is happening at the Timucua Arts Foundation. Founded in 2000 by Benoit Glazer, the music director for the Cirque du Soleil show here called “La Nouba,” Timucua stages more than 70 events each year, most of them free, most of them concerts and many of them in Mr. Benoit’s living room, which is expansive enough to seat 99. It recently launched the new 15-piece Alterity Chamber Orchestra as its ensemble-in-residence. The orchestra presents contemporary classical pieces with passion, but without the formality normally associated with classical concerts.Picket-fenced bungalows, moss-laden trees and brick-paved streets fill the historic residential neighborhoods of Thornton Park and Lake Eola Heights to the east and north, respectively, of downtown Orlando’s Lake Eola. Take a D.I.Y. tour to get a feel for Old Florida life aboard one of the orange bikes in the Juice Bike Share program ($8 an hour). Make your first stop Downtown Credo coffee, a social-impact-oriented shop with four locations around town that sources coffee direct from growers and asks customers to name their price for each cup. Make sure to walk that bike around Lake Eola: Bikers are forbidden from cycling on the sidewalks that ring the shore.In the 19th century, old-money snowbirds from the north began spending their winters beside the lakes of Central Florida, particularly Winter Park, the Orlando neighbor that feels more like a village than a suburb. They and modern-day successors built mansions lining Lakes Osceola, Maitland and Virginia, which are connected by old logging channels: narrow passages about the width of the 18-seat pontoon boats operated by Scenic Boat Tour. The tour company’s hourlong itinerary ($14) takes in the fine homes and the Spanish-Mediterranean-style campus of Rollins College. The excursion is also a nature tour, especially in the slim canals where guides point out a 150-year-old live oak, among other sights.One of Winter Park’s affluent part-timers was Charles Hosmer Morse, whose heirs eventually amassed the largest collection of glass works by Louis Comfort Tiffany in the world and made it the anchor of the Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art. In addition to wall-size, garden-themed panels, the museum’s Tiffany collection includes the kaleidoscopic chapel he created for the 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago and several rooms from Laurelton Hall, his Long Island estate. For contemporary ballast, cross the leafy Rollins College campus to the Cornell Fine Arts Museum, which mounts shows with pieces that range from old master paintings to modern-day neon.If you’ve shopped in a hip stationary store recently, chances are you’ve seen the festive and funky designs of Rifle Paper Co. The Winter Park design firm operates an airy boutique in the Hannibal Square neighborhood, where you can pick up everything from cards and journals to wrapping paper and iPhone cases in its signature floral patterns. A few blocks east on Winter Park’s main drag, Park Avenue, independent boutiques include Violet Clover, selling blouses and accessories; and Han Design, with unique jewelry and Turkish rugs. Grab a novel and flop down in a cozy armchair at Writer’s Block Bookstore, where the staff tapes their mini book reviews to the shelves.Getting around much of Orlando requires a car, but Winter Park offers a bounty of restaurants within walking distance of each other. Start at the Ravenous Pig, staffed by crack bartenders who whip up cocktails that may include a rum-port-spiced apple Needle in the Hay ($12). Move on to bustling Prato, where the partner and chef Brandon McGlamery serves market-inspired Italian dishes, including house-made pastas ($17) and pizzas ($16) cooked in a wood-fired oven. He also oversees Luma on Park, a romantic spot with an open kitchen and a luscious pineapple curd ($8) on the dessert menu.The culinary arts and the fine arts meet at the Alfond Inn at Rollins, a few blocks from Park Avenue. Established by Rollins College, the nonprofit inn funnels all proceeds to its scholarship programs. Contemporary art fills the ground floor of the 112-room hotel in a rotating arrangement overseen by the curators of the Cornell Fine Arts Museum. Join the locals for post-dinner drinks in admiring the art or sitting around the courtyard fires beside the bougainvillea hedges.The freshwater springs and abundant lakes of Central Florida are central to the appeal of the region. Rarely do you see such bodies of water buffered by native hardwood forests, which makes Wekiwa Springs State Park, about 16 miles from downtown, worth the trip. Giant spreading oaks festooned in Spanish moss shade the grass and palmetto fields where wild turkeys wander. Show up early to join the regulars in swimming circular laps in the designated swimming area of the Wekiva River. Rent a canoe ($19.15 for two hours) to paddle the waterway, deemed a National Wild and Scenic River, looking for wild things, including alligators, deer and black bear.Few places capture the creative energy of millennial Orlando as tastily as the four-year-old East End Market. Garden plots grow herbs and vegetables outside the building in the Audubon Park Garden District. Inside, a collection of businesses skew to culinary independents, including Skyebird Juice Bar & Experimental Kitchen, where fresh-pressed juices come in canning jars; Gideon’s Bakehouse, whose substantial cookies have a cult following; and Florida & Co., serving locally raised meats and seafood in sandwiches and small plates. Eat at the picnic tables beside the garden, then wander back through to shop the nifty potted succulents at Porch Therapy and the leather accessories made on the spot at Freehand Goods.In the pedestrian-friendly village of Winter Park, the Alfond Inn at Rollins offers resort amenities, including a rooftop pool, a restaurant that champions Florida products, and a rotating contemporary art collection from the local Cornell Fine Arts Museum. Rooms from $229; thealfondinn.com.The former utility commission headquarters has been converted into the 118-room Aloft Orlando Downtown, with the original terrazzo floors, marble walls and 10-foot floor-to-ceiling windows. It is conveniently located across the street from the Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts. Rooms from $189; aloftorlandodowntown.com.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byQ&AThe director of “The Shape of Water” wants visitors to explore Guadalajara, his hometown. He also recommends Merida and a Baja beach called Barriles.By Shivani VoraGuillermo del Toro, 52, who has best director and best screenplay Academy Award nominations for “The Shape of Water” (he won a Golden Globe Award for best director for the film), is well-known for his science-fiction and horror movies. (His other films include “Pacific Rim” and “Pan’s Labyrinth.") But Mr. del Toro’s talents go beyond film: he has also co-authored a trilogy of vampire novels and is the creator of the computer-animated Netflix series “Trollhunters.”One of his latest projects, the drawings for the box of a limited-edition tequila from Patrón called Patrón x Guillermo del Toro, is a homage to his upbringing in Guadalajara, in the central western Mexican state of Jalisco. There, he would often see the fields of agave teeming with jimadores — the farmers who harvest blue weber agave plants used to make tequila. “It was fascinating to watch them work because their craft of picking and trimming the plants is so intricate,” he said.It’s the jimadores who inspired Mr. del Toro’s drawings, he said.And while Mr. Del Toro currently lives in Toronto and Los Angeles, he returns to Guadalajara every six weeks to visit his family and still sees the jimadores working in the fields.Below are edited excerpts from a recent conversation with him.Jalisco is where tequila is produced, but what does the state offer for tourists?There’s plenty to see. First of all, whether you drink tequila or not, I do think it’s worth visiting some tequila houses in the town of Tequila and in the Highlands region. By going to a house, you can learn about how the agave is extracted to produce the drink.But going beyond tequila, I love Magdalena, a small town famous for its opal mining. You can visit the mines and see how the workers find the stones. Then there’s Puerto Vallarta, which has beautiful beaches, and my hometown of Guadalajara, where my favorite sights are the murals by Jose Clemente Orozco — he is one of the greatest Mexican mural artists ever, and his art is everywhere is the city. In the Hospico Cabañas, for example, there’s a work called “Man of Fire” painted on a dome.What are some other destinations in Mexico that tourists tend to miss?Several places come to mind. Mérida, in the state of Yucatán, is a beautiful colonial city where the people used to dress in all white from head to toe. The culture is very rich, especially the music — it’s a limerick style called son where the phrases repeat again and again.Then you have Oaxaca, which is an incredibly mystical city with a lot of shamans. The cuisine is refined but spicy, and you find a lot of mole. And Campeche City, in the state of Campeche, is a vibrant port city with fantastic seafood which is also very nice to walk around in.Each of these places are in the same country but are so different culturally and cuisine-wise that they might as well be different countries.Compared with the cities you just named, Cancún and Cabo San Lucas are much more popular with tourists. Do they give travelers an authentic sense of Mexico at all?I’ve only been to Cancún once and didn’t really like it so I can’t offer any perspective there, but as for Cabo, you need to get away from the touristy parts to appreciate its beauty. For me, the hidden gem there is a beach called Barriles, near the city of La Paz. All the locals go there, and the swimming is fantastic. The beach also has food stands where you get the best lobster and fish.Do you have any recommendations for souvenirs that travelers to Mexico should buy?I’m partial to candies called borrachitos. They’re sugary and soft and come in different flavors. I also suggest buying alebrijes — they are these bright fantasy creatures handmade by local artists, and you can find them at craft markets all over the country. They’re distinctly Mexican. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bythe getawayTravelers are swapping standard hotel rooms for new interpretations of traditional lodgings. By Stephanie RosenbloomVacation lodging used to mean a room with four walls in a hotel or motel. Today travelers are increasingly seeking — and easily finding — accommodations that allow them to be more in tune with their surroundings, be it a forest, a beach or a house designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. Airbnb’s booking data for the beginning of this year suggests that more travelers are ​interested in ​spending their vacations in what the short-term rental site calls “nontraditional​” spaces, particularly those that allow travelers to be or feel closer to nature. ​Bookings for nature lodges ​and ryokans (​traditional ​Japanese inns) ​have skyrocketed since last year. Reservations for yurts and recreational vehicles (R.V.s) have also spiked. These are hardly new​ or nontraditional​ forms of shelter. The ryokan is​​ centuries old. Yurts have been ​used by nomads for ​decades​. Yet it seems interest in such lodgings has prompted more ​places ​to not ​only ​offer them, but ​​reimagine them, too. The ​latest iterations ​have modern comforts and deluxe trappings even as they aim to retain some of the minimalism and spirit of their predecessors.This year, Lakedale Resort at Three Lakes, an 82-acre property with cabins and cottages on San Juan Island in Washington state, is opening Lakedale Yurt Village, a wooded area by Fish Hook Lake with seven “luxury yurts” (rates start at $325 a night), each with a pillow-top king bed and en suite bathroom, a flat-panel television, refrigerator, sleeper sofa and private deck with a hot tub, barbecue, dining set and Adirondack chairs. Interest in yurts and R.V.s, be they rustic or ritzy, isn’t surprising given the resurgence of camping, which Kampgrounds of America, one of the largest privately owned networks of campgrounds, has said is being driven by millennials. Today, companies like Tentrr allow would-be campers to book acres of private land and a fully equipped campsite with a few taps of an app or clicks on its website. And sites like Hipcamp make it easy to book lodgings like tree houses, yurts and R.V.s. Even more so than in the case of R.V.s, new interpretations of the ryokan are at once a departure and a homage to the original. Consider the Nobu Ryokan on the Pacific Coast Highway in Malibu, Calif. Perched on the sand along the ocean, the low-slung hotel has 16 teak and ipe wood rooms (including teak soaking tubs) with tatami mats and sliding doors that bring the outdoors in. Rates are from $2,000 a night during peak periods. (The property is currently accepting reservations for stays beginning after Feb. 9.) In Tokyo there’s the nascent Hoshinoya Tokyo resort, which at first blush looks like a high-rise. Yet behind the patterned metal lattice that veils the 17-story tower is a contemporary ryokan or rather, several: Each floor in the tower is designed to be like a six-room ryokan with a tatami hall and common lounges (ochanoma) where guests can find books, sake, teas and treats. In the rooms, there are kimonos and shoji screens. The property also has an indoor hot spring bath (rates from about $480 a night). Other brands are taking a similar approach, blending old and new, East and West, resisting characterization as a single style. The Hiramatsu Hotels & Resorts, which has opened what it calls European-style ryokans — like the 13-room Atami on Sagami Bay in Shizuoka, Japan, which takes its inspiration from both ryokans and French auberges. The Vipp hotel in Europe bills itself as an “untraditional hotel” as it’s really more a collection of properties in different locations. Vipp shelter, for instance, is a sleek steel-and-glass box inspired by industrial design (think submarines and airplanes) at Lake Immeln in Sweden (600 euros a night for up to two adults, or about $745), while Vipp loft has two queen beds with a kitchen, dining and living area at the top of a 1910 printing factory in the Islands Brygge area of Copenhagen (1,000 euros a night for up to four adults). This year, Vipp is opening Chimney house in a landmark brick building, a former water-pumping station, also in Copenhagen. All of the spaces are self check-in and there is no daily housekeeping, and no amenities such as a gym or restaurant.Additionally, new apps and websites are making it easy to discover properties that go beyond the everyday.Take, for instance, PlansMatter, a free site that last year began offering vacation rentals and hotel rooms selected primarily for their architectural merit, with properties ranging from under $100 to more than $1,000 a night. Users can search by rentals or hotels, and also by architect — including Frank Lloyd Wright, whose artful marriage of home and landscape is as in vogue as ever. The site is simply a place to browse properties; to book you click a link that takes you to the website of the property owner or manager, or his or her rental site page. For example, PlansMatter has photos of and information about Wright’s 1950s Kinney House in Lancaster, Wis., a three-bedroom, more than 1,700-square-foot house that can be rented for $395 a night (two-night minimum stay required). If you decide to book, a link will lead you to the listing for the house on Airbnb. Other Wright houses on PlansMatter include the 880 square-foot Seth Peterson Cottage at Mirror Lake, Wis., (from $250 a night, plus a $30 handling fee), Still Bend, the Bernard Schwartz house, with four bedrooms, in Two Rivers, Wis. (from $295 a night), and Palmer House, a three-bedroom home, in Ann Arbor, Mich. (from $350 a night). Stephanie Rosenbloom writes the Getaway column for the Travel section, as well as features about solo travel and notable destinations. Over the years, she has had beats in the Business, Styles, Real Estate and Metro sections.@stephronyt•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by5 placesThompson's Point, a formerly run-down industrial zone west of the city center in Portland, is today the city’s most unlikely hot spot.By Ingrid K. WilliamsFor decades, drivers in Portland, Me., sped by Thompson’s Point, a forlorn peninsula jutting into the Fore River just west of I-295. Described as “the biggest dump in Portland” in the local independent monthly The Bollard in 2011, the area is today the city’s most unlikely hot spot. In 2015, a new outdoor concert venue began staging shows on the riverbank; this past summer’s slate of 14 performances included Wilco, the XX and Alabama Shakes. And nearby, an abandoned brick warehouse has been transformed into an entertainment row, with food-and-drink establishments alongside a peculiar cryptozoology museum and a circus school. One more reason to stop: a new ice skating rink open through March 4.In June 2016, this cult craft brewery relocated to an enormous facility with colorful murals splashed on the walls, steel tanks in the back and ample, two-level taproom seating. Expect lines out the door during releases of their hard-to-find, limited edition I.P.A.s, which attract fans from across the Northeast.4 Thompson’s Point #108; bissellbrothers.com.Opened in August 2016 by the acclaimed local restaurateur Jason Loring, this fried chicken joint serves chicken and waffles with Maine maple syrup and cayenne-doused, Nashville-style fried chicken so spicy that orders come with protective rubber gloves. It also operates a convenient takeaway window in the Bissell Brothers taproom.4 Thompson’s Point #107; bigjschicken.com.The study of hidden animals is the focus of this unusual museum, which moved to this location in July 2016. Exhibits explore the pseudoscience of mythological creatures, such as Bigfoot, the Loch Ness Monster and the Yeti.4 Thompson’s Point #106; cryptozoologymuseum.com.From pinot gris to pinot noir, a variety of varietals are poured at this tasting room, which opened in May 2016. Wines from the Lincolnville winery up the coast can be sampled by the glass or in tasting flights paired with cheese, crackers and charcuterie.4 Thompson’s Point #110; mainewine.com.Completing the neighborhood trio of beer, wine and spirits, this small-batch distillery opened in July 2016. In addition to producing vodka, gin, bourbon and rye, the distillery also has a tasting room with two bars, one pouring sampler flights and the other mixing cocktails made with the house spirits.4 Thompson’s Point #104-105; stroudwaterdistillery.com.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTrendingThe Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo has plenty to offer all comers — even if the rodeo itself isn’t up your alley.By Shivani VoraIf you love horses, barbecue, and live music, one of the world’s largest livestock shows and rodeos, the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, is happening from Feb. 27 to March 18 at NRG Park. The event, which began in 1932, welcomed more than 2.61 million visitors last year. According to Joel Cowley, the president and chief executive of the event, visiting the grounds is a fun experience for all, with plenty to offer to people who aren’t traditionally interested in agriculture or rodeo events. “Anyone from little kids to great-grandparents can have a good time because there is such a diverse lineup of activities,” he said. Admission to the 300-acre event grounds is $15 per day for adults and $5 for children between the ages of three and 12. Admission to the daily rodeo and concert in NRG Stadium, one of the park’s main venues, starts at $18 and includes entry into all other activities on the grounds. Admission is free for children two and under.  For more information and to buy tickets, visit the show’s website. Here’s a sample of what visitors can look forward to.Mr. Cowley said that the daily rodeo performances in NRG Stadium, which seats more than 72,000, are the highlight of each day. Over 300 cowboys and cowgirls from around the world compete in a series of rodeo sports including bull riding, where competitors attempt to ride a bull for eight seconds and barrel racing, a speed event where women ride on a horse around a barrel pattern. The two-hour rodeo performance is followed by a one-hour concert from a notable band or musician. This year, country musicians Garth Brooks, Blake Shelton, Luke Bryan and the pop band OneRepublic are among the performers. Each day, all day, NRG Center, a 1.3 million square foot building adjacent to the stadium, will host a livestock show. Visitors can see about a dozen species of animals including cattle, pigs, llamas and sheep, and there’s an area where they can watch chickens hatch and calves, lambs and baby pigs being born. The building also has a retail area where vendors from around the world sell Western-themed goods such as clothes, boots, jewelry, furniture and art. NRG Arena will also host several horse shows a day. “These are fast paced events that are thrilling to watch,” Mr. Cowley said. Onlookers can expect multiple events demonstrating each rider’s prowess and the stamina and strength of the horses. One example is mounted shooting, where cowboys and cowgirls ride past balloons lined up on a stick and shoot into them with a blank rifle. The winner is the person who shoots the most number of balloons in the least time.The event also features a wine garden, which will be open daily. Visitors here will be able to buy small tastes, full glasses and bottles of around 50 wines from around the world and can imbibe while listening to live music performances from local bands. Always an attraction for children, the carnival, open all-day, has more than 50 rides including an observation wheel, two Ferris wheels and several roller coasters. When you (or the kids) get hungry, hit the many food vendors selling fried foods on a stick such as smoked and fried turkey legs or fried cheesecake. Several properties in Houston offer packages themed to the livestock and rodeo, ideal for out-of-towners or locals looking to make a vacation out of the event.Hotel Derek, near the city’s Uptown entertainment district and seven miles from the livestock show and rodeo, has an All Roped In Package inclusive of accommodations, a Southern inspired breakfast, valet parking and a welcome amenity of locally smoked beef jerky and a jar of honey roasted Texas pecans. Prices from $159 a night. Another option is the Rodeo Houstonian Style package at The Houstonian Hotel, Club & Spa, situated in the heart of the city and about a 20-minute drive from the event; it includes accommodations, two Texas-themed cocktails at the hotel’s bar, a welcome amenity of a charcuterie board, a $50 Uber gift card, valet parking and a boot shine. Prices from $289 a night. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCULTURED TRAVELERIn the 3-D film “America’s Musical Journey,” the singer-songwriter Aloe Blacc takes viewers on an exuberant exploration of the country’s creative roots.By John L. DormanThere’s one thing that has a remarkable way of connecting people from different cultures and backgrounds: music.In “America’s Musical Journey,” a 3-D documentary film narrated by the actor Morgan Freeman and hosted onscreen by the singer-songwriter Aloe Blacc, the musical spirit of the country is explored through Mr. Blacc’s excursions to New York, New Orleans, Chicago, Nashville, Detroit and Miami. In the 40-minute film, which premiered at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington last week and will expand to theaters around the country and abroad, his trips tell the story of how jazz, country, blues, soul and rock 'n' roll melded to fuel American creativity.Before a recent screening at an IMAX theater in Manhattan, Mr. Blacc’s enthusiasm for the project was obvious. “I always wanted to be a movie star,” he said in an interview. “Traveling across and country and engaging with people gave me the opportunity to learn more about music. It was a no-brainer to want to do this.”The film, which was produced by independent distributor MacGillivray Freeman Films, in association with Brand USA, provides stunning views of the Chicago skyline, steamboats on the Mississippi River in New Orleans and Beale Street in Memphis. But Mr. Blacc said he was surprised by what he learned about these places and the lives of many of the native musicians.“I knew that Elvis Presley had long been influenced by black music, but I wasn’t aware of his engagement with gospel music,” he said. “I learned about how early folk music from Appalachia influenced country and bluegrass music.”The Louis Armstrong House Museum, in Corona, Queens, is a prominent stop in the film. Mr. Blacc sits on the front steps with a group of children and sings his own version of “What a Wonderful World,” Mr. Armstrong’s 1967 hit. In the film’s narration, Mr. Freeman details the sting of racism that Mr. Armstrong endured as an African-American man, noting that early in his career, he wasn’t permitted to stay at the many of the same hotels where he was performing because of his race. In many Southern locales, he slept overnight in vehicles, along with members of his band. Although Mr. Armstrong eventually became an international sensation, the earlier chapter in his life was a reminder of the pangs of discrimination.New Orleans is the site of some of the film’s most festive scenes, with Mr. Blacc and “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert” bandleader Jon Batiste walking in and around the city’s French Quarter, and joining a second line, a brass band parade. “The rhythms in the second line are infectious,” Mr. Blacc said. “They just add that flavor to the music.”The city’s vibrancy is evident through its French Creole influences and its jubilant music. In Memphis, Mr. Blacc takes in the blues scene and eats in Mr. Presley’s favorite booth at the Arcade restaurant on South Main Street. At Arcade, which opened in 1919 as one of the city’s first cafes, a dance routine breaks out, and everyone, from the staff to the patrons to Mr. Blacc, is swept along. Mr. Blacc then makes a trip to Graceland, Mr. Presley’s estate, and learns more about the musician’s life and sees the almost-endless procession of plaques on the wall.The trip to Nashville focuses on its rich country scene. Mr. Blacc visited the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, the Grand Ole Opry and Fisk University. At Fisk, which was founded in 1866 and played a vital role in the education of freed slaves and other African-Americans, Mr. Blacc finds musical inspiration with the Fisk Jubilee Singers, a collegiate a cappella choir that first organized in 1871.In Chicago, Mr. Blacc spends time with the jazz pianist and native Ramsey Lewis, who has recorded over 80 albums during his career and is known for songs like “The In Crowd” and “Sun Goddess.” It is a career that Mr. Blacc said he deeply admires.“Maurice White was the drummer for Ramsey Lewis,” Mr. Blacc said in the interview, referring to the founder of the band Earth, Wind and Fire. “Ramsey was probably one of the most important factors in the creation of Earth, Wind and Fire, which is one of my favorite bands. It’s a special story to me.”Mr. Blacc then joins a flash mob in Millennium Park, singing along to the Avicii hit “Wake Me Up,” which he co-wrote. In Detroit, the birthplace of Motown Records, Mr. Blacc pays homage to the city’s legacy of rhythm and blues, soul and jazz when he visits Hitsville U.S.A., the record label’s former headquarters and now the Motown Museum.Miami, a center of salsa and electronica music, is a natural destination in the film.As the son of Panamanian immigrants, Mr. Blacc told me, he feels a deep connection to the Latin-inflected music that permeates the city, as it reflects the diversity of his Central American roots. He also met Gloria and Emilio Estefan, who were at the forefront of the Miami music scene in the 1980s and much of the 1990s, with a personal story that Mr. Blacc clearly respects. “They came here with nothing and had a bold, beautiful American story,” he said.“America’s Musical Journey” is currently showing at select IMAX and large-format screen theaters. Additional cities in the United States and abroad will feature the film over the duration of the year. The running time is 40 minutes.Follow John L. Dorman on Twitter: @jon425.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCHECK-INThe Hewing Hotel has the spirit of the state, from the loons in the wallpaper to the cedar sauna on the roof.By Elaine GlusacDoubles start at $159. The handsome red brick warehouses that cluster north of downtown Minneapolis near the Mississippi River speak to peak 19th-century commercial traffic on the waterway and nearby rail lines. Many have more recently been reclaimed by some of the city’s most buzzed-about restaurants (including the Bachelor Farmer) and stylish shops (MartinPatrick3). Now the Hewing Hotel, opened in 2016 in a prominent warehouse that once stored farm equipment, pays homage to one of those trades — logging — in six stories of wood-framing, flooring and paneling. Channeling the spirit of an urban lumberjack, massive, rough-hewed posts picket the sunny lobby filled with low-slung leather couches. Patterned wallpaper featuring fish and moose and retro accessories on library shelves including vintage hockey gloves mirror Minnesota’s affinity for the outdoors. Minnesotans have returned the love, crowding the hotel’s ground-floor restaurant and bar Tullibee, which champions the bounty of the region with a Scandinavian accent. Fittingly, there’s a sizable sauna and outdoor hot tub on the rooftop, as well as a bar.The Hewing resides in the gentrifying North Loop neighborhood, part of the Minneapolis Warehouse Historic District. Target Field, home to the Minnesota Twins, is within a few blocks. The Guthrie Theater, just over a mile downriver, is a quick Uber ride away. The MetroTransit Blue Line nearby links the neighborhood to the airport and the Mall of America beyond.The hotel’s 124 rooms benefit from the building’s warehouse origins with high ceilings, generous windows and exposed brick walls. Visible duct work lends an industrial edge, softened by full length drapes, a leather library chair stationed beside a floor lamp, plaid throw blankets from the regional Faribault Woolen Mill Co. and the occasional use of Minnesota-motif wallpaper featuring deer, loons and boat oars in a pattern suggestive of Scandinavian folk art. Darkly stained wooden bedside tables with leather pulls repeated the organic theme, while a desk with open shelves veers in a modern direction. Mini bars deal local products including Tattersall Gin, Spruce Soda and Thumbs Cookies. While there is no coffee maker in the room, management provides free SpyHouse Coffee every morning in the lobby. Floor-to-ceiling white subway tile and rectangular porcelain sinks brighten the bathroom, though an ax, framed behind glass and apparently quoting the timber theme, made me think of emergency fire equipment. My ADA-compliant room, number 228, had a generous walk-in shower and a rain-forest shower head. Toiletries come from the grape-seed-based 29 by Lydia Mondavi.Guests are well-advised to make a dinner reservation at Tullibee when they reserve their room. The Nordic restaurant occupies half of the hotel lobby and the cocktail crowd sipping old-fashioneds commonly spills into the other half. Its chef Bradley Day, a native of Australia, seems to embrace the northwoods larder at Tullibee, named for a rare fish found in Minnesota’s deep lakes. The menu changes often but regularly features foraged and fermented ingredients as well as house-butchered meats. Recently, he gave Caesar salad a regional spin with aged Gouda and smoked smelt dressing, made his own lamb sausage and baked both bread and ginger cake in tiny Bundt pans, a salute to the local Nordic Ware cookware company that developed the popular ring pans. The restaurant is open for breakfast too; try house-made lefse, a traditional Norwegian flatbread, with cured ham. The top-floor hot tub, bar and 24-person cedar wood sauna are part of the Rooftop social club, open to members and guests who pay a fee. The pool and sauna are restricted, but the public can patronize the indoor/outdoor rooftop lounge in the evenings. For a different kind of sweat, there’s a fitness center and separate yoga room in the basement.The backwoods goes big city at the Hewing Hotel, where woody interiors and rustic décor warm the industrial setting, and dishes like pork wild rice sausage at its restaurant Tullibee feed the lumberjack spirit. Hewing Hotel, 300 North Washington Avenue, Minneapolis; 651-468-0400; hewinghotel.com.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byUnesco’s Creative Cities Network initiative is going strong, despite U.S. plans to pull out of the organization. By Elaine GlusacIn October, the Trump administration announced that the United States would withdraw from Unesco, the United Nations cultural organization known for its World Heritage sites program, by the end of 2018. But that rejection, tied to perceptions of anti-Israel bias, has not stopped Unesco from naming a number of American cities to its Creative Cities Network.In November, Kansas City, San Antonio and Seattle joined a class of 64 cities inducted into the program which evaluates applicants in seven different creative fields, including crafts and folk art, design, film, gastronomy, literature, media arts and music. The network, which now includes 180 cities from 72 countries, aims to encourage members to share best practices “to promote creative industries, strengthen participation in cultural life, and integrate culture into sustainable urban development policies,” according to a statement announcing the new members.“Being a member of the U.C.C.N. is the starting point of a long journey to which Unesco invites all cities wherever they may be, provided they share the vision of working together to stimulate culture and creativity as motors for sustainable urban development,” Emmanuelle Robert, Project Manager for the Unesco Creative Cities Network, wrote in an email.Unlike Unesco’s World Heritage Center, which singles out cultural and natural landmarks like the Great Wall of China or the Great Barrier Reef for their universal value to humanity, the Creative City designation is looser and more dispersed. For travelers, a Creative City designation can provide a new lens through which to view a destination. Tucson, recipient of the country’s first City of Gastronomy designation in 2015, used it to train attention on its agricultural history, seed banks and locally owned restaurants. (As a possible measure of that new attention, its hotel revenue per available rooms, a marker of hotel performance, shot up 13.5 percent in 2017 over the year prior).“Many of these restaurants have operated for decades and by generations of families,” said Brent DeRaad, the president and chief executive of Visit Tucson. “The Unesco designation provided the credibility we needed to convince media, foodies and other discerning travelers to finally visit Tucson.”The latest group of Creative Cities ranges far and wide and includes Limoges, France, as a City of Craft and Folk Art based on its famed ceramics. Alba, Italy, synonymous with truffles and Barolo wines, was named a City of Gastronomy. Chiang Mai, Thailand, was named a City of Craft and Folk Art, based on its lacquerware, bamboo weaving and other artisanal work. Bristol, England, home to the Oscar-winning animators Aardman Animations and the BBC’s Natural History Unit, was cited as a City of Film. Istanbul drew on its historic architecture and craft traditions, as well as its emergence as a contemporary design center to be named a City of Design.Some cities offer guidance to orient travelers to their creative sides. For others, the designation is a push in that direction. The following new American designees represent that spectrum.Birthplace of the jazz soloist Charlie Parker Jr., Kansas City, Mo., earned the nation’s first City of Music title, based on its history of jazz, especially bebop and swing, and the influence those styles had on musicians at home and abroad. The application was made by a number of organizations, including a neighborhood association representing Wendell Phillips, the city’s African-American community. It is home to the 18th and Vine district, also known as the jazz district, where visitors can still hear live music in the Blue Room at the American Jazz Museum. The nearby Mutual Musician Foundation International, a union founded in 1917, still holds jam sessions on weekend nights after midnight.Robert Altman made the 1996 jazz-themed film “Kansas City” in the area where the city hopes to see increased investment.“We are hopeful this is a way to get more attention to round out the development going on down there and take some of those properties with old facades and generate some new interest,” said Scott Wagner, the mayor pro tem of Kansas City.San Antonio based its pitch as a City of Gastronomy on its long history of settlement tied to its river and natural springs. Spanish colonists drew on these to create irrigation canals that linked their five regional San Antonio Missions, which are collectively a Unesco World Heritage site. Later, German immigrants contributed flour mills and breweries. “Our food here is a composite of all these different cultures — German, Spanish indigenous and Mexican,” said Elizabeth Johnson, a chef who owns Pharm Table restaurant and worked on the Unesco application. “We made the case that we have all these amazing traditions and we need to protect, reclaim and prioritize traditional foods.”It’s not hard to find good Tex-Mex food in San Antonio, but Ms. Johnson highlights the Pearl Brewery, a former brewing complex now revitalized with distinctive restaurants that include Southerleigh Fine Food & Brewery, which makes its own beer amid the historic works. The Native American side of colonial settlement — including native food — is emphasized on programs offered by Yanaguana Mission Heritage Tours.The city is also known for its food festivals, including the four-day Culinaria Festival (May 17 to 20) and more niche affairs, like the one-day La Gran Tamalada, featuring tamale-making each December.Several culinary initiatives are in the works, including trails devoted to tacos, barbecue and margaritas expected in 2019.Seattle has thriving music and culinary scenes, but applied to Unesco as a City of Literature, highlighting its 19 independent bookstores; widespread library system with a central showpiece attraction in the Seattle Central Library, designed by the architect Rem Koolhaas; and the number of nonprofits sponsoring writing workshops and author readings. “We decided on literature because it tells a story about Seattle that maybe people haven’t heard before,” said Stesha Brandon, the board president of Seattle City of Literature who worked on the Unesco application.While music and dining might be more concrete experiences to hang a trip on, Seattle offers an array of creative programs that show off its literary leanings. The first Wednesday of every month, a silent reading party — where people read silently in the company of others — takes place at the Hotel Sorrento. Among nonprofits, Hugo House regularly offers author readings, classes, book launches and workshops. Seattle Arts & Lectures fills 2,500-seat Benaroya Hall for talks by such authors as Colson Whitehead and Viet Thanh Nguyen. Seattle’s bookish character surfaces in other mediums as well. Book-It Repertory Theater specializes in adapting full-length novels such as “The Maltese Falcon” for the stage. Musicians with the Bushwick Book Club Seattle write and perform songs inspired by a selected book, and encourage audiences to read that book before they attend the show. At any time, visitors can pull up the Seattle Poetic Grid on their smartphones and click on dots on the map that bring up poems contributed by locals related to that area.Advertisement

      By ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 25, 2018

A new generation of chefs is championing locally sourced menus, and a relaxation of liquor production laws has led to a boom in microbreweries.
Related Article
The construction cranes that pierce the downtown Calgary skyline and nearby neighborhoods suggest a boom on the Alberta prairie. In fact, in the past two years, sagging oil and gas prices have crimped Calgary’s economy, which is now showing signs of recovery. Projects underway before the slowdown, including the music museum at Studio Bell, have charged the city’s cultural scene. A new generation of chefs is championing Alberta-grown-and-raised foodstuffs, and a relaxation of liquor production laws in 2013 has led to a boom in microbreweries. Banff-bound visitors commonly land in Calgary and head directly to the national park, about a 90-minute drive west. But Calgary also champions the outdoors, with extensive recreational paths, world-class Olympic facilities that are open to the public and a penchant for open-air cafes even in winter when, occasionally, the chinook winds sweep in.
Explore the map and find things to do in Calgary.
Arrive at Studio Bell (18 Canadian dollars admission, or about $14.40), home to the National Music Center, in time to catch the 3 p.m. demonstration of its silent-movie-era organ. The music museum approaches its subject from multiple angles spanning the purely visual — recently, K.D. Lang’s vintage-inspired costume collection — and the science of sound. Interactive exhibits teach visitors to play the drums, guitar or piano and conduct a touchless theremin instrument. The fifth-floor bridge that connects the two wings of the museum, designed by the architect Brad Cloepfil, features a “Solar Drone” installation that gathers solar energy from roof panels to play its ceiling-suspended series of piano sound boards. When you leave, peek through ground-floor windows to spy the R.V.-based mobile studio once owned by the Rolling Stones.Calgary’s Beltline, a gentrifying neighborhood just blocks south of downtown, is destined to expand yours. Some of the city’s most creative chefs and bars have addresses here. Start with a fancy cocktail — try the rosy mezcal-sloe-gin Other Other Woman (13 dollars) — in a swanky setting at Proof. Then walk a block to Ten Foot Henry, a hardy vegetable-focused restaurant with a bustling dining room and a cheeky cartoon namesake. The open kitchen turns out robust dishes that recently included roasted gai lan broccoli in tahini (13 dollars); a Spanish style tortilla made with yams (10 dollars); and scallops with smoked prosciutto (29 dollars). For small plates and natural wines, hit the retro charmer Pigeonhole from the chef Justin Leboe where past menus have included heirloom tomatoes with local peaches (15 dollars) and lamb bacon atop toast (12 dollars).The stretch of 9th Avenue Southeast running from Studio Bell through the neighboring Inglewood district has been dubbed the Music Mile for its clubs. At least two of them stage live music nightly, including the blues-centric Blues Can. Nearby, Ironwood Stage & Grill programs everything from bluegrass and jazz to Bruce Springsteen tributes, socially conscious folk music and nationally touring acts. Paintings and photographs of music stars line the walls bracketing the raised stage, and elevated banquettes offer uninterrupted sightlines.With some 500 miles of multiuse pathways, Calgary claims to have the most extensive urban recreational network in North America, and Calgarians cycle in all seasons, including winter. Make like a local and arrange to have a fat-tire bike, designed to ride in the snow, delivered from Nomad Mobile Gear Rentals (60 dollars for one day). For a scenic ride from downtown, cycle the paths that follow the city-bisecting Bow River. A series of pedestrian and cycling bridges crosses it, including the tunnellike Peace Bridge, designed by the Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava.Work up an appetite for lunch at Deane House. The retrofitted 1906 home, originally part of the frontier outpost Fort Calgary, is now under the management of the team behind the acclaimed River Café in Prince’s Island Park. The menu champions contemporary Canadian cuisine, drawing on local ingredients in seasonal dishes that recently included hangar steak tartare with puffed barley (17 dollars), cured Alberta trout with beets (14 dollars) and duck confit pirogi (21 dollars). Tables fill sunny wraparound porches, and interior rooms channel the wild yonder in landscape paintings, mounted animal heads and a chandelier made of branches.Public art animates Calgary’s downtown, and Jaume Plensa’s gigantic wire-mesh head “Wonderland” is a popular selfie stop. For a more thoughtful exploration of contemporary art, make your way to the Esker Foundation (free) on the fourth floor of an Inglewood office building. The privately funded, noncommercial gallery, named for the ridge left behind by a retreating glacier, aims to stimulate discussion on contemporary affairs via three shows staged each year. Winter shows survey the color effects explored by the artist Kapwani Kiwanga (Feb. 3 to May 6) and the fantastical beasts created by the duo known as DaveandJenn (Jan. 29 to April 29).Across the Elbow River from downtown, Inglewood makes a funky first impression, and its collection of independent boutiques maintains that vibe. Troll for locally made ceramics and wood-turned bowls at Galleria Inglewood. Among several resale shops, Antiquaire Boutique assembles good-condition vintage apparel. Shop Purr Fine Clothing & Accessories for retro-inspired looks, the Uncommons for wearable sleeping bags and the Silk Road Spice Merchant for herb blends. Lodged in a former stable, the Livery Shop stocks clothing and accessory brands with rustic character, including Brixton flannel shirts, Fjallraven backpacks and the shop’s own Camp Brand Goods T-shirts.Since December 2013, when the province dropped its minimum production levels, microbreweries have exploded in the city. Eighteen are now plotted on a new map available free at many breweries. While in Inglewood, take a break with a refreshing Dandelion’s Blonde or a fruity This Must Be the I.P.A. (5 dollar pints) at Cold Garden Beverage Company. The 2017 newcomer occupies a garage-like industrial space with thrift-shop couches and wooden tables in view of the brewing tanks.New construction is filling the redeveloping East Village near the river. But one prominent historic address, the former Simmons mattress factory, has been saved and now hosts three acclaimed restaurants. Try them all by dining at one, Charbar. Here the chef Jessica Pelland butchers animals, ages steaks and cooks them on an Argentine-style wood-fired grill. This is a steakhouse that meat-averse diners can embrace, with loads of vegetable options, including a charred and raw vegetable salad (14 dollars), best ordered with a side of Sidewalk Citizen sourdough (6 dollars) from the neighboring bakery. Grilled “asado style” steaks (market price) come with beef fat fries. Start with a spicy rum-citrus Boxspring cocktail (13 dollars) and end with an espresso (5 dollars) from Phil & Sebastian Coffee Roasters, another Simmons tenant.Calgary may be most associated with cowboys, thanks to its 10-day summer rodeo, the Calgary Stampede, but its actors, dancers and musicians contribute to a thriving performing arts scene over the rest of the year. Though influential groups, including Lunchbox Theatre and the Alberta Ballet, perform elsewhere, the Arts Commons complex of theaters downtown makes handy one-stop cultural shopping. Resident companies include the polished Alberta Theater Projects, staging new works and, often, those by Canadian playwrights, and the innovative One Yellow Rabbit Performance Theater.You may spot local chefs and restaurateurs browsing the Calgary Farmers Market, especially if you’re in the company of Karen Anderson, owner of Alberta Food Tours. The Calgary-based cookbook author offers a series of culinary tours in the province, including the Sunday Brunch and a Calgary Farmers’ Market Tour (55 dollars). The event starts with Yum Bakery savory pastries, salads and Fratello Analog coffee procured at the market and served at the neighboring J. Webb Wine Merchants shop. Next, a prandial promenade around the food stalls samples Better fruit popsicles, Sylvan Star Gouda cheese and Lund’s Organic Farm seasonal produce, among many satiating stops.Calgary held the Winter Olympics in 1988 and has continued to use the competition’s venues, which are now a training draw for medal hopefuls. Several Olympic facilities are open to the public, including the bobsled run at WinSport park. More accessible is Olympic Plaza in the heart of downtown; it was built for the games as the site of the medal ceremonies. In winter, the reflecting pond becomes a free skating rink, attracting Katarina Witt and Brian Boitano imitators (skate rentals cost 12 dollars for up to two hours).Hotel rates can be quite high in Calgary during the week when business travelers dominate the guest registries. But on weekends, rates tend to drop, making some of its nicest hotels affordable. Leading that list is the 143-room Le Germain Hotel Calgary, a stylish spot downtown across the street from the Calgary Tower. Spacious rooms with espresso machines and plush linens feel residential, and the popular restaurant Charcut is in the lobby. Rooms from 189 dollars; legermainhotels.com.Opened in 1914, the historic Fairmont Palliser offers grand public spaces, including its elegant lobby and woody bar, and a full range of amenities, among them a spa and swimming pool. Rooms from 190 dollars; fairmont.com.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by5 placesGastronomic Montmartre is on the rise. Arty younger Parisians are flocking to this atmospheric old working-class quarter, which has seen a wave of new and reasonably priced restaurants. One was just awarded a Michelin star.By Alexander LobranoFor years, the 11th and 12 arrondissements, two formerly quiet, working class neighborhoods in eastern Paris, have been the preferred location for the French capital’s best young chefs. Why? Affordable apartments assure a hungry young clientele for the new restaurateurs who choose the area for its low-rent commercial spaces. Now a growing number of the city’s fledgling cooks are setting up shop in another atmospheric old working-class quarter: Montmartre, a hilltop district in the 18th arrondissement best known for the Sacre Coeur basilica and the artists who once lived and worked here — Toulouse-Lautrec, Utrillo and Modigliani, among others. Today, most of the action is on the back of La Butte (the mound, in French), as the locals call this spot in the center of Montmartre. Here on the north-facing slope of the district, arty younger Parisians who’d rather spend their money on good food than rent are flocking to a wave of excellent new and reasonably priced casual restaurants, including one that was just awarded a Michelin star. Aside from the miniature Jeff Koons-style sculptures adorning the tables, this year-and-a-half old place on a quiet side street looks like countless unremarkable middlebrow neighborhood restaurants in Paris. The locals know better, since young chef Laurent Magnin’s superb contemporary French cooking had made it one of the capital’s most exciting dark-horse tables. In early February, though, it won a star in the 2018 Michelin Guide to France, so the secret is out. Still, the snag for some may be that there’s no a la carte menu here. Instead, they only serve multicourse, blind tasting menus, although food phobias and allergies are respected. The menu changes often but dishes like risotto garnished with veal-stock lacquered crayfish; grilled sea bream with peanut sauce and a deconstructed paella are as beautiful to taste at as they are to behold. Good value for the money, and open for both lunch and dinner on Saturdays, too.39 rue Lamarck, 18th Arrondissement, restaurantlarcane.comSupplied daily by the country’s Atlantic, North Sea and Mediterranean ports, landlocked Paris is one of the world’s best cities for seafood lovers. The hitch? The sparkling fresh catch of the day is generally expensive. This explains why this year-old spot in a slickly redecorated former hardware store has become such a hit — their high-tide menu is easy on the wallet. Start with some smoked haddock, Breton oysters or shrimp with homemade mayonnaise, and then go for dishes like tuna tartare with black rice, cabbage, radishes and trout eggs; scallops with watercress, ricotta, Granny Smith apple and dried black olives; or octopus with cockles, broccoli and poutargue (dried fish eggs). Great list of craft beers and natural wines, too.98 rue Marcadet, 18th Arrondissement, fichon.frThe puckish name of this year-old organic vegan-vegetarian bistro — an abattoir is a slaughterhouse — comes from the fact that this stylish light-filled restaurant was formerly a butcher shop. The menu changes often but runs to dishes like a starter of quinoa-sweet-potato-and-red-cabbage rolls, blanquette of seitan (chewy wheat protein) in sesame cream and rose-and-pistachio cake.61 rue Ramey, 18th Arrondissement, facebook.com/abattoirvegetalA favorite French dictum is “Tout est bon dans le cochon,” or “Everything’s good from the pig.” For proof, come to this friendly bistro that celebrates the succulence of French pork in a variety of preparations, including an andouillette millefeuille, grilled pig’s ears with oranges and coriander, head cheese with capers and shallots, and pork belly roasted with citrus fruits. Non-porcine options include chicken-liver terrine, a catch-of-the-day fish and duck, and the profiteroles with vanilla ice cream and hot chocolate sauce should not be missed.185 rue Marcadet, 18th Arrondissement,lecochongaulois.comSince it opened just over a year ago, this good-looking modern bistro with a market-driven menu, oak-plank floors and Scandinavian style furniture has become one of the popular tables in the neighborhood. The chef Romain Lamon and his team work at a small open kitchen in the back of the room, and their seasonally evolving menu runs to contemporary French comfort food that’s consistently light, inventive and satisfying. Expect dishes like ravioli filled with egg yolks and miso, braised beef cheeks with lemon-carrot purée, and a clever riff on crème brûlée that comes with roasted apples and crushed pecans. 35 rue Ramey, 18th Arrondissement, polissons-restaurant.frAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerThere’s always the music, of course, from the Opry to hideaways like Santa’s Pub. The food is memorable, too, including Indian-Southern fusion.By Lucas Peterson“Folsom Prison Blues,” the 1955 Johnny Cash classic, isn’t exactly a deep cut — anyone with even a passing familiarity with country music has heard it. So when the Don Kelley Band tore into the opening riff at the beginning of their set at Robert’s Western World — one of many honky-tonks on a brightly lit neon strip of Broadway in downtown Nashville — I nodded my head and tapped my feet along with the other hundred or so people in the joint. It was the musical equivalent of comfort food — nothing too surprising or challenging. I wasn’t quite ready for what happened next.Luke McQueary, a skinny 17-year-old in a plaid Western-style shirt, stepped to the front of the stage and, instead of delivering the workmanlike guitar break I was expecting, set the stage aflame with a blistering solo I would have expected from someone twice his age and experience. It was no fluke — the virtuosity continued during the following song, performed with an earnest, almost Hendrix-like showmanship. I half expected someone to come out from the wings, wrap a robe around him, and help him off the stage, à la James Brown. I was surprised, but I shouldn’t have been. A place nicknamed “Music City” has a reputation to uphold, and Nashville was more than ready to exceed my expectations. A mecca for talented musicians, Tennessee not only has more high-quality live music than you could ever hope to enjoy, but top-notch dining — both traditional Southern cooking and contemporary twists on old standards. It’s a great location for those on a budget, too — I scarcely noticed the damage to my wallet after a four-night trip there in November.That area of Broadway is a little like the Las Vegas Strip or Bourbon Street: crowded and touristy, but fun in small doses. I visited there with my friend Halena Kays, with whom I crashed in nearby Murfreesboro, a suburb southeast of the city. We ended up at Robert’s Western World accidentally, as our plans to have dinner at nearby Merchants Restaurant, on the corner of Broadway and Fourth Avenue South, had hit a snag — the place was booked solid. No matter: We grabbed a $4 fried bologna sandwich (imagine a BLT — now imagine it twice as salty) and a couple of $4.25 Miller Lites at the honky-tonk while we listened to the aforementioned band.I soon received a text that a table had opened up and we walked over to Merchant’s. The place effectively operates as two restaurants, a pricier steak and seafood restaurant on the second floor, and a less expensive, modern southern bistro on the ground floor. We opted for the latter and grabbed a booth in the bright, spacious dining room. The fried green tomatoes ($11) were spot-on, and the Nashville Caesar salad with cornbread croutons ($12), and a pulled pork sandwich ($13) were satisfying. One nice thing: When they saw we were sharing everything, they were happy to split the dishes into separate portions.That strip of Broadway is just a stone’s throw from Ryman Auditorium, an indelible piece of Nashville history that belongs on every to-do list, especially if the Grand Ole Opry happens to be in residence. The Opry, an artistic home to country musicians since it began in 1925, takes place primarily at Opryland, about 25 minutes northeast of downtown. But if you can, see the show at the Ryman, home to the show from 1943-1974, which sometimes still hosts the Opry. The building itself is a relic — opened in 1892 as the Union Gospel Tabernacle, it earned the moniker “Mother Church of Country Music.” Near the back steps of its hallowed halls, Halena and I passed a young street performer with an amazing voice crooning a song I didn’t recognize. In Nashville, even the buskers have exceptional talent.Tickets aren’t terribly cheap — the premium seats run close to $100 — but there’s a slight workaround. I picked up the cheapest tickets I could find: Two obstructed view seats for $48 apiece. (I also checked StubHub and other second-hand ticket sites; they weren’t helpful.) I was expecting to sit smack in front of a column — I wasn’t. The seats, on the main floor, right in the middle of the auditorium, were perfect. And while there was a thin pole in my line of sight, it didn’t bother me at all.Onto the show — the Opry was one of the most pleasurable music performances I’ve attended in recent memory. After grabbing a $9 draft beer, we found our seats to the din of audience chatter and the buttery baritone of the evening’s announcer and M.C., Eddie Stubbs. The Opry functions simultaneously as a live radio show, broadcast on 650 AM WSM. If you’re familiar with public radio’s “Live from Here” (the show formerly known as “A Prairie Home Companion”), it functions in a similar way. Different acts come on and play just two or three songs — while that’s happening, the next act is hanging out in the wings, which gives the show a casual, collegial quality.An announcer’s podium is set up stage right, along with different producers and assistants working on their laptops — bands tune their instruments, guests chatter and banter with Mr. Stubbs, who also functions as an impeccable straight man, and the audience groans and chuckles while cheesy ad copy is read during the breaks. It’s a ton of fun. And then, of course, there’s the music.“Connie Smith, ladies and gentlemen, the Rolls-Royce of country singers,” announced Mr. Stubbs, who then motioned for us to applaud. Traditional crooners like Ms. Smith were in the house, as was a fresh-faced young man named William Michael Morgan, who played his debut single “I Met a Girl” (“He ain’t been off the teat long,” quipped Mike Snider, one of the other musicians). Having discovered my inner country music fan, I stopped by the Country Music Hall of Fame ($25.95, but only $14 after 4 p.m.; the museum closes at 5 p.m.) to continue my education. It’s easy to get lost in the overwhelming amount of history and information — but make sure you don’t miss, among other relics, Carl Perkins’s blue suede shoes (yes, those blue suede shoes), Elvis’s gold Cadillac (complete with refrigerator and swivel-mounted color TV) and some of Chet Atkins’s old guitars, including his first, a Sears Silverstone.But there’s no substitution for live music. I made my way to the Bluebird Cafe, a popular, intimate venue that features local and established acts. Tickets are, well, extremely difficult to come by (it’s been showcased on the television show “Nashville”). They’re released weekly by the venue and space is tight, which means you have to be both lightning quick and lucky to nab a seat. If you’re in, you’re golden — tickets typically run in the $20 to $30 range. Cafe workers supposedly monitor Craigslist and ticket sites to crack down on scalping. If you’re not fortunate enough to snag online tickets (the likely case), you can wait in a queue that approaches the “Hamilton”-esque for one of 10 or so same-day tickets. I showed up at 7:30 one evening and the man at the door stifled a laugh. “Yeah, you’re not gonna make it in,” he said.Down but not out, I headed over to Bransford Avenue to Santa’s Pub, a bar housed in a trailer that does live music on Sundays. After showing my ID to a man with a huge beard (was that Santa?), I headed inside, the top of my head almost brushing the ceiling of the double-wide. “No Cussin’, No Beer, No Cigarettes” read a sign on the back wall. Well, I counted all three. The place was cramped and smoky, like any respectable dive bar, and the beer was cold and cheap ($2 for a Pabst Blue Ribbon). The band, a five-piece outfit called Santa’s Ice Cold Pickers, was tight — their rendition of Ray Price’s “Crazy Arms” had me humming along.Another highly enjoyable show I attended was at the Basement East, on the other side of the Cumberland River in East Nashville. The venue was decidedly less intimate than Santa’s or Bluebird, but I couldn’t complain about the program — a Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young tribute show, with proceeds benefiting Autism Speaks. For $10 (plus $2 service fee) I was treated to a Murderer’s Row of young, local talent. Highlights included Jesse Lynn Madera performing a lovely cover of “Don’t Let It Bring You Down” and Amber Woodhouse leading the excellent house band in a stirring rendition of “For What It’s Worth.” While music is unquestionably the star of the Nashville scene, there are exceptional eats to enjoy between shows. Hot chicken, which has seen its star rise over the last decade, is one of the biggest attractions. I loved my crispy-skinned, exhilaratingly spicy leg quarter from Prince’s Hot Chicken ($5) which has no equal, in my opinion. But it also took an hour of waiting in line. It took no time to get my order at Pepperfire, another worthwhile hot chicken joint less than 10 minutes away from Prince’s. There, I dug into a Tender Royale, a spicy, deep-fried cheese sandwich topped with three chicken tenders ($12.49) with a strong, cumin-forward profile. For those looking for a complete Southern meal, Arnold’s Country Kitchen is the place to find it. The classic meat-and-three (main course and three side dishes) runs just $10.74 for a huge tray full of food. I had a plate of thinly shaved roast beef with mac and cheese, tender greens and powerfully smoky pinto beans. Cafe Roze, a place with slightly healthier fare from New York-transplant Julia Jaksic, does a mean grain bowl called the Roze Bowl ($14) with beet tahini, black lentils and quinoa. And then there’s the happy hour at Chauhan Ale and Masala House, an Indian-Southern food fusion restaurant, where I got an order of lamb keema papadi nachos with a tamarind chutney ($6) that I still think about weeks after the fact.But Nashville’s power to disarm and delight remains rooted in its music. When I attended the Opry, two guys who go by the handle LoCash strutted onto the stage in what came as the biggest surprise of the night. At first glance, LoCash seemed to epitomize the slick twang of everything I don’t particularly enjoy about modern country music — impeccably crafted facial hair, power chords and tacky clothes. Halena grabbed my arm, and I braced myself for awfulness.Boy, was I wrong; these guys were fantastic performers. Within minutes, they had me and the rest of the audience eating out their hands — clapping and singing along to a song I’d never heard before. I don’t know if their exceedingly catchy “I Love This Life” will go down in the annals of country music’s great songs. But it was easily the most fun four minutes of the trip, and had me unironically singing the refrain the entire car ride home: I love a Friday night — man, I love this life.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrom skating to bobsledding, the Olympic village in the Adirondacks offers visitors a chance to participate in a variety of winter games. The food is good, too.By Bill PenningtonRocketing down an iced bobsled track at 50 miles an hour, my first thought was not of the pageantry and festive spirit that will accompany the Pyeongchang Winter Olympics in South Korea in February.Yes, that 16-day winter sports celebration will feature athleticism, grace and life-changing accomplishment, captivating tens of millions watching at home.But as our bobsled whizzed into a sharply banked turn that flipped me nearly upside down, my reaction was more primal: Am I still living an interactive Olympic experience if I close my eyes in fright?In the upstate New York village of Lake Placid, home to the Winter Olympic Games in 1932 and 1980, it is much more than an existential question.For most of us, the Winter Olympics are something to be viewed from afar. We won’t likely qualify to compete, and attending the Games is logistically daunting, especially at this late date.But the Winter Olympics need not seem like an inaccessible, almost illusionary world set inside a snow globe.At Lake Placid in the Adirondacks, about a five-hour drive from New York City and Boston, there is a fully operational, authentic alternative for those feeling left out of the Olympic party this winter. And unlike watching the Olympics on your living room couch, in Lake Placid, you get to participate.In addition to Lake Placid’s Olympic-level bobsled runs, the public can skate on the 400-meter oval where Eric Heiden, an American, won five speedskating Olympic gold medals in 1980. There are miles of groomed trails that take cross-country skiers past the same sparkling, forested scenery that hosted the world’s best Nordic skiers. They even let you cross-country ski and shoot a rifle at a target if you’ve always wanted to try the biathlon.You can ascend an elevator 26 stories to stand adjacent to the launching point atop the imposing 90- and 120-meter ski jumps. They do not let you go off the jumps, but trust me, you get the idea.There is downhill skiing and snowboarding on the trails that decided the outcome of six Olympic races at Whiteface Mountain. The terrain at Whiteface caters to all abilities and can be as challenging as anywhere, too — its vertical drop of 3,430 feet is the most in the East, including New England’s famed ski areas.And last but certainly not least, in the center of the village is the rink where the powerhouse Soviet Union ice hockey team was dethroned as Olympic champion by a band of American college students in what has become known as the Miracle on Ice. It draws more than a million visitors annually.The public skating opportunity is not limited to the speedskating oval; there is also public skating inside a rink from the 1932 Olympics, which is contained in the village’s Olympic Center, where there is an Olympic museum.The various sports facilities have been maintained and periodically upgraded — the area still hosts World Cup events — by New York State, which shortly after the 1980 Olympics recognized the need to protect and develop the state’s investment in the Lake Placid Games.A website, whiteface.com/activities, explains all the details of the Olympic venues and lists the prices to use them. Some venues are more affordable than others — skating on the oval is $8, for example, while the bobsled experience costs $95 for an adult (and includes a photo and T-shirt). There is also a discounted $35 one-day ticket called the Olympic Sites Passport that allows access to various venues; visit whiteface.com/tickets.But as much as Lake Placid offers a wealth of exhilarating outdoor winter recreational activities, it is much more than a quasi-Olympic fantasy camp. It is a year-round resort — more popular, in fact, in the summer than winter — and as such is chock-full of shops, restaurants, bars, cozy inns and large resort hotels.It is the reason that Ski Magazine readers regularly select Lake Placid as the best ski village in the Eastern United States.The dining temptations are many and varied, from Smoke Signals (2489 Main Street; smokesignalsq.com), where the pulled pork and beef brisket are smoked in-house, to The Cellar, which brings an innovative approach to familiar German dishes. The Cellar (2830 Wilmington Road; cellarlakeplacid.com) has been renovated under new ownership and is downstairs from the modest Alpine Inn. But don’t let the understated appearance dissuade you — it’s a subterranean, hidden gem.Lodging options are diverse and plentiful, with at least 35 to choose from, although the major hotels do fill up quickly on weekends. At one end of the village is the idyllic Mirror Lake Inn Resort and Spa (77 Mirror Lake Drive; mirrorlakeinn.com; doubles start at $280, weekdays), which has rooms with mountain and lake views and a comfortable lobby where you’ll want to sit by the fire and play checkers all night.Also located just off Main Street is the Hampton Inn and Suites (801 Mirror Lake Drive; hilton.com; doubles start at $129, weekdays), which is a short walk to the Olympic Center and just steps from another popular local hangout, the Lake Placid Pub & Brewery (813 Mirror Lake Drive; ubuale.com).The mile-long bobsled run, meanwhile, is about a 15-minute drive from the village, which gives you time to build up your courage. It’s not quite as scary as it sounds, although they do place a heavy duty Nascar-like helmet on your head and assign a professional driver and brakeman to accompany you on the descent through about 20 hair-raising, zigzag turns on the refrigerated track.It’s sort of like an amusement park roller coaster except in one significant way. A few seconds into the trip you realize that you’re not on rails. The driver’s considerable skills and centrifugal force are keeping you on the track. But it’s also true — and calming — that they have been training bobsled drivers on the site since 1930.That’s when you realize how deep the Olympic spirit runs in Lake Placid. And that allows you to finally open your eyes to take it all in.Bill Pennington, a sports reporter at The New York Times, will cover his 10th Olympics next month at the Pyeongchang Winter Games in South Korea.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byfrugal travelerThere is no shortage of history, sultry beauty and architectural delights. And a visit needn’t cost you much.By Lucas PetersonMy guide, Karen Wortham, led me on a path from Johnson Square, one of the many quadrangular parks that give Savannah, Ga., its distinct character, down to River Street, which runs along the Savannah River. We stopped in front of a relatively modest statue that depicted a black family with an inscription from Maya Angelou below. The statue, Ms. Wortham explained, was a compromise after a yearslong battle with the city. Originally, she said, the monument was to depict a more real, raw picture of slavery in Georgia. The city balked, and the monument’s designer settled on a family of four in church clothes, with chains lying at the family’s feet. The quotation, too, was called into question for its graphic language, but it was, Ms. Wortham said, simply the reality of what happened.Savannah is a gorgeous place — Spanish moss drips gloomily from gnarled oak trees and old colonial-style houses line its dignified streets — but it is also a city of great complexity. Old Southern money coexists with a majority African-American population, who in turn share Savannah with a steady flow of tourists — some headed to nearby Tybee Island and others hoping to enjoy the city’s relaxed open container laws. Mix in a slew of young business owners and students from the Savannah College of Art and Design and you’ve got a fascinating demographic in a city with no shortage of history, sultry beauty and architectural delights. It’s a place well worth getting to know, and, as I found over a recent weekend visit, it needn’t cost an arm and a leg. It is also, apparently, one of the most haunted cities in America. That, according to my friendly Uber driver, Charlene, originally from Tennessee but a 40-year resident of the city. “In my own house I’ve experienced some stuff,” she said. “I was talking to my girlfriend on Skype and she said, ‘Do you have a cat?’ I looked and there was like a cloud, dancing beside me. It freaked her out and me, too.”She dropped me off at the beautifully restored Galloway House Inn, a Neoclassical plantation-style house built near the turn of the 20th century. One of the owners, Jim Klotz, met me on the wide, welcoming porch, behind a series of huge white columns, and took me around back to my apartment. It had everything I needed, including a complimentary bottle of wine. The price was right, too — $139 per night booked through Hotels.com. For seasonal specials and promotions, check the inn’s website — which, by the way, has a section dedicated to its possibly being haunted. I was beginning to sense a theme.So I ran with it, booking a tour with Got Ghosts!, led by Patrick Burns, a paranormal investigator. I paid roughly half what I would have paid booking through the website by taking advantage of a Groupon deal I found and combining it with an additional coupon code that was being advertised on the site (final cost: $15). Clad in a kilt and carrying an iPad, Mr. Burns declared Savannah to be a “city built on its dead.” Members of our group, some of whom were drinking from plastic cups (drinking in public is allowed within the Historic District, and some restaurants will offer to-go cups at the end of a meal), tittered under their umbrellas.It was fun to take a nighttime walking tour around Savannah — we saw, among other things, the Sorrel Weed House (a period mansion that offers its own ghost tours), the old Savannah Theater (established in 1818) and Chippewa Square, where the famous bench scene from “Forrest Gump” was filmed. Maybe it was the steady rain pelting our group during this outdoor tour, but beyond a few nice personal anecdotes, I wasn’t terribly impressed with the ghost stories and peeled off after about 90 minutes.I had better luck with the weather the next day, when I took a quick tour through the beautiful Bonaventure Cemetery, a former plantation site that became public land in 1907. The cemetery, which was depicted in John Berendt’s “Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil,” imparts a sense of sad, haunted stillness with its many decaying monuments and trees weeping with moss. After making a small donation at the visitor center and taking a map, I visited the graves of the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Conrad Aiken and the songwriter Johnny Mercer.The next morning, I found myself crossing the inspiration for Mercer’s most famous song — I drove over Moon River (in a car booked through Priceline for $28 a day) on my way to a half-day kayaking tour I purchased through Savannah Canoe and Kayak. For $65, we would tour marshlands around Skidaway Island, one of the major barrier islands off the Georgia coast.Our guide, Aaron, had an affable, mountain man sensibility, and did a nice job leading our group on a three-hour tour through the patches of spartina, or cordgrass, that grew in the brackish marsh water. The tide was high, Aaron noted, as we paddled. “In a couple of hours, we might not be able to make it back to the dock,” he said, only somewhat ominously. We saw a variety of wildlife, including cormorants, egrets, a couple of bald eagles and plenty of deer sloshing around in the marsh. We made a stop on Skidaway Island itself, hiking a quick loop in the state park before paddling back. Shoulders slightly sore, I tipped Aaron $10 and took my leave.There’s no shortage of ways to have fun outside and around Savannah. On a different morning, I crossed the South Carolina border on Highway 170 while Jerry Reed’s “East Bound and Down” played on the radio and drove to the Savannah National Wildlife Refuge. I was hoping to explore the refuge a bit and, if I got lucky, see an alligator — after all, the road I was driving on was nicknamed Alligator Alley. I made a turn onto Laurel Hill Wildlife Drive and did a slow crawl over the next hour or so through the refuge, alternately driving on the unpaved road and occasionally getting out to hike around and keep an eye out for wildlife. As I was nearing the end of my loop, I saw the car in front of me stop and a bare arm emerged from the passenger window, pointing urgently to the left. I stopped my car, too, and looked out to see the outline of — a gator! It was maybe 7 or 8 feet long, flicking its tail and slithering through the marsh. I watched for 10 minutes or so until it had completely faded into the murk. I got lucky.If there’s one thing you don’t need much luck at all to find in Savannah, it’s a good meal — the city is crawling with both newer chef-driven concepts and reliable, more modest standbys. Eating in the main dining room at The Grey, a restaurant housed in building that served as a Greyhound bus station from 1938 to 1964, was a bit outside my budget, so I went in early one evening and ordered off the bar menu. I had a respectable chicken schnitzel sandwich ($12) that went well with a happy hourglass of Portuguese sparkling rosé ($5.50, down from $11). Another repurposed space, The Atlantic — located in an old gas station — definitely impressed. After a rather lengthy wait to get seated, I enjoyed a crunchy romaine wedge ($10) followed by a potpie ($14) that was loaded with fat oysters the size of hotel soaps. I chased with a nice full-bodied local beer, a Teufel Hunden from Savannah-based Service Brewing ($6).Closer to my inn was Cotton & Rye (located in a former bank), another in the wave of new restaurants that have flooded Savannah the last several years. I mostly appreciated their modern take on Southern cuisine — a salad of tossed greens in a bacon-sorghum vinaigrette ($9) struck me as a little rudimentary, but a small cast-iron skillet filled with succulent shrimp and cheesy, slightly tangy grits ($13) was maybe the single most enjoyable thing I ate on the trip. A hoppy local saison from Southbound Brewing ($3 during happy hour) made a good accompaniment.If you’re not one to take pictures of your food and want that quintessential Savannah photograph, check out Wormsloe Historic Site, a former plantation (Georgia’s oldest) established in the 1730s by Noble Jones, one of the first settlers to arrive from England. After driving through the large gated entrance and paying the $10 admission fee, I stared slack-jawed at the poignant beauty of an avenue lined on either side by hundreds of trees — stately oaks covered in Spanish moss, creating a canopied thoroughfare over a mile long.At the end of the avenue (which you can walk or drive) is a small museum and visitors center that tells the history of the site. While slavery was actually outlawed in Georgia’s original charter, that charter was revoked soon after Wormsloe was established and the use of slave labor began. In general, I found the role of slavery in the history of the site (and in much of Savannah) to be somewhat glossed over.“This is what’s known as softening history,” said Karen Wortham, of Journey By Faith tours. We were standing on a ballast-stone road at the entrance to barracoons (from the Spanish, barracón): cavelike enclosures where slaves were held before being sent to auction. During the course of her tour ($25), which I wholeheartedly recommend, Ms. Wortham told me a good deal of information about Savannah’s history — information that I did not see on most of the visible signs and plaques around the city. “They say cotton is king,” Ms. Wortham said. “No, it is not. The money was in the breeding plantations. Two men keeping eight women pregnant at all times. In 10 years, you could become a rich man.”We met in Franklin Square, across from the First African Baptist Church, which dates back to 1773. Franklin Square, Ms. Wortham said, was supposedly the place where slaves were brought to be punished. The legend, she said, was that Savannah’s signature Spanish moss would not grow in the trees at Franklin Square because of the shame of it all. Slightly skeptical, I looked up at the branches. I didn’t see any moss. Over the next couple of hours, we walked and talked — about the horrors that took place during Savannah’s pivotal role in the trans-Atlantic slave trade, but also of her love for the city she has no plans to leave anytime soon. She told me about The Weeping Time — the largest single sale of human beings in American history, which took place on a racetrack in Savannah in 1857 to pay off a gambling debt — as well as slave manifests, and how some of the language of those manifests (words like “trifling” and “sorry,” used to describe slaves) came to be appropriated by black culture. Ms. Wortham taught me a good deal that I didn’t know, and she never hedged and never softened her language — and for that, I was grateful.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesThe ever-evolving menu at Gastón Acurio’s Bodegón, which opened in July, is a deep dive into casera home-cooking and Lima’s multicultural cuisine. By Shaun PettThe trick of Gastón Acurio’s latest restaurant, El Bodegón, is to make you believe it has always existed on this quiet corner in the Miraflores neighborhood. Mr. Acurio, Peru’s most famous chef, with a global empire of 50 restaurants, kept the name and much of the design of the previous restaurant in order to evoke a classic Limeña taberna. The walls are covered in old portraits of famous footballers and Peruvian celebrities. Classic rock — Sting, Clapton, the Beatles — plays in the background. Mostly local workers fill the intimate space, textured with dark wood, brick and marble tables, during a late lunch.With nearly 50 dishes, the ever-evolving menu at Bodegon (which, in fact, opened in July) is a deep dive into casera home-cooking and Lima’s multicultural cuisine. Over 20 years ago, Mr. Acurio lit the fuse for the boom in Peruvian cuisine, and here he is again, offering a new statement of possibilities. The chef said he is remembering and recovering the food from his childhood, “all the dishes that I lost in time because they were only made by my grandmother or my family or because they were just made in the ’70s.” While this effort could easily descend into an exercise in twee nostalgia, Mr. Acurio’s playfulness and sincerity grounds things in the present: The menu follows seasonal, local ingredients and he solicits food memories from his customers and on social media. During a recent visit, baffled by options, we depended on the friendly and knowledgeable waiters to decipher the menu. We started with the salty and rich crab causa, poetically named “more crab than causa,” which arrived as a Pop Art provocation of golden mashed potato layers overflowing with a crab and egg salad, drenched in a Pepto-Bismol-pink sauce. A salad of lima beans was fresh and tasty. A whole cauliflower did something new with a vegetable oft overlooked in Peru, subbing here for chicken in the popular dish aji de gallina; cooked in a rich creamy sauce spiked with Parmesan and peppers, the cauliflower melted in my mouth. The huatia de res — an ancient pre-Columbian preparation of braised beef in herbs — was succulent, accentuated by sides of beans, rice and fried yuca. For dessert, we ordered the suspiro (breath) de chiramoya, chunks of the buttery custard apple bathed in dulce de leche and topped with soft meringue. This is fun, casual gluttony and the copious portions have many diners leaving with leftovers. My only quibble — a minor lapse encountered at other Lima restaurants — was a glass of local draft beer delivered with far too much foam. But one can’t go wrong with classic pisco-based cocktails and the ginger ale-spiked Chilcano goes down far too easily.The experiments of Lima’s high-end tasting menus have garnered the spotlight, but El Bodegón is part of a growing movement to renovate the food of the everyday. Mr. Acurio is broadening the accessibility of Peru’s culinary gains and offering a quality of cooking rarely found at this price point in Lima. The hourlong lines at lunch — reservations are accepted for dinner only — already have him planning another taberna.El Bodegón, Calle Tarapacá 197, Miraflores; www.elbodegon.com.pe. An average meal for two, without drinks or tip, is 130 soles, about $40. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCHASING THE DEALWengen, a popular winter sports destination, has seen visitors turning toward attractively priced rental properties; hotels are working to stay competitive. By Jane A. PetersonVisitors arrive in Wengen on a cogwheel train and find a traffic-free Swiss ski village perched on a snowy cliff that overlooks the Lauterbrunnen Valley. Towering above are the famous Eiger, Mönch and Jungfrau peaks; nestled in one mountain saddle is Europe’s highest rail station, Jungfraujoch. Time has not radically altered the quaint look of Wengen’s shingled chalets and belle epoque hotels — or its miles of forested ski runs, which this season received piles of snow in November and December. What is changing, though, is where visitors choose to stay — with rising numbers choosing to rent private chalet apartments rather than hotels. (Still, the Jungfrau region enjoys the highest hotel occupancy rates in Switzerland, according to government figures.) Wengen is on the world map because of the famous World Cup racecourse, the Lauberhorn. During the races, held in January, thousands of fans pour in to watch racers hurl themselves down the icy slopes, followed by long bouts of partying.Cheering on Canada’s racers this year was Peter Stephens, whose party of four booked a new two-bedroom chalet apartment with an uninterrupted view of the mountains. “It’s awesome,” he said. “We’re right in the village close to the gondola and the train.”While Mr. Stephens booked with the local Swiss Maid Services,  a small chalet operator managing 34 privately owned apartments, the apartment is also advertised on other booking sites, including Airbnb, which is credited for the latest surge in chalet rentals in all Swiss mountain resorts. “Airbnb has finally come to the mountains, bringing new clientele,” said Harry John, the director of BE! Tourism, the canton of Bern’s government tourism board. “It’s part of the game today, especially with the younger generation.” In Wengen, the Airbnb surge began two years ago, according to Rolf Wegmüller, the managing director of Wengen Tourism, the local government tourism board. As more owners have signed up, he said more guests are able to book chalets, an increasing preference among all generations. Americans Carol Birkland and Tom Woxland, who have been coming to Wengen since the early 1990s when they lived in Geneva, abandoned winter hotel stays four years ago after they spotted a sign at the local cheese shop, “Ferienwohnung zu vermieten,” which means holiday home for rent. The couple, now retired and living in Iowa, like to spend three weeks in the shop’s two-bedroom flat in Chäs Gruebi, which rents for approximately 1,200 Swiss francs a week — roughly the same in United States dollars. “We feel a part of the village — more like residents than guests,” Ms. Birkland said. “We open a bottle of Swiss wine, light the fireplace, sit on a comfy sofa, relax with friends and then enjoy a great cheese fondue. You can’t do that in a hotel room.”Minnesota native Jerry Johnson, who also prefers chalets over hotels, booked directly with Swiss Maid Services on his second visit to Wengen, after mixed success with VRBO.com. When he arrived, there were groceries on the doorstep and an immaculate condo with a view of the Jungfrau. “You can see actual pictures of rooms and views of where you are staying versus checking in to find your hotel room is over a Dumpster with no view,” he said. Beyond the homey ambience, guests often book apartments, rather than hotels, to save money. “It’s a good deal less — up to 40 percent,” said Julie Doyle, the owner of Swiss Maid Services. For a two-bedroom, her rentals range from 1,200 to 2,650 Swiss francs per week. She has a one-week minimum during high season periods that include Christmas, New Year’s, and school holidays, which are staggered throughout February. Otherwise, the minimum is four nights. (A weeklong stay in mid-March for a family of four at the Beausite Park, a four-star hotel near the children’s beginner slopes, currently starts at 3,136 Swiss francs.) Wengen now has a number of chalet service providers that offer a host of extras. “We have a concierge available daily,” said Rachel Padley of Alpine Holiday Services, a Swiss native who founded her business four years ago after sensing growing demand for a personalized service that would boost rental prices of top-end chalets. Two-bedroom flats she manages range from 1,800 to 2,600 Swiss francs per week. Extra services, charged separately, include daily cleaning, breakfast and grocery delivery, champagne and flowers on arrival. During high season, booking far in advance is advisable. In October, returning Philadelphia guest Mark Putnam found only one three-bedroom chalet available over the holidays. He took it for his party of five at a cost of 5,485 Swiss francs for nine days. “As it turned out, we have a gorgeous view, a good location, and it’s well equipped,” he said. In Wengen, chalet rentals started accelerating a decade ago when many longtime visitors began to snap up properties as fast as developers could build them, a trend that lost momentum in 2012 when Swiss voters approved a “second home law” that prohibited more holiday home building in Swiss resort areas, partly to stop the increase in absentee owners who leave their holiday homes shuttered most of the year. But the law did not slow the demand for rentals, particularly among Swiss visitors. In the winter 2015-16, Swiss guests booked 25 percent more nights in chalets than they had four years earlier. Mr. Wegmüller credits part of that rise to Swiss parents who prefer booking chalets because they offer better “family time.” Several Wengen hotels have converted into private apartments, which are then sold separately to both Swiss and foreign buyers. “The driving force is that a hotel is worth more than double when broken up into apartments, even after conversion costs,” said Alan Norris, one of 20 hoteliers in Wengen. The four-star Hotel Silberhorn, just across from the train station, is converting part of its hotel into apartments and using the proceeds to improve the hotel infrastructure, pay high staff costs and stay afloat. “Our biggest issue is with Airbnb,” said owner Bettina Zinnert, whose family owns three hotels in Wengen. “For an Airbnb, you need a smartphone that can make pictures, load it up and, in the end, just a cleaning lady,” she lamented. Hotels remain a key part of the tourism picture in Wengen, but the business is not without challenges beyond chalet apartment rentals. “With high staff costs and the strong Swiss franc, we are not able to compete anymore against ski areas in Austria, France and Italy,” Ms. Zinnert said. During Lauberhorn week, for instance, members of a German television group staying at the Hotel Alpenrose, an uphill walk to the train and gondola, each paid 220 Swiss francs a night, which they estimated is twice as expensive as a comparable hotel in Austria. “Switzerland was always very expensive, but two years ago the exchange rate jumped,” said the television commentator Michael Pfeffer. “As pretty as Switzerland is, I would not book a private ski vacation here. It’s a matter of price.” For family-owned hotels in Wengen, there is also further pricing pressure from chain hotels in the village that dropped prices two years ago to attract Asian tour groups, forcing other hotels to lower prices. For this year’s low season, Ms. Zinnert estimates prices at two of her hotels will be down 30 percent compared to 2015 — despite stronger bookings this season that followed early heavy snowfalls. (At the Hotel Wengener Hof, a four-star hotel, current prices for a weeklong stay in mid-March for two start at 1,967 Swiss francs. At the Hotel Belvedere, a three-star hotel, rates for two start at 1,435 Swiss francs.)Last year, Jungfrau Railways took one million tourists — 70 percent from China, South Korea, India and Japan — to Jungfraujoch. While the majority of Asian groups don’t stay overnight in Wengen, Asian bookings at the centrally located Victoria Lauberhorn Hotel, part of a Swiss hotel chain, are rising. Asian travelers account for up to 18 percent of all winter bookings, rising to 40 percent during the summer season, according to the manager, Roger Wyrsch. (Winter rates for private bookings start at 180 Swiss francs per night.) Another complicating factor for hotels: the declining popularity of skiing in Switzerland. Numbers of skiers started declining in 2004, dropping sharply after 2012. “It seems that there are too many [vacation] options to choose from and preferences are different,” said Judith Graf Engi, who owns Hotel Bellevue and is the president of the Wengen Tourism Association. “The stay of guests is getting shorter and shorter; 20 years ago it was six days in winter, now it is about three.”At Hotel Regina, the longtime owner Guido Meyer predicts smaller hotels may continue to close — three in the last 15 years have fully converted into private apartments — but larger ones will survive as the summer season booms, especially among tourists from Asia and the Mideast. “It will keep Wengen definitely on the map,” he said.Mr. Norris, whose small luxury Hotel Caprice faces the Regina, said he is also upbeat. “There are signs the Chinese, particularly from Hong Kong, are coming to Switzerland for skiing,” he said, noting they could offset the slump in British and European demand. “We had strong bookings for Christmas and New Year,” he said. “Now the snow has arrived in abundance – the best since 1998 — my feeling is that it will be a very good winter season.” Mr. Putnam said he intends to book another private chalet in Wengen for a third season. “We’ll absolutely come back, he said. “The skiing is incredible — miles and miles of runs, no driving, and perfectly-timed trains. It’s better than the States.”  AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTrendingHotels around the country are introducing robots to handle repetitive tasks like room service deliveries, entertaining guests, and even giving directions.By Nora WalshHotels across the country are rushing to introduce robots with the promise of enhancing the guest experience and increasing efficiency. The automated companions can do everything from make and pick up deliveries to help guests find their way around.Aloft Cupertino in the Silicon Valley (rates from $150) was the first hotel in the United States to debut Savioke’s Relay robot in 2014. The three foot tall autonomous robot, nicknamed Botlr, weighs 90 pounds and makes deliveries throughout the hotel using multiple sensors, 3D cameras and Wi-Fi to operate the elevators. Marriott has since begun mobile robot service at four other Aloft properties. “Botlr’s most popular guest deliveries are forgotten toiletry items, bottled water, microwave popcorn and coloring books for kids — all complimentary, of course,” said Andy Evers, Aloft Cupertino’s general manager. Other hotels are following suit. H Hotel Los Angeles’s Relay robot, named Hannah, made 610 front desk deliveries and 42 room service deliveries, traveling a total of 50 miles, in the first three months since the hotel opened last October (rates from $249). “It’s a great timesaver for our team because no one has to leave their station to make a delivery,” said Tiffany Jassel, a manager. The robot cruises at a speed of 1.7 miles per hour and has a two-cubic-foot bin to carry items, which guests unlock by typing in a code on its 7-inch touch-screen. When a delivery is complete, the robot celebrates with a swivel dance and chirpy sounds. The Sheraton Los Angeles San Gabriel Hotel (rates from $149), opening February 2018, will be equipped with eight Tug robots developed by Aethon. One robot will escort guests to destinations on the first floor, while the remaining seven multiuse robots will use the service elevators to deliver in-room items to guests, like their luggage, room service meals and fresh linens.In Nevada, the Mandarin Oriental, Las Vegas (rates from $259) employs Pepper, a humanoid robot from SoftBank Robotics. Located in the Sky Lobby, Pepper supports staff by handling repetitive tasks like greeting visitors, providing directions and answering property-specific questions using technology similar to Amazon’s Alexa. The four-foot robot has large eyes, lifelike gestures and facial recognition technology that allows it to discern a guest’s gender, approximate age and mood, and respond in intuitive ways to entertain guests by telling jokes and posing for selfies. Royal Sonesta Boston (rates from $189) has a robot from Double Robotics that offers site tours and attends meetings for clients who can’t be there in person by allowing them to log in remotely using an app. They’re able to control the robot’s movements, see through its wide-angle lens cameras and communicate via a tablet screen. In New York, The Westin Buffalo (rates from $189) uses a Relay robot to deliver wellness amenities like running shoes and fresh juices to guests who request them, and the new Luma Hotel in Times Square (rates from $399) launched Manhattan’s first Relay robot, nicknamed Alina. “She helps us provide a better guest experience by taking on tedious tasks like in-room deliveries, which frees our staff to focus on more complex needs of the guest,” said Kate Martin, the Luma’s general manager. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCHECK-INPoli House, a Bauhaus landmark, is a journey through geometry: a circular bar, a curving staircase, slanting shelves, oblong mirrors.By Debra KaminFrom $265.The Poli House, a sleek Karim Rashid-designed property rising above one of urban Tel Aviv’s most trafficked intersections, breathes new life into a Bauhaus landmark that until its recent renovation had seen better days. Previously known as the Polishuk House, the ship-like structure was first purchased by Yehuda Polishuk, a Ukrainian immigrant who arrived in pre-state Palestine in 1934 and leased its three curving floors to businesses including a shoemaker and a printing press. The Israeli architect Nitza Szmuk, an expert in preserving the historic buildings that comprise Tel Aviv’s Unesco-designated White City, took care to maintain the building’s original curved staircase and to source Italian tiles that would resurrect the original external facade. But while grounded in historic Tel Aviv, the Poli House, which opened in 2016, is a futuristic fun house: guests are whisked from its street-level entrance and art gallery to the neon rooftop lobby via translucent elevators, common areas feature egg-like pod chairs in fluorescent yellow and pink and corridors are ringed by cheeky phrases of scrolling LED text.Spitting distance from the city’s largest outdoor fruit and vegetable market and overlooking Allenby Street, one of its major traffic arteries; nearly all Tel Aviv roads (and bus lines) lead to the hotel. The beachfront and trendy Rothschild Boulevard are both within walking distance.My second-floor “Poli+”—a middle-category room— was a study in contrasts. Black walls and thick charcoal carpet were brightened by tessellating series of slim white stripes, while the door and closet popped in bright chartreuse. The plush double bed featured a fluffy white duvet and pillows. A cocktail shaker and a bottle of the licorice-flavored Middle Eastern tipple arak awaited me on the U-shaped writing desk, while a concave neon shelf carved out just above the headboard was fitted with asymmetrical drinking glasses (the better to sip it with). Twin hourglass-shaped wall mirrors were fitted onto the closet. And while my floor-to-ceiling windows doubled as sliding doors opening onto a trim balcony above hustling Allenby Street, they sealed shut and I was well insulated from street noise overnight.Mr. Rashid’s unconventional aesthetic was most evident in the bathroom, where the door swings sideways to double as a barrier wall between toilet and shower stall (there was no tub) when needed. An oblong mirror and circular basin sink continued the geometric theme, as did slightly slanting shelves and the Leaning Tower of Pisa-inspired bottles of complimentary toiletries.There is a minibar in the room and free Wi-Fi throughout the hotel. The rooftop has a heated infinity pool with Mediterranean views, as well as a circular cocktail bar and curtained-off spa suites for massages. Bicycles and guest passes to a nearby gym are available.With no in-house restaurant, dining options are limited, but the staff encourages guests to take advantage of the surrounding neighborhood by providing local guidebooks and delivery menus for nearby establishments. Breakfast is served in the adjacent LovEat cafe, an organic, vegan-friendly coffeehouse chain where hotel guests get private access to a garden terrace and menu options include a “Sabich plate” — a deconstructed version of the beloved Israeli sandwich featuring tahini, hard-boiled egg and eggplant; and the “Tel Aviv Breakfast” of two eggs any style, chopped salad, bread basket and assorted dips. Coffee, cookies and free-flowing champagne are available in the street-level gallery space 24 hours a day.In a rapidly gentrifying neighborhood, this glossy, digi-pop inspired hotel pays homage to its urban neighborhood with the right balance of history and high-end fun.The Poli House, 1 Nahalat Binyamin Street, Tel Aviv, brownhotels.com/poliAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPursuitsFor nearly three decades, the American master weaver Carol Cassidy has been working with Laotian silk weavers on the grounds of a grand old colonial mansion in Vientiane. By Jane PerlezThe outdoor workroom in a lush garden not far from the mighty Mekong River seems a world apart from Paris. A dozen Laotian women talk among themselves as the city traffic from the streets of Vientiane swirls by. Their wooden shuttles make a soft slithering sound as they hand weave large swathes of silk fabric in rich colors on handcrafted looms. Well before the success of handmade crafts on the e-commerce site Etsy, the studio of Carol Cassidy, an American master weaver, has been a favorite stop for travelers in this corner of Southeast Asia. Ms. Cassidy has been working with Laotian weavers in the backyard of a grand old colonial mansion in central Vientiane for nearly three decades. Together they have kept alive age-old traditions of Laotian design in woven cloth and the natural colors of a palette extracted from plants in the forests: reds, pinks, yellows, greens. Just steps from the garden, her showroom, Lao Textiles, on the mansion’s wood-paneled first floor — a cool retreat from the city’s blazing heat — is a haven for easy-to-pack gifts. Day and evening silk scarves, zippered all-purpose silk pouches and elegant cushion covers are arrayed on tables, all at fairly reasonable prices for handmade pieces. Few know that they are buying the creative efforts of weavers who also make top-of-the-line drapes, sofa and cushion coverings for the retail palaces of luxury fashion houses in Paris, London and Milan.On the afternoon of my visit, a weaver was working thin strips of buttery soft beige leather into off-white silk thread stretched across the wooden frame of her loom. Flecks of gold silk gave contrast. Ms. Cassidy designed the fabric with its slightly rough texture especially for window shades for a store on the Champs-Élysées. “We are the new luxury because our pieces are still entirely created by human beings with the uniqueness the human hand brings to the fabrics,” Ms. Cassidy said. As consumers worry about the ecological impact of what they buy, woven Laotian silk is a near perfect investment. “You can come here and see the preparation of the silk, the dyeing of silk, the winding and the designing. You can see it on any given day.” Ms. Cassidy and her husband, Dawit Seyoum, arrived in Laos in 1989. He had a background in small business development; weaving had been her passion since her father took the family to Mexico for a visit in the 1960s. She studied at the University of Helsinki under Dora Jung, the fabric designer for the Finnish architect, Alvar Aalto. The collaboration between the famed architect and the fabric designer inspired the young Ms. Cassidy who would later transfer her skills to the temples of luxury-brand retail. “I learned from her that you could design fabric for a specific place,” she said. “You designed a fabric to consider the shape and the lines and the architectural features.” In Laos, the couple could see the potential for showcasing to the world the extraordinary weaving that was used for religious and ritual ceremonies as well as everyday wear. Woven silk cloth in dazzling or muted colors are an intrinsic part of rural life in Laos, and of upper-class life, too. The fabrics are fashioned into the borders of long skirts still worn by Laotian women, into curtains and bed covers for village and grander homes, and into head cloths, sashes and intricate bodices for dress up occasions. But the official atmosphere was unwelcoming: The Laos government was hard-line Communist. “It was an exact replica of East Germany,” Mr. Seyoum joked. He was an exile from Ethiopia, so he had some ideas about how to deal with authoritarian rule. To their surprise they won approval for the first business license issued to foreigners. In those days, only the hardiest tourists mastered the hurdles for getting a visa. So their first sales were to expatriates at the embassies in the sleepy capital. Getting things done for overseas orders wasn’t easy. The government considered fax machines subversive; they took a boat trip to Thailand to communicate with the outside world. The two-story house that had been the residence of the French governor general in Laos, Paul Blanchard de la Brosse, seemed an ideal place to establish the workshop. They flew to Versailles to talk to the owners-in-exile, and the government granted a lease. They began with three Laotian weavers. Now they employ more than 40. At a mid-1990s show at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York they set up a demonstration of two looms operated by two weavers. It was a hit. Architects and interior designers raved about the surprise of the silks that would impress rich clients always on the look out for the new and exclusive. Peter Marino, the architect for high-end stores, including Chanel, Dior and Louis Vuitton, loved the olive-hued silk covering for a sofa, Mr. Seyoum recalled. Many assignments from Mr. Marino followed, using Laotian motifs and styles of weaving (brocades, ikat, tapestry) that are well-suited to the grandeur of luxe interiors. The United States bombed Laos from 1965 to 1973, leaving the northern part of the country a wreck, a dangerous place with unexploded ordnance that has caused terrible injuries since. Many of the weavers, who mostly come from the Tai ethnic group, survived. Their looms, usually their most important possessions, were mobile and they were able to flee the bombing. Producing the silk was one of the most difficult things to revive, Ms. Cassidy said. She invested in some of the worn-down silk farms in northern Laos, and soon had a ready supply. In the last few years, though, the silk supply has plummeted again, and the cost has increased because of the scarcity. Sometimes she resorts to silk from Thailand and Vietnam, but never uses Chinese silk, which is shiny and often synthetic. In Laos, farmers still feed the silkworms with mulberry leaves, producing a fine silk. In Vietnam, the silk is coarser: It is fed with cassava. “Lao silk is matte, and uneven. As a textile artist I look for the variety and the hand-twisting of the silk.” Many farmers are turning to more lucrative cash crops, including opium, for sale to China. The increasing scarcity of silk is forcing Ms. Cassidy to turn to more creative weaves — incorporating fine leather, feathers and cotton. It’s not such a bad thing, she said. The mixtures produce interesting textures. The greatest challenge to the art is not only where to find a guaranteed supply of local silk, but how to encourage the next generation of Laotian weavers. Bouakham Phengmixay, 39, with long black hair tied back in a ponytail and a radiant smile, is a star weaver at Lao Textiles. She has been working in the garden since 1997. “In my village in the north, the incentive to produce silk is dying because of the imports from Vietnam,” she said. Her daughter, 16, knows how to weave, and made a hand-woven skirt when she was 9. But that was her first and last attempt at weaving. “She doesn’t want to weave anymore. Our daughters are really not interested in weaving. It’s not entertainment for them.” Young women want jobs in offices and banks, not at the loom. But Ms. Cassidy is undeterred. She will find a way, she insists, to ensure the tradition of Laotian woven silk endures. Lao Textiles, 82 Nokeo Khoumane, Ban Mixay, Vientiane; laotextiles.com.      Jane Perlez is the Beijing bureau chief. She has served as bureau chief in Kenya, Poland, Austria, Indonesia and Pakistan, and was a member of the team that won the 2009 Pulitzer Prize for reporting in Pakistan and Afghanistan.@JanePerlezAdvertisement

      By ROBERT DRAPER

JAN. 18, 2018

No longer does the city dubbed “the swamp” by its inhabitant in chief have the starchy, insular appearance of a white male fiefdom. There’s a dynamism that, along with its fabled history, qualifies it as a great American city.
Related Article
Those who visit the nation’s capital for the first time in a decade or so are in for a pleasant surprise. No longer does the city derisively dubbed “the swamp” by its Inhabitant-In-Chief have the starchy, insular appearance of a white male fiefdom. Overlooking (if one can) the federal government’s maladroitness, as a destination, Washington today possesses a dynamism that, along with its fabled history, qualifies it as a great American city. It’s now entirely possible to spend a couple of memorable days here without once eating a New York strip steak or darkening a marble corridor. Check those boxes on your first visit, then come back for This Town’s revelations.
Explore the map and find things to do in Washington.
Since its opening in September 2016, the city’s hottest draw has been the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History & Culture on the National Mall. The museum’s immense collection is well worth the long lines. The artifacts — including Nat Turner’s Bible, Louis Armstrong’s trumpet and the first edition of Booker T. Washington’s 1907 book “The Negro in Business” — are themselves impressive. But the three-tiered layout lends the feeling of a journey, by turns painful and triumphant. The path ends with a moving video collection of contemporary African Americans reflecting on their life experiences (free admission; walk-up tickets are available on weekdays starting at 1 p.m.). The galloping culinary scene in Washington coincides with the regrettable trend of no-reservations restaurant policies. But Himitsu, arguably the city’s most creative dining spot, makes the ordeal relatively stress-free. Give the host your name and cell number, then amble down the street to one of the many Petworth neighborhood waystations (such as Ruta del Vino and Hank’s Cocktail Bar), and enjoy a glass or two until a text message informs you that your table awaits at the tiny Japanese-inflected creation of the chef Kevin Tien. His ever-rotating menu includes shareable and uniformly delectable plates of raw seafood, roasted soy chicken and Asian-spiced vegetables. In suitable weather, the streetside tables maximize Himitsu’s chill, not-your-grandfather’s-Washington vibe. If you’re solo, you could do worse than to snack away at the bar while trying wines from countries as far-flung as Bolivia and Georgia. (Dinner for two without wine, about $100.) The “No Clowns” sign on the door hints at the stodge-free ethos of Showtime Lounge, a miniature and easily overlooked cash-only pub in the unprepossessing neighborhood of Bloomingdale. Step inside and you’re under the city’s floorboards: framed images of Humphrey Bogart and spaghetti Western stars on the walls, foreign-language songs from the speakers and a beguiling cast of locals not likely to be found on a CNN panel. Beers on tap, Utz potato chips for food. For the butt-end of the evening, Showtime is an optimal closer.It took a few years, but now Union Market in the city’s northeastern quadrant has become Washington’s swankiest and most-trafficked indoor market. Though the 22,000-square-foot space hosts several restaurants, some excellent specialty vendors and a seasonal farmers’ market, it achieves peak appeal during weekend breakfast hours. That’s when mostly young and affluent locals gather at tables over the freshly prepared goods of (among others) DC Empanadas, Panorama Bakery and Peregrine Espresso, while others avail themselves of the city’s best fresh seafood and meat grocers. After becoming properly caffeinated, stretch your legs and search for take-home items like imported spices and high-end cutlery.Though the sumptuous and expansive National Museum of Women in the Arts was opened in 1987, the world’s only major space dedicated to the work of female artists has never received the touristic attention it deserves. The museum’s recent special exhibits include abstract works by female African-American artists and a Mexico City-based artist’s use of a clothesline to depict instances of violence against women. Its permanent collection features work from around the globe, as well as revered American artists like the celebrity photographer Annie Leibovitz and the impressionist painter Ellen Day Hale. On the mezzanine level, a quiet and lovely cafe is one of the city’s best refuges (admission for adults, $10).One of the fastest-growing neighborhoods is the 42-acre stretch along the Anacostia River known as the Yards. Though it teems with barhopping millennials, the area hasn’t been regarded as a fine-dining destination. That may change with the recent opening of the District Winery — which, as its name suggests, makes more than a dozen wines on-site, using grapes harvested from Virginia, California and New York. The wines, crafted by the Brooklyn Winery veteran Conor McCormack, are uniformly excellent (particularly the zinfandel and cabernet franc). You can tour the winery, try each selection at the tasting bar and buy bottles to take home. Best of all, enjoy exquisite pairings of the wine with New American cuisine at the casually elegant in-house restaurant Ana, overlooking the river. (Winery tour and tasting, $35. Lunch for two without wine, about $80.)A trip to the nation’s capital wouldn’t feel complete without at least a glancing view of its many war monuments. The most underappreciated one is today — thanks to President Trump’s ongoing war of insults with the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un — perhaps the most topical: the Korean War Veterans Memorial, on the western flank of the National Mall, in the shadows of the much-visited Lincoln Memorial. Dedicated in 1995, its evocative centerpiece consists of 19 stainless steel statues of American soldiers trudging through heavy brush with grim and hyper-alert expressions. In subtle acknowledgment of that war’s vague objectives and not-altogether-satisfying outcome, the etched tribute notes that the soldiers “answered the call to defend a country they never knew and a people they never met.”Few buildings in Washington are wrapped up in the city’s political intrigue as much as the Watergate, a complex of condominiums and hotel rooms on the banks of the Potomac River. Though the botched burglary in 1972 that metastasized into the toppling of the Nixon presidency began in what the hotel now bills as “Scandal Room 214,” today there’s an additional reason to visit: the Watergate’s Top of the Gate outdoor bar, which opened this past summer and offers the best 360-degree, cocktail-laden views of the city. There is even a small ice-skating rink (with artificial ice) nestled beside the bar. If the weather turns foul, repair to the amply stocked whiskey bar on the lobby level.Washington’s newest development to the southwest, the Wharf, is still a work in progress and for the moment retains the half-populated and over-polished facade of the waterfront town in “The Truman Show.” Already, however, it features one of Washington’s culinary stars: Del Mar de Fabio Trabocchi, the brainchild of Fabio Trabocchi, whose Italian restaurant in Georgetown, Fiola Mare, has supplanted Cafe Milano as the city’s reigning celebrity magnet. Mr. Trabocchi’s Spanish and seafood-centric restaurant opened its doors in October and has instantly become a Michelin star-worthy enterprise. In studied contrast to hip newcomers like Himitsu, Del Mar’s cavernous and fish-sculpture-bedecked interior is designed to dazzle the eyes. But as with all of Mr. Trabocchi’s restaurants, the food still counts most here. From the mango-colored gazpacho to the velvety Iberian ham to the selection of standout paellas, Del Mar is the only reason anyone needs to visit the Wharf — though likely there’ll be more in the coming months. (Dinner for two without wine is about $140.)Yet another fast-developing Washington neighborhood is Brookland, dominated by Catholic University and the majestic Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception. The city’s newest high-quality restaurant, Primrose, opened here just after Thanksgiving. Though the casual, if gorgeously appointed, French bistro serves on-target country staples like coq au vin and boeuf Bourguignon until 11 on weekend nights, Primrose is also ideally suited for nightcaps. Sitting at the bar among a diverse neighborhood crowd with one of the restaurant’s 15 wines by the glass (all from France or Virginia — several of the latter being made by the co-owner Sebastian Zutant) to accompany stout cheeses and rillettes de lapin, you would have no reason to suspect that you’re in anybody’s idea of a swamp, much less a drain-worthy one.Among northwest Washington’s many high-activity neighborhoods — Logan Circle, Columbia Heights, Adams Morgan — the Shaw district is the latest to be lit up with clever dining spots. One of Shaw’s newest and best is Tiger Fork, a temple of Hong Kong cuisine situated in an alleyway. The eclectically red-and-bamboo Chinese interior (designed by Lauren Winter, who also fashioned Primrose) is smile-eliciting, much like its weekend “Dim Sum and Then Some” menu. Hong Kong-style French toast, Chinese bacon and creamed tofu are among the Sunday hangover remedies, best teamed with a prosecco and passion fruit liqueur-based drink known here as Bad Girl Mimi. (Brunch for two without drinks is about $70.)The Ritz Carlton, Georgetown (3100 South Street NW) is sequestered on a quiet locale previously occupied by the city’s garbage incinerator. This chic 86-room hotel is the chain’s smallest and feels more like an elite Alpine nook than a hub of ever-bustling Georgetown. Doubles from around $475 a night.The Watergate Hotel (2650 Virginia Avenue NW). The iconic site of the break-in that set off America’s greatest political scandal (so far, at least) underwent a sweeping makeover in 2017 and is now a sleek neighbor to the Potomac River and the Kennedy Center. Doubles begin at $232 a night.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by5 placesLos Angeles’ Highland Park neighborhood is seeing an influx of younger residents. Cool bars, restaurants and shops have followed.By Shivani VoraHighland Park in Los Angeles has long been a diverse and vibrant community. In the last few years, however, 20- and 30-somethings, lured by the neighborhood’s affordable rents and proximity to downtown Los Angeles, have moved in and are giving local entrepreneurs a new incentive to open new restaurants, bars and boutiques. Many are on old Figueroa Street, now a vibrant thoroughfare full of pedestrians. A bar, restaurant and bowling alley all in one space: originally a popular bowling alley dating back to 1927, this sprawling space was a punk rock music venue until a local hospitality company, 1933 Group, took it over and restored it to its former glory with the original bowling lanes, candy machines and placards. There’s also a Neapolitan pizza restaurant and four bars. Bowling is $50 per hour per lane; each lane accommodates six people.5621 North Figueroa Street, highlandparkbowl.comIn 2016, a former clothing store became a Mediterranean restaurant serving refined dishes in a laid back setting of high vaulted ceilings, copper tables and a long white marble bar. Renata Rokicki, the executive chef, aims to create approachable dishes using seasonal ingredients such as Moroccan spiced fried chicken and a citrus salad with pistachios and ricotta. Most dishes can be shared, and there’s a strong cocktail program. A meal for two people with a cocktail each is about $60.5631 North Figueroa Street, cafebirdiela.comIs this year-old establishment a deli, a liquor store or a grocery? Jeremy Fall, the owner and a Los Angeles restaurateur, will tell you that it’s all three. The front of the store is stocked with high-end but affordable spirits, wine and craft beer as well as basic groceries; in the back is a hidden deli where patrons will find high-quality sandwiches made with house cured meats, breads baked in-house and made from imaginative in-house sauces such as sambal ranch. A six-inch sandwich, the smallest size, is $8.5900 North Figueroa Street, tinfoillg.comOpened in late 2015, this airy men’s store with high ceilings and exposed brick walls is the place to peruse items from the eponymous brand. A team of four designers turn out the beanie hats, woven button down shirts, jersey T-shirts and other pieces from an atelier inside the store. The attire is sometimes simple, sometimes edgy but always comfortable and meant for everyday wear. 5627 North Figueroa Street, thequietlife.comThis long, minimalist boutique, opened in late 2016, sells one-of-a kind Japanese-inspired items. Among the finds are elegant ceramic tea ware, singing bowls traditionally used in meditation, art objects like handmade ceramic Buddhas, meditation stones and casual clothing spun with organic cotton and linens.5711 North Figueroa Street, shopsonomama.comAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bypersonal journeysAfter my mother died, my father bought back the beloved boat they had sailed on together years before. A trip with him was full of memories and moonrises.By Karen SchwartzI stepped off the sailboat onto the dock in Gibsons, British Columbia, and although it was solid, a moment of reverse seasickness made me feel as if the ground was swaying. I silently wondered if this sensation was similar to what my mother felt when she complained that her Parkinson’s made her feel unsteady.It was an odd thought to have during a relaxing weeklong sailing trip with my father and nearly five years after my mother’s death. But this wasn’t just any sailing trip. It was my first trip in my father’s new boat, which was also formerly his old boat — until he bought it back, that is.The boat is a 33-foot Freedom Yacht, a revolutionary design when it was built in 1982, as its strong carbon fiber masts didn’t require any stays. The irony of the name wasn’t lost on me. When my father bought it new, he was a 50-year-old entrepreneur looking for freedom from the incessant grind that had brought him the successful sale of his company. When he bought back the same boat as an octogenarian, he was looking for freedom from the memories of my mother’s disease and death.My own associations with the boat were different, of course. I was a young adult when my parents owned it the first time; busy at first with university and then with my career. Still, I tried to make time to join them when I could to cruise the Gulf Islands, scattered throughout the Strait of Georgia between mainland Canada and Vancouver Island. I appreciated the short runs between anchorages that allowed time to go ashore and explore the quirky towns and thick forests of fir and cedar.There were always surprises: a particularly stunning sunset, a vivid meteor shower, orcas breaching in the distance, pods of frolicking dolphins, and porpoises surfing our bow wave. I even recall being serenaded at one anchorage by a man in a kilt playing bagpipes as he stood on the bow of his boat.Still, the unexpected wasn’t always good, on a boat as in life. There was the occasional anchor that dragged at night, a misread chart or a motor that wouldn’t start. It was an intense storm that scuttled my first attempt to sail the Desolation Sound area roughly 25 years ago. Because the northern end of the Gulf Islands is a 100-mile, three-day sail from Vancouver, my parents had brought the boat up ahead of me. I flew to Vancouver from Boston, where I was working as a new reporter, expecting to continue to Campbell River the next day. Instead, my parents met me at the airport, explaining that winds of 30 knots (35 miles per hour) and huge seas had scared them into leaving the boat at a marina to fetch on a later trip, after I’d returned to the East Coast.I don’t recall the last time I sailed before my parents sold the boat. I know I didn’t make it to Desolation Sound, and I know too that my mother never showed symptoms of her impending Parkinson’s disease while on it. Looking back, that was a godsend. The boat remained free from any association with her illness.As the neurological disease progressed, freedom became ever more elusive. My mother became a prisoner of a body she could no longer control. She became bedridden and my father became her caregiver, shackled by her needs. My vacations were no longer relaxing adventures where I’d be rocked to sleep by lapping waves, but rather trips to their home to help where I could. A decade passed, then another. Then she died.In his grief, my father would sometimes reminisce about their sailing trips — the times without me — when as a couple they left behind their demands and distractions and reveled in one another’s company. He often described one particular time at Princess Louisa Inlet, a fjord that’s a frequent stopover on the way to Desolation Sound, when they woke to find themselves in fog so dense they could see nothing but white. Unable to sail, they had no choice but to laze away the day. “It felt as if we were the only people in the world,” he said with a dreamy look.Although he liked to share these stories — to talk about my mother — there had once been tangible reminders, too, in the way of photographs. Then, less than two years after my mother’s death, a flood claimed their house. Days later, I sat with my father amid the ruin, surrounded by curled, soiled pictures and muddy belongings on what would have been their 60th wedding anniversary, and we wept.On a cold January evening six months later, an email popped into my inbox. “I just spent a bunch of your inheritance by buying back my old boat,” my father wrote. “Anyone for sailing this summer? “Surprised, stunned, I was nevertheless thrilled by his quixotic impulse.“We’ve lost so many things over the past few years,” I wrote back. “It feels good to have ‘found’ something. Especially something with such good memories.”If anything, his purchase was even more foolhardy the second time around. He still lived in Calgary, Alberta, 1,000 miles from the boat; only now the airlines required passengers to arrive at the airport two hours ahead of departure. He still didn’t keep a car in Vancouver, so getting provisions and other logistics were complicated. While he was new to ocean sailing when he first purchased the boat, he now had the experience, but not as much strength and agility. And without my mother as first mate, he needed to search for competent and compatible crew.Still, we don’t often get second chances in life. For him, it was an opportunity to have a physical connection to something he shared with his wife. For me, Desolation Sound still beckoned. The same rugged wilderness that Capt. George Vancouver reviled when he named the region in 1792 now attracts upward of 40,000 visitors each year. They come by boat or kayak to the largely undeveloped islands and inlets around the sound, enjoying the warmest water on the British Columbia coast, hikes to freshwater lakes and the rich sea life. I still yearned to experience it.Undoubtedly, there have been changes since my first attempt decades ago. A new Trudeau is prime minister. I’m older now than my father was then. And, this time, the weather was glorious. Arriving to meet my father, I looked out at the forest of masts and immediately spotted the black carbon fiber and our Freedom’s distinctive cat ketch design, with the larger mast at the bow and a smaller one midsection.I was nearly giddy with excitement as I went below into the cabin. The couple who owned the boat in the interim had replaced the green interior cushions with ones that are navy. The icebox was converted to a refrigerator, a heater was installed, and there’s GPS now. But it felt like I was looking at an old friend wearing a new outfit; the sort of old friend you might not see for years, yet you pick up seamlessly where you left off.And like a visit with an old friend, there never seemed to be enough time. We started in Comox, on Vancouver Island, then stopped at Squirrel Cove on Cortes Island, before overnighting at just two anchorages along the 37-miles of coastline contained within the Desolation Sound Marine Park.Grace Harbour was a well-sheltered cove teeming with jellyfish that allegedly don’t sting. I was mesmerized watching them dance past the boat. Tenedos Bay was rimmed with sheer cliffs dropping into water so deep we had trouble setting the anchor. Where the rocks had spalled, the ledges were covered in moss and spiked with twisted red arbutus trees. Each place was different from the other, and both were unlike any other area I’d sailed. That evening, we sipped glasses of wine and gazed out at the snow-capped mountains of the Coastal Range. It was then that my father confessed that his second chance hadn’t worked out as he’d planned.“I had the idea that by buying the boat, I would really be able to touch the memories, and that hasn’t happened,” he said. “But I realize that it doesn’t matter. I never go through a day that I don’t have a half-dozen times when something happens and I think of your mother.”On the last days of the trip, we headed south along the Sunshine Coast toward Vancouver, stopping in Powell River where we chanced upon a logging sports competition. We had so much fun watching the men and women chop, saw, nail and climb that we spontaneously altered our itinerary and stayed another day.In Secret Cove we rented kayaks and spent the afternoon paddling around the inlet. “I’ll remember this day,” my father told me lovingly.Yet even as we created new memories, the old ones simmered just below the surface. Heading toward Gibsons and our last night on the boat, my father started talking of an ice cream shop in the town that he and my mother used to favor. Hours later, I too remembered her, but in a different, dark way. As my equilibrium faltered when I stepped onto the dock, my mind went to her disease and how much it took from her, from all of us.Steadying my legs, and my memories, we headed off in search of the ice cream shop. Mike’s Gelato was there now. My father thought it was the same place, and I didn’t have the heart to contradict him. He ordered mint chocolate chip. Like my mother, I gravitated to chocolate.As we sat outside licking our cones and watching the moonrise over the water, I was content, happy to be sailing again with this man, on this boat. But what about him? Was he sorry he bought the boat back?“Not at all,” he said. “I still love the boat. I love the adventure, the sense of accomplishment. I love the freedom.” Advertisement

      By DEBRA KAMIN

JAN. 12, 2018

More than 20 years after the horrific genocide in Rwanda, Kigali is emerging as a proud city, known for its progressive start-ups, energetic art scene and great dining and coffee.
Related Article
Kigali, Rwanda’s gleaming capital, pulses with African charm. About 23 years after the horrific genocide in Rwanda, Kigali has reclaimed its narrative and emerged as a proud and progressive city, buzzing with tech hubs, creative start-ups and cafes serving some of the best coffee in East Africa. But despite its rolling green hills, sparkling clean streets and energetic young arts scene, Kigali still struggles to attract tourists — most visitors to Rwanda pass right through on their way to jungles and safaris, making now an ideal time to visit before the world catches wind of all Kigali has to offer. With low crime, a vibrant dining scene and friendly locals, this is a city ready for its close-up. Hire a driver for the day, or live more dangerously and jump on one of the ubiquitous motorbike taxis — however you choose to explore, you’ll find an optimistic city eager to welcome you.
Explore the map and find things to do in Kigali.
To embrace the Kigali of today, you must understand its complicated past. In 1994, 800,000 ethnic Tutsi citizens were systematically murdered by their Hutu neighbors over the course of 100 unspeakably brutal days. The Kigali Genocide Memorial opened in 2004 and serves as both a museum tracing the events of the genocide, as well as a mass burial ground for more than 250,000 victims. The main exhibition details the colonial history of Rwanda and the factors that led up to the slaughter. A second exhibition focuses specifically on children who were murdered in the genocide, while a third examines other mass atrocities, including the Nazi Holocaust and the genocides in Cambodia and Armenia. Give yourself at least 90 minutes to make your way through the exhibits, then head outdoors to the peaceful memorial gardens to pay respect to the victims buried here and process what you’ve just seen. (Audio tours cost 12,000 Rwandan francs, or about $14.) Rwanda is known as the land of one thousand hills, and at sunset, Kigali is truly the jewel in its bucolic crown. At Inzora Rooftop Cafe, a charming coffee shop tucked inside the Ikirezi bookshop, Friday night is cocktail night and custom tipples, featuring gin, hibiscus and jasmine are mixed for customers on the sky-high patio. Pull up a perch and savor the last streaks of daylight; if you’re feeling peckish, Inzora also offers tasting boards featuring Rwandan cheese, jam and house-made pickles (cocktails, 6,000 francs; wine 4,000 francs; tasting board 8,000 francs). Kigali is enjoying a restaurant boom, and there’s perhaps no better spot to sample the creative fusion that marks the city’s food scene than Poivre Noir. The menu at this superb bistro combines French and Belgian influences with Rwandan ingredients; standouts include pork filet mignon sautéed with tagliatelle and mustard cream (12,500 francs), and a knockout burger of Rwandan beef served on a homemade toasted English muffin (8,500 francs). Save room for dessert — both the coffee liquor chocolate mousse and the Belgian cuberdon ice cream, based on the cone-shaped, berry-flavored gummy Belgian candy have a cult following.Rwanda’s hills, volcanic soil and temperate climate make it ideal for growing coffee, but while the world loves Rwandan java, most locals never touch the stuff. A handful of new fair-trade coffee shops are slowly changing that. At Question Coffee, beans grown by women farmers are roasted in-house by smiling baristas. Pair a creamy cortado (2,500 francs) with a cinnamon-dusted pretzel (1,000 francs), baked down the road at The Women’s Bakery, and delivered fresh each morning.At the foot of Mount Kigali — the highest of Kigali’s hills, with an elevation of more than 6,000 feet — sits Nyamirambo, one of Kigali’s most diverse districts. Early risers can enjoy panoramic views of the city after scaling the mountain’s summit (start at the Sun City Hotel and then head straight up), but those who prefer a later start should head directly to the Nyamirambo Women’s Center, an N.G.O. combating gender-based violence through the power of needle and thread. The center houses a vibrant sewing shop where local seamstresses transform colorful kitenge — the bright, batik-printed cotton fabrics ubiquitous across East Africa — into dazzling souvenirs, and it also offers a lively walking tour every day at 10 a.m. that takes visitors into Kigali neighborhood life. Tours run two and a half hours and are offered daily; stops include a milk bar, a women’s hair salon and a secondhand clothing market (15,000 francs; call ahead).Rwanda is a landlocked nation, but its freshwater Lake Kivu keeps fishermen in brisk business. At lunchtime, make your way to The Green Corner, a no-frills Nyamirambo institution, for “The Big Fish,” a mouthwatering, slow-roasted whole tilapia that you eat with your hands. Pull up a plastic chair, order a round of Mutzig beers with your fish (beers 1,200 francs; fish 10,000 to 15,000 francs, depending on size) and relax — it can take an hour for your food to appear, but you won’t regret the wait.Kigali is filled with interesting art galleries, but none are quite so vibrant — or have such an endearing back story — as Niyo Art Gallery. A humble Rwandan home that has been transformed into a small, colorful museum, Niyo features local artists who have agreed to split their profits with the Niyo Cultural Center, which protects and educates more than 100 Kigali street children and also offers them training in traditional music, drumming and dance.In 1994, when Paul Rusesabagina sheltered hundreds of Tutsi refugees within its four-star walls, the Hotel des Mille Collines was the last word in Kigali luxury. Today, the rooms of the real-life Hotel Rwanda are a bit worse for wear, but downstairs at the enchanting poolside bar, the allure remains. Order a drink and make a toast to Rwandan history: At twilight, it is immensely pleasant to sip something cold and watch the city light up below.Rwandans can’t get enough of the brochette — skewered cubes of grilled savory meat or fish. To sink your teeth into some of the best brochettes in Kigali, head to the festive Repub Lounge, where there’s live music, flowing carafes of wine and a striking view of Kigali’s twinkling lights from the patio. For hungry groups, the African-style house specialty — in which the kitchen selects 12 dishes for sharing — is an unbeatable deal (brochettes, 7,000 francs; house specialty, 16,000 francs per person).Kigali isn’t exactly known for its party scene, but there are a number of rollicking dance clubs and nightspots if you know where to look. One of the best, Papyrus, sits within stumbling distance of Repub Lounge. Upstairs, Papyrus is a restaurant, bakery and lounge, but in the basement, it’s a sweaty, full-volume disco that only really gets going after the clock strikes midnight (cover charge, 2,000 francs).At Heaven, a delightful expat-run restaurant and hotel, the weekend brunch buffet is sacrosanct. For traditional Sunday morning dishes with an African twist, get your fill of buttermilk pancakes with mango and plum; made-to-order omelets with Gouda, peppers and dodo (a hardy leafy green); and a full range of sweet and savory crepes (adults 11,500 francs; children 7,500 francs).Kigali overflows with souvenir stalls, but the quality can be questionable, and many items on offer are actually not made in the country. But at Go Kigali, a beautifully curated boutique located inside the new Kigali Marriott hotel, shoppers can choose from gorgeous jewelry, clothing for adults and children, leather satchels, woven baskets and more, all made by Rwandan and East African artisans. Each item has a tag providing detailed information on its origins. The owners also run full- and half-day city tours of Kigali.Heaven Boutique Hotel (doubles from $145) offers 22 bright and spacious rooms featuring cushy, mosquito-net draped beds; local artwork; a gym and heated saltwater pool; and complimentary breakfast at the adjacent Heaven Restaurant. Service is friendly; other perks include yoga classes, an on-site organic garden and a concierge happy to arrange gorilla treks, market tours and more. On the same property, the ultra-luxe Retreat by Heaven (doubles from $675), with 11 plush rooms and a focus on wellness, takes pampering to the next level.The brand-new Radisson Blu Kigali (doubles from $240) opened in 2016 in conjunction with the Kigali Convention Center, a striking multicolor glass dome that has quickly become a new icon of the city. But with five-star service, extra-large rooms, six restaurants and bars and an Amani spa, this amenity-packed hotel is not just for business travelers.Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe explorer James Cook first sailed to the Pacific 250 years ago (attention will be paid). San Antonio turns 300 in style. By Elaine GlusacIt’s a big year for civic tricentennials, artistic anniversaries, wilderness salutes and one baseball birthday party where the fans will get the presents.In 1718, the French explorer Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville found a bit of high ground 100 miles from the mouth of the Mississippi River and founded New Orleans where today Jackson Square sits. The city — our No. 1 pick for 52 Places to Go this year — will celebrate its 300th anniversary throughout 2018 in signature colorful style with parties, fireworks and concerts. The tricentennial has kicked off several major infrastructure improvements, including a remodeling of popular Bourbon Street, which hasn’t been done since 1928, and a new airport terminal that is due in 2019.San Antonio, too, will be blowing out 300 candles on its virtual birthday cake. A year’s worth of programming includes concerts, historic tours, museum exhibits and more with a concentration of events, including public art unveilings, formal balls and military flyovers taking place during Commemorative Week, May 1 to 6.In 1768, the explorer James Cook sailed the ship Endeavour down the River Thames in England, embarking on the first of three voyages to the Pacific region. The website JamesCook250.org is tracking multi-year anniversaries of these journeys to Canada, New Zealand, the South Pacific and Hawaii. This year, the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich will open its Exploration Wing, with four galleries devoted to Captain Cook and other explorers.In Scotland, design fans will be celebrating the 150th anniversary of the Glasgow-born architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh. The official day is June 7, but many events take place throughout the year, including building tours, city walking tours and an exhibition at the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum that includes Mackintosh works never before publicly displayed. The Czech Republic and Slovakia went their separate ways in 1993, but 2018 marks the 100th year of their union in the aftermath of World War I as Czechoslovakia. National museums in both countries will mark the occasion with special exhibits, and in the Czech Republic a series of events, including concerts, will highlight the union’s initial 20 years, known as the First Republic.In neighboring Austria, the capital will salute the 100th anniversary of the passing of four of Vienna’s artistic heroes, the painters Gustav Klimt and Egon Schiele, the architect Otto Wagner and the graphic designer Koloman Moser in Viennese Modernism 2018. Museums across the city will explore their art and influence in exhibitions that begin in February and run through fall.Stateside, April 4, 2018 marks the 50th year since the civil rights leader the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis. The National Civil Rights Museum, which includes the motel, will hold a two-day symposium on the state of civil rights and racial and economic equality, April 2 and 3, and a storytelling event on April 4, featuring Representative John Lewis and other active members of the social justice movement.Outdoors enthusiasts will cheer the 50th anniversaries of both the National Trails System and the Wild & Scenic Rivers System, two key conservation programs established by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968. Since then, 11 national scenic trails such as the Appalachian Trail, 19 national historic trails, including the Selma to Montgomery National Historic Trail, and more than 1,200 national recreational trails have been created. Over 12,000 miles of rivers in the country are designated Wild & Scenic. Special hiking and boating events will take place throughout the year at many of these locations.Among golden anniversaries in sports, the Engadin Ski Marathon, the largest cross-country ski race in Switzerland, will kick off for the 50th time on March 11, attracting some 13,000 racers capable of skiing 26 miles above 5,000 feet elevation. Too much work? Head to Oakland, Calif., where the Oakland Athletics will mark their 50th year in baseball on April 17 with a game against the Chicago White Sox and a rare gift to fans: admission-free entry.A number of hotels will mark major anniversaries with specials and upgrades including the Willard InterContinental Washington, D.C., which is celebrating 200 years in 2018 by renovating its rooms. Advertisementroad tripWhen you escape your life at 45, as in a Thelma and Louise-level escape, you go on a road trip. The writer and her best friends of 25 years picked Marfa, the artist hub in the middle of the West Texas desert, as their destination. The road to Marfa with Davis Mountains in the background.CreditStacy Sodolak for The New York TimesSupported byBy Hayley KrischerWhen you escape your life at 45, as in a Thelma and Louise-level escape, you go to the desert. My best friends of 25 years joined me. We were all leaving behind something. Beth and Miriam were leaving their young children behind. Sara had just recovered from breast cancer; her mastectomy was fresh, just under a year. I was taking a break from kids, my husband and my 80-pound incessantly barking dog.We picked Marfa, the artist hub in the middle of the West Texas desert as the destination of our road trip last winter. We had been traveling together for 15 years. The quirky art community was part of the reason we landed on Marfa. We wanted to fade into the weirdness of the town, with our identities washing away into the artist Donald Judd’s concrete blocks, the dry landscape and the big sky. We knew it would be the kind of place you might forget to call your family. (Indeed, it was.)If we were lucky, we’d get some much needed refueling, maybe a chance to scream in the middle of the road, or, like Thelma and Louise, innocently flirt with a Brad Pitt type of cowboy. And even though GPS would never allow any of us to get lost, we longed for that feeling of disappearing. Just temporarily.Beth and Miriam drove from Austin. I flew from New Jersey into El Paso to meet Sara, who came in from Los Angeles. We wanted to separate from the reality of our lives. Leave behind not just the kids and the responsibilities, but the newspaper headlines and cable news. Was that even possible?In our all-American S.U.V., I gave it my best Bruce Springsteen-Thunder-Road-I’m-pulling-out-of-here-to-win moment and we tore out of El Paso onto 10 East doing 80 miles per hour through the vast Chihuahuan Desert, passing through long stretches of flat landscape with puffs of sage brush for the three-hour drive ahead of us.Past the border patrol checkpoint, past an abandoned truck stop, with a great old (nonworking) Art Deco-style neon sign that simply read “Truck Stop,” a 1960s relic; when Interstate 10 bypassed Sierra Blanca and it became something of a ghost town. That’s when it sunk in. We were really, finally nowhere.Nightfall came quickly and the bluish Chinati Mountains disappeared in the darkness as we turned onto U.S. 90, a two-lane road leading into Marfa. A refurbished neon sign glowed in the pitch dark night; it read, vertically, in pink, “Stardust,” then underneath in blue, “Motel.” Except there was no motel. Not a soul in sight. And when you’ve been driving for two-plus hours down a dark desert highway, it gets creepy. Sara and I had fallen under the spell of the hypnotic yellow lines down the center of the road. Awful country music streamed from the radio, coming in and out of frequency.That’s when I saw it. A beam of light in the shape of an orb hopped across the road and just as quickly disappeared.I grabbed onto the wheel and screamed and then Sara screamed, “What is it? What! What?”“I think we’re seeing our first U.F.O.”I was half-kidding, half-serious. We were in West Texas. Roswell, N. M., where ominous U.F.O. stories have been churned out for decades, was only four hours from here. Plus Marfa had its own weird phenomenon called the Marfa Lights. Yellowish orbs had been spotted flashing through this desert since the late 1800s. (There’s even a Mystery Lights Viewing Area, a truly unusual roadside center where people gather nightly.)I didn’t pull over because when you think you see a U.F.O. in the desert and there’s no one around, you don’t pull over. I have enough nostalgic alien movies under my belt to know this. However, I slowed down the car and there they were again — orbs the size of grapefruits, miles away. My heart pounded because it was only the beginning of our journey and we had already descended into a Steven Spielberg extraterrestrial movie. But as we drove closer, we realized they weren’t free-floating orbs at all. They were just truck lights dipping in and out of the sightline. And there you have it: My first desert mirage.During our four-day road trip, our home base was El Cosmico, a quirky hotel and campground on 21 acres, filled with vintage trailers (Beth and I stayed in a 24-foot, 1950s Branstrator with a turquoise-painted top), Sioux-style teepees and yurts. Sara and Miriam holed up in a bright pink 1953 Vagabond trailer. That first night we reserved a wood-fired, barrel-like hot tub. We opted for moonlight and naked bodies. We’ve been friends for a quarter of a century and this wasn’t our first time in a hot tub together in our birthday suits. The steam rose above the tub and the moon peeked through as we sipped our wine in the darkness. It felt good to be together. No men.In the morning, while everyone was asleep, I headed over to Marfa Burrito. It was a little house. Inside, Mexican decorations and pictures of Matthew McConaughey covered the wood-paneled walls. A fuchsia poster board listed five burrito choices, including egg and chorizo, bean and cheese and my personal favorite, the Primo, stuffed with beans, potatoes, onions, tomatoes, salsa and cheese, for only $6.50.Ramona Tejada, the owner, was a cute middle-aged woman with glasses and a woven sun hat. I ordered a cheese-and-egg burrito. “Huevos con queso,” I said in my survival Spanish, and she smiled. There were three other women cooking in the kitchen. One man, sitting in the corner, sorted red chilies.We took the day to roam around Marfa, stopping at the Food Shark, a food truck that’s a bit of a culinary institution and a great spot for people watching. You can drive through Marfa in a blink of an eye, but you can’t miss the mix of urbanites and folks who, I’m guessing, were transplanted from hip, urban spaces; people with purple hair and horn-rimmed glasses clomping around in muddy cowboy boots.We drifted from one strange experience after another. First we played Ping-Pong in the local artist Michael Phalen’s gallery. We shopped at Ranch Candy, an oddities-and-gift shop on the main drag, and chatted with the shop owner, an amiable guy with wide silver-rimmed glasses. (I bought an embroidered, vintage Western shirt there for my husband, Andy.)We stopped later at a gas station to fill up the tank, attempted to pump gas from a nonworking pump, then quickly realized that it was not a gas station after all — but an art exhibit. (Instead of prices for gas, the sign read: “ART.” Who knew?) And that night, we saw an experimental chamber opera, “Pancho Villa From a Safe Distance,” about the life of the Mexican Revolutionary general Pancho Villa, at The Crowley Theater, a single-story, weathered stone building with a curved Spanish Colonial facade; a string of white globe lights outlined the building in the velvety black sky.But Marfa also had a dusty, timeworn Texas feel. Turquoise pickup trucks were parked on the street. Most buildings had midcentury Spanish facades. (Marfa is about 60 miles from the Mexican border.) A Union Pacific train ran through the middle of town. We strolled past cattle feeders and beat-up hardware stores with nothing in the window but a deer head and portable gas cans for sale. And if anything speaks old-school cinematic Texas history, it’s the movie “Giant,” starring James Dean and Elizabeth Taylor, filmed here in 1955. Life-size photos from the movie line the 1930s-era Hotel Paisano. Marfa is an eccentric and remarkable mix of artists and cowboys. Their seemingly comfortable coexistence is most likely owed to the vision of the artist Donald Judd. Judd, who died in 1994, is the magnet of art pilgrimages to Marfa. In 1971, a successful minimalist artist, he moved to Marfa with his children to escape the New York art scene, turning abandoned offices of the United States Army Quartermaster Corps into his home and personal work space. La Mansana de Chinati, informally known as The Block, which is part of the Judd Foundation, is a space so large it took up an entire city block and encompassed two airplane hangars.So in the morning, we took a guided tour at The Block. Everything at The Block was symmetrical. The metal and glass doors. The endless bookshelves. The stack of woodcut yellow and blue plexiglass installations, all isolated rectangular blocks, hung vertically on the wall. The concrete raised pool. The plum trees in a line, one after another. Symmetrical, except, one could argue, for the old, yet working, grain mill across the street, with its machinery churning and grinding all afternoon.The mill was loud. Leave it to my friend Miriam to look beyond the art. “You move all the way to the desert,” she said, “and you built an art compound across the street from a grain mill?”Fair point. But it wasn’t the clamor of the mill that bothered me. It was the nine-foot-tall adobe brick wall. I was sick of walls. And eight-foot fences. And border delineations. I lived in a tight suburban New Jersey enclave with one neighbor’s driveway only 10 feet from my house.“We need to drive back out to the desert,” I told my friends after the tour. We all agreed that it was time to go.When you leave Marfa, it’s a deep dive into the rural framework of Texas. Back to the grasses and the yucca. The uninterrupted sky. A whole lot of space to fill. And what a sky it was! It had been so fickle, now finally we saw glimmers of bright blue patches above the long dark ribbon of a road ahead. Look at that road! With nothing on it!“This would be a good time to stand in the middle of the road,” Beth said. And she was the family therapist. The reasonable one! It was a spur of the moment suggestion. No reasoning behind it. We might be getting older, but in Texas, in the desert, you can still pull over, jump in the middle of the road and not a soul will know about it.We hopped out of the car and screamed our heads off, drunk with all of the space. And it was exhilarating! When my kids were little, I told them not to run into the street about 100 times. (Maybe more?) Here we were, four women in our mid-40s. It went against all of our instincts as responsible adults, and we let those instincts go into the wind that night.The sun was quickly dropping into the desert so, after our “I’m the queen of the road” stunt, we got back in the S.U.V. and I revved up to 80 again. In my path were two large black crows, snacking on roadkill. I slowed down a bit so they’d have time to ascend, but one got caught by the wind and it swooped down with a sharp force. My car plunged into it, everyone screamed and the bird propelled into my windshield. I did what any sane person would do when something large is coming at you: I ducked, yet my hands remained steady on the wheel.For whatever reason — maybe it was the desolate road, maybe it was how fast I was driving, or my desert head space — but my instinct was to simply duck, not to swerve. I’m a good driver. I can take a highway or a city street. But this was not a normal reflex. I’m telling you, I didn’t move that wheel. I’m going to chalk it up to adrenaline. Something raced inside of me that said “Get your head down. Now.”After we all calmed down a bit, once the screaming was over, Beth put her hand on my elbow. She asked me if I was O.K. I nodded.“You handled that perfectly,” Beth said, trying to calm me.“I didn’t handle it perfectly at all,” I said. “I killed an enormous bird.” I knew it was dead. It had catapulted into the field behind us; I saw it in the rearview mirror when I briefly peeked.The manic energy leading up to that moment flattened out. Music turned down. Everyone still. But that black bird was not my albatross. I wouldn’t let it be, I told myself (and it wasn’t, but all of that driving will play tricks on you), and so we sailed along the road, quieter, through the low tawny grass, past the sprawling ranches along U.S. 90 to a spot we’d all been talking about visiting: The Prada Marfa.Then there it was, a shining beacon of consumerism, nestled into the landscape, this landmark, Prada Marfa, a fake Prada store, a symbol of wealth and prosperity. Right in the middle of the desert, about 37 miles northwest of Marfa. It’s a small building that looks like a stand-alone storefront with wide windows. A few purses and shoes on display, donated by Miuccia Prada. Absolutely nothing else but miles and miles of empty ranchland on each side of it.This building is a lone rider, is as if someone had airlifted it into the desert. Or an apocalyptic relic, the only sign left of modern commercialism.The Berlin-based artists Michael Elmgreen and Ingar Dragset built the cultural landmark in 2005 with the help of the Marfa art collective, Ballroom Marfa. In 2014, Beyoncé did a split jump in front of the structure, posting it to her Instagram and sealing the Prada Marfa’s cultural fate forever.A pink sky erupted around the building as we modeled in our most Instagrammable poses. This may sound cliché, but at sunset, it truly does feel like you’ve entered a painting. So yes, the visit to Prada Marfa was worth it. Dead bird and all.In the morning, we hit Marfa Burrito again to fuel up before our drive out of town.Ramona recognized me and waved from the kitchen with her brilliant smile, calling out, “Hola, chica!” This time her sister-in-law Lucy, a warm woman with beautiful blue eyes and thick lashes, took my order. The line was out the door.We made our way up State Highway 17 to Davis Mountains State Park, which averages about 5,000 feet above sea level, for a hike. We usually hike at least once on our road trips — why not hit the highest mountain range in Texas? It was sunny and bright that morning, this time, the Chinati Mountains in the distance popped up over the desert landscape. We played an eclectic soundtrack: Fleetwood Mac’s “Sara,” the B-52’s “Dance This Mess Around” and Willie Nelson’s “On The Road Again.”“I don’t want to go home,” Sara said. A cancer survivor, she didn’t want to face follow-up tests. But it wasn’t just that. I knew she didn’t want to get back to work, the day-to-day routine. None of us did. And who wants to when you can surround yourself with art, eat fantastic food and drive on long, empty roads. This trip was a dream. I missed my kids and husband on every trip I’d ever been on, but this time, I was content to drive my way into this beautiful country of ours, through the fields and crevices and never reappear again.A few hours later, after the hike, we pulled into Blue Agate and Rocks, a small roadside crystal shop — the sign above the door simply says “Rock Shop” — in Fort Davis, about 21 miles from Marfa. Owner Donna Trammell was a petite, older woman, her face etched with lines, perhaps from years of crystal-hunting in the West Texas sun.“How do you pick a crystal?” I asked her, dizzy from the dozens of glittering rocks that packed her shelves. “You have so many.”“You have to listen to the rocks. They talk to you,” she said, passing a row of 30-pound purple amethysts and smaller, metallic iron pyrite. “I’m serious. If you pass one spot and pick it up, it’s because the rock is talking to you.”A large chunk of selenite, also known as a shaman stone, spoke to me. It was a cloudy white crystal with thick jags, a little larger than the palm of my hand and reminded me of the moon.It was our last day in West Texas and we were determined to pack it in. Still in our sweaty hiking clothes, we drove straight to The Chinati Foundation (another decommissioned army base that Mr. Judd had turned into an art compound) to experience Mr. Judd’s “15 untitled works in concrete,” which is essentially 15 giant gray rectangles settled in the middle of massive ranchland. I ran my fingers through the high yellowed grasses, relishing the open space and these architectural formations.Maybe my face seemed content and wise, because a small group approached us with a confused look. “Help us,” a woman from Houston said, pleading. “Did you get it? We don’t get it. Help us get it.”We tried some textbook explanations about how the concrete boxes are unexpected, an alteration of reality. When none of that worked, I told her in my blunt East Coast manner, “We don’t have fields like this in New Jersey.”Just down the road was the permanent exhibit, “From Dawn to Dusk,” by the large-scale installation artist Robert Irwin that had opened in July 2016. There were two entrances: One is light, the other is dark. We walked in from the dark side, gradually making our way into the light. This is the way you want to end a trip. Basking in the light, completely transformed and blissed out.And in the light, that was when we spotted him: a tall, handsome cowboy giving a small art tour. Every Thelma and Louise road trip story like ours needed a Brad Pitt moment and we found ours at The Chinati Foundation.His name was Chris Cole and truly, he looked like Richard Prince’s iconic Marlboro Man with his unmussed brown corduroy jacket, his tall cowboy build, his long hair and his 10-gallon hat. We overheard him talking about ranch water and because there’s nothing wrong with flirting, we asked what it was. Turns out ranch water was a simple mix of tequila, lime juice and soda water.“Nothing special, but fun to say,” he said. “Thanks for coming all the way to Marfa.” And he seemed like he meant it.Chris the Cowboy — or as we deemed him later that night, the “Hottie from Chinati,” as we gulped down our ranch waters at the Hotel Saint George bar where we stopped in for a drink after dinner — had walked away into the sunset.Our last night in the trailer, the four of us cozied up under colorful serapes, reading animal spirit cards. We were wistful about leaving Marfa and leaving each other. It would probably be another year until the four of us set out on another adventure.Before we left town on that bright Sunday morning, we stopped again at Marfa Burrito. Ramona and Lucy invited us to the back, in the kitchen, where we hugged them and thanked them for feeding us for our entire trip. “That’s what we do, feed people and make them feel good,” Lucy said. They certainly did.Hayley Krischer is a freelance writer living in New Jersey.Advertisement
UPDATED January 10, 2018

Josh Haner/The New York TimesAn earlier version of this list misstated the name of a new hotel in Iceland. It is the Retreat at Blue Lagoon Iceland, not the Moss Hotel (Moss is the name of the hotel’s restaurant). AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTEST RUNRecharge lets you rent a room by the minute at luxury properties. We put it to the test.By Shivani Vora Why pay for an overnight hotel stay when you need a room during the day for only a few hours or even just a few minutes? It’s an idea that is likely to appeal to many consumers, according to a handful of companies that sell hotel rooms for short blocks of time.By-the-hour hotel rooms aren’t a novel concept. In fact, they have a reputation for being used for illicit reasons, said Sean Hennessy, a hotel consultant and an assistant professor of hospitality at the Jonathan M. Tisch Center for Hospitality and Tourism at New York University. But while these brief rentals are traditionally found at budget hotels, the enterprises today involve higher-end properties and are targeting middle-class to affluent customers for considerably different purposes.“Now, more than ever before, the hotel industry is focused on trying to generate as much revenue as possible, and taking advantage of empty rooms during the day is one way to do that,” Mr. Hennessy said.The guests who might book these rooms, he said, include travelers with layovers, corporate travelers who need a quiet place to work and don’t have an office in town, and locals who are seeking some downtime during the day and find it more convenient to check into a hotel near where they are rather than go back home.Mr. Hennessy said that it can often be too logistically challenging for hotels to try sell rooms for small pockets of time on their own, and instead, a growing number of properties are collaborating with companies that can help them.One example is HotelsbyDay.com, with a presence in more than 60 cities in the United States, including New York City, Chicago and Denver, as well as in London and Paris. The brand works with more than 600 hotels in the three- to five-star categories, and rooms are available to book for a minimum of four hours between 9 a.m. and 7 p.m. Pricing varies by destination, but the chief executive officer, Yannis Moati, said that the national average is $90 for four hours.Dayuse.com, available for 4,000 hotels in 22 countries, also partners with three- to five-star properties, with a three-hour minimum on reservations.And now, with the app Recharge, users can book rooms by the minute at luxury properties in New York City and San Francisco.Intrigued by the idea, I used Recharge to book stays at three hotels in New York City, where I live. My visits were all under a half-hour, and over the course of a weekend, I got the feel of what it was like to be a by-the-minute hotel guest.Recharge launched in San Francisco in 2016 and last April in New York City and can be used to book rooms by the minute in about 20 hotels in each destination, at any time of day or night. Many are five-star properties, such as the Surrey and the Pierre in New York City and the Taj Campton Palace in San Francisco, and some are in the four-star category. In 2018, the service will expand to Los Angeles, Chicago, Miami and Washington, D.C.The company’s co-founder and chief executive officer, Manny Bamfo, said that he started Recharge because he believed that there was a demand for hotel stays in minute-long increments. These stays can be booked for immediate visits or for ones up to a day in advance, but booking is only through the app.Recharge’s customers — more than 30,000 as of November — are mostly locals and include mothers who want a clean place to nurse their babies or pump their breast milk, people seeking a quiet space to take a phone call and those seeking a midday reprieve. “We’ve even had fathers who need to change their child’s diaper and would rather do it in a hotel room than in a coffee shop bathroom,” Mr. Bamfo said. “You pay for the amount of time you need and nothing more.”Hotels benefit, too, Mr. Bamfo said: According to the company’s research, a 250-room property can get almost 275-rooms’ worth of revenue in one day from these short stays.Every hotel listed on Recharge’s app has a service fee, ranging from $30 to $50. The more luxurious the hotel, the higher the fee. After the service fee, per minute prices for the stays range from 50 cents to $2. Pricing for the same property can fluctuate throughout the day, depending on supply and demand, and some hotels may have a minimum charge at certain times of the day.I tried Recharge on a weekend when I had to hit different neighborhoods in Manhattan for various errands.My first trial was on a Saturday afternoon after I unexpectedly spent two hours at the Apple store on Fifth Avenue in Midtown, getting my iPhone fixed. There was just an hour before my dinner reservation on the West Side, and going back to my East Side apartment only to leave again almost immediately for the meal seemed like a waste of time. Here was my opportunity to turn to Recharge. The app showed availability in a dozen hotels, including the Pierre, just a few blocks away. I reserved my room, showed up five minutes later and was warmly greeted at the front desk by an employee, who had a record of my booking and offered me a bottle of water.Although my room overlooked a wall, it was well-appointed with silk fabrics, wood furniture and a white marble bath stocked with toiletries from the luxury brand Etro. I relaxed on the bed, weary from my long wait at Apple, and after channel-flipping for 15 minutes, I was somewhat revived and ready to enjoy my night out. Checking out, which involved clicking one button on the app, couldn’t have been easier, and once I did, I got an email receipt for my $69.95 stay.The next day, between returning clothes at multiple stores, buying baby gifts and restocking my spices with a trip to Kalustyan’s in the Curry Hill neighborhood, I checked into two hotels when I needed a break. The first one was Fifty NYC, an Affinia hotel, in Midtown East. Recharge listed the property in the four-star category, and it was indeed less lavish than the Pierre, although the service was just as warm. My room’s simple décor didn’t bother me, but the lack of light did: on a bright, sunny day, my view of a wall made it feel like it was dark outside. I caught up on emails during my 14-minute, $45.03 stay, and although it was time well-spent, more natural light would have made that time more pleasant.Would I fare better at the Michelangelo, on the West Side? No, as it turned out. The property, with gleaming marble floors and gilded elevators, was opulent, and my room was spacious, but it was the darkest of the three. I spent $61.05 for my 20 minutes there, which I used to call my mother-in-law in India, and truthfully, I couldn’t have stayed much more — the ambience was too gloomy.Mr. Bamfo said that my rooms were not reflective of the typical Recharge experience. “Hotels put our customers in any available rooms, even if they’re not in the entry-level category,” he said. “It’s unusual that you would be in a string of dark rooms.”Recharge is easy to use and has an appealing list of hotels. In a market in which companies sell stays at properties for small chunks of time, the brand’s by-the-minute feature helps it stand out. I can’t necessarily justify paying to use it on a regular basis, but I can see why some people would. When you need a place to put your feet up or are seeking privacy for another reason, checking into a fancy hotel room for as little as a few minutes may be just the thing.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesThe food at Lady of the House, in the Corktown neighborhood, could be described as seasonal-voluptuous.By Rebecca Flint MarxThere’s a world of hospitality contained in the tiny cups of black tea that greet you — along with a dainty plate of Welsh rarebit-flavored crackers — when you sit down to eat at Lady of the House, a nominally Irish, decidedly welcoming restaurant that opened last September in Detroit’s Corktown neighborhood.The lady in charge of this particular house is Kate Williams, a Detroit native whose family roots run deep in Corktown: her great-grandparents met at the neighborhood’s Gaelic League after emigrating from Ireland. Ms. Williams, who previously cooked at other restaurants around town, had long wanted to open her own in Detroit, where “as much as we can,” she said, her business is now “getting the money back into a city that needs to grow the tax base.” And, indeed, her focus is local: Much of Ms. Williams’ produce comes from urban farms, her house gin was created in collaboration with Detroit City Distillery and her tables and bar shelves were made by a local artist. A sense of resourcefulness pervades her cooking, which incorporates so-called ugly foods — ingredients that would have otherwise been discarded for purely aesthetic reasons — and whole-animal butchery. “Chef is passionate about no waste,” our server informed us. “You’ll notice at the end of the night that we only have one compost bucket.”We didn’t, largely because there was so much else that demanded our attention. Namely, there was the food, which is served on old-fashioned china and could be described as seasonal-voluptuous: roast chicken for four; mighty slabs of mushroom toast smeared with homemade ricotta; crisp-creamy roasted cauliflower served in a puddle of parmesan sauce; a trio of scallops, fat as tuffets, plopped on a bed of polenta cooked in whey; and a sardine tin full of lethally rich shrimp butter, tinted scarlet with a dusting of Aleppo pepper and accompanied by toasted rye-sourdough bread. That bread, not incidentally, is exceptional; it’s the work of Shelby Janisch, the restaurant’s 21-year-old baker who is also, our server said, “really good at puns.”Such cozy food asks for cozy surroundings, and Ms. Williams has obliged: the dining room has the low lights and polished dark-wood floors of a good pub, along with elegant banquettes upholstered in green velvet and caramel leather and a marble-topped bar. And there is the women’s restroom, where hospitality comes in the form of a machine dispensing free tampons and a bench whose fabric is printed with Ryan Gosling’s face. The bathroom is a subtle nod to female empowerment, said Ms. Williams, adding that the bench, which is bolted to the ground, “is the most photographed thing here.”Almost as popular are the restaurant’s potato doughnuts. “My dad is still passionate about the potato famine,” Ms. Williams said. “So I was like, I can’t open a restaurant without a white potato dessert.” Served with dried yogurt and a chamomile sauce, they are improbably airy, although we were so stuffed that we had to have them boxed up. They were just as good the next day — one last touch of hospitality taken to go.Lady of the House, 1426 Bagley Avenue; 313-818-0218; ladyofthehousedetroit.com. An average dinner for two, minus drinks and tip, is about $110. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 Places to Go in 2018Her name is Jada Yuan, and you’ll have all of 2018 to get to know her. Each year, we put together a list of 52 places to inspire travelers for the coming year. This year, we’re actually sending a traveler to each and every place. You have seen some of our favorite submissions (we got 13,000 of them) and perhaps perused this year’s list — now meet the traveler: Jada Yuan. Jada has spent the last decade at New York magazine, covering celebrities, film festivals and presidential conventions. She grew up in northern New Mexico, has a degree in history from Yale University and currently lives in Brooklyn. Not for long, though — her first stop on her journey will be our No. 1 destination, New Orleans.  Follow her on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook as she begins her travels. She will be looking for your advice as she makes her way around the world.Here is a little more from Jada’s submission video on why she thought she would be a great fit for the job. Obviously, we agreed. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 places to go in 2018Notable properties in Indonesia, Greece and elsewhere will focus on the environment.By Elaine GlusacInnovative design and other features that channel the destination unify the following coming and just-opened hotels, which are among the most promising debuts of the new year.Amanyangyun, ShanghaiWhen a new reservoir threatened their destruction, an entire camphor forest and 50 Ming and Qing dynasty-era houses were moved 400 miles from the Jiangxi province to the outskirts of Shanghai and refashioned into Amanyangyun. After 15 years of conservation work, the 25-acre resort will open Jan. 8, with 13 villas in the reconstructed houses featuring modern interiors and 24 additional suites. A cultural pavilion offers guests opportunities to practice calligraphy, watch an opera or partake in a tea ceremony. Rooms from CNY 6,900, or about $1,062; aman.com. The Murray, Hong KongFormerly home to Hong Kong government offices, the iconic 1969 white high-rise known as the Murray Building will reopen this month as The Murray hotel. The British architectural firm Foster + Partners has undertaken its transformation to a 336-room hotel spanning 25 floors. Among five restaurants and lounges, the rooftop bar will overlook the city’s business district and Hong Kong Park. Rooms from 3,850 Hong Kong dollars, or about $493; niccolohotels.hotels.com.Hotel St. George, HelsinkiAlready a member of Design Hotels, the 153-room Hotel St. George will open in the spring in a historic building largely designed by the architect Onni Tarjanne and formerly home to the Finnish Literature Society. A ground-floor gallery will exhibit a large-scale sculpture of a dragon by the Chinese artist Ai Weiwei and an 18-foot-long brass bird by the sculptor Pekka Jyllhä will hang from the glass ceiling of the winter garden. Expect two restaurants, a swimming pool and, of course, a sauna in the spa. Rooms from 220 euros, or about $265; stgeorgehelsinki.com.Calilo, Ios IslandThe former Wall Street trader Angelos Michalopoulos has acquired about a quarter of the island of Ios in the Aegean Sea where his new 30-suite Calilo resort is expected to open next summer with solar power, geothermal cooling and building materials such as marble and granite quarried at the beachfront site. The 1,000-acre property will host six miles of trails, an open-air cinema and an organic garden providing food for the restaurant. Rooms from €680; calilo.gr.Capella Ubud, BaliThe designer Bill Bensley, whose extensive resume includes the Four Seasons Golden Triangle Tented Camp in Thailand, brings his romantic colonial style to the Capella Ubud in the upland rice-growing region of Bali. Opening in early 2018, its 22 tents and a two-bedroom lodge come with plunge pools on a jungle property where even the gym, library and restaurants are tented. Activities range from guided walks to chocolate-bar making. Rooms from $838; capellahotels.com/ubud.Vista Palazzo Lago di Como, ComoIn the town of Como, at the southwestern end of the villa-ringed Lago di Como, the new Vista Palazzo Lago di Como, set to open in June, will retrofit one of the lake’s 19th-century palaces, using marble, wood and fabrics all sourced in Italy, to hold 18 suites and the town’s first rooftop restaurant and bar. Guests can tour the lake by Riva speedboat or seaplane. Rates from €695; vistalagodicomo.com.Mukan Resort, Sian Ka’an Biosphere, Quintana RooOn Mexico’s southern Caribbean coast, the Sian Ka’an Biosphere, a Unesco World Heritage Site, protects tropical forests, mangrove channels, lagoons and part of the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef. To get to Mukan Resort, which opened on an islet in the preserve in December, guests of its four beachfront bungalows and five suites take a 45-minute boat ride from Tulum. Come to snorkel, paddle and fish. Rooms from $420; mukan.com. Isla Palenque Island Resort, Gulf of ChiriquíThe eco-focused Cayuga Collection, which runs Lapa Rios in Costa Rica among others, plans to open Isla Palenque Island Resort in the summer. The 400-acre island in the Pacific already has a six-room villa and will add eight beachfront rooms. Guests can hike on land and explore the marine park off shore via kayak and paddleboard. Rooms from $600, including breakfast; cayugaonline.com. Illa Experience Hotel, QuitoIlla Experience Hotel, opened in December by the Ecuador-based tour operator Latin Trails, aims to immerse guests in the culture of Quito with daily activities such as coffee tastings, watercolor classes and lessons in making local sweets. Its 10 rooms occupy a former 18th-century house in the historic San Marcos neighborhood with a bar on the roof and the city’s acclaimed Nuema restaurant on the premises. Rooms from $459; illaexperiencehotel.com.Tiny Urban Escapes, IndianapolisThis summer, two shipping containers that have been remodeled with glass walls will open on four acres of private land adjacent to Eagle Creek Park in Indianapolis as getaway cabins called Tiny Urban Escapes. Poised to draw nature-loving city-dwellers, the 160-square-foot rooms will each come with two bikes for exploring the nearby trails. Rooms from $179; tinyurbanescapes.com.The Source Hotel, DenverComing this spring to the Source food market in Denver’s booming River North Art District, the Source Hotel will have its own microbrewery from New Belgium Brewing in Fort Collins and a rooftop space called the Woods after the 50 oak barrels stationed there to age its craft beer. Guests of the 100-room hotel will get a brew at check-in. Besides drinking, there will be a cantilevered pool and a barbecue restaurant. Rooms from $250; thesourcehotel.com.Sheldon Chalet, Denali National Park, AlaskaOne might argue that any shelter in the Alaska wilderness is a luxury. But travelers to the Denali region will have a true luxury lodging option when the Sheldon Chalet opens in February. The five-bedroom lodge, 10 miles from Denali in a summit-ringed basin known as the Don Sheldon Amphitheater, promises running water and fine dining along with aurora viewing, skiing and guided glacier trekking. Rooms from $2,300; sheldonchalet.com.Rosewood Miramar Beach Montecito, Montecito, Calif.Long closed and its future in limbo, the landmark Miramar By the Sea Hotel has been redeveloped and will open in summer as the Rosewood Miramar Beach Montecito in the affluent Montecito enclave near Santa Barbara. The 16-acre property, which its owners say has the only private beach in Southern California, encompasses some 161 rooms (many in cottages and bungalows), two swimming pools, six restaurants and bars, and a spa. (Because of the Jan. 9 mudslide, Highway 101 near the resort is closed. The hotel itself was not in its path and it remains on track to begin operations in the summer.) Rooms from $825; rosewoodhotels.com.Park MGM and NoMad Las VegasIn the first half of 2018 on the Las Vegas Strip, MGM Resorts International aims to replace the mundane Monte Carlo Resort and Casino with two flashier hotels in one tower: the 2,700-room Park MGM with an Eataly food market and the relatively boutique 292-room NoMad Las Vegas from the Sydell Group. With the latter comes a NoMad restaurant from the chef Daniel Humm and the restaurateur Will Guidara. Rates to be determined; parkmgm.com.Azerai Can Tho, Can ThoThe hotelier Adrian Zecha, who created Aman resorts, founded a new hotel group called Azerai that made its debut in Luang Prabang, Laos, in 2017. Its second property, Azerai Can Tho, is slated to open by year-end on the Hau River, a Mekong tributary, in Vietnam’s fourth-largest city. The 60-room resort features a spa, tennis court and two restaurants. Excursions include visits to the city’s famous floating markets, bike trips and sampan boat tours. Rooms from $250; azerai.com.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byHeads UpScandinavia is known for its innovative craft brews, but in Stockholm, there's a trend of less is more: new bars and bottle shops stocked exclusively with low-alcohol beers.By Ingrid K. WilliamsTo understand the rigidity — and some would say absurdity — of Sweden’s alcohol laws, step inside a Systembolaget, a government-run liquor store, on a Saturday afternoon. It’s predictable chaos because these shops are the only retailers permitted to sell beverages containing more than 3.5 percent alcohol by volume (ABV). At precisely 3 p.m., the doors will shut until Monday morning, and anyone hoping to buy a bottle of wine for a spontaneous dinner party or a few beers for a Sunday cookout will be out of luck.But increasingly, Stockholmers have other palatable options.Grocery stores are allowed to sell what is known as folkol (“people’s beer”), containing 2.8 percent to 3.5 percent ABV. Long maligned as tasteless, watered-down pilsners, these low-ABV beers are now getting a reboot by craft brewers seeking to shake up the Swedish market. At the same time, a wave of new folkol-focused bars and bottle shops — all opened in the last two years — is fueling interest in this formerly low-prestige beverage.In a country known for its innovative craft beer, often high-alcohol IPAs and sour ales, this emerging trend in the opposite direction is being driven by Swedes’ interest in healthier living, but it’s also a way to skirt Sweden’s strict alcohol laws. Whatever the reason, it’s making the city’s drinking scene notably livelier.First up was Bottl3.5hop, which opened in June 2016 as a low-alcohol bottle shop, a designation that necessitates neither a liquor license nor a kitchen (Swedish regulations require that bars also serve food). Located in a trendsetting neighborhood in the Sodermalm district, the shop doubles as a bar with low-ABV beers on tap and a rotating assortment of about 120 different bottles from around the world, including the occasional collaboration beer with small Stockholm breweries.“When people find out that good beer doesn’t have to be high ABV, I think we will see a difference in the drinking patterns,” said co-owner Martin Jamtlid, who noted that the number of producers brewing low-ABV beers has grown exponentially in recent years.“It’s all about the talent of the brewer,” he said.At the forefront of the trend in Stockholm is Omnipollo, a beer producer founded here in 2011 by Henok Fentie and Karl Grandin.“For us, it’s always been about getting as good beer as possible into as many hands as possible, to be frank,” Mr. Fentie said. “We want to replace your average beer for something that’s more unique.”One of the top folkol options available right now is Omnipollo’s Bianca Mango Lassi Gose — “an Indian-beverage-inspired German-style sour beer, which sounds quite far-fetched but it worked really well,” he said.“I shied away from low-ABV beers for a very long time because part of the truth is that flavor does go hand in hand with higher ABVs,” continued Mr. Fentie, who has a reputation for brewing potent I.P.A.s and sublime stouts with double-digit ABVs.“But as we progressed as brewers and also as consumers, it’s become more of an enticing challenge to try to create a lower ABV beer that has a lot of flavor,” he said.“The other part of it is that we’re parents,” he said, and lower-ABVs make early mornings easier.The ability to enjoy a beer without the attendant side effects was also part of the appeal for Alli McCleary Olin, a Tennessee native who in December 2016 opened Folk & Friends, a dog-friendly folkol cafe on Kungsholmen, with her husband, Victor. A second location is scheduled to open later this winter in western Sodermalm.“I think everybody has this mind-set that they want to drink for pleasure, not for effect,” she said, echoing the sentiment that folkol is well-suited to Swedes’ increasingly active and health-conscious lifestyle.The couple, both former homebrewers, had noticed an uptick in quality of low-ABV beers, especially among Swedish craft brewers such as Poppels, Oppigards, Brekeriet and Omnipollo.“I realized there was a big trend going on with the folkol,” she said. “More brewers were brewing it and the quality was becoming better and better, and it still is to this day.”Folkolsbutiken, another bar and bottle shop that opened on Sodermalm in August 2016, is focused on promoting Nordic, and primarily Swedish, brewers.Despite increased buzz, many fledgling craft breweries still struggle to get their beers to consumers, said owner Johan Palo, noting the difficulty of landing a spot in Systembolaget’s inventory.To introduce flavorful folkol to a wider audience, Folkolsbutiken also has a beer bike pouring sour beers and low-ABV IPAs at Hornstulls Marknad, a popular weekend market open April through September.“It’s a coincidence that we opened at the same time,” said Mr. Palo of his fellow folkol-focused establishments. “But it definitely says something about how Swedes want to drink now.”That Scandinavian credo — in ABV, as in all things — is moderation.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesMrs Robinson’s manages to match the German capital’s cheeky, creative spirit in its vibe and food. By Gisela WilliamsDespite Berlin’s reputation for its uninhibited night life and progressive counterculture, traditionally the city’s fine dining restaurants have fit within the same ho-hum, predictable mold. In the last few years several small but ambitious restaurants have managed to break free, but none have managed to match Berlin’s cheeky, creative spirit as successfully as Mrs Robinson’s. Located in a small space (formerly a kebab restaurant) in the Prenzlauerberg neighborhood, the tiny kitchen is headed up by two recent and young Berlin transplants: the Israeli chef Ben Zviel and Samina Raza, a London native. Mr. Zviel, 28, who first trained with Amir Ilan in Tel Aviv and then, briefly, worked under Wylie Dufresne at WD-50 in New York, had always desired the freedom to develop his cooking without compromise. After some stints in Berlin, he decided that the German capital was one of the few major European cities affordable enough that he could make it happen. With help from several friends, Mr. Zviel and Ms. Raza renovated the space on a tiny budget and finally opened Mrs Robinson’s (named after a “saucy and warmhearted” friend of Ms. Raza’s) in late 2016.“We have a small budget but complete freedom,” Mr. Zviel said. “We are committed first to our truth and then to our customers, never to the whims of an investor.”From the street, the well-lit room with white-brick walls and pale oak floorboards can resemble a minimalist stage set. Once inside, though, it feels more like a friend’s dinner party where everyone is hanging out in the kitchen. An initial visit just a month after Mrs Robinson’s opened revealed an early taste of what Mr. Zviel aspired to: a lively kitchen where he could play and riff with Asian-inspired, umami-rich dishes directly inspired by New York City chefs like Mr. Dufresne and David Chang: a bowl of crispy charred brussels sprouts served with crunchy toasted rice and loads of fresh chopped cilantro; shrimp noodles in a buttery sake-saffron broth, loaded with little salty bombs of fish roe and caviar; a fried soft-shell crab served on a fluffy white bao bun with homemade spicy mayo and a thin slice of kohlrabi. (Because Mrs Robinson’s encourages both sharing and indulging, there is little difference between appetizers and mains.) During another visit in December, over some obscure and upbeat ’70s music, a guest and I perused the menu, which had clearly evolved since my last visit. We started with an off-menu special: two spicy deviled eggs with fried oysters, which were messy but delicious. There were hits and misses: A generous and gutsy sandwich of aged beef tartare, fried sweetbreads, shiso béarnaise and hot sauce was a standout; the octopus Bolognese had great potential but the ratio of sauce to pasta overwhelmed. The biggest surprise at Mrs Robinson’s is the desserts. Unlike most Berlin restaurants, Mr. Zviel treats it as a grand finale. A thick, creamy popcorn soup is poured around passion fruit ice and a swirl of sweetened black tahini cream, under which are obscured sweet crunchy bits of caramelized popcorn and peanuts. A rum banana cake was served with a nondairy amazake (traditionally a sweet, non- or low-alcoholic Japanese beverage) ice cream and like the popcorn soup, kept revealing new flavors and textures with every bite — hidden at the bottom was a layer of toasted puffed quinoa and amaranth. Like a catchy tune, the dish replayed in our minds days later. Mrs Robinson’s, Pappelallee 29; 49-152-0518-8946; mrsrobinsons.de. An average meal for two, without drinks or tip, is 100 euros, about $120. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTrendingSightseeing tours in stylish motorcycle sidecars are catching on as a unique, fun and intimate way to explore cities around the globe. Here’s how to try one yourself.By Shivani VoraSightseeing tours in motorcycle sidecars are taking off around the world. Riding in the three-wheeled vehicles with a driver who’s also your local guide is a unique and fun way for travelers to explore a destination. It can be an attention-getting way to explore a city, too. Remi Di Nino, a founder of the Paris sidecar tour company Retro Tour Paris, said that spectators often snap pictures of the sidecars during excursions. “They’re not your typical way of getting around, so people get excited when they see them,” he said. “Also, the riders on the tours get a completely different perspective of Paris than they would by sitting on a bus.” Mr. Di Nino’s company offers four excursions around Paris, ranging from 40 minutes to seven hours, in stylish Ural sidecars (Ural is a well-known sidecar manufacturer). The tours are customized based on what travelers want to see. Alternatively, their guides can lead the way and take them to their favorite spots in the city. Prices start from 69 euros a person; the price for a second rider starts at 20 additional euros. Book online on their website.BrightSide Tours offers seven excursions in Barcelona, also in Ural sidecar motorcycles. The three-and-a-half hour Foodie Ride is a popular pick, and the tour includes stops at three popular tapas bars to enjoy traditional Spanish fare. It also includes a stop at Montjuic, a hill with views of the city, for a Cava toast. Prices start at 240 euros for one passenger, and 160 euros per person for two passengers. Book online on their website.AndBeyond offers a visually rich, eight-hour tour in and around Cape Town, South Africa, in a vintage World War II motorcycle with a sidecar. Travelers ride through the scenic suburb of Camps Bay, along the edgy cliffs of Chapman’s Peak, to Boulders Beach to see the colony of penguins, and to the Constantia Winelands, where they’ll visit two boutique wineries. Bookings start at $241 for two people. Reserve by email: contactus@andBeyond.com. From Africa to Asia: Beijing Sideways has several sidecar tours of Beijing in a Chang Jiang 750 Chinese motorcycle. One option is the two-hour Beijing by Night that includes more than a dozen stops around the city, including at the gate of the Forbidden City. Also among the destinations are the National Center for the Performing Arts, an eggshell shaped building designed by the French architect Paul Andreu, and Tiananmen Square. Prices are about $181 for the first passenger and $91 for the second. Book by email: booking@beijinsideways.com. Some hotels also offer sidecar tours. The Royal Mansour, in Marrakesh, Morocco, for one, offers a sidecar excursion to the home of the renowned French perfumer Serge Lutens. The residence is full of intricately carved ceilings and walls and still has the laboratory where Mr. Lutens has created more than 70 of his fragrances. Guests will be driven to the home in a vintage motorcycle sidecar; following the tour, their driver will take them on a ride to see popular sites in Marrakesh. Prices are around $400 for two people, and for hotel guests only. Book by email: info@royalmansour.ma.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPursuitsAway from the skyscraper-dominated megalopolis of urban Dubai, an outing aboard a hot-air balloon offers participants a bird’s-eye view of a falcon’s realm. By Joshua HammerJust before dawn, the Hajar Mountains, about 20 miles east across the Arabian Desert, began to emerge from the darkness. I shifted my position in the wicker gondola and watched, rapt, as the sun peeked above the silhouetted limestone range. In the east, the sky glowed orange and crimson, and the light illuminated a sea of saltbushes, sweet grass and wind-rippled dunes. Beside me, the pilot, Mike Schaefer, a big, balding German with a salt-and-pepper goatee and black-framed glasses, turned to his co-pilot, Robertas Komza, a skinny Lithuanian new to desert flying, and ordered him to take us higher. Mr. Komza depressed a lever on a gas valve, sending a fearsome jet of propane-fueled flame into the 130-foot-tall hot-air balloon. “Head up to 4,000 feet, then we’ll let the falcon fly a bit,” said Mr. Schaefer, gesturing to a large hooded bird with white- and charcoal-barred feathers, resting on the gloved arm of his colleague, Dylan Freeman. We were drifting over the Dubai Desert Conservation Reserve, an 87-square-mile former camel farm purchased by Dubai’s ruler, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, in 1997. Since then, the fenced-in wilderness, a part of the Arabian Desert, has served as a protected habitat for a variety of indigenous mammals — hedgehogs, shrews, gazelles, Arabian hares and at least three species of bats — and a getaway spot for tourists and locals overwhelmed by the skyscraper-dominated megalopolis of Dubai, the most populous of seven city-states that comprise the United Arab Emirates. For the past year, the reserve has also been the locale for a remarkable new venture that combines hot-air ballooning with an introduction to falconry, the Arab world’s most ancient and venerated sport. In the cool of the morning, passengers soar high over the desert joined by a captive-bred bird and its trainer. The hourlong experience provides an intimate look at how these raptors — which can soar to 8,000 feet and plunge after their prey at 150 miles per hour — fly and hunt at high altitudes.I’ve always been leery of hot-air balloons, an unease that ramped up considerably in February 2013, after a fiery balloon accident in Luxor, Egypt, resulted in the death of 19 tourists.  But on a recent trip to Dubai to research a nonfiction book that unfolds in the falconry world, I was seeking an opportunity to closely observe the raptors in flight, and so I suppressed my fears and signed up for an outing (prices vary, depending on group size; I paid about $325). The project, I reassured myself, came with a top pedigree: Sheikh Butti Bin Juma al-Maktoum, the brother-in-law of the ruler of Dubai, and an ardent conservationist and falconer, initiated it in early 2016, and brought together the staffs of two of his popular touristic enterprises to make it happen. Royal Shaheen Events, co-founded by the South African falconer Peter Bergh and the Zimbabwean falcon breeder Howard Waller, runs luxury falconry demonstrations by Land Cruiser in the desert. The other, Balloon Adventures Dubai, co-founded by the Hungarian ballooning expert Peter Kollar, has been flying tourists over Dubai since 2005.  The first chicks designated for the project were hatched in May 2016 at Sheikh Butti’s breeding center in Scotland, and then taken by Land Cruiser for training in Umbria, Italy, where Mr. Kollar runs a ballooning company during the summer. “We had no idea how they would react to the basket and to the burning jets. But we were surprised by how quickly they learned,” Mr. Kollar told me. “The falcons look at the basket as their nest, and they’re trained to return to it. They were very young, and they didn’t even pay any attention to the fire.” At 3:30 on an October morning, a van picked me up at the Dubai Marina and shuttled me down the empty highway for an hour to Sheikh Butti’s sprawling property near the Desert Conservation Reserve. Staffers were still inflating the balloon in the darkness; a thick jet of propane-fed flame filled the huge nylon sack with an eerie orange glow. Mr. Freeman, a stocky and bearded Zimbabwean, stood off to the side, stroking the feathers of his 17-month-old bird, Bomber. Bomber, he said, was a mix of gyrfalcon, a highly prized, nonmigratory species often found north of the Arctic Circle, and the more common saker falcon, a migratory species that crosses the Arabian Peninsula every winter. Arab falconers trapped them here until Dubai banned capturing birds from the wild in the 1970s. The saker bloodline, he said, “helps Bomber deal with the desert heat.” Nineteen passengers — Chinese, Scandinavian, French and me — gathered around Mr. Schaefer, who gave a safety briefing, fitted us with harnesses and carabiners, divided us into two groups and hustled us into a partitioned wicker basket. Four propane tanks fitted with four burners allowed Mr. Komza to adjust the air temperature inside the balloon while aloft. With the air heated to 100 degrees, we soared over the desert as the luminescent red glow on the horizon signaled the imminent dawn.At 4,000 feet, Mr. Freeman removed the hood from Bomber. The raptor swiveled his white mottled head and took a measure of his surroundings. “You can see how big his eyes are, so he can spot his prey,” the trainer said. The bird flapped his pointed wings and rose from Mr. Freeman’s glove. He climbed another 20 feet and circled the balloon three times, dipping and rising on the desert thermals. He swooped close to a Chinese tourist whose bag of potato chips stuck out from the pocket of his hoodie, then abruptly veered away. Mr. Freeman waved a chunk of quail. “Hey, hey, hey,” he shouted. Bomber rose, dove, and then alighted on Mr. Freeman’s glove. As he gobbled the bloody morsel, he spread his wings, fanned his tail and arched his body over the food — an instinct known as mantling, protecting the prey from other predators. Mr. Freeman fed him another chunk. “He eats 10 percent of his body weight in three minutes,” he said. “That’s like me eating 18 pounds of steak in the same amount of time.”It was only a couple of generations ago — when Dubai was a sleepy fishing port bordered by a vast swath of desert — that trained falcons like Bomber could eat their fill in the wild, Mr. Freeman said. The Arabian Desert abounded with the houbara bustard, a migratory, partridge-like fowl found in arid habitats across Asia and northern Africa. But the sheikhs hunted the birds to near-extinction on the Arabian Peninsula, obliging them to organize lavish houbara-hunting trips overseas.  In 2002, Sheikh Hamdan bin Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, the crown prince of Dubai, launched the sport of falcon racing in an effort to keep some semblance of the tradition alive in Dubai, and the sport has proved immensely popular, spreading to Abu Dhabi, Qatar and Saudi Arabia. Meanwhile a houbara-breeding program launched by Sheikh Mohammed has introduced the birds to private hunting grounds in Dubai, where wealthy falconry enthusiasts can bag a few a year at high prices. “It’s been so effective that there’s a surplus,” Mr. Freeman told me. “They release the extra bustards into the Desert Conservation Reserve.”  Despite the comeback of the falcon’s traditional prey, Mr. Freeman doubted that falconry would ever be fully revived in the Emirates. “The sheikhs really still want to go abroad to hunt,” Mr. Freeman told me, explaining that it was a purer and more challenging experience. “A released bustard might have been let go two years ago, but it doesn’t have the stamina of a bird that has migrated a couple of thousand miles.” After Bomber’s show, Mr. Schaefer, the German pilot, directed Mr. Komza to tug on a dangling blue cord known as a “vent line” that rotated the balloon and allowed some air to escape. (The adjacent red line, he explained, collapsed the balloon irreversibly and was to be used only for emergency landings. “We have a nice saying,” he told me. “If you pull red you are dead.”) We clipped our carabiners to a safety line as the balloon descended to a few hundred feet, and sailed toward a date palm plantation owned by Sheikh Butti. “As we prepare for landing, you never know where you will end up,” Mr. Schaefer, said, grinning. The balloon grazed a high hedge and then headed for a sweep of cream-colored dunes.  Mr. Schaefer barked instructions to the Lithuanian. The gondola hit the dunes hard, bounced twice, then rolled on its side. For one moment, I was terrified that the basket would flip over, but then it came to rest at a 90-degree angle. I unhooked my carabiner and scrambled onto a dune. A convoy of Land Rovers was parked nearby, ready to whisk us off to the sheikh’s desert compound for a breakfast of poached eggs, fruit, smoked salmon, toast and Arabic coffee. As I stepped into the vehicle, I paused to admire Bomber one final time. The raptor, now hooded, was perched serenely on Mr. Freeman’s glove, looking none the worse for his wild ride.   AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byOn the calendar: Blues in Canada, rock in Ireland and Afropunk in South Africa.By Shivani VoraWhere will the sounds of music take travelers in 2018? The destination may depend on your favorite song, but whether that means jazz, Afropunk, rock or another rhythm entirely, there’s definitely a place to go.For blues fans, the Tremblant International Blues Festival (July 6 to 15), in the village of Mont Tremblant, in Canada, is celebrating its 25th anniversary in a big way. The 10 days of festivities will include more than 100 indoor and outdoor concerts — most of them free — from both blues legends and emerging musicians from around the world. And for festivalgoers seeking a more intimate immersion into the blues, the event includes several freestyle jam sessions at restaurants and bars around town.Despite the name, it’s not only about jazz: the music and cultural party known as the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival (April 27 to May 6) is going all out for the Big Easy’s Tricentennial in 2018 with performances from over 500 bands, playing virtually every style of music. The lineup for this year is still in the works, but it’s likely to be as diverse as in the past when artists have included Bruce Springsteen, Pearl Jam, Snoop Dogg and Louisiana locals Trombone Shorty and Dr. John.It’s also a big year — the 60th, to be exact — for Festival di Spoleto (June 29 to July 15), in Spoleto, in Italy’s Umbria region. The event includes more than 100 classical and opera concerts at venues around town, and the opening night show of the tragic opera “Jeanne d’Arc au Bucher” by Arthur Honegger, held in the grand Piazza del Duomo, is a way to get into the listening mood.If moving to rock is more your speed than the sounds of classical or opera, head to Ireland for the annual concert at the 18th-century Slane Castle (May), north of Dublin and home to a whisky distillery, Slane Irish Whisky. The event attracts more than 80,000 spectators, and it’s not hard to see why: Rock ‘n’ roll royalty have performed in past years, from Guns ‘n’ Roses and Bon Jovi to Eminem and Kings of Leon. The 2018 band has yet to be announced, but a star name is practically guaranteed.The dancing is sure to be as much fun at Vivid Music, part of the 10th annual Vivid Sydney (May 25 to June 16), a festival dedicated to light, music and ideas. The vibrant contemporary music showcases artists known for breaking the mold — Björk, Anohni, Morrissey and Lauryn Hill have performed in previous years. The musicians hold concerts in intimate spaces around the city as well as the grandest of ones including, of course, the Sydney Opera House.From contemporary tunes to more traditional ones: Celtic Connections (Jan. 18 to Feb. 4), in Glasgow, is turning 25 this year and will fill the Scottish city with not only Celtic music for two weeks, but folk, jazz and fusion tunes, too. David Milligan, one of the festival’s performers in its inaugural year, is the musical director of the opening gala, an event that celebrates the history of the festival with a lineup of the genre’s most respected artists, including Sharon Shannon.There’s celebrating a big anniversary, and then there’s celebrating diversity: the Afropunk Festival (December), in Johannesburg, South Africa, celebrates the latter and is a two-day event to honor equality for people of all races, colors, creeds and genders. Afropunk stars like Laura Mvula and the Free Nationals performed last year, and the artists in 2018 promise to be just as notable.Yes, there really is a music festival in the middle of a rain forest: the Rainforest World Music Festival (July 13 to 15), in Sarawak, Malaysia, in the heart of the Borneo jungle and in its 20th year, draws more than 20,000 attendees. They come to listen to the diverse range of musicians — traditional, indigenous and world fusion genres are part of the mix — who perform on two stages. The setting is one-of- a-kind, and the music is, too. Music fans may want to visit Utah for the Moab Music Festival (Aug. 27 to Sept. 13) where jazz and classical music concerts are set among the region’s renowned red rock formations. At the Bach Festival (June 8 to 17) in Leipzig, Germany, concerts are held in 40 venues across the city, including outdoors at Leipzig Market, the Leipzig Zoo and the city’s main train station.Jessica Colley Clarke contributed reporting.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by52 Places to GoThe roster includes the Winter Olympics in South Korea, the World Cup in Russia and the World Equestrian Games in North Carolina.By John L. DormanAfter years of planning and construction, the Winter Olympics and the World Cup are generally regarded as the marquee sporting events of 2018. But there is an abundance of events throughout the year for sports enthusiasts around the globe, from the British-centric Commonwealth Games to the rough-and-tumble Rugby World Cup Sevens to the refined World Equestrian Games.Super Bowl LII, or 52, will be played on Feb. 4 at the U.S. Bank Stadium in Minneapolis. The city, which previously hosted the Super Bowl in 1992, will offer a range of fan-friendly events over the course of the 10 days leading to the game. The singer Justin Timberlake will headline the halftime show.Pyeongchang, South Korea, will be the site of the Winter Games from Feb. 9 to 25. Spectators can take in skiing, snowboarding and bobsledding among the 102 events, a record number for a Winter Olympics. Curling, ice hockey, figure skating and speed-skating competitions will be held in the nearby city of Gangneung, but the activities don’t stop there. The Paralympic Games, which follow the Winter Games in Pyeongchang, are set for March 9 to 18.From April 4 to 15, the Commonwealth Games will be held on the Gold Coast in Queensland, Australia. The competition, which features badminton, basketball, artistic gymnastics and squash, among other sports, features athletes from 70 Commonwealth countries and territories.The World Cup, the quadrennial international men’s soccer tournament, will take place from June 14 to July 15 with 64 games across 11 Russian cities, including Kaliningrad, Moscow, Nizhny Novgorod, St. Petersburg and Sochi. There will be 32 participating countries, including teams from Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and Panama. Germany, the 2014 champions, will be defending their title. Notable team absences include Italy, which had previously qualified for 14 consecutive tournaments, and the United States, which lost a qualifying game to Trinidad and Tobago last year.For horse racing fans, there are several notable events on the calendar. The Kentucky Derby is scheduled for May 5 and the 143rd Preakness Stakes at Baltimore’s Pimlico Race Course will be held on May 19. In Liverpool, England, the famed Grand National steeplechase is scheduled for April 14 at the Aintree Racecourse, and the Melbourne Cup, a 3,200-meter race (just under two miles), is set for Nov. 6 in Victoria, Australia.Mill Spring, N.C., which lies near the state’s border with South Carolina, will be the host for the World Equestrian Games from Sept. 11 to 23, with events that will include jumping, reining and vaulting.The Winter X Games, scheduled for Jan. 25 to 28 at Buttermilk Mountain in Aspen, Colo., includes competitions like snowboarding and snow bike racing. There are a range of ticket options, with single-day general admission tickets ranging from $25 to $50 to a four-day platinum sports and diamond music club admission for $1,888. The Summer X Games, from July 19 to 22 in Minneapolis, will include skateboarding and BMX biking, among other sports. The Games will then head to Sydney from Oct. 19 to 21, marking the event’s Australian debut.The Rugby World Cup Sevens, with 40 men’s and women’s teams competing for separate rugby titles, will take place from July 20 to 22 in San Francisco. Single-day tickets to the international event, held every four years, start at $108, excluding taxes. Three-day passes will also be available for revelers.Nearly everyone is familiar with the endurance-testing behemoth of cycling that is the Tour de France, which will be held from July 7 to 29 and weaves through the countryside and coastal towns and cities. The Union Cycliste Internationale Road World Championships in Innsbruck, Austria, which will welcome over 1,000 participants and thousands of spectators from Sept. 22 to 30, is another premier road cycling tournament. Another competition to watch is the Track Cycling World Championships in Apeldoorn, the Netherlands, where participants will engage in a competition of track cycling (track bikes on velodrome or custom-built tracks) from Feb. 28 to March 4. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe Henry Howard Hotel is inspired by the past of both the building and the city.By Lindsey TramutaFrom $209While most visitors to New Orleans want to be in the heart of the city’s dynamic French Quarter, there’s no denying that its boisterous vibe doesn’t appeal to all travelers. Fortunately, there’s a more relaxing option a streetcar ride away in the Garden District. The 18-room Henry Howard Hotel, a historic double-gallery townhouse, was built by the acclaimed architect Henry Howard in 1867 as a mansion for Edward Conery, a steamship owner and ship chandler, that he later bestowed to his two daughters. After years as a rundown inn, the New York-based Fitzgerald Hotel Group modernized the property while maintaining structural elements for its opening in February 2016. Local culture is tastefully celebrated throughout, from snare drums used as coffee tables in the ground floor parlor to the second line brass instruments hanging above beds in each guest room. The designer Lauren Mabry of Hunter Mabry Design pulled inspiration from both the building and the city’s past for a stunning interior overhaul that is both fun and elegant, and unlikely to date itself.Located in the lower Garden District, only a 10-minute taxi ride from the French Quarter, the hotel sits a block away from St. Charles Street (also known as the Mardi Gras route). The restaurants, bars and antique shops of Magazine Street are a short walk away, as are several of Henry Howard’s other architectural projects that are worth checking out.Our Queen Superior room was located in the north wing, accessible from an outdoor covered corridor, overlooking a nearby parking lot. It was smartly decorated, with red pine hardwood floor, custom toile wallpaper featuring New Orleans icons like the steamboat and the St. Charles streetcar, an iron bed canopy, a mounted trumpet, vintage chairs done up in a black and white stripe fabric, and oil portraits by the local artist Hayley Gaberlavage. But it was a cramped fit for two people. The dressing table was small but helpful in the absence of a closet large enough to properly store our luggage (there was only hanging storage).The bathroom was perched on the mezzanine level of our room, which was a nice separation from the main living space, but given its small size, there was limited room to place our toiletries. The standout feature was the goat-milk bath and body products from Beekman 1802.There is no restaurant on the premises nor a room service menu. Aside from the complimentary breakfast of fresh orange juice, croissants and muffins from the local Laurel Street Bakery that is served on weekends in the downstairs Parlor, you’ll need to dine elsewhere. Fortunately, there are excellent options nearby, like District Donuts for coffee and breakfast, Joey K’s and Shaya. The property offers free Wi-Fi, flat screen TVs, local snacks (Zapp's potato chips, Slow & Low rye whiskey) and useful items like Southern Rhoades bug spray in each room for a charge, plus complimentary coffee from Revelatory Roasters, a local specialty coffee roaster. The hotel has partnered with Franco’s Gym on Magazine Street and City Surf for guests who wish to get in a workout for an extra fee.The lack of on-site dining aside, there’s no mistaking the appeal of this sharply designed boutique property in a neighborhood that was sorely lacking in quality lodging. But to truly make the most of your stay, book Royal Queen rooms and above for more space and greater comfort. Henry Howard Hotel, 2041 Prytania Street, New Orleans, 504-313-1577. henryhowardhotel.com.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPursuitsPecorino di Pienza, from a tiny town in Tuscany, has been produced the same way for thousands of years. But that may not always be the case. By Danielle PergamentI’m not saying I drank too much Brunello di Montalcino. But if I had drunk too much Brunello di Montalcino — the Podere Le Ripi 2014, for example, at, say, 2 a.m. — then a hot, dusty barn packed with sheep wouldn’t have been my first choice of places to be at 6 in the morning. Yet there I was, surrounded by a hundred little animals, white wool coats matted down with hay and dirt, making small, timid bleats as they trotted past me up the ramp to the milking station. As the sun rose, rivers of dust filled shafts of light; you could sense the day was going to be scalding by breakfast. But for now, in the barn, it was bearable — just me, a pretty young farmer named Giulia, and a herd of sheep ready to be milked. I was at Podere Il Casale, an organic farm outside the tiny Renaissance-era Tuscan town of Pienza, to educate myself on the intricacies of the town’s most famous commodity, pecorino di Pienza. You have likely heard of pecorino — but the town, not so much. Outside of Tuscany, it’s possible the only place you would hear the word Pienza is at a gourmet cheese counter. “Pecorino is poorly understood,” said Matthew Rubiner, the owner of Rubiner’s Cheesemongers & Grocers in Great Barrington, Mass., and a man with an encyclopedic knowledge of all things cheese. “People assume all pecorino is Pecorino Romano — which is very salty and more of a cooking cheese. But that image is seared into the minds of even my most food-conscious customers. So I don’t call it pecorino — I say it’s a sheep milk cheese from Italy. And as soon as we stock it, we sell out.” Standing there watching a steel device milk the sheep, I didn’t consider myself one of the people Mr. Rubiner was talking about. I spend part of every evening eating cheese. I’ve sampled hundreds in my life. But I would learn my palate is not a sophisticated one. I would learn my palate is akin to a kindergartner. With a head cold. “To make a great pecorino, you must know what your sheep eat, how they live,” explained Giancarlo Floris a few days later. Mr. Floris is the owner of Caseificio Piu, another organic farm, home to 1,400 sheep, and some of the most celebrated pecorino di Pienza. He moved to Tuscany from Sardinia when he was only 18. “Half of my sheep eat wild herbs; their milk is very strong. Half eat planted grains so their cheese tastes softer. A great pecorino should always taste different.”Mr. Floris, a bald man with the trademark tan of a farmer, a thick black goatee, and a curiously crisp white T-shirt, led us to the highest point on his farm. The Val d’Orcia, which cuts through the southern half of Tuscany, unfurled before us like an endless straw blanket, crunchy and suffocating in the summer heat. In the distance, fields punctuated with freshly baled hay, orchards of olive trees, and growling tractors churning up the land, filling the air with dust, turning light to haze. Despite all the glossy marketing of recent years, Tuscany is, first and foremost, farm country. “Fifty years ago no one wanted to be in the Val d’Orcia,” said Paolo Coluccio, a renowned chef and the owner of Gusto E Evoluto, a company that organizes tastings and culinary tours. He had brought me to Caseificio Piu to introduce me to one of his favorite cheese producers. Mr. Coluccio offered some background: In the 1960s, young Italians left here to get jobs in the cities; large swaths of southern Tuscany were effectively abandoned. Meanwhile, Sardinia was teeming with farmers. The Italian government offered huge Tuscan parcels to Sardinians for almost nothing. In exchange, the Sardinians, like Mr. Floris and his father, brought their skills — and their sheep — and began working the land. I asked Mr. Floris how many pecorino producers there are in the Val d’Orcia. He started counting on his hand. “Twelve,” he said, pausing. “But maybe 20.” The Val d’Orcia, a Unesco Heritage Site, is Tuscany at its Tuscaniest. I started coming here in 2004 — at first with my boyfriend, and many more times once he became my husband, and then with our children. In the last 14 years, I’ve seen changes. Design hotels, Michelin-rated restaurants, high thread counts — the Val d’Orcia has become a place people (like me) come to get married or go on their honeymoon or go truffle hunting. In fact, while I standing on this hill, Edward Norton was likely asleep at his villa — he was staying one hill over from us. And Wes Anderson was renting the palazzo at the bottom of our dirt road. That’s Pienza now: equal parts Edward Norton and sheep. According to the farmers I met, the secret to their product is the unique combination of Sardinian sheep and Tuscan grass: wild fennel, clover and “these pastures are full of absinthe,” one farmer told me with a wink, referring to wormwood, the infamous herb that is a primary ingredient of the liquor. “Maybe you love it, maybe you hate it, but pecorino should always surprise you,” Mr. Floris told me. “Supermarket cheese will never surprise you.”We had moved into the tasting room. Mr. Floris was slicing off pieces of a pecorino stagionato — pecorino di Pienza aged at least six months. It was salty and earthy, delicately crumbly — and served by a passionate, fast-talking man who revered the process of making this cheese as much as its history. I may have been eating the perfect food. Unlike Parmigiano-Reggiano or mozzarella di bufala, pecorino di Pienza does not have its own D.O.P. (Denominazione di Origine Protetta, or Protected Designation of Origin), and is therefore not protected. In other words, any sheep cheese made nearby can be labeled pecorino di Pienza.“There are about 3,000 sheep in Pienza,” said Mr. Coluccio, a handsome man with an easy smile. “You would need three million to account for all the cheese that calls itself pecorino di Pienza.”To understand pecorino di Pienza, to respect it, I had to visit an uncomfortable place that sounded like a Lemony Snicket book: La Camera Calda — the Hot Room. This is where the whey drains from the curd — a place as humid as the Amazon and fetid as, well, old milk. A place that smells like something horrible happened. A place no one (who wants to love cheese in ignorance) should ever have to visit. La Camera Calda in question is inside a dairy belonging to Silvana Cugusi. As clean and well-lit as an operating room — I had to wear blue paper slippers over my sneakers — it was filled with plastic vats of what would become pecorino di Pienza. Some would be rubbed with ash, some covered in straw, some pressed with tomatoes. The pecorino fresco would remain pure and young, while the larger wheels would become the pride of the dairy, the gran riserva — aged anywhere from six months to (albeit rarely) as long as two years. I held my breath the whole time. Blessedly, moments later we continued the tour — first to La Camera Freda, where the cheese is dried, then to the cantina, the cave in which it is aged. “A good pecorino should be sweet even if it’s mature,” said Gian Maria Menta, the owner of Romeo Formaggi di Menta Gian Maria e Gionata, a famous cheese store in Piombino, who had come with me to the farm. Mr. Menta and I walked through the dank cantina of Cugusi, past shelves of gran riserva, which are turned twice a day to prevent mold. “We don’t want to get bigger,” Ms. Cugusi said. “We want to make a quality pecorino.” To these artisanal farmers, the two are mutually exclusive. “My father moved his family here in 1962. The Val d’Orcia has gotten richer but the environment hasn’t changed — we protect the land, we don’t use chemicals, the shepherds respect the countryside.”My 6-year-old son has inherited (or perhaps absorbed) my love of cheese. I have seen him turn spaghetti away when he sensed the parmesan was not Parmigiano-Reggiano. I have seen him correct the arrangement of a cheese tray. So when I was invited to a pecorino tasting at my favorite hotel in the valley, I brought Finn. “We will move from light to heavy, sweet to spicy,” explained Dario Ferreri, the chef at La Bandita. “This is not a cheese tasting.” Finn and I looked at each other, somewhat befuddled. “We must think of what happened to make this cheese,” Mr. Ferreri said dramatically. “We must think of the story that it tells. This will be our journey through the valley.”We began our odyssey with pecorino fresco paired with vin santo jam. Then pecorino with saffron, drizzles of local honey, aged pecorino wrapped in walnut leaves, Tropean onion preserve, green tomato mostarda, and on and on. The trick to finding your pecorino soul mate: “You try and you try and you taste and you taste and then you arrive at the right match and it’s BOOOOOM!” Mr. Ferreri threw out his hands like there was a stick of dynamite in his mouth. (My explosion was the pecorino crusca, with hops jam; Finn’s was the pecorino staginato and fig preserve.)As in any industry, there is competition — but not between the farmers. “The French sheep are a problem,” said Michael Schmidig, the son of a local farmer, talking about another breed that has showed up in the valley recently. “They produce three liters of milk a day. They eat grain and live in a barn. Sardinian sheep produce one liter. They eat grass, they need fences. The French sheep milk is not nearly as good, but you don’t have the problem with wolves.”“The amazing part of Pienza is that this valley has very poor soil,” said Ulisse Braendli, the owner of Podere Il Casale, where I’d watched the milking. “And a suffering plant has to work harder; it will give you more flavor. This valley is full of suffering herbs.” Mr. Braendli moved here from Zurich in 1991 and has been making pecorino di Pienza since 2003. (“Let’s say it wasn’t so legal before that.”)“The first 10 years were so different,” he said. A good decade before the rest of the world was talking about farm-to-table, Mr. Braendli dreamed of agrarian utopia — a farm in which he sourced all his own food and wine. “I’m a shepherd,” he said. “There are not many of us left.” I asked him if the unseasonably hot summer had any effect on his trade. “The plants are going crazy; they don’t know what’s happening. When a clover has made a flower, the pasture is over — it’s the end of the season. Our clovers bloom at the end of May. But because of the change in climate our clovers are blooming a month earlier. And now we have hail. We never had hail before.” It’s a jolt for a cheese that is “one of the oldest in the world,” Mr. Rubiner told me. “What makes this cheese so special is that it’s impossible to replicate elsewhere. Pecorino di Pienza is sweet and complex and it’s reinforced by the emotional attachment to the beautiful place it comes from. It has a story.” It’s the story of an ancient cheese made by people from another place. Cheese that has been produced the same way for thousands of years. But that may not always be the case. The climate is changing. The big factories are moving in. And the French sheep are coming. FARMSPodere Il Casale. Among the first in the area to make pecorino di Pienza, Podere Il Casale is an organic farm-to-table restaurant and campground that also offers cooking classes. (Podere Il Casale, 64; www.podereilcasale.com; 39-0578-755109).Caseficio Piu. A working pecorino farm with some of the best views in the Val d’Orcia. Call ahead and ask Giancarlo Floris to organize a tasting. (Podere Casaloni, Sarteano; piuzzo1974@hotmail.it; 39-0578-075129 or 39-347-8844288).Cugusi di Cugusi Silvana. A farm, dairy, and shop, Silvana Cugusi makes some of the most formidable pecorino in the valley. (Via della Boccia, 8; caseificiocugusi.it; 39-0578-757558).Fattoria Pianporcino. Order a variety from the farm’s shop and let the owners make all the decisions for you. (Loc. Pianporcino, 109; fattoriapianporcino.it; 39-347-911-7382). RESTAURANTSOsteria La Porta. If you can’t get a table on the terrace, don’t worry. The pecorino cacio e pepe is every bit as warm and gooey and satisfying if you sit inside. (Via S. Luigi, 3, Monticchiello; lacantina@osterialaporta.it; 39-0578-755170).La Bandita Countryhouse. The chef is a local boy who loves nothing more than pairing cheese with the perfect preserve — and explaining the provenance of each. (Podere La Bandita; la-bandita.com; 39-333-404-6704).Gusto E Evoluto. Paolo Coluccio is a private chef who will arrange tastings, cooking classes, private dinners, or anything else you want that involves delicious local food. (gustoevoluto.com; 39-349-123-6226).Oreade Ristorante. Perched on the hilltop hamlet of Castiglioncello del Trinoro, Oreade is as impressive for its views as it is for its organic, farm-to-table menu. (monteverdituscany.com; 39-0578-268-146). SHOPsMarusco e Maria Enoteca. The best cheese shop in a town of cheese shops — make it your last stop out of town. Pick out a few wheels and have them vacuum sealed for the trip home. Ask nicely and the owner will show you the pecorino cantina. (Corso Rossellino, 21; damaruscoemaria@virgilio.it; 39-0578-748222).AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesHenrietta Red may have an envy-inducing aesthetic — but it also lives up to its image as a place you actually want to be. By Gabriella GershensonHenrietta Red, a restaurant in the Germantown neighborhood of Nashville that opened last February, has many of the telltale trappings of Instagram clickbait. While there’s no millennial pink, the black sandwich board and expanse of marble at the bar, coupled with the wishbone chairs and tile-framed wood-burning oven in the dining room, fit a certain envy-inducing aesthetic. But unlike other places that hit those idealized notes, Henrietta Red lives up to its image as a place you actually want to be. Start your meal with something fun — a craft cocktail Jell-O shot, perhaps. The potent, jiggly cubes offer reassurance that, despite the restaurant’s cool interior, it’s O.K. to relax. They come are offered in flavors like Fernet and Coke, are served skewered, and, like liquid cocktails, come with a garnish. Next up are more things to slurp. One of the goals of Julia Sullivan, the chef and an owner, who opened the restaurant with the general manager and sommelier Allie Poindexter, was to fill the void in Nashville’s oysterscape. A small, perfectly nice selection hailing from both coasts, Canada and the Gulf, comes with a seasonal mignonette (in our case, juicy watermelon) in addition to the usual condiments. The best oysters, though, come out of the wood-burning oven, slathered with a grassy pesto-like green curry then cooked until custardy. But the sleeper hit of the raw bar was the snapper tartare, a symphony of textures and pastels — gumdrop-tender fish the shade of rose quartz, crunchy lavender daikon and pale green compressed cucumber, punctuated with serrano chile, toasted nori and crispy quinoa. Ms. Sullivan, a Nashville native who previously worked at Michelin-starred spots Blue Hill and Per Se in New York, has a special talent for making humble foods the heroes of a meal. The anchovy butter that comes with the order of warm flatbread is pungent, smoky and irresistibly salty, like the perfect marriage of garlic butter and lox cream cheese. The red leaf lettuce salad, tossed with olives, toasted almonds, Asian pear and pickled turnips, is dressed with a mouthwatering mustard vinaigrette that hooks you anew with every bite. An entree of sausage and beans is in fact a delightfully garlicky, loosely packed pork link made in-house, served with pleasingly firm black-eyed peas and mustard greens, slicked with that same dressing.Desserts, from the pastry chef Caitlyn Jarvis, are a bit more elaborate. A refreshing vegan coconut pudding with melon-y cucumber sorbet, coconut chips, mint “snow” and bits of coconut is one of many superb animal-free options on the menu. “It’s a point of pride for us,” said Ms. Sullivan, whose pistachio-crusted cauliflower steak has been a best seller (currently, there’s a turnip steak in its place). “My mom is vegan, so I knew I had to be prepared.” For fans of more intense desserts, the “malted chocolate” offers up malted chocolate ice cream with whey caramel, crunchy hazelnut-chocolate nuggets and blondie cubes that are fudgier than the finest brownie. It photographs fine. But the food here is best experienced in person.Henrietta Red, 1200 4th Avenue North; 615-490-8042; henriettared.com. An average dinner for two, without drinks and tip, is $70.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byWHERE TO GO NOWFrom the airport to the exhibition, here is how to get the most out of a visit to the North American International Auto Show.By John L. DormanFor die-hard car lovers, few events are more exciting than the annual North American International Auto Show, held in Detroit, the heart of the American automotive industry. This year’s show will be held from Jan. 13 to 28 at the 2.4 million-square-foot Cobo Center in downtown Detroit. The show, which started as the Detroit Auto Show in 1907 and has become one of the largest automobile shows in North America, with about 800,000 visitors expected, encompasses much more than a casual observer might imagine.In addition to the viewing of new vehicles and concept models, guests can experience some of the most luxurious vehicles in the world, learn about the evolving automotive industry and attend a dazzling charity show. Anchored by Detroit’s economic resurgence, the auto show is an excellent showcase of the city’s vitality and innovation. Here are some ways to plan your trip to Detroit, explore the auto show and enjoy the cultural gems of the city.Visitors to the auto show are eligible for discounts of 2 to 25 percent on select fares with Delta Air Lines through Feb. 1.Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport, one of the busiest airports in North America and a major hub for Delta, serves the greater Detroit area. The airport, in suburban Romulus, is roughly 25 to 30 minutes from downtown Detroit. Shuttle buses are available from McNamara and North, the two terminals at the airport, to virtually every major rental car agency. The Skoot Detroit shuttle, which transports visitors from the airport to and from various destinations in the city, including the Cobo Center, is also an option. Ticket prices for a shared van start at $20 per person for each individual ride to and from the airport. During the auto show, you can get $2 off the cost of a round-trip ticket using the promo code NAIAS18.For rail travelers, the Detroit Amtrak station (11 West Baltimore Avenue) is in the New Center neighborhood, about 3.5 miles north of downtown. Once you get off the train, you can walk to the adjacent QLine streetcar station, which opened last May. The streetcar runs down Woodward Avenue, one of the city’s most important commercial arteries.Once you’ve made it to Detroit, the Cobo Center (1 Washington Boulevard) will likely become your second home while in the city. The center is on the Detroit River shoreline, directly across from Windsor, Ontario. From public transportation to ride-hailing, there are several solid options for accessing the center.The Detroit People Mover, an almost three mile, 13-stop monorail system, has a station on the third floor of the center. The fare is 75 cents, and the system normally runs from 6:30 a.m. to midnight on Monday through Thursday; 6:30 a.m. to 2 a.m. on Friday; 9 a.m. to 2 a.m. on Saturday; and noon until midnight on Sunday. There will be extended hours on select dates, including Sunday, Jan. 14, when the People Mover will run from 11 a.m. to midnight, and Friday, Jan. 19, when the system will run from 6:30 a.m. until 2:30 a.m. On the weekends during the public viewing of the auto show (Jan. 20 to 21 and Jan. 27 to 28), the People Mover will begin operations at 8 a.m. The system connects visitors to some of Detroit’s most well-trafficked areas and notable attractions, including the Renaissance Center, the world headquarters of General Motors, Greektown, Campus Martius Park, Grand Circus Park and the Detroit Opera House.From Jan. 20 to 28, Canadian visitors can take an express bus from the Windsor International Transit Terminal in Windsor to the auto show. A round-trip ticket from the terminal to the Cobo Center costs $10 and can be purchased at the terminal. Proof of citizenship is mandatory.Along the People Mover route, there are a number of parking garages with various rates where you can essentially park and ride with ease.The ride-hailing company Lyft will offer a discount of $5 to and from the Cobo Center for new users during the auto show, using the code NAIAS18.The auto show festivities largely begin with The Gallery, a luxury vehicle showcase featuring models from manufacturers such as Aston Martin, Bentley, Bugatti and Lamborghini. In years past, this event was held at the M.G.M. Grand Detroit casino, but it will take place at the Cobo Center for the first time. The event, on Jan. 13 from 6:30 to 11 p.m., will also feature fine food and drinks. Tickets are $250, with admission limited to guests 21 and older.From Jan. 17 to 18, the Industry Preview will feature an array of start-ups, with many focused on autonomous driving and other new technologies. Along with the relatively new AutoMobili-D showcase, the event will also highlight automotive leaders and other emerging technologies. Admission is $110, and tickets can be used for only one of the two days. The AutoMobili-D showcase will also be open on Jan. 20 to 21, with only a ticket to the public show required for admission.One of the hallmarks of the North American International Auto Show is its commitment to the Detroit community. On Jan. 19, the black-tie Charity Preview will take place. At the end of the preview, there will be a performance by the Four Tops, the soulful Motown musical group. Over the past decade, over $41 million has been raised for a broad array of youth charities from this event alone. Tickets to the event are $400, with $390 of that amount eligible for a tax deduction. The charity preview is from 6 to 9 p.m., with the after-party running from 9 p.m. to midnight.The public show, which features vehicles from manufacturers ranging from Ford and Volkswagen to BMW and Infiniti, with Alfa Romeo and Mercedes-AMG also reserving space, will be held from Jan. 20 to 28. Max Muncey, the public relations manager for the North American International Auto Show, said that with an expanded Cobo Center, there will be even more things for visitors to experience. “We will have seven new exhibits this year that are fresh and exciting,” Mr. Muncey said. “People that are coming in can expect an amazing product.”Visitors will be able to walk around the large showroom floor, examining new cars, taking photos and often jumping inside to enjoy the interiors. Tickets are $14 and can be purchased online or at the show. During the public show, several other events are on the agenda, including a 5K race (Jan. 20 at 8:30 a.m.), a visit by several players from the Detroit Tigers (Jan. 26 at 2:45 p.m.), car parades and a family day (Jan. 26).You can download the auto show’s app, available for iOS and Android, and stream concept car unveilings and have a handy guide to the showroom.Detroiters are proud of their hometown, and for good reason. The city rolls out the welcome mat every year, inviting people to explore its diverse neighborhoods, learn about the city’s history, take in the growing arts scene, eat some Detroit-style pizza while enjoying Vernors ginger ale, attend a Pistons or Red Wings game and much more.“Over the last few years, there’s been excitement and positivity in Detroit that hadn’t been around for a long time,” Mr. Muncey said. “We’re happy to help promote that.”Follow John L. Dorman on Twitter: @jon425.AdvertisementBy MAYA SALAMJAN. 4, 2018
Guests of some Walt Disney World hotels no longer have the option of hanging a “do not disturb” sign on their doors, part of a policy change that requires a hotel employee to enter every room at least once every 24 hours, Disney said on Wednesday. Guests will instead get a “room occupied” sign.“The hotel and its staff reserve the right to enter your room for any purposes including, but not limited to, performing maintenance and repairs or checking on the safety and security of guests and property,” according to Disney’s updated guest information pack.For now, four properties are affected: the Polynesian Village Resort, Grand Floridian Resort & Spa, Contemporary Resort and Bay Lake Tower. All are along the Monorail loop in the resort area around Disney’s Magic Kingdom theme park in Orlando, Fla.But Disney, which put the policy in effect on Dec. 22, said that it is planning to apply this new measure to all Disney World resorts as well as all Disneyland properties, in Anaheim, Calif., in the coming weeks.AdvertisementIf a “room occupied” sign is in place, hotel employees must knock and announce themselves before entering, Disney said. Guests are being notified about the new guidelines upon check-in, and management is addressing on a case-by-case basis any potential concerns about hotel workers entering a guest’s room.AdvertisementThis new standard comes just months after Stephen Paddock opened fire on concertgoers in Las Vegas, killing 58 people and injuring hundreds of others, before killing himself. Mr. Paddock checked into his suite on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino three days before the massacre and kept a “do not disturb” sign on his door for his entire stay, during which he methodically brought an arsenal of firearms into the room. On the night of Oct. 1, he busted out two windows of the suite and rained bullets down on the Route 91 Harvest country music festival below.Disney declined to connect its policy change with the Las Vegas shooting, but said safety, security and the overall guest experience informed the decision.“One of the lodging industry’s top priorities is the safety and security of its guests and employees,” said Rosanna Maietta, a spokeswoman for the American Hotel & Lodging Association. Hotels have safety and security procedures in place, including “do not disturb” policies, that are regularly reviewed and updated, as are their emergency response procedures, she said.Usually hotels will wait 24 to 72 hours before sending hotel employees into a room, she said. “Because hotels own the rooms, they have the right to enter for reasons of security, safety of guests, maintenance or sanitation purposes.”Disney is not the only company to update its “do not disturb” rules in recent weeks. Hilton revised its policy late last year, said Nigel Glennie, the company’s vice president for corporate communications. Unlike Disney, Hilton guests will still have the option to hang a “do not disturb” sign on their doors, but the revision includes a 24-hour detail to help Hilton employees manage extended use of the signs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The clock starts when a team member first notices the ‘do not disturb,’” Mr. Glennie said, and “they will alert a manager if it’s still up after 24 hours.”That doesn’t mean someone will enter the room every day, but it will help inform management’s decisions, he said.“This guidance was provided to help properties protect guest privacy, but also manage suspicious activity and any concerns about a guest’s welfare,” Hilton said in a statement provided by Mr. Glennie.AdvertisementMr. Glennie declined to comment on whether the Las Vegas shooting prompted the changes, or on what Hilton considers suspicious. But the website LoyaltyLobby.com, which tracks loyalty programs, said that requesting specific rooms and the extended use of a “do not disturb” sign are among the activities Hilton deems suspicious.Last year, about a week after the mass shooting in Las Vegas, Steve Wynn, the chief executive of Wynn Resorts in Las Vegas, spoke with Fox News about the future of security in Las Vegas and how he had begun putting in place a counterterrorism program in his hotels and casinos in 2015 to hopefully identify and pre-empt terrorist or violent actions.We have “rules about ‘do not disturb,’” Mr. Wynn said. “If a room goes on ‘do not disturb’ for more than 12 hours, we investigate.”“We certainly wouldn’t invade the privacy of a guest in a room,” he went on. But Mr. Paddock “didn’t let anyone in the room for two or three days.”“That would have triggered a whole bunch of alarms here, and we would have, on behalf of the guest, of course, investigated for safety,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byMeet Malin Fezehai, who had the first iPhone picture to ever get a World Press Photo Award; Walter Thompson-Hernández, who created the very popular “Blaxicans of L.A.” Instagram account and Stephen Hiltner, who reported a story from his motorcycle. By Joanna NikasWe sifted through over 500 résumés looking for reporters who can tell visual stories about subcultures that flourish online and within their communities. We were looking for people who could write, take photographs, capture videos, post to Instagram, find stories on Reddit and more. We knew we were asking for a lot. As the editor on the project, I also wanted people with diverse backgrounds and storytelling techniques. Meet the three Surfacing residents who will travel the world to find interesting stories of hidden communities. Name: Malin FezehaiAge: 34Hometown: Stockholm. Malin grew up in a suburb called Husby in a community of mostly immigrants. “It was my first entry to learning about the world through my friends because a lot of them were children of refugees, everybody I knew was coming from another place,” she said of the multicultural community where she grew up, with people from Iran, Kurdistan, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Gambia.Instagram: @malinfezehai How she got started: In 2003, Malin attended the International Center of Photography. “I started photography by just shooting my friends,” she said. She was also drawn to current events and wanted to combine both of her interests. Photojournalism seemed like the perfect fit, she says. After I.C.P., she lived in Ethiopia for eight months volunteering and working on a project about child workers. “I familiarized myself with East Africa, and knew I wanted to continue working there in some capacity,” she said. In 2006, she received a grant from I.C.P. and Global Fund for Children photographing grass-roots organizations that were assisting marginalized children in Peru.What she has done: Malin knew she wanted to work internationally, and she has done it. She went to war-torn Sri Lanka, to the Republic of Kiribati for a story about people being displaced because of rising sea levels and to Senegal for a story about surfing. She worked on a project about African refugees in Israel for two years that was ultimately published both in Time and The New York Times. She has been going back to Lalibela in Northern Ethiopia documenting Christmas celebrations. In 2015, she went to Selma, Ala., to photograph the people who witnessed the events on March 7, 1965, when the police attacked protesters that marched across the Edmund Pettus Bridge. “It was amazing to meet the generation that were there during the Civil Rights movement and hear their experiences and reflections,” she said. She also has accompanied Malala on her annual birthday trip for three years in a row, where she travels to a place to highlight issues on female education. One year they went to Lebanon to bring attention to the Syrian refugee crises, one year to Dadaab refugee camp in Kenya to focus on girls’ education. Last year they visited the refugee camps outside Mosul, Iraq. The latest project she did was for the United Nations documenting survivors of violent extremism across five countries in Africa, which she published in a book and showcased in three different exhibitions. Also, one of her images was the first iPhone picture to ever get a World Press Photo Award.What she plans to cover: Malin wants to explore stories about people who go against the grain and is also interested in documenting indigenous and traditional cultures that are fading because of modernization. “I want to do stories that are all different from each other.”Off the clock: Malin does yoga at least four times a week. She also always makes time for her friends, who are a constant source of inspiration for her, “I feel that in New York, that is something we don’t do enough.”Read Malin’s piece on a synchronized swimming team in Jamaica. Name: Walter Thompson-Hernández Age: 32Hometown: Los AngelesInstagram: @mychivas How he got started: In 2014, Walter received his master's degree in Latin American Studies from Stanford University, knowing that he wanted to pursue journalism. After graduate school, he started pitching freelance work to Buzzfeed, Fusion and NPR. “I started to write, take photos and work on stories around the world.” In 2017, he started working as a multimedia journalist on race and identity for The Root. He also was a journalist at We Are Mitu, a digital media company with a Latino point of view. What he has done: Walter created the popular Instagram account “Blaxicans of L.A.” in 2013, before enrolling in the master’s program. “I was interested in thinking about my experience in Los Angeles being the child of a black father and Mexican mother,” he said. “What it means to be both at a time when the communities were at odds with race riots.” He used photos, videos and photo captions that explored multiracial identity in America through Instagram portraits. From 2015 to 2016, Walter embarked on a yearlong series for Fusion about Latinos who converted to Islam. “It drew awareness to a population that had very little voice in the media before that.” In 2016, he spent four months in Cuba reporting for Fusion. His stories focused on race, Afro-Cuban hip-hop, and how the modernization of Cuba is changing the religious landscape of Santeria, an Afro-Cuban religion with origins in the Caribbean. This past year, on assignment for The Root in Madagascar, he did a piece about child sex trafficking in the capital city. What he plans to cover: Walter wants to explore the intersections of race, gender, sexuality, music and popular culture. “I’m interested in what it means to belong and not belong to society, to a culture,” he said.Off the clock: For three years, Walter taught and mentored inmates with the Prison Education Project. He also loves music including Kendrick Lamar, Kamasi Washington, Erykah Badu and says the best concert he ever went to was Nas and Lauryn Hill.Name: Stephen HiltnerAge: 32Hometown: Hudson, OhioInstagram: @sahiltnerHow he got started: Stephen went to the University of Virginia and double majored in biochemistry and English literature in hopes of eventually going to medical school. After college, he decided to follow his passion for English literature instead and earned a master’s degree at Oxford. His first job in writing was for The Paris Review, where he worked for six years as an editor of literary stories. Toward the end of his tenure there, he started writing his own stories and shooting photographs, a lifelong love since his dad and sister had outfit the basement of his childhood home with a studio to develop and print their own photographs. He realized that taking photos has been in the family when he discovered a trove of photographs by his grandfather, who captured his life as a child growing up on a farm in Ohio and his time stationed in the South Pacific during World War II. “It’s just an incredible collection of photographic history, and I thought about it a lot,” he said. In 2016, he joined The New York Times as an editor on the Insider desk.What he has done: Stephen has a knack for finding an eccentric. Like this piece he did on Will Shortz, the crossword puzzle editor for The New York Times whose apartment is completely littered in crossword paraphernalia. “He’s like the Willy Wonka of puzzles,” he said. Or this one on Willa Kim, the theatrical costume designer behind Mikhail Baryshnikov’s looks and more, whose apartment he described as, “an artistic menagerie.” The idea for one of his first pieces for The New York Times came when he took a cross-country road trip on his motorcycle. As he was somewhere in Missouri on U.S. Route 36, he noticed that most of the roadside signs were of Trump support and there were little to no for Hillary Clinton. “I pulled over and sent an email to Carolyn Ryan [the editor who was in charge of presidential campaign coverage for The New York Times],” he said.What he plans to cover: Stephen is interested in exploring the world of competitive sports and athletic endeavors; creative individuals who have mastered a craft and beyond.Off the clock: Stephen is a vintage motorcycle enthusiast and has two that he stores at his parents’ home in Ohio: a 1968 Honda and a 1973 BMW. He hopes to pursue more stories that allow him to ride them.AdvertisementBy LAURA M. HOLSONAPRIL 22, 2018
In the 1990s, the painter David Hockney was so enamored with his dachshunds, Stanley and Boodgie, that he immortalized them in paintings and a book. Starting this month, anyone who loves dachshunds as much as he does can visit what is being called the first museum to honor this favorite breed.The Dackelmuseum opened in early April in Passau, Germany, a gallery of dachshund memorabilia with a collection of more than 4,500 paintings, books, statues and porcelain wares devoted to Bavaria’s celebrated wiener dog. It is only one of several new museums celebrating man’s — and woman’s — best friend, including the Museum of Dog, which opened last month in North Adams, Mass. Early next year, the American Kennel Club Museum of the Dog will open in New York City, just in time for the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show.Like the Museum of Dog, the Dackelmuseum grew out of its founders’ love of their canine companions. “No other dog in the world enjoys the same kind of recognition or popularity as the symbol of Bavaria,” Seppi Küblbeck, one of the founders of the Dackelmuseum, told Reuters.No, it’s not the Smithsonian, although hounds are well represented in that institution’s collections. Still, dogs have long had a place in the art world, from Cairo, where a canine mummy is on display at the Egyptian Museum, to Manhattan, where Jeff Koons’s “Balloon Dog (Orange)” sold for $58.4 million at Christie’s in 2013. (It was the most ever paid at auction for a work by a living artist.) In England, there’s even something for the fashion crowd: Leeds Castle, in Kent, has a collection of dog collars dating to the 15th century.AdvertisementBelow are a few museums around the world devoted exclusively to our canine friends. At this rate, cats may start to wonder what’s up.Mr. Küblbeck and Oliver Storz have been collecting dachshund memorabilia for a quarter-century. But the bulk of the collection — about 3,500 items — was acquired from a Belgian musician who sold it because he was getting married, Mr. Storz said. An array of books, drawings and porcelain figurines are now crowded into overstuffed display cases.One object of note: a Waldi, the first official Olympic mascot, created for the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich. (It’s a plush toy.) Dachshunds, which were bred in the Middle Ages to flush badgers out of their burrows, are the 13th most popular dog breed, according to the American Kennel Club. Fans including Pablo Picasso and Albert Einstein.AdvertisementJust in case Park Avenue didn’t already have enough dogs on display: Next year, the American Kennel Club Museum of the Dog is moving from its current home in suburban St. Louis to a ground floor gallery space in the Kalikow building, in Midtown Manhattan. The museum has more than 700 works of art, including paintings, porcelain figurines and sculptures, many donated to the museum by members of the club.Alan Fausel, the club’s director of cultural resources, said the new museum would focus more on education and children’s programming. “We want to get the museum to a different audience,” he said. “We want to tell the story of the dog, and we can do that through our collection.”Where else would one find a museum to honor the St. Bernard? Martigny is situated at the Great St. Bernard Pass in the Pennine Alps, where for centuries travelers have been greeted by the loyal dogs, known for their prowess in avalanche rescues. Monks bred St. Bernards in the late 17th century for work and to aid travelers overwhelmed by harsh winter conditions.The museum, founded in 2006, is next to a Roman amphitheater and houses portrayals of the creatures in literature, art and culture. The main attraction, though, might be the dogs themselves, which can be petted and observed in their kennels on the first floor.In 1977, Gertrude Hunt donated a collection of more than 60 dog collars to the Leeds Castle Foundation in memory of her husband, John Hunt, an antiques dealer and scholar of Irish history. They became the centerpiece of a collection that includes more than 130 rare collars from the late 15th to the 19th century. The oldest is a Spanish mastiff’s iron collar, worn to protect dogs against bears and wolves that roamed the European countryside.Collars from the medieval era are studded with spikes and barbed metal. Later, in the 1800s, canine neckwear became more ornate as more dogs moved indoors and became companions and pets. Pieces from the collection include an intricate gilded collar from the Baroque period, a set of engraved silver collars from the 19th century, and a display of neckwear with owners’ markings. More modern collars are laden with beads and gemstones.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David York loves pooches a lot. So much so, in fact, that he opened a dog museum last month in the Berkshires. For the Museum of Dog, situated in a historic building near the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, Mr. York has assembled more than 180 pieces of art, including works by Mary Engel, a sculptor from Athens, Ga., and William Wegman, whose popular photographs of his Weimaraners are in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art and the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York.Metal dog collars are prized collectibles among dog lovers; Mr. York has two from the 1800s. Most of the museum’s collection is owned by Mr. York, a rescue dog advocate. But he said the museum would also feature work by visiting artists. The first is Jesse Freidin, a fine art photographer who takes pictures of — what else? — dogs.Get what you need to start your day. Sign up for the Morning Briefing newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2018, on Page C4 of the New York edition with the headline: Museums Celebrate the Dogs That Love Us.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byCHECK INAll the rooms that were fit for print: Bangkok Publishing Residence evokes the age of the page.By Seth Sherwood Double rooms from 4,800 baht (about $154). Stop the presses. The fading glories of books and printing receive a retro-chic resurrection at Bangkok Publishing Residence, an intimate eight-room hotel in the former offices of Bangkok Weekly magazine that opened last year. The atrium-like four-story structure features throwback factory architecture — catwalks, exposed girders, a wire-cage lift that resembles a freight elevator — and common areas decorated with old printing machines and vintage typewriters. The result is a wondrous world that Willy Wonka might have created if he had been hooked on books rather than candy. Though centrally situated along a busy multilane boulevard, the hotel is soundproofed and feels insulated from the hubbub, thanks in part to its hushed, candlelit spaces and policy of admitting only hotel guests on the premises. Bangkok landmarks including The Golden Mount and Democracy Monument are five to 10 minutes on foot, while popular neighborhoods like Chinatown and Khao San Road are a short taxi ride away. Alas, there is no nearby Skytrain or subway.  Noël Coward, Oscar Wilde and other bygone British dandies would have loved my cozy and elegant room, a Regency remake with paneled wooden doors, dark wooden furnishings, a luxurious sleigh bed and black silk robes for lounging. Should literary inspiration strike, the dresser transforms into a writing desk, and the hotel desk can provide blank notebooks and pens embossed with the hotel name. Gadgets like a Nespresso maker and flat-screen television ensure 21st-century comfort.  Somewhere between a Manhattan subway station and a colonial lodge, the small but appealing bathroom was lined with white rectangular tile and wood-slat blinds over the windows. The sizable shower was big enough to host an editorial meeting, but a tub would have been more conducive to scribbling and reading. The hotel-brand shampoo and shower gel are made with Thai white charcoal, a substance said to “emit negative ions that increase your sense of well-being,” according to the overwrought text in the room’s guest services guide. Crowded rooftop bars fill this teeming, tall city. The hotel bucks the trend with a private and lushly planted rooftop garden, complete with fruit trees, a small library lounge and a whirlpool tub. You can grab a banana (from the source), a best-seller (Charles Dickens, Stephen King, Agatha Christie) and plunge into cool, bubbly waters as you plunge into fictional worlds. “One cannot think well, love well, sleep well, if one has not dined well,” as Virginia Woolf wrote in “A Room of One’s Own.” Alas, it seems that Bangkok Publishing Residence missed that week of book club: The hotel has no restaurant, and the (free) minibar offers just some small packets of candies, nuts and sliced fruits, along with water and juice. The writer’s most vital nourishment and inspiration — alcohol — is also absent. Bangkok Publishing Residence does have a kitchen, however, and a copious breakfast of eggs, meats and fruits, staves off total hunger. Whether you fall under the spell of the hotel’s vintage factory fantasia will depend on what price you put on style, service and seclusion — the hotel’s calling cards. The place should find avid fans among solitary bibliophiles, cocooning couples, design-magazine devotees and former publishing barons nostalgic for the heyday of print. But for anyone seeking bodily pleasures — gastronomic indulgence, cocktail therapy, spa treatments, fitness workouts — the price-to-payoff ratio is steep.  Bangkok Publishing Residence, 1 Lan Luang Road, Bangkok. bpresidence.com. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBitesBlack Rabbit, which opened in November in downtown Nashville, is the latest brainchild of the local chef Trey Cioccia.By Catherine M. AllchinWood-roasted rabbit sliders. Chesapeake Bay oysters. Osetra caviar. This is not your typical bar food.Black Rabbit, which opened in November in downtown Nashville, is the latest brainchild of the local chef Trey Cioccia. He and his business partner Robert Compton fell in love with an 1890s brick building near Printers Alley, the hub that buzzed with night life many decades ago. They wanted to recreate that early-20th-century ambience by featuring handcrafted cocktails, small plates to share and live music. While a visit may feel like stepping back in time, the food and drinks are some of the most innovative in Music City today.“Back then, Printer’s Alley was the place,” said Mr. Cioccia of the one-block-long street. He wanted the bar “to be a cool little social place for adults where you can have a conversation, do business, maybe play a game in front of the fire.”What’s notable — other than the fantastic cocktails, original brick walls and wood floors — is the quality of the food. Mr. Cioccia made a name for himself nearby at the Farm House restaurant, where he specializes in Southern fare, working closely with local farmers and ranchers to procure the best ingredients.At Black Rabbit, the food menu complements the creative cocktail list and encourages sharing. With expertise from the Farm House and Capitol Grille in the landmark Hermitage Hotel — the oldest Southern restaurant in Tennessee — Mr. Cioccia and his chef de cuisine, Chad Kelly, run the Black Rabbit kitchen much like a fine restaurant: all breads are made in-house, meats are cured downstairs and many ingredients are “kissed” with hickory on a grill in the open kitchen. The attention to detail is paying off. “We are selling a lot more food that we thought we would,” Mr. Cioccia said. Late one afternoon, before the music had started, my husband and I sat down and perused the cocktail menu. On the left side are Classics and on the right are Revisions, riffs on classics. We started with a couple of bright, citrusy classics — a Bee’s Knees and a Southside — and began to discover one culinary surprise after another: Marcona almonds grated on top of pork sausage; chow chow, a spicy relish, made with cabbage, peppers, onions, turmeric and celery seeds the way Mr. Cioccia’s grandfather prepared it; sous vide cauliflower, charred, then draped with six-month aged ham; succulent smoked trout with white beans and dill on a gorgeous vintage-style plate.Just two blocks away, the original Printer’s Alley was named after Nashville’s printing and publishing industry that started at the turn of the last century. The area became known for lively speakeasies and, later, nightclubs that showcased performers such as Chet Atkins, Dottie West and Hank Williams. In a nod to that era, Black Rabbit features live music nightly, mostly jazz — often played on the 100-year-old piano.Black Rabbit, 218 3rd Avenue North; 615-891-2380; blackrabbittn.com. An average meal for two, without tip or drinks, is about $45. Cocktails are $10 to $16. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported bySURFACINGA growing community of people in Nairobi are reclaiming the city’s bus culture using new practices, art and social media to combat negative stereotypes.By Rachel Clara ReedNAIROBI, Kenya — Clutching the door frame, Sheriff Safania Maina leans out of the bus as it hits potholes going 45 miles per hour. He jumps out of the door of the vehicle as it slows down. He starts to run alongside it. He yells, encouraging people to board. He spots a prospective passenger and bangs on the side of the vehicle to signal the driver to stop. He helps a woman with her bag get on. He hops back in.“This is my office,” he yells, as “Humble” by Kendrick Lamar blares out of bus’s 28 speakers. Mr. Maina is one of many young people in Nairobi who work on a matatu, the privately owned buses that have transported at least 60 percent of Nairobi’s population since the early ’60s. The word matatu comes from the Kikuyu word for “three,” referring to the three ten-cent coins used to pay for a ride to the city when matatus first started operating. In the mid-to late 1990s, matatu drivers became known in Nairobi for their infamously dangerous driving habits, and the industry was linked with violent criminal gangs like Mungiki, who infiltrated matatu routes and extorted “protection” money from matatu crews. In 2004, the government attempted to clean up the industry and instated the Michuki rules, which require matatus to have speed regulators, proper seatbelts and a uniformed crew. But these rules were rarely enforced because of police corruption on the streets, according to John Gichigi, the branch executive officer at Matatu Owners Association. In 2010, in efforts to eliminate gangs from the industry, matatu owners became members of a SACCO or a Savings and Credit Cooperation Organization. There are multiple privately owned SACCO’s in Kenya. They are cooperatives which make it easier to register and manage the matatus and their routes.Today, a growing number of young people in Nairobi have been trying to rebrand matatu culture, once seen as dangerous and reckless, through polite manners, art and social media.Mr. Maina has more than 4,500 followers on Instagram, and said that posting regularly helps maintain his brand. In a post from January, he stands in front of Woodini, the matatu on which he works, staring defiantly into the camera as passengers look on. “Most of my clients, I got them through social media,” he says. “They see my posts and they want to come ride with me.” There are a lot of matatus on each route, so passengers choose to ride the matatus considered the coolest on their route. “Be clean, dress smartly, be polite,” said Brian Ouma, Woodini’s driver, of the unofficial rules on his matatu. “Before, the job was associated with riffraff, but we want to change that perception. Customers come for the experience.” In Nairobi’s Central Business District, matatus line up next to leafy palm trees and fried chicken and chip shops in anticipation of customers, featuring a variety of themes. A Scooby Doo-themed matatu is painted neon pink and has a fluffy Scooby Doo doll hanging on the dashboard. Down the road, on the Breaking Bad, images of the characters Walter White and Jesse Pinkman and a gold periodic table elements outfit the matatu. On Giovanni, a Spartan helmet sits above the number 300 spray painted across the windows as a nod to the film. There is even an Iggy Azalea-themed one. Anna Mugure, one of the only female matatu drivers, steers Revolt, a bus covered in graffiti of revolutionary leaders like Malcolm X and Che Guevara. She said she has had to be more aggressive on the road — and with the matatu community. “I can match any man on the road driving. I have to show them I’m not easy. I have to be tough,” she said, skillfully cutting off another driver before pulling onto the side of the highway to drop off a passenger. Even though she has been in the industry for 21 years, first as a conductor and now a driver, she said male drivers ignore and often harass her on the road. The appreciation from some of her female passengers keeps her motivated. “People are surprised to see me in the driver’s seat,” she said. “But I fell in love with matatu culture.”“My friends say I treat it like it’s my baby,” says Roy Johnson Mungai, the owner and designer of Woodini, a red and gray matatu that displays the faces of some of hip-hop’s greatest names: Tupac, Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg. “I add small details like fuzzy side mirrors, and people notice.” He estimated that he has spent 7.5 million Kenyan shillings, or about $75,000, on to outfit the vehicle.It pays to have the most elaborate matatu in town: The better-designed vehicles can charge up to three times as much as plain ones.Dressing fashionably is just another aspect of what some consider a show-off culture, which started in the 1990s and early 2000s, with what the author Kenda Mutongi calls “Generation Matatu.” In her book, “Matatu: A History of Popular Transportation in Nairobi,” she describes a generation of young, educated men and women who grew up as Kenya’s neoliberal economic policies developed, and who were disenchanted with government work and unable to find employment other than in the growing matatu industry. “Social or economic class seemed to be less important than knowing the latest hip-hop hits, or wearing the right kinds of clothes,” Ms. Mutongi wrote.“I have a theme today; it’s all Gucci,” Mr. Ouma said. “I got the hat and scarf from a shop here in town but a friend in the U.S. sent me these shoes.” Also part of the job are the matatu conductors’ death-defying stunts. They run and jump onto moving matatus, or hang off the edge of the door frame, their feet nearly grazing the ground. Mr. Maina makes sure to fit in a few stunts during each 10-hour shift just to stay awake. One trick involves kicking up his legs into a backbend on the side of the matatu. “I believe in hard work, I never relax, and I dress to kill,” he said. “And my shoes and shirt color always match.”Dennis Muraguri, 37, a multimedia artist in Nairobi, recalled a matatu stop outside his window growing up in Naivasha, a town west of Nairobi. “From when I was a kid, I was fascinated with the whole theater of it,” he said. The artist now creates vivid woodblock prints of matatus from scenes he photographs around Nairobi, and sells his artwork in Kenya and abroad. In his studio, his prints hang to dry on clotheslines, stickers with images of matatus cover the furniture and a photo series of matatu stunts lines the wall — a matatu obsession that he hopes is catching on. “The matatu is an icon in Nairobi. It’s not just graffiti on the walls. It’s not just the car,” he said. “It’s everybody and everything. Even the city around the matatu is part of the whole affair.”Brian Wanyama, 27, a self-proclaimed matatu ambassador and publicist, “grew up boarding the coolest matatus in Kenya,” including one called Brain Child, where passengers sat on recycled airplane seats.  In 2010, Mr. Wanyama helped rebrand the matatu industry’s image by starting “Matwana Matatu Culture,” a social media campaign at Nairobi Design Week that promotes and preserves the industry by sharing photos of designs online, hosting award ceremonies that celebrate the vehicles and their crews and championing road safety practices. “People don’t know that matatu culture is a big community,” he said. “Matatus connect everyone.”AdvertisementBy CHRISTOPHER CLAREYAPRIL 7, 2018
GUSTAVIA, St. Barts — It has been 40 years since Jimmy Buffett traveled on a whim to the French island often known as St. Barts.He liked what he saw then from the deck of his sailboat, and he has continued to return: surfing off its beaches, writing books and songs and celebrating many a holiday, including Christmas, which is his birthday.He is 71 now, as much business mogul as entertainer, branding Margaritaville to sell everything from pool floats to retirement homes.But he has also used his clout and voice to support St. Barts after Hurricane Irma, sending private planes to help ferry supplies in the early days after the storm and giving a benefit concert in the port of Gustavia in December. He is one of the ambassadors for Les Voiles de Saint Barth, the annual sailing regatta that will take place this month despite the challenges posed by the island’s recovery efforts.Advertisement[READ MORE: Yacht Race Helps St. Barts Heal from Irma]He is in the process of building his latest home on the island and plans to race aboard a friend’s yacht during the regatta. He did this interview from his boat in the Bahamas. It has been condensed and edited for clarity.AdvertisementWhy was it important to you to be involved in this race?I think anything we can do to make it known that St. Barts is on the way back is good, and as my friend said, “I guess your house will be ready just in time for the next storm.”And I was going, “Please God, don’t let it be a big one.”I think there’s a little bit of that apprehension in everybody there who went through Irma but you’ve got to keep moving on forward, breathe in and breathe out and move on. That’s kind of the way I think about it.If you’ve been exposed to hurricanes the way people down there have and the way I have all my life, that’s what we choose to do.It is hard to imagine anything resisting winds of 200 miles an hour.I’ve never seen any storm like that, and I’ve been in storms as a kid and down on the Gulf Coast with 100- and 125-mile-an-hour winds, and they did enough damage of their own.But I wish everybody well all over the region. I’m actually going to do some shows in Puerto Rico in January. Lin-Manuel Miranda is doing “Hamilton” down there to refinance the arts in Puerto Rico, so when Hamilton is in town, on their dark nights I will take my band over so we will be the entertainment when they are not up.There are still so many blue tarps in place of roofs in Puerto Rico. St. Barts is obviously a much smaller place, a place of greater means, but when you see how far they’ve come in seven months, how do you feel about what’s happened in Puerto Rico?It is a disgrace is what it is, the reaction to it. I don’t think there is enough attention being paid to the problem, but this administration in Washington, it’s pretty obvious to me that they don’t give a damn. I believe it will come back to bite them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What goes around comes around, but they are great folks down there in Puerto Rico, and I’m going to do as much as I can. I spent time in all those islands: Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, St. Barts, St. Martin. It’s a great part of my life, and I’m going to do what I can to help them get back.AdvertisementWhen did you first come to St. Barts?It was 1978. I had a boat, a Cheoy Lee Clipper 48, and we had sailed from Bermuda down to St. Martin and I remember in those days there was very little technology other than charts and books. I was reading this book that had a short but very interesting little paragraph describing St. Barts. And I said, “Well, let’s check it out.”I remember sailing in, and where Maya’s restaurant is now, there was a cemetery, and I remember saying that’s where I want to get buried when I die because it’s the prettiest place I’ve ever seen.A couple of kids came out from a boat and they brought me croissants and coffee and said welcome to the island and there were parents living on board and home schooling their kids and so it just had a magic to it that I loved.We sailed on, and my whole idea was to go to Martinique. I was infatuated with Martinique because I’ve got some French Creole on one side of my family. We sailed down there and almost to Trinidad, and we just looked at each other and said, “Well, the coolest place we’ve seen is St. Barts.” So we turned around and went back. I stayed a long time.I know “Autour du Rocher” is about a club on St. Barts. How much of your work has been about the island over the years? It’s a great place to write. I rented a house for years in St. Jean at the top of the hill and my oldest daughter kind of grew up down there.It was a small place, so I rented a room in the old Eden Rock hotel before they renovated it and had a little studio in there, and I wrote most of my first book in there. And the last album we did, Songs from St. Somewhere, we did most of the vocals in the studio in the new Eden Rock hotel.So it has always been a very inspirational place for me to either write songs or other things.”A lot of people in St. Barts think you wrote “Cheeseburger in Paradise” on the island.There are many stories out there about “Cheeseburger.” A lot of people want it to be written in their bars, but I know exactly where I wrote it. I wrote it in Tortola back in 1972, when I sailed there for the first time on a little 33-foot boat.AdvertisementDo you still have your open tab at the restaurant Le Select in St. Barts?I have a deal at Le Select. I used to play there, just play at the bar, and Eddie, when he was running Le Select, he came to me and said, “I want to start a cheeseburger stand and is it O.K. if I call it, ‘Cheeseburger in paradise?’ ” And I don’t even know if we had any franchises at that point or not. But I said, “Here’s the deal, you can do it, but me and my immediate family eat and drink for free at Le Select for the rest of our lives.” And we shook hands, and the deal still exists.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2018, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »By CHRISTINE HAUSERMARCH 17, 2018
An Alaska Airlines pilot has sued the airline, alleging she was drugged and raped by another pilot during a layover last year.The lawsuit by Betty Pina, 39, was filed in King County Superior Court in Washington State on Wednesday, 20 days after it was presented to the airline on Feb. 13. A copy of the complaint was provided by her lawyer, Eric John Makus.It claims that Ms. Pina, an Army veteran who flew helicopter missions in Afghanistan, was the co-pilot on a June flight with the captain from Anchorage to Seattle to Minneapolis, where the two had a scheduled layover.According to the complaint, the pilot asked Ms. Pina to join him for pizza and drinks in the hotel bar where flight crews spend time. Once there, Ms. Pina said she had one glass of wine, and then he brought her a second. Sitting on a stool, she had a “hard time keeping her head up” and “things appeared to be closing in,” the complaint says.AdvertisementIt claims that he proceeded to “drug Ms. Pina and rape her during a state of involuntary intoxication.”AdvertisementThe lawsuit was reported this week by The Seattle Times and other local news outlets.In an interview late on Thursday, Ms. Pina, reached between flights, repeated many of the details in the lawsuit. It says she blacked out, and when she came to early the next morning, she was in his hotel room bed, naked from the waist down; her underwear was in her purse.“I knew something gravely bad had happened,” she said in the interview.In the lawsuit, she said she was sick and vomited, and when she “challenged” the pilot, he denied that there had been sexual contact and replied, “You were coming on to me pretty hard.”According to the lawsuit, a flight attendant told a flight operations officer that she saw the pilot walking down the hall “with a girl and two glasses of wine,” and that the attendant expressed concern about flying with him.A new newsletter on women, gender and culture.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The two were taken off duty for the return to Seattle on June 6, the day after the episode. Ms. Pina said over subsequent weeks, she reported details of what she could remember to the union, an airline human resource official and an investigator referred by the airline. She did not report the episode to the police.She did not fly again until January, she said.Ms. Pina is seeking damages for workplace rape and the airline’s “unlawfully retaliatory” actions, according to the complaint. It claims that the airline has failed to hold the male pilot accountable and that he poses a “threat to other employees.”Courts in the United States have previously tackled the issue of sexual harassment of flight crews during layovers, expanding the definition of a work site. In 2001, a federal appeals court in New York ruled that Delta Air Lines was potentially liable for not doing enough to stop what a flight attendant said was a rape by another attendant, even though the events occurred when the two were off duty in a hotel room.In a statement, Alaska Airlines said it was taking the matter seriously.“Our policy is to withhold an employee from work during this type of investigation,” it said. “He was immediately removed from flying back in June and remains on leave pending the outcome of the investigation.”AdvertisementThe pilot, who is not named as a defendant, could not be reached on Friday. He has not been charged with a crime.Ms. Pina has been flying for 17 years, including seven years of active duty military service that included flying Chinook helicopters in Afghanistan, for which she was featured in a PBS documentary series “Kansas to Kandahar: Citizen Soldiers at War.”She started working for Alaska Airlines in 2016. She said that after years in the military, she was accustomed to reporting problems only to her superiors. That, she said, might explain why she did not report what happened to the police when she returned to the Seattle area.“I never thought to call the police,” she said. “I was more worried about my job than my own personal safety.”But over time, she said, “I knew I failed myself.”Ms. Pina said that she pursued the lawsuit because she wanted the company to hold the pilot accountable. “It happened on an overnight with a captain who was abusing his position of authority in an opportunity with me being in a hotel right next to him,” she said.“It needs to stop from being swept under the rug,” she said. “I don’t hate my company. I just hope they step up, and say we have zero tolerance and maybe make any future attackers think twice and not follow through.”A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2018, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Saying She Was Raped, Pilot Sues Airline.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.AdvertisementSupported byBitesAt Faviken, his beloved restaurant in Are, Magnus Nilsson adds a rotating pop-up restaurant Uvisan, cocktail bar Svartklubb and cafe and bakery.By Giulia PinesIf you’ve heard of Are, Sweden, you’re either a winter sports fan or a passionate foodie. That’s because this town, about 400 miles north of Stockholm, is the country’s premier ski destination, but also the gateway to Faviken, the widely celebrated restaurant from the chef Magnus Nilsson.Tucked away in a family hunting lodge far from town, Faviken has always benefited from its remote, near-Narnian setting. But now Mr. Nilsson has opened a trio of Are (pronounced OOR-eh) establishments, intended to make his relentlessly local ethos more accessible. The restaurant Uvisan, the cocktail bar Svartklubb and the cafe and bakery Krus all occupy the same space; a rotating placard is the only outward sign of their daily transformation. “We had so many guests who wanted to stay a second night in Are and asked for recommendations,” Mr. Nilsson said. Though labeled pop-ups, both bar and bakery are permanent, while the dinner concept changes seasonally. The pop-ups give Faviken’s pool of talented sous chefs the chance “to take more responsibility, develop and be creative,” Mr. Nilsson said. (Last summer it was Hoon’s Chinese, with the Singaporean chef Ethel Hoon running the kitchen. The current concept will rotate out again in May or June, depending on when they feel it’s time for a new one.) At Uvisan in late December, as at Faviken, the meal started with a quick succession of single-bite wonders. Delicate shiso leaves were glazed with a crystalline layer of tempura, while a tiny pot of creamy mushroom chawanmushi (egg custard) was sophisticated in its simplicity, like an adult memory of a beloved childhood dish. Faviken favorites made appearances, as well, including an appetizer of king crab (improbably but satisfyingly daubed with a roasted hazelnut sauce reminiscent of savory Nutella) and a tiny dish of gyoza filled with succulent pieces of dairy cow.Lastly, a pot of mirin- and soy-based broth was set bubbling over a flame, to which diners added veggies, mushrooms and paper-thin slices of moose shoulder dipped in raw egg yolk and aged soy. Handmade udon were then swished around the pot to extract flavor, and each diner was handed a microplane and invited to grate the fragrant zest of a yuzu onto the chewy noodles. This take on Japanese home cooking is the work of Uvis Janicenko, a Latvian chef who spent two years in Japan before joining the Faviken team. (“Uvisan” is a composite of his first name and the Japanese honorific “san.”) “I used some of the classic Japanese dishes but adapted the flavor [to] local ingredients,” he said. “Japanese cuisine is very pure and clean in flavors that are close to me, so it comes naturally.” All the same, Mr. Nilsson’s hallmarks abound: Beds of forest moss, modest wooden spoons, and whimsical dishware suggest a woodsy fairy tale. Sweet flavors slip easily into the savory realm, savory into the sweet.After two nightly seatings, the space transforms into Svartklubb, serving drinks like gin with “forest tonic” and fermented milk known as fjallfil, chilled into a slushy and laced with a liqueur of dill and fennel.Before first light (around 9:30 a.m. in December), cocktail bar becomes bakery, serving traditional Swedish saffron buns, floury sourdough loaves, thumbprint cookies, and crisp Pepparkaka gingerbread biscuits. The menu at Krus is like an à la carte version of Faviken’s indulgent breakfast, including marbled charcuterie from Mr. Nilsson’s butcher shop in the nearby town of Undersaker, soft-boiled eggs with chilled cod roe, and delicate, just-made yogurt.Up here this time of year, when the sun’s late rise is followed closely by an early but glorious sunset, it’s enough to get you out of bed in the morning.Uvisan, Torggränd 2B. A set menu for two, without drinks or tip, is 1,300 Swedish kroner, about $160.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byWith recent reported inflammatory comments, President Trump put the spotlight on places many Americans have never visited. Here are some travel recommendations on a few of those places.By Justin SablichThe comments President Trump reportedly made recently, asking why the United States should accept immigrants from “shithole countries,” shed an uncomfortable spotlight on Haiti, El Salvador and the entire African continent. Several political figures and others from these nations responded swiftly — with a mixture of anger and mocking humor — to counter the sentiment, both in public statements and on social media. If this is “shithole” then don’t know what good is1. Johannesburg 2. Nairobi3. Kigali 4. Abuja pic.twitter.com/FGodSwuqa9The tourism industry jumped on the comments as well. The lodging company Gondwana Collection Namibia released a satirical Namibian tourism video featuring the voice of a Mr. Trump impersonator.And Airbnb is reportedly spending at least $100,000 on a digital ad campaign to promote travel to these countries — a message echoed in a tweet from its chief executive. While Mr. Trump’s strong language (he denied using the word “shithole”) has been widely condemned as ignorant and racist, it’s clear by other reactions that many see these countries as undesirable destinations. “This is about poverty and crime,” tweeted Paul Joseph Watson, a far-right YouTube personality and an editor at large at InfoWars.com. “It has nothing to do with race.” The tweet was liked over 5,000 times, and many users commented in agreement. Opinions, though, differ significantly from those who are familiar with the countries. “Of all the amazing places I lived in during my 18 years as a diplomat — including highlights like Paris and New York — Haiti is the place that sticks in my mind the most, because of its beauty and the character of its people,” said Peter Kujawinski, a writer who, as an American diplomat, lived in Haiti for a total of four years since 2000.Avid readers of travel journalism may have also noticed many of these same countries on a number of prominent 2018 “best of” destination lists.Our own 52 Places to Go in 2018 featured several African destinations, including Kigali, Rwanda; Liuwa Plain National Park, Zambia; Tangier, Morocco; and São Tomé and Príncipe. Elsewhere, Harar and Addis Ababa in Ethiopia were recommended by National Geographic and Condé Nast Traveler, respectively, and Forbes flagged destinations in Haiti, Tanzania and Senegal as “Best Budget Travel Destinations for 2018.”  And Tanzania’s Ruaha National Park was chosen by National Geographic as one of its “Places You Need to Visit in 2018.” "Traveling is so much more to me than sightseeing. It also means sharing, learning and feeling,” said Ana Sánchez, who writes about solo female travel at anianywhere.com. Ms. Sánchez, who has spent significant time in Senegal, Turkey and Iran, added, “it was in these countries where I felt most alive.”In this spirit, here’s a small window into a few of the countries that Mr. Trump has brought new attention to — including travel recommendations from those who have spent time there. “I traveled alone to 15 countries in Africa from June to August of 2017 and it has been one of my most rewarding travel experiences to date,” said Kach Howe, who runs the Two Monkeys Travel blog with her husband, Jonathan. “Tanzania is a very modern African country, but retains its unspoiled wilderness.”Mount Kilimanjaro, the tallest mountain in Africa, is on the bucket list of many adventure travelers. For the height-averse, consider a spice tour or one of the many pristine beaches in and around Zanzibar, an archipelago off the coast.“Unlike most people’s perceptions of Africa, I was able to travel securely, comfortably and very affordably, even in the less populated village of Nungwi (Zanzibar), where I learned to cook real local cuisine,” Mrs. Howe said. More Coverage:36 Hours in ZanzibarIn East Africa, Safaris That Leave a Lighter FootprintTreading Lightly in the Simanjiro Plains of Tanzania“Kenya has a lot of choice and its accessibility and infrastructure for tourism means you can easily combine all manner of activities,” Becki Enright, who writes at bordersofadventure.com, said. “This makes it a great country for a first-time visit to the Africa continent.” Safaris in Kenya get a lot of attention, and rightfully so (the word itself has roots in East Africa, meaning “journey” or “expedition” in Swahili). But its proximity to the Indian Ocean also makes water-related activities like windsurfing, sailing and snorkeling popular. Additionally, there’s the world’s largest permanent desert lake in the Kenyan Rift Valley; Lake Turkana; and Mount Kenya, Africa’s second tallest mountain after Kilimanjaro.Those hoping to glimpse some of Africa’s “Big Five” safari animals have many options, including the Masai Mara National Reserve, the Tsavo National Parks and the Borana Conservancy of the Laikipia region, which made our 52 Places to Go in 2017 list. More Coverage36 Hours in NairobiA Kenyan Pursuit: Perfecting the Chicken Dish Kuku PakaThrough the Eyes of the MaasaiHaiti is one of the poorest countries in the world, according to the World Bank, and the U.S. State Department continues to warn travelers of potential risks. But signs of a tourism rebound are there. In recent years, the number of new hotels — including the $45 million, 175-room Port-au-Prince Marriott Hotel that opened in February 2015 — have increased, according to the U.S. Department of Commerce. An investment of $345 million has been made in the tourism industry in recent years, according to the Department.“In my opinion, Haiti is safe for an adventurous tourist, especially if you can speak a little French,” Mr. Kujawinski said. “I think it’s very worthwhile to visit now, because you get a sense of the place before a big tourist wave rolls through.” More CoverageIn Haiti, Tracing a Paradise LostChef José Andrés on Giving and Getting Back in HaitiChristy Turlington Burns on the Trips That MatterLike Haiti, El Salvador, which Lonely Planet calls “Central America’s most underrated country,” does have a high poverty rate and the U.S. State Department says travelers should be aware of high crime rates and violence — but that hasn’t kept tourists away.The number of visitors to the country has increased each year since 2010, according to statistics from the World Bank and World Tourism Organization, including over 2 million tourists in 2016. El Salvador Tourism said in December that cruise ship arrivals increased by 100 percent in 2017 compared to 2016. More CoverageTrump Administration Says That Nearly 200,000 Salvadorans Must LeaveSurfers Are Here! El Salvador Sheds Its Image“South Africa is a country that is, quite often, devastatingly misunderstood, and once you visit your mind is opened to the complexities, as well as its natural beauty,” Ms. Enright of bordersofadventure.com said. Cape Town, which was No. 1 on our 52 Places to Go in 2014 list, has long been known by tourists for its stunning beaches, Table Mountain (South Africa’s most-photographed landmark, according to Sony) and its closeness to the Stellenbosch wine region. It is currently dealing with a severe drought and has put in place water consumption limits, so those visiting soon should find out in advance what this means and how they can help. “Tourists traveling to a destination, in terms of being a responsible traveler, should always be aware of context of a destination to which they’re traveling, whether it’s cultural sensitivity or religious sensitivity. This is water sensitivity,” Lisa Scriven, the director of Levelle Perspectives, which works to implement sustainable tourism practices, told The Times in December. There is no shortage of other must-see attractions across the country, including the massive Kruger National Park in the northern provinces of Limpopo and Mpumalanga, the scenic Drakensberg Mountain Range, Durban’s Golden Mile beachfront and Johannesburg’s numerous cultural offerings. More CoverageA Meditative Train Ride Through South Africa36 Hours in Cape TownIn Durban, South Africa, 13 Curry Stops in 5 DaysMr. Trump was roundly mocked after referring to Namibia as “Nambia” (or did he mean Zambia or Gambia?) in a speech last September. Once you get the name straight, consider Namibia for a family-friendly African adventure or for a great solo trip.“Namibia is one of the safest countries in Africa for travelers, and one of the easiest to explore independently,” said Megan Jerrard, a travel blogger at mappingmegan.com. “It’s ‘Africa for beginners,’ and has everything you could possibly want out of an African experience — a wealth of iconic wildlife, natural beauty, remote wilderness and one of Africa’s last remaining nomadic tribes.”More Coverage7 Days, 1,500 Miles in NamibiaIn Namibia, Conservation and Tourism Intersect“Zambia is one of the lesser-visited gems of Africa, but that means the experience is an authentic one. You can experience the remote African wilderness free of the mass tourism of more popular destinations like Kenya and Tanzania,” Ms. Jerrard said. One remote safari destination to consider is Liuwa Plain National Park, No. 14 on our 52 Places to Go in 2018 list. “Zebras, spotted hyenas and wildebeest are among the resurging wildlife in this 900,000-acre national park in Western Zambia, where the nonprofit organization African Parks has spurred conservation efforts since 2003,” Sarah Amandolare wrote.Up Close With the Tribes of Ethiopia’s Imperiled Omo ValleyThe Wonder Women of Botswana SafariSeeing Six African Countries by RoadIn Sacred Grove in Nigeria, Worship and Connection6 Vacation Ideas From Our Experts36 Hours in Kigali, Rwanda36 Hours in Victoria Falls (Zimbabwe Side)36 Hours in Marrakesh, MoroccoAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byComedians know a thing or two about travel, since their job is to make people laugh in cities all across the world. Here are a few pointers from Tom Segura, whose new special “Disgraceful” is now streaming on Netflix.By Justin SablichThe comedian Tom Segura doesn’t necessarily like traveling, but he knows what works for him, and it doesn’t involve fancy outfits (though sleep masks do come into play). “I see people glammed up and it’s like, dude, you should dress like a fugitive when you get on a flight,” Mr. Segura, whose latest comedy special, “Disgraceful” is now streaming on Netflix, said. “You should make travel as comfortable as possible.”He does, though, have his limits on casual wear — more on that below. And you also have to be prepared to react to other people’s actions, he said, which is where the sleep mask comes in. “On early a.m. flights there’s always one jackass who still wants to watch the sun rise and then stare into it for the next five hours,” Mr. Segura said. “Meanwhile, everyone in the whole cabin has their window shade down and it’s dark but there’s that one guy. So now I just put on a sleep mask.” Traveling with children is a whole other thing. Mr. Segura and his wife — fellow stand-up comedian Christina Pazsitzky — became first-time parents in Dec. 2015. “Traveling with kids is tough. My best advice is don’t do it,” Mr. Segura said. But if you have no choice, he has thoughts on that too and further observations on how to make travel more bearable. I’m definitely a jaded traveler but you try to make the best of what you know about the experience. Like, I know how to pack a bag. I know that checking a bag is for rookies. I know that if you’re in a high traffic time going into a major airport — I live in L.A., so at L.A.X. — you want to be dropped off at arrivals, not at departures. There’s less traffic there and you can run over to departures quickly. So it’s the little things that you pick up on the way.Begin with perhaps covering your torso. Have you seen photos of how people traveled on planes in the ’60s? Coat and tie was the standard. I’m not suggesting we all go back to that but for God’s sake do you really need to wear a tank top? Put on some deodorant and add a shirt if you don’t mind. I get that most people aren’t going to be served food on a flight but the amount of people with zero regard for their fellow man is astounding. People bring all types of food onboard and by the smell of it, it wasn’t meant to be consumed. Tuna melts, pastrami, curry and virtually all fast food has what can only be described as a stench in a confined space. It’s mind-blowing how checked out and inconsiderate so many people are of the other passengers. Dude, eat that garbage before we board so the rest of us don’t have to spend the next four hours nauseated because you can’t plan out your meal times like an adult.Leave your kids behind and take your trip, that would be my No. 1 tip. The second thing to do is, if you can, bring help. Whether it’s a friend, a nanny, a relative, whoever you can bring with you to help out. I’ve never done it alone so I’ve just been fortunate enough to always have some help with me. Without it, I think I would be freaking out. I’m not built to do that. It’s all about getting great sleep. I’ve even gone as far as asking them for duct tape and I’ve taped that space, that gap that lets in light. In Canada one time, I told the guy, “yeah man, you know, I keep trying to block out the light” and they sent up the engineer and he’s like, “what are you doing?” I said, “I want it to be blacked out, man, so I can sleep.” And he goes, “oh I can staple it.” And I’m like, “you want to staple it to your own walls?” He was like, “yeah, sure.” And I was like, “I think you’re getting fired this week.”Sleep is important for a comic — like it is for a lot of people. But sometimes we’re getting up at crazy hours. So I always ask for a hotel room not near the elevator. And I always ask for something not near the ground level. And depending on the class of hotel there’s little tricks like if you tell them you have medicine they’ll put a fridge in your room. Like, I don’t have any medicine but I still want a fridge.If you ask somebody locally where a good spot is, they’ll often take you to like a bar with chicken fingers. And you want to be like, “what is wrong with you?” But you realize it’s just like what that person knows. So the way you find out the best restaurant in any city is go, “where do rich people eat?,” or, “where do people go for graduations and anniversaries.” It sucks that you have to phrase it that way because you sound pretentious but it’s the only way.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCultured TravelerFrom Sylva, N.C., to Dunkirk, France, this year’s Academy Award nominees offer plenty of vacation possibilities for the film-obsessed traveler. By Elaine GlusacFor armchair travelers, a film may be the best way to get to, say, Italy — or, if you’re a "Star Wars" fan, the planet of Ahch-to. But for those who actually like to get on a plane, a movie’s location can determine an entire itinerary. In fact, films and television shows often serve, long after the fact, to drive tourism.Roughly 60 million people annually choose travel destinations based on what they see on big and small screens, according to Stefan Roesch, the author of “The Experiences of Film Location Tourists” and the director of FilmQuest, which offers tours to film locations.Some films attract travelers based on their connection to place. “Sideways,” the 2004 film set in the California wine country outside of Santa Barbara, created a tourism boom that still resonates today, particularly around Buellton, which is home to several “Sideways” locations. “It’s a cult film that people will watch before coming here to refresh their familiarity with the place,” said Kathy Vreeland, the executive director of the Buellton Chamber of Commerce & Visitor’s Bureau. Other movies become tourist attractions even when the story is otherworldly. In New Zealand, where “The Lord of the Rings” was shot, travelers still flock to the film sets and production sites related to the trilogy that was released between 2001 and 2003, thanks in part to Tourism New Zealand’s campaign promoting them.Whether intimately associated with their settings (like “Dunkirk”) or relying on alluring destinations to create fictional locales (like “Star Wars: The Last Jedi”), below are the most travel-related films of this year’s nominees and how to visit them.The town of Ebbing in the director Martin McDonagh’s film is fictional. But Mr. McDonagh, who also wrote the screenplay for “Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri” — about a mother’s efforts to get her daughter’s murder solved — brought the place to life via three North Carolina towns.“He wanted a Main Street, U.S.A., feel that people could easily relate to and looked like it could be Anywhere, Middle America,” said Guy Gaster, the director of the North Carolina Film Office. Sylva, in western North Carolina, played a central role, hosting the Ebbing police department (actually a home décor store) and the advertising company across the street from which Frances McDormand’s character, Mildred Hayes, hurls flaming bombs. In nearby Dillsboro, Country Traditions, a food and wine store, played the gift shop where Mildred worked. The titular billboards were constructed on a scenic road near Black Mountain. Visit North Carolina has created a three-day itinerary that identifies many of the film locations.Mr. McDonagh’s story can’t be called inspirational, but viewers have responded to the backdrop in the region’s wooded, rolling hills rather than the plot, explained Mr. Gaster. He noted that fans of “The Last of the Mohicans,” a 1992 film with a tragic conclusion, still seek out filming sites such as Chimney Rock State Park. “People do see the difference between what is really there and what the story line is,” he said.Nominated for eight Academy Awards, including best picture and director, “Dunkirk” captures the World War II evacuation of Allied soldiers from the port of Dunkirk in northern France in 1940. The plan, known as Operation Dynamo, saved more than 338,000 troops.The director Christopher Nolan shot much of the film in Dunkirk, where a walking tour visits Malo-les-Bains, the seaside area depicted in the movie, and East Mole, the breakwater that was vital to the evacuation and was partly rebuilt by the production (€120 for up to 30 people, or about $150).Like the popular D-Day beaches in Normandy, the real-life Dunkirk is strewn with World War II wreckage, especially visible at low tide. Near the beach, the Dunkirk 1940 Museum tells the Operation Dynamo story. Travelers can see Dunkirk from the point of view of a Royal Air Force pilot on a 15-minute aerial tour aboard a light aircraft (€120 for up to three people). The opening frames of the best picture nominee “Call Me by Your Name” indicate the setting is “somewhere in northern Italy.” And indeed, the film location, including the homey villa where the main characters reside, is in Lombardy, the northern region of the country that includes Milan and the Lakes Region.The enchanting countryside where the protagonists have long meals in gardens, swim in idyllic ponds and cycle through medieval towns is a seductive character in its own right.“Italy is often the backdrop for romantic stories, both onscreen and off, but the better-known destinations — Venice, Tuscany, the Amalfi Coast — are usually the settings,” said Kathy McCabe, the host of the TV show “Dream of Italy.” “This movie reminds us that there are so many more layers of Italy for travelers to explore.”The film’s director, Luca Guadagnino, centered production around the town of Crema, roughly 30 miles east of Milan, and his characters made jaunts to Lake Garda, one of the region’s lakes with an Alpine backdrop. They also visit Cremona, saluted by Unesco for its traditional violin-making, the walled city of Bergamo in the Alpine foothills and, outside of Bergamo, the dramatic Serio Waterfalls, Italy’s highest cascades.“Star Wars: The Last Jedi,” nominated for four Academy Awards, including original score, picks up Luke Skywalker’s story line where the previous film left off — on the planet of Ahch-to, the fictional shelter played by the real-life monastic retreat Skellig Michael, a steep and rocky island off the southwest coast of Ireland.Though the film was also shot on location in Bolivia and Croatia, the production expanded to feature more of Ireland, including coastal locations such as Loop Head in County Clare and Malin Head in Donegal. Most of these areas lie along the Wild Atlantic Way, a name given by Irish tourism to the country’s west coast. The tour company Zicasso guides guests to many of them in a new eight-day itinerary called “Ireland and the Last Jedi Encounter” (from $2,975 a person). The main character in “Lady Bird” can’t wait to get out of Sacramento, which she calls “the Midwest of California.” But in the course of the director Greta Gerwig’s coming-of-age film, she comes to appreciate the charms of California’s capital.Nominated in five categories, including best film, director and actress, “Lady Bird” will be the subject of new running and walking tours of Sacramento starting this month by Sac Running Tours. The 3.2-mile walking tour and the 4.5-mile running version (both $20 a person) focus on East Sacramento, including the Fabulous Forties neighborhood where the main character indulges in real estate envy, and the McKinley Park Rose Garden where she stargazes. “Sacramento is a lot cooler than people give it credit for,” said Jenn Kistler-McCoy, the owner of Sac Running Tours. She aims to add bike tours that will range farther and include visits to other locations featured in the film, including Tower Bridge and Gunther’s Ice Cream shop.For independent travelers, Visit California has compiled a list of “Lady Bird” filming locations, including Thrift Town, where the movie mother and daughter shop for dresses. The list created by Visit Sacramento includes many of the city’s vintage neon signs captured in the film.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byCarry-OnThe all-star basketball player always brings his PlayStation, ChapStick and cologne.By Nell McShane WulfhartThe basketball player Joel Embiid of the Philadelphia 76ers is almost as famous for his playful grandstanding as his considerable skills on the court. The 23-year-old, who grew up in Cameroon, has become synonymous with the concept of “The Process,” a strategy for long-term talent building that originated with the former 76ers general manager Sam Hinkie — Mr. Embiid famously punctuates his feisty tweets with the phrase. Currently in his second season with Philadelphia, Mr. Embiid will play in the N.B.A. All-Star game in Los Angeles on Feb. 18. Mr. Embiid spends much of the year on the road, traveling for games. “Generally, commercial flights aren’t designed to accommodate someone my size — and I get it, there aren’t many people that are 7-foot 2,” he said. “I just don’t feel comfortable since I don’t exactly fit.” Fortunately the team usually travels by charter, which has more room to spread out. When Mr. Embiid travels, he usually spends his free time on his PlayStation, not partying. “A lot of my teammates party in L.A. and I have a lot of friends in L.A., but L.A. is like the only city. Maybe New York but that’s about it. Other than that, I just want to chill and play video games.”He said he doesn’t get sick of the travel. “We travel a lot, but that’s what I signed up for, so I never complain about it. We get paid a lot of money to do so, so I’m going to live with it, and I don’t think I would ever get tired of it. Sometimes, you miss the food at home, you miss the people around you, but other than that, you should never get tired of traveling.”He’s excited to head to Los Angeles for the All-Star game. “It’s my first time being in All-Stars, so this should be fun.” Is he nervous? “I’m not nervous. You know, I like putting on a show. And I feel like those are the biggest days to do it. That’s my element, so I’m going to have a lot of fun.”Here’s what he takes on every trip.“Everywhere I go, I always have to bring my PlayStation. I’m a big game guy. I play ‘FIFA,’ ‘NBA 2K,’ ‘Madden’ sometimes. Sometimes, ‘Grand Theft Auto.’ Other than that, I play Monopoly and then sometimes I play poker.”“I always have a picture of my little brother that died; that’s always in my bag.” (Embiid’s brother Arthur passed away in 2014 at the age of 13.)“I bring a lot of ChapStick because I lose about a ChapStick a day.”“For basketball, the team actually takes care of it, so they carry our shoes and stuff. But my own personal shoes, sometimes we go on the road for like six, seven days, and that’s when I bring about four or five pairs. I have tons and tons of shoes. I’m signed with Adidas, so I kind of have to wear Adidas. The NMDs, that’s what I wear a lot at the moment. I like them, that’s probably one of my favorite pairs of Adidas. And then when I have to dress up nice, I wear Giuseppes [the designer Giuseppe Zanotti]. I like Guiseppes a lot because they’re flashy — gold and all that.”“I just got a Nintendo Switch. It’s pretty good so I think I might have to bring it everywhere. If I’ve go to go somewhere, and I can’t carry the PlayStation, I can always have the Nintendo Switch.” “I’m a simple guy so I always have sweats on. Or sneakers with my face on it. I love myself too much.”“I wear this cologne called Baccarat [Baccarat Rouge 540], it’s really good. It’s probably the best I’ve ever had, that’s what I wear a lot. And then I like Creed, I like Chanel, Yves Saint Laurent is pretty good, too, and then Montblanc sometimes. I mix it up every day. Women love when a man smells really good so, you know, I’ve always got to smell good. Every time a woman approaches me, she feels so connected to me because I smell so good.”  AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPete Souza traveled to more than 60 countries as the official White House photographer. He has some great memories — and tips for taking terrific pictures.By Shivani VoraDuring his eight years as the chief official White House photographer for President Barack Obama, Pete Souza, the former director of the White House Photo Office, traveled to all 50 states and more than 60 countries. Those trips added up to more than 1,300 flights on Air Force One and nearly 1.5 million miles.“My job was to basically tag along with the president and visually capture the professional and personal moments in his life,” said Mr. Souza, 62, who was also the official White House photographer for President Ronald Reagan.He shot almost two million images during his tenure with Mr. Obama, and his new book, “Obama: An Intimate Portrait,” released in November, has 315 of the most memorable ones. Besides the tension-filled shot of Mr. Obama and his advisers in the Situation Room during the Osama bin Laden mission, there are several pictures from the president’s travels including an image of him with his family in front of the Christ the Redeemer statue in Rio de Janeiro at night in the fog and a picture of him looking at the Great Wall of China.Below are edited excerpts from an interview with Mr. Souza.Can you share some of your most memorable trips with President Obama?Early on in his presidency, we went to Egypt, and on the last day, we went to the pyramids and got to climb inside the Pyramid of Giza. I had never been to Egypt before, and the experience of being inside that pyramid is something I won’t ever forget. Prague was another great trip. It’s a beautiful city with a lot of history and old architecture, and it was also the first time I went there. Also, I traveled with the president to Hawaii every year, which is a fantastic locale. I liked the beach, the sun and the food, especially the sushi and the grilled opah [a variety of fish].What about standout trips with President Reagan?I took my first trip to China with him, and going to Beijing and seeing the Great Wall and Forbidden City and walking through Tiananmen Square stick in my mind. They play such a big part in Chinese history and to see them firsthand was special. My trip to Russia with President Reagan had the same sense of historical resonance. I saw Red Square and St. Basil’s Cathedral in Moscow, and we also went to St. Petersburg, where I got to visit the Hermitage Museum.Outside of your professional travels, are there particular destinations you enjoy photographing?Rather than specific places, I like taking pictures of anything that’s new and different to me. Although my years in the White House had me traveling the world, my trips weren’t about exploration, and when I’m not working, exploring is what I like to do.In your opinion, do travelers who want to take photos of their trips need to invest in a camera or is a phone camera good enough?It depends on what you want to do with those shots. I use the camera on my iPhone all the time, and it’s perfectly acceptable. You can even enlarge the images you take from your camera phone, but if you’re looking to blow up your pictures to a poster size, it’s better to have a digital camera because you’ll get better quality shots. Brands like Sony, Nikon, Canon, Fuji and Leica sell digital cameras in a range of prices.What’s your advice for taking great travel shots?You can take pictures of anything, including landscapes, people and historical sites, but most tourists are typically out sightseeing from the late morning to midafternoon. The best light for photographing, however, is during the early morning or late afternoon when the sun is lower on the horizon. Some night shots, with lights and shadows, can be especially dramatic. I also encourage photographing in bad weather, such as rain or snow, because these settings yield interesting pictures.How should travelers photograph iconic sites such as the Eiffel Tower or the Taj Mahal?The tendency is to shoot iconic sites up close, but I think it’s more fun to take pictures of them from a distance. A picture of the Eiffel Tower that incorporates other parts of Paris is more unique than one of the Eiffel Tower alone.AdvertisementYou can’t visit every destination. But our photographers often offer the next-best thing to being there.First up: Kodiak Island in Alaska.CreditChristopher Miller for The New York Times.1 of 18AdvertisementSupported byThe tourism authority, which lobbied against the ban, predicts visitor losses in the wake of recent restrictions.By Elaine GlusacLess than a year after a Supreme Court decision legalized same-sex marriage in Bermuda, the government of the British Overseas Territory has outlawed it, a reversal that is poised to roil the waters of the cruise industry and potentially threaten travel to the island.The country where a ship is registered influences how cruise lines conduct marriages at sea. Cruise Lines International Association, a trade group comprised most of the industry’s cruise lines, said that about 10 percent of its members’ ships are registered in Bermuda, accounting for about 13 percent of passenger capacity. Subsequent to the reversal, cruise ships registered in Bermuda that offered same-sex weddings have determined they can no longer do so. When same-sex marriage was legalized in Bermuda last May, Cunard, which registers its fleet in Bermuda, announced it would extend its wedding-at-sea packages to same-sex couples, with marriage licenses issued in Bermuda. Cunard held its first shipboard same-sex marriage in January. Given the repeal, another couple, who had planned to marry next fall on a ship, has decided to wed before the sailing, according to a company spokeswoman.Of the 17 ships in its fleet, Princess Cruises has 13 ships registered in Bermuda, and began offering same-sex weddings on them after the change in law last year. “Because Princess had not yet formally launched a same-sex wedding program we had only a few couples with bookings,” wrote Negin Kamali, a spokeswoman for Princess, in an email. Two weddings previously approved by Bermuda will be allowed to proceed in March, but another two couples with shipboard marriage plans later in the year will be offered a refund if they wish to cancel.Catering to British travelers, P&O Cruises, which, like Princess and Cunard, is part of the Carnival Corporation group of cruise lines, began offering same-sex ceremonies at sea last spring. Most of its eight ships are registered in Bermuda. “What we know is that both the cruise industry and L.G.B.T.Q. cruisers are eager to have the option to marry same-sex couples at sea. The reversal was a huge setback for both,” wrote Colleen McDaniel, the senior executive editor of Cruise Critic, a website dedicated to cruising, in an email.There are alternatives for couples seeking to wed at sea. Celebrity Cruises, which registers most of its ships in Malta where same-sex marriage was legalized last summer, held its first gay wedding in January.Beyond cruise ships, the marriage reversal risks tourism cancellations on the island.Bermuda is coming off a record year in tourism, likely boosted by the America’s Cup yacht race, which took place there last May and June. According to figures recently released by the Bermuda Tourism Authority, some 692,947 visitors traveled to the island, the largest in recorded history dating to 1995. Tourism was up 7 percent over 2016.The tourism authority, which is an independent, nongovernmental agency, publicly lobbied against the ban. In December, it sent a letter to island senators, predicting tourism losses in the wake of same-sex marriage restriction. It cited the case of the transgender bathroom bill, rescinded last year, that cost North Carolina an estimated $3.76 billion in business and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act signed in 2016 by then-governor Mike Pence in Indiana, which allowed business owners to deny services to patrons based on their sexual orientation. In its wake, Indianapolis lost 12 conventions representing up to $60 million in spending.“Significantly, it’s not only L.G.B.T. travelers that care about equal rights based on sexual orientation. Our research indicates many companies, consumers and travelers, including the overwhelming majority of the younger visitors powering Bermuda’s growth, care about this issue,” said the letter, signed by Kevin Dallas, the chief executive officer of the Bermuda Tourism Authority.The global value of L.G.B.T. travel is over $211 billion, according to Out Now, a marketing and consulting firm that specializes in the L.G.B.T. market.Jack S. Ezon, the president of Ovation Vacations, a travel agency based in New York, said that the prime season for travel bookings to Bermuda, which is seen as a last-minute getaway, is May. But already nearly 5 percent of the firm’s reservations to the island have been canceled not just by L.G.B.T.Q. couples but friends who “feel they do not want to support an economy that is, in one person’s words, ‘backward,’” Mr. Ezon wrote in an email.  L.G.B.T.Q. activists point to legislative wins since 2012 in Bermuda, including an anti-discrimination measure that protects people on the basis of sexual orientation and the opening of adoption to same-sex couples.“The change by their government wouldn’t cause our association to deter travelers from experiencing the beauty of Bermuda, nor the many countries globally that don’t have gay marriage,” said John Tanzella, the president and chief executive officer of the International Gay and Lesbian Travel Association, of which the Bermuda Tourism Authority is a member. “Bermuda does have protection laws that include sexual orientation.” Advertisement
                        Our 52 Places Traveler answers readers’ questions about the journey so far and traveling alone, as a woman.                                            


By JADA YUAN

                        Richness is everywhere in the Colombian capital, from vivid street art to what may be the gaudiest restaurant you’ve ever seen.                                             


By JADA YUAN

                        The pre-Incan ruins of Kuélap share similarities with their more famous cousin. But getting there can be a herculean effort.                                            


By JADA YUAN

                        Peninsula Papagayo is where the ultrarich go to avoid having to interact with the regular rich. But our 52 Places columnist finds a way to get away from the traps of luxury.                                            


By JADA YUAN
A visit by our 52 Places Traveler to the Puerto Rican capital, still recovering from last year’s hurricanes, was one of the most calming and soul-filling experiences of her trip so far. 


By JADA YUAN
The first half of our 52 Places Traveler’s trip around the Caribbean brings her to Trinidad and its famous Carnival, and to St. Lucia, where she had a relaxing stop.


By JADA YUAN
Did our 52 Places Traveler love Disney Springs, Fla.? No. But she did love that other people love it.


By JADA YUAN
The Alabama city has a complicated history, heavy with racial tensions. But it’s also a powerful place, and a friendly one for travelers. 


By JADA YUAN
Despite some transformative growing pains, the city may well be one of the most pleasant and livable ones in the United States.


By JADA YUAN
Our new columnist — chosen (out of 13,000 applicants) to visit all of the spots on our 52 Places list — finds plenty to celebrate in New Orleans, including fierce pride and a spirit of forgiveness.


By JADA YUAN
Meet Jada Yuan, picked from 13,000 applicants to become The Times’s first 52 Places correspondent.


By RAILLAN BROOKS and ALEXANDRIA SYMONDS
At the same time that we were sifting through thousands of applications for a much-coveted Travel correspondent job, we were also reviewing hundreds of destination suggestions from contributors.


By DAN SALTZSTEIN
A starter kit for escaping into the world.


How does Jada Yuan, who beat out 13,000 other applicants for the job, feel about spending the year traveling the globe? “Elated and terrified.”


The southern tip of Baja California, Mexico, turned out to be like an immersive choose-your-own-adventure novel. Here are a few of those turns, and the resulting ups and downs.By JADA YUANI never imagined that my main takeaway from the Bolivian city, where women have struggled for equality, would be one of female empowerment — thanks to everyone from chefs to wrestlers.By JADA YUANThe southern tip of Baja California, Mexico, turned out to be like an immersive choose-your-own-adventure novel. Here are a few of those turns, and the resulting ups and downs.By JADA YUANI never imagined that my main takeaway from the Bolivian city, where women have struggled for equality, would be one of female empowerment — thanks to everyone from chefs to wrestlers.By JADA YUANAdvertisementSupported byBitesAt Turkey and the Wolf, standard lunchbox fare is just a launching pad for the high-flying imaginings of a merry band of inventors.By Christopher HallPlenty of people regularly ate sandwiches as kids. But few, if any, have spun that experience into culinary gold like Mason Hereford, whose restaurant Turkey and the Wolf in New Orleans was lauded by Bon Appétit as America’s best new restaurant in 2017.“I sure enough ate my share,” said Mr. Hereford, 31, who grew up Charlottesville, Va., before moving to New Orleans in 2008 and working his way from line cook to chef de cuisine at Coquette, a respected contemporary Southern bistro. “But it wasn’t until I came to this city of po’ boys that I began to consider the creative potential of a sandwich.”Sandwiches are the stars at this 40-seat, no-reservation restaurant with street-front patio seating for 25 more, a former barbecue joint and a wings shop in the Irish Channel neighborhood. Inside, cinder block walls are painted sea-foam green and décor runs to thrift store whimsy. Patrons order at the counter and eat at sundry chrome dinettes off mismatched dishes (including plastic Disney plates), seasoning their food with kitschy vintage salt and pepper shakers.But to call Turkey and the Wolf a sandwich shop is misleading. Standard lunchbox fare is just a launching pad for the high-flying imaginings of Mr. Hereford and his team, a merry band of inventors whose professional cooking chops are on view in the crowded but supremely orderly open kitchen. Over the course of two different lunches, friends and I grazed through much of the small, changing menu, which includes cocktails with enigmatic names like the bourbon-based They Grow Up Slow Fast and My Mom Blacks Out Better Than Yours, featuring pecan vodka and mulled wine. Given the reports of lines out the door, our wait to order and sit was surprisingly short — probably thanks to a pipe-bursting freeze that had settled on the city. The collard green melt on rye wowed us with its marriage of tender, braised greens, crunchy slaw, gooey Swiss cheese and spicy pickled cherry pepper dressing. Lemony yogurt and cucumbers brightened a roti filled with deeply seasoned, slow-cooked lamb neck meat, while a crazy-looking sandwich of nicely chewy, fried bologna soared on the crisp vinegar-brined potato chips, melted American cheese and hot mustard also layered between its two thick slices of buttered-and-griddled white bread (baked by a friend of the chef). On the “Not Sandwiches” side of the menu, which included deviled eggs garnished with fried chicken skin and an Alp-sized wedge salad, the fried potpie, plump with herb-infused, moist chicken and paired with a tarragon-buttermilk sauce, disappeared quickly. According to Mr. Hereford, coming up with new dishes is a collaboration, and nothing appears on the menu until it’s been tinkered with and tasted up to 20 times by the kitchen staff. “We’re looking to create a fun vibe here, to be a place that doesn’t take itself too seriously,” he said. “But that doesn’t mean we don’t take our food seriously.”Turkey and the Wolf, 739 Jackson Avenue; 504-218-7428; turkeyandthewolf.com. An average meal for two, minus drinks and tip, is about $35.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byMeet the all-female Brazilian drum group that is challenging gender norms.By Shannon SimsSALVADOR, Brazil — This northeastern Brazilian city is famous for its Afro-Brazilian drumming traditions; the internationally acclaimed bloco-afro band Olodum has broadcast its colorful drums and pounding syncopation internationally for decades through music collaborations including Michael Jackson’s “They Don’t Really Care About Us” and Paul Simon’s “The Obvious Child”. To see that band — which is composed almost exclusively of men — or any of the city’s other renowned bloco-afros, like Ilê Aiyê, perform live in the streets of Salvador is a deep dive into the roots of this country’s musical traditions. But traditions change. Or actually, traditions are changed. By women like the ones that make up Banda Didá, a group composed exclusively of black women, pounding out those same Afro-Brazilian rhythms, filling up Salvador’s night with its old sounds, played by new hands. Banda Didá is a unique musical group breaking gender boundaries in the capital of Bahia, the state that is the epicenter of Brazil’s African cultural infusion. “Until Didá, no one here played like us,” said one of the band’s leaders and longest-serving members, Viviam Caroline de Jesus Queirós. Formed in 1993, the band was believed to be the first all-female bloco-afro in Brazil. “We’ve brought visibility to a group — black women — that have been historically marginalized here,” Ms. Queirós said. “We’ve feminized percussion here.” Though they’ve been around for years, Didá’s popularity today is representative of an atmosphere of female empowerment in Brazil. Didá, once a torchbearing group among dozens of all-male bloco-afros, now shares the streets of Salvador with a few other all-female groups. As Brazil’s power structure has turned more conservative in recent years, with many female politicians being replaced by male lawmakers who have pushed for legislation to limit women’s access to abortion, the country’s feminist movement has gained strength.For more Surfacing pieces, like one on a Jamaican synchronized swimming team, click here.  Banda Didá earned its visibility by taking on old social norms that pushed women away from drums. Historically, “drumming in Salvador has been considered a man’s role,” said Jeff Packman, a University of Toronto associate professor who specializes in the study of drum culture in Salvador. He and Ms. Queirós both report that the gender norms around drumming came out of particular beliefs about a woman’s role and place. One theory, the big bass drums are too heavy for women. The women could even get hurt, and then who would have the babies? Another theory suggested that playing drums in the streets in the night — especially during the bacchanalia of Carnival season, when drum groups perform most intensely — is too time-consuming and dangerous for women, who should instead stay home. Good luck convincing the women of Banda Didá of those theories today.On a recent weekend evening, a few dozen of the group’s 85 members gathered in the second floor of their headquarters. Women, some with children in their laps, listened attentively to the guest speakers, which included older local black women sharing their experiences of finding strength in their feminism and their blackness. “It is our responsibility to share with the world the power that is within us as black women,” one speaker told the group. Two nights later, the band was busy rehearsing its Carnival performance; the celebration is just weeks away. During the captivating rehearsals, which take place in the street in front of their headquarters, the women not only play bass drums — called surdos — strapped around their shoulders or waists and resting against knees protected by thick kneepads, but also swing the heavy, keg-sized drums up into the air, balancing them above their heads with one trembling arm, as the seconds tick by and the gathered crowd cheers, in an act symbolizing their defiance of those old gender rules.Adriana Portela, the first female conductor of a bloco-afro in Salvador’s history, attributes the debunking of the myths around female drumming to “the power of the uterus.” She said this just before rehearsal, while pulling on kneepads and helping the group’s young singer with new lyrics. Jean Jesus dos Santos, one of the younger members of the group — part of the next generation of Didá — was one room over and painting blush onto her cheeks. “They used to say drumming wasn’t for women because the instrument was heavy,” said Jean. “But we’re warrior women, and yes, we can play. And the proof of that is there in the street: we play just as well as the men.” An hour later, after their rehearsal and backstage at an Olodum show a block away, Olodum’s vice president, Marcelo Gentil, said he can’t disagree. “They are from Bahia, so they drank from the same source as Neguinho,” he said, referring to the man who is regarded as the founder of the samba-reggae rhythm that drives much of the drumming in Salvador. “And they play that rhythm a lot better than men who aren’t from Bahia.”Neguinho do Samba, a former leader of Olodum, founded Banda Didá in 1993. Neguinho died several years ago, but his daughter, Debora de Souza, remains an integral part of the administration of Banda Didá. While counting out registration forms in a yellow folder labeled “Carnaval,” Ms. de Souza recalled the passion that led her father to form Banda Didá. "My dad was a feminist. He cared about women, and while he was with Olodum he saw that there was a need for there to be a female drum group.” According to Ms. de Souza, Paul Simon felt so grateful to Olodum for helping him earn a Grammy nomination for Album of the Year in 1992, that he helped him acquire the three-story colonial mansion where Banda Didá in now based. Neguinho’s vision was long-term: to form an all-female drum group, but also ensure the perpetuity of the group by offering free instrument-making workshops and music lessons for women and children at the house.Despite the financial uncertainty that troubles most Brazilian cultural groups that receive little government support, the Didá project has been a success. Today, 130 women and girls take drum lessons at Didá — still for free — creating a diverse pool of candidates for inclusion in the band. The group finances itself through private events and donations. Mornings at the Didá house are filled with the muted sounds of private tutoring in tambourine or conga drums behind closed doors. In the afternoon, young girls scamper down the central stairway after their drum lessons, and on a recent afternoon, older women waited in line to register to volunteer during the group’s Carnival performance. The uniqueness of the city’s first all-female group, and the luxury of the group having a physical headquarters, means that Didá’s reputation now precedes it. The group used to go out to the poor neighborhoods around Salvador to recruit talented young drummers; now, on a typical day, a steady stream of young women show up at the house to inquire about drum lessons or joining the group. "This is the place where I found myself,” said Maiana Santos Bonfim, another young member of the band. “It's where I learned to accept myself, my hair, my body, my race. And I just love playing drums.”Ms. Queirós was just 16 years old when she started playing drums with Banda Didá. She is now 34 and pursuing a Ph.D. in samba-reggae ethnomusicology in her free time away from the group. “I feel like I became a woman through this group,” she said with steady conviction, between sips of passionfruit juice at a local Afro-Brazilian cafe."In my opinion, the drum could be the great technology for women this century. It redefines the body of a woman — especially black women,” said Ms. Queirós. “I think it’s a weapon; it’s a tool. It gives us power, and makes us more beautiful. And it makes it so that our message is heard farther and farther away.”Advertisement
UPDATED 10 de enero de 2018

Josh Haner/The New York TimesAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe star of “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” loves loungewear, her portable humidifier and her dog Wiley.By Nell McShane WulfhartRachel Bloom is the co-creator and star of “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend,” a standout television show on the CW network that combines elaborate song-and-dance numbers with comedy and drama. It has scooped up a number of awards, including a Best Actress Golden Globe for Ms. Bloom, and is currently in its third season.Based in Los Angeles, Ms. Bloom travels frequently, but still struggles to (politely) avoid conversations with strangers on the plane. “I like to be solitary and kind of left alone when I travel and so something that I’m still learning is, how do I remain solo and be in my quiet space without feeling guilty — like I have to talk to someone just because they talk to me?” She’s developed a technique to deal with chatty seatmates. “I meditate now, and when you say to someone, ‘Hi, you know, I’m just gonna meditate,’ they don’t know what to say. They go, ‘Oh, oh, O.K.!’ It’s either that they really respect it, or they think you’re a weirdo, and either way they leave you alone.”Her favorite travel accessory? Her dog, Wiley. “Because my husband was in New York for so long, I got my dog certified as an emotional support animal. And you can always tell when you’re on a flight coming in from L.A., with the amount of emotional support dogs on it.” Wiley’s first cross-country flight was a success. “She understood that it was quiet time. She’s in her middle years — my dog’s around eight — so she’s a woman in her comfortable middle age, who kind of knows how to chill out.”Here’s what she takes on every trip. Humidifier“My throat gets really dry on plane rides, so I have a little portable humidifier that I bring. It actually just plugs into a phone charger, it’s a USB-powered humidifier. What you do is you get a water bottle, and you screw it in, and the water bottle creates the moisture for the humidifier. So that’s always exciting.”Loungewear“I wear basically pajamas on the plane. I wear the softest pants that I can find, the softest shirt that I can find. I mean sometimes I won’t wear a bra. I am just basically preparing to pretend that I’m in a bed for six, seven hours.”Magazines“I did this thing a couple years ago where I subscribed to one magazine and somehow got like seven magazine subscriptions that I’ve been meaning to cancel, so my house is filled with magazines. I mean every single bathroom in my house is filled with all these magazines. So usually in my carry-on I will have some combination of magazines and then nine times out of ten I end up falling asleep or watching a movie and I don’t finish the magazine, so I’m walking around with the same copy of The Atlantic for the whole vacation, and then I bring it back home.”Laptop“I usually am trying to get work done on the plane. Usually it’s writing a song, writing a script. I always had this thing even before I was working on the show: I didn’t want people to see I was working on a script because when people see you’re working on a script it becomes the inevitable question, ‘Oh, are you a writer?’ ‘Yeah.’ ‘What do you do?’ and then suddenly you have to go over your whole career with a stranger. And then you have to get into the nitty-gritty of what you’re working on, or people are looking to network, and I just want to be basically left alone. So, I try to hide what I’m working on. I just want to work on my lonesome, and I don’t want to go into the history of how I found my passion with the person that happens to be sitting next to me.”Dog supplies“Obviously when I bring the dog, I bring dog treats. It’s her food, it’s her treats, that’s half of what I’m carrying. When I went to New York last time, I fooled myself into thinking I would take her on the subway by carrying her around in a dog backpack. They make these bags that you just kind of strap your dog into like you’re climbing a mountain, and so on this latest trip, I brought this dog backpack. I didn’t end up using it because she’s a dog and she wants to walk.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byBrazil is hoping to attract more tourists by allowing Americans, Canadians, Japanese and Australian citizens to obtain visas online. Here’s what to see when you get there.By Ernesto LondoñoStarting this week, Americans wishing to visit Brazil will be able to apply online for a visa for a $40 fee, down from the $160 fee applicants were previously charged at consulates.Brazil rolled out the new e-visa system, which is also available for Japanese, Canadian and Australian citizens, in an effort to jump-start its tourism sector, which has struggled amid rising violence in much of the country, a prolonged economic recession and residual apprehension following the 2016 Zika epidemic.“If we want to compete for international tourists, we need to do away with the bureaucracy and extend a red carpet so they choose our destinations,” Brazil’s tourism minister Marx Beltrão said in a statement.The e-visa program is kicking in weeks before the Brazilian government is expected to sign an “open skies” agreement with the United States. The pact will allow market forces, rather than government regulators, to dictate the frequency and destination of flights between the two countries.Brazil’s Senate is expected to approve the deal next month, following passage in the lower House of Congress last month.Open skies agreements that Washington has signed with other countries have significantly expanded the number of daily flights, leading to cheaper fares. Since the United States signed one with Colombia in 2010, for instance, three new airlines began offering service between the two countries, eight new routes were launched and daily flights more than doubled.The Brazilian government estimates that the e-visa system will increase travel from the four eligible countries by 25 percent and make Brazil a more attractive destination to hold conferences and other large events. More than 570,000 Americans traveled to Brazil in 2016, according to the tourism ministry, a figure exceeded only by the number of Argentines who flock to the beaches in the country each year.So why visit Brazil now? Having arrived here last July to run coverage of the southern cone of South America for The New York Times, I have a few tips — and a word of caution.Rio de Janeiro, my new hometown, is a dazzling seaside metropolis with an embarrassment of riches for beachgoers and music lovers. If you’ve never been, it should be at the top of your list.You should be mindful, however, that like much of Brazil, Rio de Janeiro is grappling with an epidemic of violence. It is easy to overlook in tourist hot spots like the area that includes the beaches of Ipanema and Copacabana, but you should do your homework to avoid stumbling into a dangerous neighborhood. Another caveat: brace yourself for reliably inattentive service.If gorgeous beaches surrounded by a constellation of mountains isn’t your thing, São Paulo, the largest metropolis in South America, has more to offer in the way of museums, awe-inspiring architecture and culinary innovation. You can visit what may be the coolest building in Latin America: the curvaceous Copan built by the renowned Brazilian architect Oscar Niemeyer downtown. Or the modern Museu do Futebol, an ode to the country’s soccer-rich history tucked inside the Art Deco Pacaembu Stadium.But be forewarned about the city’s notorious traffic jams and graffiti-smeared streets that give much of the city a blighted feel.If you’ve been there, done that, consider going a bit further afield.You can travel to Brazil’s wine country — yes, there is one! — near the southern city of Porto Alegre. While Brazil’s wine sector is dwarfed by industry titans Argentina and Chile, several sparkling wines made here are excellent and reasonably priced.Seeking more adventure than a buzz? Consider a trip to the Pantanal, the largest wetlands in the world, in Mato Grosso do Sul state. You can catch a glimpse of jaguars, macaws and caimans by going on safari-like tours. There are also beautiful waterfalls and freshwater rivers to swim in.As a relative newcomer to Brazil, I’d be delighted to get tips from veteran travelers. Tweet or email me about destinations that exceeded your expectations, funky hotels and delightful eats.Ernesto Londoño is the Brazil bureau chief, based in Rio de Janeiro. He was previously an editorial writer and, before joining The Times in 2014, reported for The Washington Post.@londonoe•FacebookAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe 2018 Winter Olympics start on Feb. 9 in Gangwon Province, a resort region in the Taebak Mountains northeast of Seoul. Here’s what to see and how to see it. By Shivani Vora and Justin SablichThe 2018 Winter Olympics, Pyeongchang 2018, will take place from Feb. 9 to 25 in Gangwon Province, a resort region clustered in the Taebak Mountains northeast of Seoul. The games will be spread across three main venues: Pyeongchang, where the official Olympic Village and Olympic Stadium are; Jeongseon, where Alpine skiing will take place; and Gangneung, where ice skating will take place. Pyeongchang and Olympic satellite cities will have free shuttle buses to Olympic game venues and also to each satellite city. For more information on schedules, visit the official Pyeongchang 2018 website, or download the official mobile app, available for Apple iPhones or Google Android devices. Also note that Verizon Wireless customers in South Korea can have their international fees waived for the month of February by signing up for its reward program.An express train, the Gyeonggang KTX, will run from Seoul’s two major stations, Seoul Station and Cheongnyangni Station, to Pyeongchang and Gangneung. The journey takes one hour and 25 minutes and two hours, depending on where you board. From Feb. 1 to 28, there will be 51 scheduled trains a day to transport visitors. International flights arrive at Seoul’s Incheon International Airport. From the United States, Korean Air has flights to Incheon from more than a half dozen cities, including New York, Washington D.C., San Francisco and Dallas. Asiana Airlines also has flights to Incheon from five United States cities including New York, Chicago and Seattle. Visitors have numerous hotel options in and around Pyeongchang. The local Olympic organizing committee has contracted special rates at 35 hotels in the area, for a total of more than 5,300 rooms. According to the committee’s accommodation newsletter, nightly rates average $265 for hotels in Pyeongchang and $90 in satellite cities. Beyond those hotels, the region has plenty of other resorts. In Pyeongchang, for example, the 214-room Holiday Inn Resort Alpensia Pyeongchang has nightly rates starting at $450 over the Olympic period, while the 419-room Holiday Inn Hotel & Suites Alpensia Pyeongchang has rates starting at $408. Rooms at either property can be reserved by calling 1-888-465-4329, or visiting the websites for each hotel.Another option in Pyeongchang is the 238-room InterContinental Alpensia Pyeongchang Resort; nightly rates during the Olympics start at $450. Reserve by calling 1-888-424-6835, or by visiting the hotel website.Residents of the host country typically get first crack at Olympic tickets, but at this point they are available to everyone. Before the start of the Games, unless you live in South Korea, you can purchase tickets from authorized ticket resellers, which vary by country. In the United States, residents can buy through CoSport and Jet Set Sports, which are also official sponsors of the United States Olympic team.Because of its long-running sponsorship deal, Visa is the only bank and credit card method accepted for all official Pyeongchang 2018 transactions. That includes ticket purchases through authorized resellers like CoSport, concession and souvenir purchases, and A.T.M. transactions at Olympic venues. You can hunt for bargain tickets on resale websites, but be careful of counterfeits. All official tickets carry a QR code and a hologram, along with the full name of the original buyer. Sites like Stubhub.com are generally safe to purchase from as they offer a money-back guarantee. For other websites, make sure you know what protections are in place before you buy.Tickets went on sale for South Korean residents last February, but roughly 80 percent of the 750,000 tickets allocated to South Koreans were still available at the end of October. Of the 320,000 tickets set aside for international fans, 57 percent had been sold. As of Jan. 15, 67.6 percent of all available tickets have sold, according to Pyeongchang 2018 organizers.Skiing events appear to be the most sought-after. Roughly 80 percent of the total tickets for Alpine skiing and cross-country skiing were sold as of late December, the most of any sport. Currently, individual tickets for various medal-round Alpine skiing events can be had for $150 to $200 per ticket through CoSport. Figure skating is always a premiere attraction, and this year short-track speedskating will also be in the spotlight. “South Korea is especially good at short-track speedskating, so expect that to be a hard one to get,” Victor Mather, a sports editor for The Times who will be on location for the Winter Games, said. Tickets for short-track speedskating are now sold out on CoSport. You should also consider lower-profile events that are fun to watch in person. Mr. Mather said the biathlon was surprisingly enjoyable during the 2014 Sochi Games, but you may want to steer clear of bobsled events. “Watching the sled streak by is kind of cool, maybe once or twice,” Mr. Mather said. “But it lasts only a fraction of a second. Standing in the cold for a very brief glimpse of speeding metal isn’t that great of a time.”Beyond individual tickets, CoSport had been selling package deals that combined events or included hotel accommodations and other perks, but most have sold out, according to the website.Athletes will compete in four new events this year: Big Air snowboarding, Mass Start speed skating, Mixed Doubles curling and an Alpine skiing team competition. Big Air is the latest addition to the increasingly popular snowboarding category, which added the Slopestyle event in 2014. As of mid-January, tickets were still available through CoSport for the women’s Big Air final on Feb. 23 for $211 each.Showcasing South Korea’s rich culture during the Olympics is a top priority for locals, according to Choi Moon-soon, the governor of Gangwon province and the co-president of the Pyeongchang Organizing Committee.Visitors can get a taste by heading to the Cultural Olympiad, held in the Pyeongchang Olympic Plaza. The events will feature two pavilions, one highlighting modern Korean culture, the other focusing on more traditional elements. Both pavilions will have plenty of art on display and feature live performances in a variety of art forms, including music and dance. Also, from Feb. 2 to Feb. 24, Gangwon Province’s tourism board is hosting a cultural festival at the Gangneung Art Center in Gangneung-si, a city about 45 minutes from Pyeongchang. The festival will showcase Korean music and dance in two to four performances a day. Korean singers and musicians will take part in performances that highlight international music and dance styles, including ballet, jazz, opera, pop music and modern dance. All shows are free to attend.Rani Cheema, a South Korea travel specialist at Tzell Travel Group, says Gangwon province is an undiscovered destination worth traveling to whether you’re headed to the Olympics or not. “It’s a paradise for active travelers,” she said. “In winter, there’s good skiing, snowboarding and trout fishing, and summer is prime for hiking and mountain climbing.”During the Olympics, she said, visitors can expect temperatures to drop below zero and advised bringing enough warm clothing. “It will be unbelievably cold in February,” she said.Skiers can hit the slopes at three popular resorts in Gangwon province: Yongpyong Ski Resort, Alpensia Ski Resort and Elysian Gangchon. For culture, Ms. Cheema suggested visiting her favorite Buddhist temples in the area: Naksansa, Woljeongsa and Sinheungsa. “Buddhist temples are a sight to see all year round, but during the winter, especially if the snow is falling, you’ll feel like you traveled back in time,” she said. Depending on where you stay, your hotel concierge can help plan additional excursions in the area.When it comes to cuisine, seafood is king. Ms. Cheema said that visiting the Jumunjin Fish Market, where vendors sell red snow crab, octopus and other seafood, is a must. Visitors can buy the catch they find most appealing and head to one of the many restaurants across the street from the market with their purchase. There, the restaurant will cook your seafood in traditional Korean style. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerA handful of practical tips to help make sure your next trip to the world’s most populous country is smooth sailing from start to finish.By Lucas PetersonChina is one of the world’s most exciting and rewarding places to visit, but can be intimidating even to experienced travelers, who might struggle with communication and lack of familiarity with rules and customs. Here’s a handful of practical tips to help make sure your trip to the world’s most populous country is smooth sailing from start to finish.The good news: Those annoying and expensive single-entry visas are a thing of the past. Americans can now apply for a 10-year, multiple-entry visa from the Chinese consulate. Download the form from the embassy website, type up the application and bring copies of your travel itinerary to your local consulate or embassy (depending on your location). Several days and a $140 fee later, you should be all set. There are also visa services that, for a fee, will take your application to the consulate for you. One other important note: Passport and visa expiration dates rarely line up exactly, creating situations where a passport might expire while a visa is still valid. I found myself in this exact situation before my last trip — would I have to go through the whole costly and time-consuming application process again? No — you are allowed to travel on a valid visa that’s in an expired passport as long as personal details like name and date of birth match up exactly (bring both passports). You’ll notice blue and green QR codes at nearly every business in China, from the glitziest boutique to the most humble dumpling shop. WeChat Pay and Alipay are gradually turning the Chinese economy cashless: Simply enter the amount you want to pay, scan the business’s QR code, and boom, you have paid directly from your bank account. It’s something of a revolution — one that you, as a tourist, will not be a part of.Cashless payment in China requires a Chinese bank card, which you can’t get unless you’re a citizen or resident. Don’t count on businesses accepting your foreign credit card, either — you’ll frequently find yourself out of luck. So load up on cash when you can — fortunately, I’ve never had trouble finding A.T.M.s in Chinese cities, and withdrawing from Chinese currency with my American debit card has been trouble-free. If you want to play it safe, you can exchange for some at your local bank before you go.While you probably won’t be participating in the cashless revolution, you will be able to use Didi Chuxing, the Chinese version of Uber (the company, in fact, purchased Uber’s operations in China in 2016, forcing them out). I found Didi to be inexpensive and as reliable as Uber is in the United States, with one caveat: paying by credit card. Didi wouldn’t accept my Chase card, but did accept one from my credit union. Then, unfortunately, my credit union repeatedly flagged the charges as suspicious, leading to several long phone conversations with the fraud department. While not foolproof, you can set a travel notification on the card you plan to use before you leave. You can also enroll in text notifications for fraudulent activity, which allow you to verify the veracity of charges right away.Speaking of phone conversations, I found the best way to cheaply make calls was through the WeChat app. A $9.99 credit (which comes with a $2.50 bonus), purchased within the app, lasts a long time. Calls to the United States are only a penny per minute, and the sound quality is decent. Texting on WeChat is easy, and I was also able to use iMessage without issue. WhatsApp is blocked in China.While you should always remain alert, China is remarkably safe for foreigners. In total, I’ve spent over a year in China, and have never felt in danger or threatened while walking around, no matter the hour. Chinese traffic, however, can be horrendous, and navigating streets as a pedestrian is always an adventure. Buckle up when in a vehicle, and be extremely careful when crossing the street: Cars do not necessarily yield to pedestrians, and motorcycles and scooters do not seem to yield to anything — not even red lights.While you won’t be able to buy a SIM card for your phone that includes a Chinese phone number, data plans with 4G speed are available for foreigners. Check at the airport (I bought one in a convenience store), or at the hostel or hotel where you’re staying, and be ready to show your passport.Wi-Fi is everywhere in China, from the pricey malls of Shanghai to modest mom-and-pop restaurants in the smaller cities. The bad news is that you won’t be able to access it some of the time, as it frequently requires you to enter a local phone number to receive a Wi-Fi access code. There are ways to circumvent this. Having a WeChat account will grant access to certain Wi-Fi networks. I also use a Google Voice number to receive internet access codes, which works part of the time. But wait — isn’t Google blocked in China? That brings us to …The Chinese government does a fairly thorough job censoring websites and traffic from sources it deems potentially unsavory or damaging to the ruling Communist Party. Say goodbye to Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, any Google-related services (including Gmail), and even (gasp!) The New York Times.There are, however, a few holes in the Great Firewall, as it is called. Virtual Private Networks, or VPNs, essentially function as tunnels under the aforementioned firewall, connecting to a private network in a country with more internet freedom, like the United States or Japan. (VPNs are a legal gray area in China. The unauthorized business or commercial use of VPNs in China is not legal, but tourists checking their email or Facebook are not likely to run into problems.) While it’s a fairly easy way for you — and almost every young Chinese person I interacted with — to connect with the outside world, VPNs do have limitations: They can slow traffic noticeably, and aren’t always reliable. There are a number of well-reviewed VPNs with names like Golden Frog and NordVPN — I opted for one called ExpressVPN, which costs $12.95 per month and offers a discount if you purchase a yearly subscription. I’d put my overall connection success rate between 85 and 90 percent. I also tried a free service called TunnelBear with slightly less consistent results. TunnelBear is free up to 500 megabytes of data per month — after that, you’ll have to pay. To get an idea of how long that will last you, loading The Times home page and clicking on an article consumed 6 megabytes.One obvious, but essential, tip: Download and set up your VPN before you leave for China. Once you’re there, you’ll be blocked from downloading any VPNs. If you’re like me, you’ve come to depend on Google Maps considerably during your travels. In China, you would be wise to rid yourself of that notion. Even with a VPN, Google Maps in China is filled with incomplete or sometimes just flat-out incorrect information. For example: There are no fewer than six subway lines currently operating in Chengdu. According to Google Maps, there are just two.I recommend downloading the app Tencent Maps for your trip. While it can be difficult to navigate for those who don’t read Chinese, it’s worth having for its accuracy. Moreover, it will sometimes recognize English words you input (“airport,” and names of some businesses, for example). It also does a great job plotting out directions. Just drop a pin (like you would in Google Maps) on a location in Tencent Maps, and it will give you accurate public transportation, driving, or walking directions. WeChat dominates the country and is used to keep in touch with friends, pay for meals in restaurants, get news and play games — it even serves as something of a dating app. Download it if you’re going to spend any significant amount of time in China, as you will need it to keep in touch with locals you meet along the way. Just don’t use the messaging feature to say anything you wouldn’t want the Chinese government to read — your privacy protections are nil (WeChat disputes the extent to which it stores and shares information with Chinese authorities).I’ve found Pleco to be a useful translation app — you can drop in English words, or paste in Chinese characters to receive their counterparts. And Dianping, the Chinese version of Yelp, is helpful for finding restaurants.You’ll notice plenty of well-maintained public restrooms in China, but they’re not always stocked with toilet paper. You would be wise to carry a small stash with you. This applies to napkins in restaurants as well — at smaller, more casual places, diners are expected to have their own supply on hand.  Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe country is a popular ecotourism destination for Americans — but the fatal crash of a charter flight has prompted inquiries about transportation alternatives.By Elaine GlusacAfter 10 American travelers and two local crew members died this week when a charter flight in Costa Rica crashed on a remote hillside, tourism operators are mourning the tragedy and assessing its impact on travel to one of the world’s most established ecotourism destinations.The Dec. 31 crash killed five members of the Steinberg family of Scarsdale, N.Y., and four members of the Weiss family from Belleair, Fla., as well as their tour guide, Amanda R. Geissler, who was working for the active travel company Backroads. The crash is still under investigation. The group was traveling aboard a single-engine turboprop plane charted from Costa Rica-based Nature Air from Punta Islita on the Pacific Coast to San Jose, the capital.“Backroads has been running active travel adventures in Costa Rica for more than 25 years. We are extremely heartbroken over this horrific loss of life and are working with the local authorities to understand the cause of the crash,” the company said in a statement.Costa Rica is home to four international airports and more than 130 public and private landing airstrips servicing charter flights, according to the Costa Rica Tourism Board, making flying a common way to get around. Since the accident, tour operators have been fielding inquiries from current and future travelers inquiring about alternative transportation options.“In the short term, the good news is anywhere you can fly to, you can drive to,” said Dan Austin, the president of Austin Adventures, an adventure travel company that is active in Costa Rica.Just the size of West Virginia, Costa Rica abounds in diversity from volcanoes and cloud forests to surfing beaches and rivers popular for white-water rafting. In 2016, some 2.9 million visitors traveled to Costa Rica, a 12.8 percent increase over 2015. Americans made up the largest sector at 1.2 million visitors, a 14.5 percent increase over the previous year.Natural beauty and biodiversity, proximity to the United States, nonstop flights and the propensity of workers in the tourism industry to speak English all helped generate that traffic, according to Denise May, a group sales specialist at Texas-based Rico Tours, a wholesale tour operator that specializes in Latin America. “Basically, you’re on the ground on the same day you leave home so you don’t lose a lot of time to travel,” she said.Although all-inclusive resorts have worked their way onto the beaches in Costa Rica in recent years, the bedrock of its allure is nature and ecotravel.“Its unique appeal is due to its remarkable mosaic of well-preserved habitats, plus a vast wealth of wildlife and easy opportunities to see them,” wrote Christopher P. Baker, the author of the guidebook “National Geographic Traveler Costa Rica,” in an email. “Given Costa Rica’s small size, it’s possible to visit several distinct ecosystems in one day. Cloud forest. Lowland rain forest. Coastal mangrove. Plus it helps that Costa Rica is renowned as a neutral country with no army and a high standard of living. It’s a very huggable country.”Costa Rica has been a leader in ecotourism, which exploded in the 1990s to become one of the country’s leading industries. The government established its first national park in 1971. Today the park system covers 70 preserves protecting over 3.2 million acres as tourism mushroomed as an economic driver in the country.Martha Honey, the executive director of the Center for Responsible Travel, a nonprofit organization advocating for sustainable travel, said the nascent ecotravel industry in Cuba is looking to Costa Rica as a model. “For a tiny little country, Costa Rica has an outsize influence in sustainable ecotourism globally,” she said.Costa Rica has also been embraced by travelers concerned about their carbon footprint. According to the tourism board, Costa Rica produces more than 90 percent of its electricity from renewable sources and 26 percent of its territory is protected natural land. A government program rates hotels, tour operators and rental car agencies based on their environmental standards.Although it is too soon to tell whether the accident will affect demand this year, it was certainly strong in 2017. Costa Rica is the top-selling destination for Austin Adventures, which is introducing a new glamping trip this year. Intrepid Travel, which recently opened a new operations base in the country said that business grew 21 percent last year in Central America, driven by demand for Costa Rica. This year, Access Trips plans to add a new culinary tour to Costa Rica.“Costa Rica is a steppingstone to perhaps more exotic destinations,” Mr. Austin said. “We see a progression. If you’re new to adventure travel you might start domestically in Yellowstone. You can look at it as a gateway drug. You have a great time then you go to Alaska. For your first international trip, Costa Rica is easy to get to, it’s got a great reputation, it’s safe and the Ticos, the locals, are extremely welcoming.” Many tour operators, including Wild Planet Adventures, eschew flights in Costa Rica in favor of ground travel. The trade-off is time. Abundant rain commonly causes potholes or muddy roads and distances that flights can cover in 30 minutes may take (a scenic) four or more hours to drive.“Once you’re out of San Jose, it’s beautiful,” Ms. May said. “There’s not a turn you’ll make that isn’t absolutely stunning. You drive through different climates from sea level up to the mountains and can see clouds in the cloud forest hanging low between the sky and the top of the mountains. If you’re adventurous, I think a car is the way to do it.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe comedian always brings an ostrich pillow, a Diptyque candle and duct tape (she explains).By Nell McShane WulfhartThe comedian Whitney Cummings is used to being on the road, starting back when she regularly visited 80 cities a year to perform stand-up comedy. Her book “I’m Fine … and Other Lies” was published in October. The film “The Female Brain,” which she wrote and directed, will be released on Feb. 9.Ms. Cummings has mastered the art of travel, from maintaining her skin care regimen on the plane to the ideal hotel sleep routine. She is a self-defined “psycho” about miles programs (she has “more miles than I’ll ever be able to use” and likes the JetBlue credit card because “their customer service is unbelievable”). And she’s learned to be unusually productive when she flies.“Being on the plane is my catch-up time,” she said. “I write thank-you notes. I read. I write stand-up jokes. For writing stand-up, I have to have a little bit of anger and frustration to be motivated to do it. Stand-up for me comes from kind of a hostile engine. And by the time I’ve done the airport and gone through PreCheck and fought with nine people and had luggage stub my toe, I’m ready to write.”She’s not shy when it comes to what she calls “owning her space” on the plane. “I’m in the television and movie business and I want to know what people are interested in, so I’ll slowly, creepily, walk down and look at everyone’s computer screen to see what they’re watching. If I hear someone laughing I’ll go back and see what they’re watching.”She’s also a self-appointed enforcer of good plane behavior. “If someone’s being too loud, I’m the person who’s like, ‘Can you keep it down a little bit?’ I’m that guy. I’m walking around, I’m the sheriff making sure everyone is in line. There’s nothing worse than someone watching a movie without their headphones on.” But she takes pity on new parents. “I used to complain about crying babies. But a friend with kids told me that your life is so much worse if you’re the one with the crying baby. So now if someone has a baby who won’t stop crying, I send them a drink.”Here’s what she takes on every trip.“I work out on planes. I put resistance bands around my knees and open and close my knees to kind of exercise my legs.”“It’s a micro-frequency thing. You have to put a little gel on it and it electrocutes your face and I do it on the plane. It’s a little machine that’s like a facial on the go. It kind of looks like a cellphone and if I’m too embarrassed I’ll talk into it so it looks like I’m on a conference call.”“I get little packets of Woolite and I do laundry at the end of the trip so I’m not coming back with dirty clothes, because that’s my nightmare. The night before I leave I’ll just put detergent in the bath and clean all my clothes, hang them in the shower, and come home to all clean clothes.”“It’s like a big headband full of beads and it blocks out noise and sound. If I’m sleeping on the plane it’s the only thing that works for me. It looks ridiculous — it’s not going to make you a bunch of friends or get you a husband — but it’s amazing.”“I have a problem with lights in the room. I can’t sleep if the TV has a red light or the AC has a green light. I bring a little bit of duct tape or Band-Aids and I stick them over all the lights in the room so it’s dark enough to sleep.”“I have this Tata Harper roll-on oil called Love Potion and I put it on before I go to bed in my home and on the road. I just put a little bit under my nose and go right to sleep.”“I take the travel-size rose-scented one. I really set up a romantic vibe for myself.”“I think it’s illegal that I travel with them but I don’t care. I take those before bed. I used to take Lunesta and Ambien and it was making me crazy — I’d wake up the next day and I’d have ravaged the minibar; I’d have an $80 bill. I’d send emails to ex-boyfriends. So I take the weed candies if I’m having trouble sleeping.”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byA blend of Old World Europe and 21st century style, Lisbon is worth a spot on your travel bucket list. Before you visit, check out our local guide to plan your trip, and pack these essentials. By Alan HenryLisbon has it all: world-class cuisine for the gastronomically inclined, ancient fortresses, art and architecture for the cultured traveler, and a vibrant local bar, music and night life scene for everyone in between. We have tips to help you explore everything Lisbon has to offer in our local guide. Before you go though, pack these essentials to make the most of your trip.We’ve shared packing essentials for any 36-hour trip in previous lists, so we talked to Ria Misra, an editor at Wirecutter, about some of the things you might want specifically for a trip to Lisbon, and her thoughts on the best products to fill those needs. Here are her picks.A good camera and a travel tripod. With gorgeous hilltop views and sweeping overlooks of both the city and the sea, you’ll want a great camera to capture the scene. The Olympus OM-D EM-10 Mark II delivers crisp, clear images, but also is compact enough that you can comfortably transport it around the city. A travel tripod will help you set up those shots (or just give yourself time to jump in-frame after setting a timer!)—but walking up Lisbon’s hilly terrain will make you glad to shed any unnecessary weight. The MeFoto Roadtrip Travel Tripod packs down comfortably small for easy carrying. Ms. Misra reminded us to secure that camera, too — especially before a hilly walk. The BlackRapid Sport Breathe was the most comfortable camera strap Wirecutter tested, and also leaves your camera easily accessible for quick snapshots while you walk around town. A sheddable, lightweight outer layer. With nighttime drinks in Lisbon’s gorgeous rooftop bars and cafes, and afternoon walks by the waterfront, you’ll want a layer that you can slip on easily when the wind off the water kicks up, but that disappears inconspicuously when you head into a local bar for a glass of port and today’s market specials. Outdoor Research’s Tantrum Hooded Jacket packs down tiny, but is easy and comfortable to layer over an outfit when you want to. A bag for all your souvenirs, and then some. If you pick up some of the cork souvenirs that the city is known for (over a third of the world’s cork forests are in Portugal) along the way, you’ll need a place to hold it — and Baggu’s Duck Bag is roomy and durable enough to give you a place to stash it (plus a few of your other essentials as you move around the city). This canvas bag has a long strap in addition to its handles, so you can sling it around your shoulder when wandering through museums and shops. An ebook reader. If you have one, you probably already take it with you everywhere, but stick with us here. An Amazon Kindle Paperwhite in your tote will keep you entertained through an afternoon coffee break at one of Lisbon’s world-class coffee bars (like Fábrica Coffee Roasters, for example) or just while people watching in the square. Both of those are activities we heartily recommend. Another virtue, though, is that you can also flip through a travel guide as you move around the city, without looking like you’re flipping through a travel guide — great for the tourist who wants to blend into the crowd. (Don’t forget to protect your Kindle with a cover — Wirecutter likes this one from Omoton — before you tuck it into your bag, too.)Sunglasses. Like any city on the sea, a pair of sunglasses is a must to protect your eyes from glare off the water and bright, direct sun. This pair of keyhole sunglasses from Kent Wang is polarized to protect your eyes, sprucely put together, and lightweight enough for me to wear comfortably all day long. Be prepared for an occasional turn of weather the other way, too, with a good, compact umbrella. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTrendingEven if you don’t know French, these two mobile apps and one theater-themed site give visitors a way to enjoy everything Paris has to offer.By Shivani VoraTravelers headed to a destination where they don’t know the language can often have a hard time feeling plugged into the local scene. Communicating with locals can be a challenge, and so can finding insider information like that off-the-beaten restaurant that serves the tastiest food in town. In Paris, at least, three new services are trying to break the language barrier so non-French speaking tourists can get the most out of their trip. Two act as concierges while a third offers theater translation. Insidr is a 4G smartphone and 24-hour concierge plus travel guide in one. You can rent one by the day, and it and works all over Europe. Unlimited calling and texting within France and to other countries in Europe is included in the rental cost while texting and calling to the United States and Canada is an additional three euros (about $3.70) a day. The phone is also equipped with Wi-Fi and works as a mobile hot spot to connect your other devices to the internet.But Insidr’s most appealing feature is the on-hand team of employees ready to help with restaurant and hotel reservations, on the spot translation, airport transfers and more, all accessible on the Insidr phone. Another draw is the included app, packed with guided walks around town, and the live messaging app that connects users with locals ready to share a list of their favorite spots in Paris.Travelers can reserve an Insidr phone online and pick it up at Paris Orly Airport or Charles de Gaulle Airport, or have it mailed to them anywhere in the city. The company was founded by Ben and Nina Forlani, a brother and sister team and Parisian natives. “We didn’t want tourists to Paris to feel like they weren’t getting an authentic perspective of the city because they didn’t know French,” Mr. Forlani said. Rental prices start at five euros a day, and Insidr concierges speak English, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Thai, Spanish, Russian and Portuguese.The City Helpline, a mobile app for Apple iPhones and devices running Google’s Android operating system, gives travelers access to a concierge, either via live messaging or by phone, who can help them with a variety of requests. The concierge, for example, can help them find the right bus and bus stop that will take them to the Louvre, recommend a guide who can give them a street art tour, connect them with a an English speaking babysitter and even share a list of restaurants that serve dishes suited to their gluten-free diet. Plus, they can also assist in emergencies such as if a traveler gets sick and needs to see a doctor. Right now, the concierge service is available Monday through Saturday from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. local time, but the company has plans to have 24-hour service before the end of the year. A subscription to use the app costs five euros a day. Concierges speak English, Mandarin, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian. Theatre in Paris translates French theater performances into English in 10 playhouses in Paris, including Theatre Mogador, currently showing French productions of “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer” and the musical “Grease,” and Theatre de Ranelagh, currently showing the play “Ruy Blas” by Victor Hugo, “Cyrano de Bergerac” and more. The company placed a projection screen above the stages in these theaters that displays an English translation of the words being spoken on the stage. Those who buy a ticket through Theatre in Paris are assigned seats that will give them the best vantage point of both the stage and the screen; they’re also met at the theater by a company employee who gives them a program in English. Tickets start at about 25 euros. Carl de Poncins, the app’s founder, said that he came up with the idea for the projection screens because he had an Australian roommate who loved theater but knew little French. “He never used to go to performances because he couldn’t understand what was going on,” he said. “Why should language get in the way of seeing the incredible theater Paris has?”AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported by36 HoursVictoria is known for natural beauty, but there’s more to see and explore. Before you go, follow our guide to plan your visit, and pack these essentials for your trip.By Alan HenryVictoria, British Columbia, is awash in the Pacific Northwest’s trademark natural beauty. It’s also home to a blend of First Nations, Chinese, British and uniquely Canadian cultural elements, all of which we teach you to explore in our local guide. Before you go though, pack these essentials to make the most of your trip.We’ve shared packing essentials for any 36-hour trip in previous lists, so we asked Suzanne Carmick, our travel columnist who wrote our guide to Victoria, to name a few items she was glad to have on her last visit — or wished she had packed.Then we turned to Ria Misra, an editor at Wirecutter, for the best products to fill those needs — and her expert suggestions for other things to pack to make the most of your trip. Here are their picks.Comfortable all-weather shoes, for rain or shine. Ms. Carmick suggests that, when you’re picking shoes to bring, remember that you’ll be walking all over town in weather that can be rainy one hour and dry the next. A sturdy pair of trail running shoes, like the Saucony Peregrine 7, will be comfortable and supportive, Ms. Misra says. Wirecutter’s testing showed that these shoes offered excellent traction in both wet and dry conditions, and were comfortable, too.Lightweight binoculars. They’ll come in handy when you’re trying to spot sea otters from the Breakwater. Ms. Misra recommends the Athlon Optics Midas ED, which have great optics, are easy to use, and (as the professional ornithologist who tested them for Wirecutter’s review learned) are durable enough to handle the jolts and bumps of travel. Compact, point-and-shoot camera. A very portable camera that still takes great shots is a must, says Ms. Carmick. The Panasonic LX10 takes vibrant shots, yet is still small enough to keep in your jacket pocket — plus it shoots 4K video, if you want the option of sharing a sharply-shot clip or two with friends back home. Picnic blanket. Whether you’re people-watching in the grass at Beacon Hill Park or stopping for lunch near the waterfront, turn it into a picnic and sprawl out in the grass and (hopefully) sun. The Nemo Victory Blanket has a flannel top so you can comfortably stretch out, but its waterproof under-layer means that even if the ground is damp, you don’t need to worry about it soaking through. And it bundles up neatly for easy carrying. Rain jacket. A bit of a no-brainer when you’re headed to the Pacific Northwest, but Ms. Carmick went out of her way to warn us. She suggests bringing a lightweight, packable jacket, and Wirecutter’s testing proved out the Patagonia’s Torrentshell Jacket, which you can stuff into its own pocket when you’re not wearing it. Sun protection. Victoria is often sunny too, though, and if you’re planning to go out on a sunny day to see Abkhazi Garden or stroll through Ross Bay Cemetery, you’ll be outside a lot. The Sunday Afternoons Ultra Adventure Hat uses a UPF 50+ fabric to shade your face and neck. It also has slits to hold your sunglasses, so bring a polarized pair, like these Gamma Rays. Don’t forget your sunscreen either.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPersonal JourneysAfter decades of living in New York City, discovering the many charms of a Manhattan neighborhood.By Robert SimonsonLive in one neighborhood in New York City long enough and other neighborhoods begin to feel like foreign countries. As with countries, there are some you want to visit and some you don’t. The Upper East Side has long been one of the lands I wanted to visit. But I’ve been a Brooklyn boy for more than 20 years, so trips to that far northerly region have not always been convenient. Recently, however, my girlfriend moved into an apartment on East 85th Street between Second and Third Avenues. Frequent trips up the Lexington Avenue line and, later, the new Second Avenue subway, followed. In short time, that neighborhood slowly began to reveal some of its secrets and charms, and a long interborough holiday of sorts commenced.The reader, at this point, may wonder why, of all New York neighborhoods, the Upper East Side held a fascination for me. A fair question. Despite all its museums, stately architecture and polished thoroughfares — or perhaps because of them — the Upper East Side’s reputation is as a stuffy, cushioned cloister of the wealthy and unadventurous. I can see that. But I can also see an area that has held on to its manners and personality while other locales — its neighbor across the park, the Upper West Side, say — have been pruned and vacuumed by the Big Bad Homogenization Machine, which sucks up bookstores and butchers and spits out Rite Aids and Chase banks. I’ve long nursed the pet theory that the Upper East Side has retained its old profile precisely because it is a redoubt of the well-heeled. The affluent are conservative and move slowly. They don’t like change and they are powerful enough to resist it. An example: A hundred yards from my partner’s new address, to my giddy delight, sat Schaller & Weber and Heidelberg Restaurant — side by side, the twin totems of what was once the mighty German-American stronghold of Yorkville. (When I mentioned to people that my girlfriend had moved to Yorkville, many asked “What’s that?” The name doesn’t enjoy the currency it once did.) I patronized the white-clad meat men at Schaller & Weber as often as I could, buying long wieners and thin, tiny Nurberger bratwurst; all manner of house-made pates; spaetzle, both fresh and dried; obscure German mustards; Black Forest ham; prepared goulash; and those little square Ice Cube chocolates that taste like, yes, chocolate ice cubes, and that you can only seem to find in German establishments. When in a hurry, I’d grab a landjäger, rip it open and gnaw on it on the way to the subway.Heidelberg, in contrast, isn’t the kind of place you can patronize often. Those titanic steins of beer and plate-sized weinerschnitzel will send you into a coma. A coma of deep satisfaction, but a coma still. The lunch service, however, I discovered, was an affordable and easygoing delight. Both the Reuben schnitzel sandwich (just what you think) and the Andy’s Special Sandwich (chicken or pork schnitzel on a French baguette with Swiss cheese, bacon, lettuce, mayo and sauerkraut) were surprisingly light. I was able to walk out of the restaurant rather than lie down on the floor.A few blocks away, on First Avenue and 87th Street, was Glaser’s Bake Shop, another relic of Teutonic Yorkville. The floor still testifies, in blue and white tile, that it was opened by John Glaser back in 1902. The store remains in the family. They’re known for their black and white cookies. But that is a local treat the appeal of which I have never and never will understand. So I went for the strudel and turnovers. I took care never to be in a hurry. The workers are as slow as molasses, making time, which seems to stand still at Glaser’s, move even more slowly. I didn’t mind that much. It’s good to slow down. (Glaser’s will bake its last black and white on July 1. The owners have decided to close up shop.)Once done with the Germans, I moved onto the Italians. My girlfriend lived just two blocks from Erminia, a local treasure about the size of a walk-in-closet I’d long wanted to visit. (I write about food and drink. That my interests lean heavily toward the consumable cannot be helped.) Erminia is not a place you eat at alone. The cozy, timbered room exists in a permanent state of imperishable romance. And, so, as a twosome, we went, and were tucked into a corner table in the back. Everyone looked like a regular, at home. Soon, we did, too. Ticking Erminia off my to-do list felt good. When my girlfriend asked if there were other items left on my Gotham bucket list, I paused. There weren’t many. Write an article for The New Yorker. See Billy Joel at Madison Square Garden. Get a table at Rao’s. Mission accepted. After some quick research, she learned from her sister, a longtime Upper East Side resident, that you can enjoy a drink at Rao’s small bar even if you don’t have one of those impossible-to-get reservations. This I did not know. A plan was born.The next Monday (actually, Halloween), we ventured into the Upper East Side’s northerly neighbor, East Harlem. At Rao’s bar, over bucket-size Manhattans served by a man in a T-shirt, we struck up a conversation with an older man who poured himself Campari and soda after Campari and soda. He said he drank it because it was low in alcohol and he could keep his head about him. Rum was what he really liked. This turned out to be one of the owners. I am not gregarious, but my girlfriend is and, somewhere between my second drink and a visit to the bathroom, she had charmed him and extracted an email address. We decamped to nearby Patsy’s Pizzeria, an 85-year-old institution where there was no wait for a table, and inhaled a pie in excited anticipation. Could it happen? Yes it could. Within a week, we had a reservation at the East Harlem icon. The meal was nothing but surprises. A red sauce joint with an outsize reputation usually means high prices and low quality. We got high quality and low prices. The waiter sat down and we all had a discussion about how we might stuff our faces. The lemon chicken, the meatballs, the orecchiette with sausage and broccoli rabe, the wine — all superb. We thanked the owner and told him we’d bring him some rum. He nodded absent-mindedly. Sure we would. There were similar evenings. The Upper East Side offers a wealth of old-school restaurants, many of them pocket-size, none of them in a hurry to innovate. Donohue’s Steak House on Lexington, the smallest and coziest restaurant to ever call itself a steak house; Le Veau d’Or, one of the last of Manhattan’s formal French restaurants; J.G. Melon, a corner building packed with regulars eating cheeseburgers and cottage-fried potatoes; Bemelmans Bar, inside the Hotel Carlyle, where snacks come in silver bowls and the patrons come with silver spoons. One night, starving at 10 p.m., we wandered into Elio’s on Second Avenue near 84th Street. We had passed by many times without curiosity; the place looked like central casting for a New York Restaurant. Turned out Elio was Elio Guaitolini, who worked at Elaine’s until he opened his own joint. Elio’s serves much the same elite clientele Elaine’s once did. I’m sure we had the most modest tax returns of anybody in the place, but we were treated well enough. The Martini I had, which the burly old bartender mixed by throwing it back and forth between two glasses, was unaccountably good. One Labor Day weekend, we checked in on the Frick Collection to make sure the Vermeers and Whistlers and Sargents were O.K. Reassured, we sat in the Garden Court and tried to imagine the building’s days as a private residence. I posted a picture on Instagram of a tuna fish sandwich I had eaten at the Lexington Candy Shop, an old soda fountain, earlier that day. (Hey: it was a good-looking sandwich.) A bartender who worked at the Bar Pleiades inside Cafe Boulud and who had been after me to stop by, commented, “You’re getting closer.” Bat signal received! An hour later, we were doing some posh day-drinking at Bar Pleiades. My cocktail featured “Chartreuse snow” and was crowned with juniper berries. If you want to drink more affordably on the Upper East Side, you can. Just walk away from the park and keep going. Everyday pubs and saloons begin to pop up after Lexington. “Wing Night” (35 cents a wing) at Rathbones, a Second Avenue mainstay for four decades, became a tradition on nights when we couldn’t afford the neighborhood’s other offerings. (That was often, to be honest. As a foreign country, the U.E.S. is Scandinavia, cost-wise) So did Ryan’s Daughter, which has been on East 85th since 1979, and where they scatter free bags of Utz chips along the bar top. More bars need to do this. By the end of 2017, my girlfriend had decided to move to Brooklyn. Before we left, one task remained. We hadn’t gotten that bottle of rum to the owner of Rao’s. On our final night on the Upper East Side, hooch in hand, we repaired to Rao’s. Drinking at the bar was a bartender I knew from Gallagher’s Steakhouse, making our reservation-free welcome a little smoother. Also at the bar was a barkeep from Bobby Van’s. All the steakhouse bartenders drink at Rao’s, it seems. The owner drifted into our orbit, Campari and soda in hand. We reminded him who we were, thanked him again for fitting us in, and handed him the promised booze, a bottle of Havana Club rum we had squirreled back from a trip to Cuba. His eyes flickered with dim recognition and he placed the rum aside, as if it was the tenth bottle he had been given that night. As we had before, we fell back on Patsy’s for sustenance and absorbed another pie. Still no wait. To our surprise (his, too) the bartender from Bobby Van’s was at a neighboring table. He sent over a piece of cheesecake. From there, we went to Brandy’s Piano Bar, a scruffy cabaret that ought to be in Greenwich Village, but that sits incongruously on East 84th Street. It’s the kind of place where the bartenders and servers sing and call out their liquor preferences. We bought the pianist a Jameson and a waitress a vodka, and listened to Berlin, Sondheim, Abba and Billy Joel. (Oh — I got those Joel tickets for Christmas.)The next day, the move commenced, and my uptown girl became a Brooklynite, just like me. The regular rides along the Q and 4 lines ended as abruptly as they had begun. In fact, that first week, I didn’t use the subway at all. The Upper East Side became a foreign country once again. But at least I’d been there. Nice place, if pricey. I’d like to visit again sometime. Robert Simonson’s most recent book is “3-Ingredient Cocktails: An Opinionated Guide to the Most Enduring Drinks in the Cocktail Canon.” He contributes regularly to the Travel section.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe 52 Places TravelerRichness is everywhere in the Colombian capital, from vivid street art to what may be the gaudiest restaurant you’ve ever seen. By Jada Yuan“So, where are you going in Colombia?” someone, usually Colombian, would ask me with anticipation. “Medellín? Cartagena?”“No, Bogotá.”“Just Bogotá?”“Just Bogotá.” “Are you sure? Can you change that?” One Bogotá resident even used an expression I had thought only popped up in awkward workshops in Spanish class: “¡Qué lástima!” (“What a shame!”) Bustling and built for governing, Colombia’s capital isn’t a colonial jewel of the Caribbean like Cartagena, or a hot spot like Medellín — Pablo Escobar’s former home base. Instead, Bogotanos seem to talk about their city the way the Milanese sometimes talk about Milan: as somewhere they love to live and work, but may hesitate to send an extranjero, or foreigner, to taste their country’s richness. Richness, though, is everywhere in Bogotá, from its street art depicting a history of conflict to the looming hills of protected parkland that line its eastern border. And it is an essential place to visit to understand the country. I’d come here because I’m on a yearlong trip to visit every destination on The Times’s 52 Places to Go in 2018 list, and Colombia is No. 2. Last summer, guerrillas from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) handed over their weapons to the government, ending decades of fighting. “It’s unprecedented how we can travel in the country now,” said Juan C. Rodriguez, an engineer and Facebook friend who offered to show me around. “I just took my family last year to Florencia, which used to be a major war hub, and the place that I live in, La Calera, 45 minutes from where we are; 25 years ago it was violently taken over by the FARC.” He later told me that the FARC had ambushed and murdered his cousin. Safety is still a concern. Armed guards with bomb- and drug-sniffing dogs are standard at most public parking garages. Regardless, I was enamored enough with what I saw to extend my stay from six to seven days. Here’s a starter kit on ways to experience beautiful, complicated Bogotá. If this is Colombia’s ugly stepchild, I can’t wait to see the rest. Before arriving in Bogotá, I heard two things: that I absolutely had to go to Andrés Carne de Res, and that it’s a rip-off and I’d be a walking cliché if I did. Both sides seemed to agree that it would likely be the gaudiest restaurant I’d ever see in my life — which, of course, meant I had to go. Glowing red hearts, Catholic iconography and wrought iron chandeliers with bulbs of every color make up just some of this mini-chain’s “more is more” décor. On weekdays, go to Andrés D.C. for steak and traditional fare. It’s named after Dante’s “The Divine Comedy”; has themed floors for Infierno, Tierra, Purgatorio and Cielo; and was minutes away from the Click Clack Hotel, where I stayed some nights in the chic, uptown neighborhood of El Chicó. In a nearby mall is a more mellow food court, La Plaza de Andrés, where a young Colombian data journalism professor, María Isabel Magaña, took me one evening to gorge on queso-filled arepas de choclo, chicharrones and mashed-and-fried plantain patacones — still surrounded by things like a lifesize plastic cow wearing sunglasses. The flagship, Carne de Res, is in Chía, north of the city center. It seats 2,100 people, with room for 4,000 on its wildest nights, and is absolutely worth a trip on weekends when it’s teeming with sweaty rumba dancers partying till 3 a.m. (For a rumba party that’s less of a trek, try Gaira Café, owned by the Colombian pop star and Shakira collaborator Carlos Vives.) Usaquén is a charming colonial town north of Bogotá that became part of the city in the 1950s, but still feels like a world apart. A shopping and dining district, it’s home to Colombia’s only W Hotel, as well as a Sunday flea market where indigenous merchants sell handcrafted bucket bags and skateboarding sneakers embroidered with traditional patterns. One can find similar wares in Bogotá’s old town, La Candelaria, but I felt more relaxed wandering around Usaquén. Don’t skip the food stands, which offer everything from five-layer cake to grilled ears of corn on a stick, dripping with butter and salt.Home to the world’s largest collection of pre-Hispanic gold artifacts, this museum offers free tours in English or Spanish. You’ll learn about the spiritual lives of Colombia’s indigenous tribes, who believed that gold contained the energy of the sun and assigned it no monetary value. I got, dare I say it, bored looking at all those static, shiny objects. But after talking to Mr. Rodriguez, I had a much better sense of the museum’s significance. “It’s the story of how the Spaniards came all the way through the jungle looking for El Dorado, a city of gold — and there was some truth to that — but they came for the money, and they destroyed these highly spiritually evolved people,” he said. “It’s a story of greed. That’s the story of how Bogotá became a Spanish town.” Cyclists here often seem as abundant as cars, streaming down equally abundant protected paths. Bogotá is credited as the first city to host a Ciclovía — and it still does, shutting down large swaths of street every Sunday for bikers, pedestrians and even acrobats. Itching to get on two wheels, I joined a three-hour ride that offered a fascinating look at the city through the eyes of our guide, Michael Steven Sánchez Navas, a graffiti artist and passionate enemy of inequality. He told us about Justin-Bieber-gate, when the Canadian singer tagged a wall under police protection just a few months after the police had shot and killed a popular graffiti artist — and inadvertently sparked a street artist uprising. He also briefed us on mistakes he’d thought had been made in the city, including the introduction of nonnative, invasive trees to the Cerros Orientales (Eastern Hills). “Our government decided that the pines and the eucalyptus make our city more fashionable,” he said. Some fruits in Colombian markets can be found elsewhere, but the freshness and variety here is unparalleled. Among my favorites were pitahaya amarilla, or yellow dragon fruit; granadilla, a relative of passion fruit; cherimoya, filled with white flesh wrapped around inedible black seeds; mangostino, a purple bulb containing sweet wedges that look like garlic; and uchuva, which look like orange cherries, grow in pods, and taste like heaven. Towering above all of them, though, is the lulo: tart and kiwi-like. It’s often chopped up and mixed with water, lime and sugar for a drink called a lulada that is so thick you have to eat it with a spoon. I dream about it daily. After three attempts to take a cable car up to Monserrate, a famous hilltop with a cathedral, and being stymied by weather or operating hours, I’d given up on getting an eagle-eye view of the city. Then Mr. Rodriguez showed me the lookouts on Via La Calera, north of the tourist sector. It was a stress-free way to understand Bogotá’s vastness. The invitation to this clandestine, monthly Mexican dinner came from a friend of a friend who’d married a Colombian and had moved to Bogotá from New York City. We followed instructions to gather in an apartment building lobby and then filed into a private library with a table set for 20. There, the chef Ximena Leal served us a home-cooked, four-course meal with unlimited margaritas for $32 a person. Best of all was the conversation, particularly from a clinical psychologist, Maria Meme Esguerra, who declared: “We won’t talk about politics and we won’t talk about religion, but we can talk about sex because that’s the one thing we can agree on.” While eating ajiaco (a thick stew of potato, chicken and corn) at La Puerta Falsa in the old town, I befriended a retired couple. They were headed to Teatro Colón for “Vive Zaperoco,” a musical about the cowboy culture of Colombia’s Llanos Orientales (Eastern Plains), and it turned out there were tickets available in the nosebleed section. The Spanish was too advanced for me, but the dancing was marvelous: rhythmic stomping and mating rituals between men in black cowboy outfits and women in colorful skirts that flared out to their waists when they twirled. When the audience stomped along with them, the whole floor shook, like an earthquake of appreciation for the arts. Memorize where you’re going on a map before you set off on an outing. Locals warned me against walking alone at night and pulling out my phone in public. When I got bold, at 11 a.m., and texted a friend from a food market, both the female purveyor at the fruit-salad counter where I was sitting and the gentleman dining next to me cautioned that I’d likely marked myself for robbery. He happened to be a taxi driver and got me to my next destination. At Hotel-Spa Casa de Lavim, where I stayed for $47 a night in the hip Chapinero district, the male staffers often walked with me on distances as short as between cabs and the front door. On the plus side, I got the sense that I could turn to anyone on the street and get an immediate helping hand. Jada Yuan will be traveling to every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.Previous dispatches:1: New Orleans2: Chattanooga, Tenn.3. Montgomery, Ala.4. Disney Springs, Fla.5. Trinidad and St. Lucia6. San Juan, P.R.7. Peninsula Papagayo, Costa Rica8. Kuélap, Peru Next dispatch: La Paz, BoliviaAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byUpdateAs the #MeToo movement gains momentum, tour operators and hotels are offering all-female excursions and programs that address gender equality.By Debra KaminThe #MeToo movement inspired women around the world to speak up about issues of gender equality and female equality. Now the tourism industry is focusing on empowerment, with new tours and programs designed specifically for women travelers.On March 8 — International Women’s Day 2018 — Exodus Travels, a London-based adventure tourism operator, launched a series of all-female departures to locations as diverse as Iran, Myanmar and the French Riviera. The guided tours, which range from eight days to just over two weeks, cost an average of $2,500 and will pair groups of 4 to 16 women with local female guides on high-adrenaline itineraries.“Travel is a male-dominated profession, so it’s very important to us that we hire female guides, which also helps educate the community in the places that we visit on the importance of females in the workplace,” said Robin Brooks, Exodus Travels’ marketing and public relations manager. “Women are feeling more empowered than ever and we wanted to be a part of that.”Intrepid Travel, an adventure travel operator focused on small-group itineraries, also chose International Women’s Day this year to respond to the #MeToo movement with its own line of female-only tours. The operator is launching three specialized itineraries for women only — to Morocco, Iran and Jordan — which promise to deliver a “sense of sisterhood” to travelers while they explore sites like the foothills of Azourki, Persepolis and the Dead Sea.[For more coverage of women and gender issues, subscribe to Gender Letter, a new newsletter, or follow @nytgender on Instagram.]Intrepid and Exodus are far from the first operators to offer gender-specific itineraries. AdventureWomen, a tour company catering specifically to women and entirely female-operated, has been around since 1982. WHOA — it stands for “Women High on Adventure” — opened its doors in 2013. But interest in men-free trips has spiked, with Exodus reporting a 300 percent increase in women on their tours over the past few years, and a jump from 55 percent women to 65 percent in the past 12 months alone. Intrepid saw the number of women booking trips through their company surge by 35 percent in just the first half of 2017.“It’s not just a man’s game anymore,” Ms. Brooks said. “Especially in today’s political climate, women are feeling more empowered than ever, so we wanted to be part of that.”Also on International Women’s Day this year, the longtime operator Trafalgar Tours introduced #SheGoes, a monthlong campaign meant to empower women through travel, inspired by the #MeToo movement and launched in partnership with “1,000 Places to See Before You Die” author, Patricia Schultz. The campaign highlights five Trafalgar itineraries that the company believes will build women’s confidence and inspire them to push their own limits, including India (“She Goes to Reflect”); national parks in the United States (“She Goes to Test Her Limits”) and the Costa Rican jungle (“She Goes to Escape”). While men are welcome to join women on these tours, each was designed specifically for women adventurers, and Trafalgar is offering a five percent discount (to both men and women) if they are booked before April 28 — within one month of International Women’s Day. An additional $50 voucher and a signed copy of Ms. Schultz’s book are also available to those who mention the #SheGoes campaign while booking. Other brands are realizing that campaigns launched ahead of the #MeToo movement now have renewed momentum. The W Hotels brand, which created “What She Said,” its platform for the discussion of gender equality in 2016, harnessed the energy of the #MeToo movement to launch an expanded campaign in 2018, starting with a Feb. 23 program at the W Hollywood featuring the writer and director Ava DuVernay.“The What She Said program was born out of this higher-level thinking about how do we really use the power of our brand to stand for things that we think are important,” said Anthony Ingham, the global brand leader for W Hotels. “We didn’t know it was going to become such a big issue. It was a drop in the ocean compared to the visibility that comes when something like the #MeToo movement takes off.”The most surprising offshoot of What She Said, said Mr. Ingham, was its embrace by properties in the Middle East — female empowerment is still a topic rarely spoken about in public. The W Dubai celebrated International Women’s Day on March 7 with a What She Said event focused on fitness and wellness, moderated by Ritu Upadhyay, the Middle East correspondent for Women’s Wear Daily, with a panel that included Raha Moharrak, the youngest Arab woman to conquer Mount Everest, and Engy El Shazly, an Egyptian ballerina who was the first in her country to dance on stage while wearing the hijab. The W Doha, the W Dubai and also the coming W Amman will all host their own What She Said events later this year.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byQ & AAs a child, the author was taken with the sunshine and beaches. He now spends every summer there because “nothing ever changes.”By Dave SeminaraFor 50 years, Paul Theroux’s addictive novels and brutally honest travel narratives have inspired readers to leave home, travel slow and with a purpose beyond sightseeing. His versatility and boundless curiosity shine in “Figures in a Landscape,” a new collection of essays (to be published on May 8), and in his latest autobiographical novel, “Mother Land” (which will be published in paperback on May 1), where Mr. Theroux takes readers to his beloved Cape Cod and deep inside the Machiavellian world of a large, dysfunctional family run by a scheming matriarch. It’s a deeply revealing and wickedly funny gem that may be the best book ever written about the interpersonal dynamics of a big family. Following are edited excerpts from a conversation with him. Why did you choose to set this novel on Cape Cod?The Cape is the scene of my childhood happiness. As a traveler, you look for conflicted or misunderstood or little known places — good places to write about. But the place that makes you happy as a child is one you return to — the blue remembered hills, the happy highways of the Housman poem. If you have the opportunity, you go back there to recapture that sense of serenity you had in your childhood. My childhood was late 40s, early 50s — a period when Cape Cod was small and simple. The cottage we rented didn’t have a refrigerator; there was an ice man who delivered blocks of ice for the chest. I remember the sunshine, the beaches, the smell of the salt marshes. I grew up in Medford [Massachusetts], but my parents moved to the Cape, and I always wanted to come back here. And so, as soon as I had some money, around 1975, when I was living in London, I bought a house on the Cape and I’ve spent every summer here since then.How closely does the family in this book resemble your own?It’s about 60 percent true to real events. Some of it is word for word real. I didn’t want to hurt anyone, but on the other hand, it’s my life, what else am I going to write about? Some of the things that have happened to me are too good not to write about. I really did have a child with my girlfriend that we put up for adoption and he really did come back into my life and is a wonderful addition to the family. That happened. We went to Puerto Rico in 1961 to have the baby, just as in the book. And there’s this business of my brother Alex writing this corrosive review of my work. My sisters did indeed sell books I’d given to them. We’re a fragmented family. I’m conversational with some of them, but not to others.Family conflicts aside, you described summer on the Cape as a fantasy of bliss, a place to lounge on hammocks, eat lobster and steamed clams, and enjoy the sound of the crickets. Is this your version of paradise?I wouldn’t spend the summer anywhere else. I never travel in the summer. From the end of May until the middle of September, I’m on the Cape. People ask me to go to writers’ conferences or go to Brazil or write about Greenland or wherever, and I say, “No. Get back to me around Columbus Day and maybe I’ll consider it.”Apart from the traffic, there’s no real downside here. There’s a height restriction on buildings, which is a great advantage. I live in Hawaii half the year, and there, there’s always a new building, a new road, a new business, a new tower block. Big hideous buildings blocking your view of the sea. When I come to the Cape nothing ever changes. Where I live, there’s no fast food — no McDonald’s, no Taco Bell, no KFC, just mom and pops and the Edward Hopper ambience. The protagonist of “Mother Land” occupies his mother’s cottage on the Cape during the high season and she has the audacity to charge him for his stay. Is having a cottage on the Cape a blessing or a curse?It’s a mixed blessing. People will want to visit you and stay there. I dislike the accumulated karma in hotel rooms, the much-used mattresses. In order to work, I like to have a place to call my own. As a writer, I don’t like to be interrupted or uprooted. I need to be in my own space.But when you have a family sharing a cottage, it’s a nightmare. Someone decides to buy a new sofa and everyone gets charged for it. The grandchildren use it and put stains on the ceiling. I came back to my place on Cape Cod once and there were footprints all over one wall. Anything shared is problematical, especially in a big family. This is why communism is a failure I suppose. Look at any big family and you’ll see why. Read my book and you’ll see why the Soviet Union broke up.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byPursuitsOne of the greatest concentrations of birds of prey in the world can be found among the towering rock formations and thick forests of Matobo National Park. By Joshua HammerJohn Brebner swept his binoculars over a fissure-ridden rock face that towered over a grove of acacia trees. Candy-colored striations of dolomite and quartz ran through the tan granite, and human figures painted by Khoisan Bushmen three millenniums ago were faintly visible on the facade. “There it is,” Mr. Brebner exclaimed, passing the binoculars to me. “Look through these and you will see the sticks quite clearly.” I moved the binoculars up and down the cliff, until I zeroed in on a horizontal crevice, speckled with bird droppings, called whitewash. Inside the opening was a striking sight: a huge, almost spherical bundle of twigs and branches, balanced on a precipice. “That’s a fairly new eagle nest, only six or seven years old,” Mr. Brebner told me. “There’s one in the park that’s been here for 38 years.”Mr. Brebner, a genial ex-cattle farmer whose grandfather settled in Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe, at the turn of the 20th century, was leading me through Matobo National Park, a 163-square-mile wilderness 20 miles south of Bulawayo. Formed some three billion years ago, when magma buried deep beneath the earth’s surface cooled and then eroded, Matobo is one of the world’s geological oddities: a vast field of granite domes, oval-shaped extrusions known as whalebacks, and blocks of broken granite called castle kopjes. Between the outcroppings lie swampy valleys, or vleis, fed by rainwater runoff and rich in acacias, mopanis, figs, euphorbias and other vegetation. This combination of towering rock formations, some of them hundreds of feet high, and thick forests has made Matobo an ornithologist’s paradise. Eagles, hawks and falcons — among the greatest concentration of birds of prey in the world — nest in tall trees or on rock ledges protected from baboons and other predators, and feed on both yellow spotted hyraxes and rock hyraxes, known locally as dassies. All told, the national park, which was created in 1926, partly from farmland bequeathed by Cecil John Rhodes, the founder of the British South African Company, which colonized Rhodesia, has more than 400 varieties of birds, ranging from southern ground hornbills to black storks to mocking cliff chats. In recent decades, thanks to the efforts of Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority — one of the few functioning institutions in this country — the park has also become a sanctuary for leopards, antelopes and a robust population of white and black rhinos.But it was the birds of prey that I had mainly come to see. Over the past six months I have been researching a book that deals in part with Jeffrey Lendrum, described by British police as one of the world’s most prolific wildlife thieves and smugglers. Raised in Bulawayo in the 1970s, at the height of the Rhodesian bush war that brought the guerrilla leader Robert Mugabe to power, Mr. Lendrum began climbing into Matobo’s hard-to-reach nests as a boy. He would later turn his agility and ornithological expertise to controversial ends, roaming from Tierra del Fuego to northern Quebec, and snatching the live eggs of wild falcons — reportedly on behalf of wealthy Arab falconry enthusiasts. (Mr. Lendrum was convicted of stealing eggs in Britain in 2010 and in Chile in 2015, and served time in prison, but insists he did it to save falcons that would otherwise have perished in the wild.) In the course of my reporting I have begun tracing Mr. Lendrum’s footsteps around the world, viewing the aeries of peregrines in the Rhondda Valley in Wales, and flying with a falcon in a hot-air balloon in Dubai. Now I had come to southern Africa see where his journey had begun.Mr. Brebner and his wife, Jen, another bird enthusiast, picked me up at my guest cottage in Bulawayo in their four-wheel-drive vehicle, and we headed down a two-lane tarmac road toward Matobo. It was just two weeks after the military coup that had unseated Mr. Mugabe after 37 years in power. “The roadblocks are gone now,” Mr. Brebner said, referring to the ubiquitous checkpoints that had appeared in the last two years of Mr. Mugabe’s rule. Desperate police officers, he explained, had extorted cash from drivers to replace their unpaid salaries. The co-coordinator for the last seven years of the African Black Eagle Survey, one of the world’s long-running ornithological studies, Mr. Brebner has spent hundreds of hours in Matobo, observing the mating, nesting and fledging of this coal-black raptor. Also known as Verreaux’s Eagle (Aquila verreauxii) after Jules Verreaux, a naturalist who collected specimens in the early 19th century for the French Academy of Sciences, the raptors start breeding at age 4 and can live to 35. Each female produces two eggs in a clutch, and, upon hatching, one chick invariably kills the other, a brutal act of self-preservation known as “Cain-and-Abelism,” documented by the Black Eagle Survey decades ago. Today, there are 30 pairs of black eagles in the park, Mr. Brebner said as we entered Matobo through the main gate and followed a dirt track through the bush. It was our mission this morning, he announced, to spot a pair. “During nesting season [June and July] the birds are everywhere,” Mr. Brebner said. “But now we’ll have to strain to see them.” We got out of the car and hiked up a grooved and lichen-blanketed rock face that turns into a channel for rainwater during the wet season. “This is a favorite spot for kids to slide on their bums,” Mr. Brebner said. The top offered a vantage point over the broken, boulder-strewn hills of Matobo. The granite rock face with the eagle nest in the crevice rose just in front of us. Before venturing into Matobo, I had been obliged to sign an agreement pledging not to offer detailed clues that would give away the locations of the nest sites. This precaution was a legacy of the Lendrum years, when the climber and his father were convicted of falsifying nest records to cover up their theft of hundreds of eggs for their private collection. (There were allegations at their trial that they were smuggling live eggs for profit to raptor enthusiasts in Britain, but these were never proven.) “You’re sworn to secrecy,” Mr. Brebner reminded me, gazing through the binoculars again at the giant sphere perched inside the fissure.We drove deeper into the park through acacia groves and rolling grassland, spotting baboons, klipspringers, reedbucks and warthogs along the road. The Brebners peered into the tops of trees and the cloud-dappled sky, trying to find birds of prey. “Jen’s got very good eyes, but mine are too old,” Mr. Brebner said. Moments later, Mrs. Brebner gestured excitedly. A gray bird with black-tipped wings, a yellow face and a sharp black beak soared overhead. “It’s a gymnogene — an African harrier hawk,” she said, delighted by our first sighting of the morning. The Brebners pointed out rock formations venerated by the Ndebele ethnic group: a towering cliff face called Mount Ififi, named after the Ndebele word for the lilac-breasted roller, a small bird whose colors resemble those of the cliff's quartz striations; the iconic Mother and Child, an impossibly balanced boulder tower said to look like a woman with a baby in her lap; and an intricate assemblage of granite blocks, resembling a chaise longue, known as Rhodes’s Armchair. As it happens, Cecil Rhodes’s grave lies within the boundaries of Matobo, atop a hill known as Malindidzimu, Ndebele for “place of benevolent spirits.” After Rhodes died in 1902 at his beachfront cottage in Muizenberg, near Cape Town, his body was placed in a lead-lined coffin to mask the odor of decay and, according to his wishes, transported by train and ox cart through Matabeleland to its final resting place. “They had to winch the ox cart up the last stretch,” said Mr. Brebner, as we stood at the summit, gazing at a bronze plaque, surrounded by rounded boulders, that marks Rhodes’s grave. Steps away lay another plaque marking the grave of Leander Starr Jameson, a South African political leader and Rhodes’s business partner, who led the famous Jameson Raid against Afrikaner forces in the Transvaal in 1896, a run up to the Boer War. Ndebele guerrillas hid out in these same hills during the Rhodesian bush war of the 1970s, joining insurgents from Mr. Mugabe’s Shona ethnic group to win independence for Zimbabwe in 1980. The Ndebele remains the dominant ethnic group around the park and throughout southern Zimbabwe. Descending from Malindidzimu, we continued our quest for the elusive black eagle. Down by the Maleme Reservoir, populated by crocodiles and hippos, we pulled to a stop beside a thorn tree, where the next best thing awaited us. Perched on a branch at eye level was one of the rarest raptors in this part of Africa: a crowned eagle, with a sharply hooked black beak, orange body and ruffled crown. “I think he’s an adult,” whispered Mr. Brebner, pointing out the bird’s massive black-feathered legs and fearsome talons. “He’s a powerful raptor,” he went on. “These birds have been known to take small children. It’s not common, but it’s happened.” We continued for another few miles, arriving at a tawny cliff, perhaps 200 feet high, riddled with ledges and crevices: ideal nesting territory. And then, with a shout, Mrs. Brebner gestured upward. Peering through binoculars, I quickly spotted two large, jet-black raptors soaring in tandem above the sheer granite wall: a mating pair of black eagles. “Do you see the white ‘V’ on their backs?” Mr. Brebner asked. “That means they’re mature — about 6 years old, I think. The bigger one is a female. You can only tell the difference by size.” I watched the yellow-beaked birds glide and alight on rock ledges, marveling at their sleek forms and effortless flight. It was such a sight that had captivated the young Jeffrey Lendrum 40 years ago. I realized though that the unusual career path he had followed had made him an enemy of conservationists and wildlife police around the globe. For a half an hour the Brebners and I followed the eagles on their hunt for hyraxes. Then we got back in our four-by-four and continued down the track, as the raptors dove behind the granite cliffs and disappeared from view.Joshua Hammer, a frequent contributor to the Travel section, is working on a book about the international falcon trade.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byQ & AThe prime minister’s granddaughter frequently accompanied him on vacations and now offers lectures about his life on tours of France and England.By Shivani VoraWinston Churchill has been a source of both admiration and criticism ever since he was elected as Britain’s prime minister in 1940, when the country was in the midst of World War 11. “Darkest Hour,” a nominee for best picture at this year’s Academy Awards tells the story of how Churchill helped Britain combat Nazi Germany and lead the nation to victory; the actor Gary Oldman won both a Golden Globe and an Oscar this year for his portrayal of the prime minister.Mr. Churchill’s granddaughter, Celia Sandys, has written five books on various aspects of her grandfather’s life and frequently accompanied him on his vacations. In a collaboration with the tour operator Tauck, she gives lectures about her grandfather on two of the company’s trips, a cruise along the Seine and a visit to London and Paris.Below are edited excerpts from a conversation with Ms. Sandys about the man she called “grandpapa.”What’s your opinion on how your grandfather is portrayed in “Darkest Hour”?Gary Oldman plays him incredibly well, and I think the movie balances his slightly ferocious side with the anguish he faced in inspiring England to win World War II. In many instances, the onscreen depictions of my grandfather make me wince because they’re not accurate. For example, he had a slight lisp, and in some films, that lisp is exaggerated. Some films also overdramatize his ferociousness.Perhaps more so than many other leaders, Mr. Churchill has been a continued source of fascination for so many people. Why do you think that is?World War II is a crucial part of world history, and he had a key role in the war. He became prime minister on May 10, 1940, when the war had already been going on for several months. It was a difficult moment for the country. The British Army was marooned on the beaches of Dunkirk, in France, and surrounded by Germans. My grandfather ordered a fleet of small boats to go across the Channel and pick up the soldiers. The Air Force flew overhead to help protect the boats.Incredibly, many of the soldiers survived, which was a huge boost to England’s morale because everyone thought that they would either die or be taken as prisoners. The success of Dunkirk gave my grandfather an incredible boost at the start of his premiership and increased his popularity on the international stage, where he still plays his part.How often did you travel with your grandfather and to what destinations? We took five trips together. He had nine other grandchildren, but they were either too young or had other commitments. I happened to be of the right age and available and feel very lucky that I had a lot of one-on-one time with him.Our first trip, in 1959, was a monthlong vacation on the Onassis yacht sailing around the Greek Islands. We were a group of a dozen, including my mother, Diana, and the opera singer Maria Callas, and her husband. Aristotle Onassis was our host. We visited Mykonos and Delos and many other islands and eventually ended up in Istanbul. During the cruise, my grandfather would sit on the boat’s deck and puff a cigar every day and take in the scenery.We also took several trips to Monte Carlo and stayed at the Hotel de Paris for several weeks at a time. Painting was his favorite pastime, and we used to go to the surrounding hills, where he painted the landscape, and we had fabulous picnic lunches.Is there one memory that stands out from your travels together?On one of our last trips, to Monte Carlo, which was in 1962, he fell down in his hotel room in the middle of the night and broke his hip. Everyone thought he was going to die, including him. The day after this happened, the Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, sent a plane to pick us up. He lay on a stretcher on the flight home. I held his hand the whole time and prayed that he would make it. He ended up living three more years, and we took another trip to France the following year.Did your grandfather have any travel rituals?Painting. He painted constantly when he was on the road and never traveled without his paints.What questions do Tauck guests most often ask you about your grandfather?Some people ask why I think he wasn’t put back in office for a second consecutive term as prime minister, but many also ask what sort of grandfather he was. I tell them that he was warm and affectionate. To us, he was grandpapa, not a famous person.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byEXPLORERTemples, floating markets, candlelight cruises, massages: you can create your own water-themed tour.By Patrick ScottThe boat ride on the Mae Klong River in central Thailand was billed as a firefly cruise, but there was no sign of the blinking bugs a half-hour into our nighttime ride. We were on a narrow, wooden craft in Samut Songkhram, a small province about an hour southwest of Bangkok with a dozen other tourists in pairs on wooden benches. The engine roared as we plowed through the glossy, black water. The only lights came from the balconied hotels and elevated pagodas on the shore, and from a temple with a startlingly large and hunched black Buddha, in a golden robe with glinting white eyes. Then, as we rounded a bend and the skipper cut the engine, we drifted toward a twinkling stand of trees, the spindly limbs seemingly strung with strands of white Christmas lights. The fireflies weren’t floating around, but were parked on the branches, flickering in unison. For the next 20 minutes, the boatman steered us from bank to bank, drifting past the silent light shows, the stars so bright it was hard to distinguish their twinkle from the luminescence of the insects.Thailand may be famous for its tropical isles and aquamarine seas, but select rivers and canals in the country’s core offer opportunities for some astonishing adventures as well. Several major rivers like the Chao Phraya and the Mae Klong course south into the Gulf of Thailand, with dozens of tributaries and canals connecting along the way. Perhaps because Thailand’s rivers are not as legendary as, say, the Nile in Egypt, where a significant sector of travel is built around tourist ships, there are only a few companies booking cruises with overnight cabins. Mostly the options are hourlong or half-day trips, so we put together our own tour. When my wife, Susan, and I arrived in Bangkok in January, I must admit that my uninformed image was that of a chaotic city rife with red-light districts. There are indeed some seedy strips and at times overwhelming traffic and crowds. But we found a well-organized, vast metropolis, with a calming Buddhist vibe. Snaking through this land of ornate temples with golden Buddhas, soaring condo towers and endless street markets, gleaming malls and moldy tenements, is one of Thailand’s most important waterways. Although people have lived along the Chao Phraya and its tributaries for centuries, the river powered Bangkok’s evolution from a small settlement in the 1400s, to the nation’s capital in 1782 and to one of Southeast Asia’s dominant economic centers today. Triple-hulled barges carrying everything from corn for breakfast cereal and cement for construction are a constant presence, led by straining tugboats. But with Thailand’s international tourism continuing to surge — rising nearly 60 percent in the past six years to 35.4 million visitors in 2017, more than a quarter from China — the barges are far outnumbered by more than 300 boats catering to tourists. Plowing through the wide, brownish-gray river from morning to night in central Bangkok are duck-billed ferries, jam-packed water buses, private tour boats and dinner cruise yachts. Slicing through it all are Thailand’s most ubiquitous and distinctive crafts—long-tail boats, like big canoes powered by diesel truck engines with protruding drive shafts tipped with propellers. We hired one at the pier of the Millennium Hilton, where our room on the 12th floor overlooked the river, and launched into a riotous ride, rising up in four-foot waves and slamming down. The motor screamed like a supersonic jet. The propeller blasted out a fan of white froth.The boats dock at the city’s most famous temples like Wat Pho, where we entered shoeless into a massive pavilion containing a 150-foot long reclining Buddha and a steady flow of shoulder-to-shoulder gawkers. On the passage along the golden figure’s backside, Thais filed by plinking coins into a row of metal bowls, creating a musical drizzle. When Tom Praisan returned to Bangkok a decade ago from Los Angeles, he wasn’t satisfied with the hurried and hectic long-tail rides. So he started Pandan Tour, offering full-day and three-hour canal cruises in Thonburi west of the river. Many of the canals, or khlongs, “were made since the ancient Khmer empire and we just took them over and built on the system, and it was the superhighway of the nation,” he said. “We build our houses on stilts to protect from the flood. We fish from the water. We use the water to grow rice. That’s just our way of life, to be close to the water.” We started on the calm and narrow Khlong Dan, the boat’s Toyota car engine emitting little noise or fumes. The banks were thick with banana and mango trees and towering coconut palms. We passed shack after wooden shack perched on the dark water. Their front porches were furnished with pedestaled shrines like dollhouses to keep ancestral spirits content, washing machines and gray cooking pots hung on faded brown boards, and families looking up from supper to smile and wave. Around a bend was a rare two-story house with two Mercedeses parked in a garage. A large monitor lizard flitting its tongue swam near the bank.We stopped at Wat Pak Nam, where Buddhist nuns chanted in a hall and we marveled at a green crystal pagoda several stories high. At the dock, a man and a boy tossed colored corn puffs into a mass of catfish so thick they were rolling on the surface. It’s taboo in Buddhism to kill, so the fish are safe at temples. “They tell their friends and family to come over,” Mr. Praisan said. On one of our nights in Bangkok, we caught a water bus on the river for 20 baht (about 64 cents) each to see where it took us. The floodlit hotels with sky bars and the sprawling Disneyesque Grand Palace gave way to darkness on the banks as we headed north. We didn’t realize that it was the day’s final run. The pier we were stranded on had an outdoor nail salon, street carts grilling squid and bagging rice and pork slices, and a barnlike building at the end. Inside, locals were shooting pool on a massive table and drinking whiskey (I lost several 20-baht bets on shots before we hailed an Uber for the half-hour drive back.) On another night, instead of choosing among the dinner cruises offering buffets and dancing, we went with Manohra Cruises’ restored rice barge with waiters serving three courses to two dozen candlelit diners. The food — especially the tom yum soup with shrimp and the mango sticky rice — did not disappoint, though the breeze cooled the entrees.There are several popular floating markets within a two-hour drive north and south of Bangkok. Decades ago they were essentially supermarkets for locals. Now they are carnivals for tourists, the show on the water supported by hundreds of vendors on planked docks and connecting streets. After our firefly cruise from the Amphawa Floating Market in Samut Songkhram, we shuffled through the throngs of international tourists past stalls loaded with T-shirts, coconuts, dried fish, Thai boxing shorts, fried quail eggs. We perched on concrete steps leading to three boats on the canal, where a woman grilled large prawns on a fire in a metal box in a boat and a man in the prow mixed papaya salad in a wooden bowl with a pestle. As we feasted on those and drank local Chang beer, Thai songs floated from a karaoke setup across the water. Long-tails growled slowly along, stuffed with tourists in orange life jackets. We stayed a mile upstream at a seven-room guesthouse tucked in the trees along a muddy bank. Simon Sriganta, a 28-year-old entrepreneur, built the River Jam with an open-air dining room and Singer sewing machine stands for tables. He opted for seclusion over a site on the broad Mae Klong. “It feels so relaxing when we sleep,” he said. “This size is O.K., you can see everything, you can look to the coconut tree.”He let us rent his car one day for the two-hour drive northwest to a section of the Mae Klong called River Kwai. Nearly 7,000 Allied prisoners of war who died during the construction of the Thailand-Burma railway in World War II are buried across the street from the town’s Death Railway Museum. As you walk the cemetery’s rows of bronze plaques you can almost hear the Colonel Bogey March whistled in the 1957 movie “Bridge on the River Kwai.” In fact, the tune pierces through the museum on a video with interviews of English veterans who survived tropical diseases, meager rations and the brutality of their Japanese captors. The museum has an impressive narrative of the railway covering the walls with facts like how P.O.W.s secreted details of their ordeal in coffins. Walking over the steel bridge, the forested hills in the distance, I imagined the prisoners on the structure as Allied bombers attacked in 1945, severing the span and clouding the water with blood.The bridge was rebuilt after the war, and now you can watch a regional train pass over from restaurants on floating docks, and notice that the engine on the tethered long-tail is Isuzu, the Japanese brand. Another train worth seeing is back in Samut Songkhram at the Maeklong Railway Market. Eight times a day, tourists with cameras and smartphones pack a railroad crossing that has a train depot on one side of the road and what looks like a permanent market on the other. Awnings and big umbrellas stretch 100 yards along the line, concealing the track. Underneath, visitors and merchants crowd tables loaded with tubs of silver fish, slabs of raw pork, and bushels of spices. Every couple of hours, the awnings are retracted, the metal tables are rolled back, and a giant locomotive crawls through, parting the souk like Moses at the Red Sea. The train cars passed by just inches from our bodies squeezed against the stalls. Then the awnings were tilted back down, the tables pushed forward and the crowds filled the rails. There’s no better way to end the journey than back on the water on what may be the only boat in Amphawa that offers a Thai foot massage. We stepped onto Hatthatara’s boat sinking into sturdy deck chairs with wide, cushioned seats and footrests. Those were the workbenches of the Thai masseuses who, equipped with bottles of coconut oil and years of experience, kneaded, poked, rapped and wrapped our feet and calves. After that, walking through the throngs never felt better. In Bangkok There are several water-bus lines designated by a colored flag on the stern. The orange flag boats are the best bet, stopping at most of the piers and costing only 15 baht.Long-tail boats cost from 1,000 to 2,000 baht an hour and stop at attractions like the Grand Palace, Wat Arun, Wat Pho and the Royal Barges museum.Pandan Tour offers several full-day canal rides for about 2,495 baht per person and a three-hour sunset cruise for 1,695 baht.Asian Oasis and Anantara Cruises run restored rice barges from Bangkok up the Chao Phraya River to Ayutthaya, the former capital that is a Unesco World Heritage Site with remnants of Buddhist temples dating back more than 600 years. Anantara Riverside Bangkok Resort also offers a Manohra Cruises dinner on a restored, antique teak boat in Bangkok for 2,500 baht per person, not including drinks.One of the best views of the city and the river is from the rooftop bars of the State Tower, where the prices are sky high, too. The Sky Bar’s Hangovertini, named after “The Hangover Part II,” shot in Thailand, costs about 750 baht. And a bottle of Perrier-Jouet blanc de blancs at Flute sells for 59,000 baht. In Samut SongkhramRiver Jam’s wood-planked rooms overlooking coconut palms on the Wat Julamanee canal cost about 1,500 baht a night, and a delicious dinner of green curry soup and minced chili pork costs about 300 baht. Hatthatara offers 90-minute Thai massage cruises for 350 baht, as well as foot and full-body massages on the Amphawa Floating Market dock. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byIf you’re headed to Budapest to enjoy world-class art, architecture, food, and thermal baths, don’t forget these essentials to make the most of your trip.By Alan HenryResting along the Danube, with the Hungarian Parliament Building on one bank and the Fisherman’s Bastion standing watch over the other, Budapest is a city of art, architecture, history, and of course, luxurious thermal baths. If you want to visit, you’ll need to prepare. Here’s what to bring. We’ve shared packing essentials for any 36-hour trip in previous lists, so I asked Evan Rail, our travel columnist who’s been to Budapest several times, to name a few items he thinks any tourist would be glad they packed.Then we turned to Ria Misra, an editor at Wirecutter, for the best products to fill those needs — and her expert suggestions for other things to pack to make the most of your trip. Here are their picks.Comfortable, Quality Sleep Mask. For the already jet-lagged traveler, Budapest’s late-night scene can be as much a challenge as a charm — especially since, as Mr. Rail notes, “hotel curtains rarely seem to be designed with the city’s night life in mind.” I can vouch for this, having once slept in a hotel room looking out at the Budapest Eye, which was always beautiful and quite colorful, but bright even at night. Bring a good sleep mask, like the Nidra Deep Rest. Ms. Misra offered a helpful reminder: Pack it in your carry-on for the flight so that you get some rest on the way. (For best results, combine it with a good pair of ear plugs and the Travelrest Ultimate Memory Foam Travel Pillow.) Swimsuit and Towel. For the thermal pools at the Rudas Baths, you’ll want your swimsuit and a quick-drying towel. The Packtowl Personal, collapses down into its own little pouch, has a loop for hanging between soaks, and is made of a fast-drying microfiber, so you won’t need to worry about pulling a sopping towel from the bottom of your pack at the end of the day. Lightweight Daypack. “Budapest is the kind of place where you can find wonderful souvenirs: storied antiques, Communist-era tchotchkes, and stuff from the city’s surprisingly cool contemporary design scene,” Mr. Rail said. A lightweight, durable daypack, like L.L.Bean’s Stowaway Day Pack — which you can stuff into its own pocket until you need it — will be incredibly useful. Sun Protection. “Even in the winter, the sunlight there can be startlingly bright, especially compared to grayer destinations in Central Europe,” Mr. Rail said. Bring sunscreen (and use it correctly!) and a pair of sunglasses, like these Kent Wangs. Pen and a Notebook. “In Budapest, plans change quickly,” Mr. Rail explained. “I’d recommend carrying a good pen and a small notebook so you can keep track of any recommendations you get, and where you can write things down in case the locals don’t understand your unique pronunciation of ‘Hármashatár-hegy.’” To keep all that info neatly together, Ms. Misra suggests a notebook that you can customize. You can fill the Traveler’s Notebook with inserts ranging from calendars to blank sheets to holders for loose cards or scraps. Tuck a reliable pen, like the Uni-ball Jetstream, into the notebook’s elastic closure before you set out.Collapsible Water Bottle and Lip Balm. “Budapest is a ton of fun, but when it’s warm it’s easy to get dehydrated,” Mr. Rail said, and I completely agree — Budapest can get hot, especially in the summer, and often humid during rainy seasons, which can make you sweat even more. Pack a collapsible water bottle, like the Platypus Meta Bottle, which can serve as cup, mug, or bottle. On the other hand, cooler seasons can kick up cold winds off the Danube, so bring a lip balm with sun protection. Ms. Misra recommends Wirecutter’s pick, Aquaphor Lip Protectant + Sunscreen. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe 52 Places TravelerPeninsula Papagayo is where the ultrarich go to avoid having to interact with the regular rich. But our 52 Places columnist finds a way to get away from the traps of luxury.By Jada YuanSome nights on Peninsula Papagayo, on the northern Pacific side of Costa Rica, the moon shone so bright, with so little evidence of human life, that I felt like an interloper just for bearing witness, for breathing through its stillness. Then I would remember how much it cost to be able to look at that moon from this particular part of the world and the poetry was quickly shattered. If this bio-diverse Central American country has branded itself as a playground for rich North Americans — 40 percent of its tourists come from the United States — then Peninsula Papagayo, in the Guanacaste Province, is where the ultrarich go to avoid having to interact with the regular rich. The 1,400-acre luxury resort area is in a tropical dry forest, 70 percent of which is conserved as open green space. Guard stations and miles of cliffside roads separate its dwellings from any public byway. Lady Gaga rang in the New Year there. A night in a basic room at the Four Seasons, which is part of a development group that controls most properties on the peninsula, would set me back more than my monthly New York City rent (around $1,445, with taxes and resort fees). A night at its most expensive estate home goes for $34,500 in peak season.As a traveler, I am deeply uncomfortable with frills. Our typical family vacation when I was growing up near Santa Fe, N.M., consisted of stuffing a black cargo van with camping gear and driving as far south across the Mexican border as we could before the van broke down. In this case, though, some frills couldn’t be avoided. I’m on assignment to visit every destination on The Times’s 52 Places to Go in 2018 list, and the entirely private, entirely exclusive Peninsula Papagayo — not to be confused with the plain old Papagayo region just to the south — came in at No. 20. Beyond the Four Seasons, one can stay in private condos (more expensive), properties managed by Exclusive Resorts (more expensive), and the Andaz, the “budget” option, where the cheapest room I could find for a single night came in at $735 (resort fee and tax included). Extreme beauty does come with those price tags. I checked in for my one-night stay at the Andaz in an open-air reception area perched on a cliff above the ocean. Soon, though, I began to feel trapped. A laundry mix-up left me without pants — long story — and after an hour of waiting for help from a bellman, to no avail, I was forced to wrap a towel around my waist and wrest new pants from the trunk of my car myself. (The laundry bill was $34 for five items.) Fellow cheap people: There is hope. I got three nights of terrific sleep gently rocking away on a $245-a-night yacht I’d found through some miracle of Airbnb, docked at Marina Papagayo. Low-key and just a 10-minute walk (and, weirdly, a 30-minute drive) from the Andaz, the marina has a dive bar called The Dive Bar and offers hotel rooms starting at $169 a night. (Laundry: $2 a load.) The yacht also had a surprise that became the best part of Costa Rica for me. I knew from my communications with the owner that a 21-year-old sailor named Álvaro Álvarez would be letting me onto the boat. I didn’t know that he’d speak no English and he’d be my roommate the whole time, sleeping on a pad on the floor of the upstairs helm. Confusion turned to delight as I came to rely on him for his funny observations of the area’s extreme wealth, for the way he’d shout out “Dime!” (“Tell me!”) whenever I’d call out his name. He told me about his life in the coastal city of Puntarenas, where he has a new wife and a 6-month-old son he adores. I told him why I was in Costa Rica, and he was eager to guide me as a kind of reporter’s assistant. With his help, I found out how to enter the peninsula through a dinner reservation at Poro Poro restaurant, run by Exclusive Resorts. (Marina employees told me they do the same thing with lunch reservations at the Four Seasons’ trio of restaurants.) A short beach hike from the marina allowed me to spend a whole day at one of the Andaz’s outdoor restaurants using its fast Wi-Fi. The only hitch was when I stayed after dark and had to ask the hotel staff to drive me back because the walk had become “muy peligroso” (very dangerous). “I went looking for you!” Mr. Álvarez scolded me that night. “The forest is full of snakes and jaguars and pumas and I was worried they ate you!” Every beach in Costa Rica is, by law, a public beach. But in two years of working in the marina, Mr. Álvarez told me he’d only seen the beaches on the Four Seasons property once — and the trek had been so arduous he didn’t think he’d ever do it again. One morning, we tried going to the best beach marina guests can get to, Playa Nacascolo, but that required an hour’s journey there and back on a Four Seasons shuttle. So when the Four Seasons got wind that I was on the peninsula and invited me to tour the property, I knew I had to take Mr. Álvarez with me. It’s a vast and arresting resort that is doing commendable conservation work (the new Papagayo Explorers Club is cataloging every species on the peninsula), and offers the best-paying work in Guanacaste. I just didn’t enjoy being surrounded by English speakers in a place where no locals could afford to live. The Costa Rica I’ll treasure is the one Mr. Álvarez and I visited on our road trips. One took us 45 minutes south to Playas del Coco, a populist beach filled with soccer-playing construction workers and fishermen just returning with their catch. On our way to another free beach, Playa Hermosa, Mr. Álvarez jumped a fence to gather green mangoes that he sliced up and served with lime and salt for dinner. (He also offered me Coca-Cola and Cup-o-Noodle soup from his own personal stash when it was clear he’d only brought enough for himself.) On my last day, we made an epic drive across the peninsula. He needed to go home to see his wife and child — he’d normally hitchhike, then take two multi-hour bus rides — and I needed his help navigating a civic festival in Guanacaste’s capital city, Liberia, in which everyone rides their horses through the streets, and then to a bar where they don’t have to dismount to grab a beer. Over many hours of language-challenged bonding, I learned that Mr. Álvarez dreams of seeing Texas someday and is afraid of bulls because one threw him into the air at a similar festival. Most of all, though, I got back to something I’d been missing over a month of solo travel: the joy of getting lost with someone whose company you enjoy. At every wrong turn, Mr. Álvarez would throw his hands up and say, “Aventura!” Maybe, I thought, with a bit of attitude adjustment I could keep the adventure going for the rest of the year. Renting a car is highly recommended for getting around Costa Rica. Be sure to have tons of runway on your credit card for the $1,500 mandatory deposit, plus the cost of the rental. (I saw an American couple have to walk away carless and spend their vacation on busses because they didn’t.) If your credit card provides rental insurance, you’ll still need to present a formal letter, in paper form, to the agency to avoid getting charged. Beware potholes and unexpected dirt roads. Always drive in the left lane on a highway to avoid hitting the many cows, pedestrians or cyclists on the right-side shoulder. When home, double check that the massive deposit has been removed. Jada Yuan will be traveling to every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.Previous dispatches:1: New Orleans2: Chattanooga, Tenn.3. Montgomery, Ala.4. Disney Springs, Fla. 5. Trinidad and St. Lucia6. San Juan, P.R.Next dispatch: Kuélap, Peru.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byChasing the DealSpring is the best time to plan a trip to Mexico, and you don’t have to empty your wallet to get there. Here are five great getaways at a variety of price points.By Shivani VoraIf you’re considering a getaway to Mexico, plan your trip before May to get the most for your money, according to Zachary Rabinor, founder and chief executive of Journey Mexico. “Mexico is coming off its peak tourist season, and hotels, tour operators and restaurants lower prices to bring in more business,” Mr. Rabinor said. Besides value, he said that travelers can expect still tolerable temperatures before the heat of summer sets in. So whether you’re interested in a sun and sand vacation, a culture-heavy trip or one that includes gastronomy, a spring trip to Mexico is possible without breaking the bank.Mayan Trail from G Adventures is an 11-day trip that begins in Playa del Carmen and ends with a few days in Guatemala. Travelers get guided tours of the ancient Mayan civilization Chichén Itzá, Mérida, the capital of the Yucatán State, and San Cristobal de Las Casas, known for its colonial architecture. Visitors also spend two nights in a jungle lodge inside Palenque National Park, where you can tour Mayan ruins, go on hikes and swim in the Roberto Barrios waterfalls. Packages are available on select dates before May, and include accommodations, guided tours and transfers. Prices start at $1,300 a person. Book online at gadventures.com.Trafalgar offers an eight-day Treasures of the Yucatán Trip, where guests get guided tours of Izamal, Merida, Campeche and Uxmal and also visit the Celestun Unesco Biosphere Reserve, where you’ll travel by small boats through lagoons and see a colony of pink flamingos. Departure dates close May 9, and the package includes accommodations, tours, hotel tips, airport transfers, daily breakfast and some lunches and dinners. Prices start at $1,595 a person. Book by calling Trafalgar directly at 866-513-1995, or by visiting their website.For travelers who want a quick urban escape, Intrepid Travel offers a four-day Mexico City Stopover. The package includes accommodations in the heart of Mexico City, two days of guided city tours and a day trip to the Teotihuacan pyramids, followed by lunch in a local family’s home. Prices start at $500 a person, and are available daily through May. Book by calling 800-970-7299. Cheap Caribbean offers a three-night beach getaway to Riviera Maya, which includes round-trip flights between Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport and Cancun International Airport, accommodations in a deluxe junior suite at the five-star Valentin Imperial Riviera Maya and all meals and drinks. Prices start at $769 a person., and are valid for travel before May 31. Book by calling 800-786-0435 or online at Cheap Caribbean.Luxury seekers can consider a weeklong private trip from Mr. Rabinor’s company, Journey Mexico, to Mexico City, Puebla and Oaxaca. It includes five-star accommodations, transportation and guides, some meals and drinks and sightseeing tours. Visitors enjoy a food tour and an after-hours tour of the Anthropology Museum in Mexico City, a guided tour of the Teotihuacan pyramids, a food tour and walking tour in Puebla, a walking tour and cooking class in Oaxaca and a tour of Monte Alban, a pre-Columbian archaeological site. Packages are available through May and start at $2,400 a person. Book by calling 800-513-1587 or emailing info@journeymexico.com. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byHistory, music, barbecue and beautiful public spaces await you in Memphis, Tenn. Before you go, pack these necessities to make the most of your stay. By Alan HenryWhether you’re planning a trip to Memphis, Tenn., for the National Civil Rights Museum’s commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King’s assassination; to take in musical history at Graceland; enjoy some of the country’s best barbecue; or all of the above, here’s what you’ll need. We’ve shared packing essentials for any 36-hour trip in previous lists, so when Elaine Glusac, our travel columnist, recently returned from Memphis, we asked her to share a few specific things she was glad she brought with her — or wished she had taken. Then we turned to Ria Misra, an editor at Wirecutter, for the best items to fill those needs — and her expert suggestions for other things to pack to make the most of your trip. Here are their picks.Collapsible travel tote. “I wish I had a magical bag like Hermione Granger in the Harry Potter stories to swallow up all the gear I need to travel with. Catching live music is a vital part of visiting Memphis and it’s hard to dance with a giant tote,” Ms. Glusac said. Since we can’t magic away the inconvenience of carrying a bag around, the next best thing is a convertible bag that’s flexible enough for different needs. Ms. Misra suggests the Patagonia Lightweight Travel Tote, which transforms into a backpack to carry a change of clothes and water bottle if you’ll be out all day, converts back into a tote for walking between shops and restaurants, and (while Ms. Misra notes that doesn’t come with a vanishing spell) it can be packed down into its own pocket when empty. Sun protection. “A hat with a bill to shade your face is essential,” noted Ms. Glusac. Wirecutter recommends the Tilley LTM6 Airflow Hat, which will protect both your neck and your face from the sun. It’s comfortable and stylish, too. Even with sun protection baked into the hat’s fabric, though, you’ll still want to apply a good sunscreen and use it correctly.Travel umbrella. We just mentioned sun protection, but keep in mind the weather can change quickly in Memphis. That means you’ll also want a small umbrella. This Lewis N. Clark Travel Umbrella is small and lightweight enough to tuck into a bag to protect you on days that rain, but not take up too much space on sunny days. Plus, if the wind kicks up, it’s sturdy enough to weather a sudden thunderstorm without buckling or breaking.Comfortable walking shoes. “Memphis is a fairly casual town and since you also need good walking shoes you can pull off comfort and style with some pumped-up kicks,” Ms. Glusac said. If you don’t already have a favorite, broken-in pair, Ms. Misra suggests the Mizuno Wave Rider 21 or the Brooks Ghost 10 for walking around town or for cycling in Shelby Farms Park.  A collapsible water bottle, like this Platypus Meta Bottle. It’s perfect for those hot Memphis days in the sun, whether you’re out shopping on South Main or checking out the museums. When you do get where you’re going and order a drink, the bottle collapses down to half its original size and is easily stored in your travel tote or daypack.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerCredit card points are generally more valuable than points or miles attached to a specific airline or hotel group. The reason? Flexibility.By Lucas PetersonThere’s no such thing as a free lunch, but investing in a credit card rewards program can land you pretty close to the mark. Credit card points are generally more valuable than points or miles attached to a specific airline or hotel group. The reason? Flexibility. With a trove of credit card points, you can get flights, hotel rooms or even cruises. While Capital One and Bank of America are coming into their own, the three major players in the travel rewards game are American Express, Chase and Citi. Here’s a basic rundown of their current programs.The basic points unit of currency for American Express is the Membership Rewards point. They can be redeemed for statement credits and used to buy things like gift cards, but you’re going to want to focus on one of two things to get the best bang for your point: booking travel through their portal or transferring points to partnered flight and hotel programs.One advantage of American Express is that there are more products with which to earn Membership Rewards points than Chase or Citi offer to earn their points. There are well over a dozen cards that earn M.R. points, compared to five Citi products that earn ThankYou points and six Chase cards that can earn or transfer to Ultimate Rewards points. Make sure you know what you’re getting before you apply for a specific card: The Amex EveryDay and Platinum cards, for example, earn Membership Rewards points. The Blue Cash Everyday card does not.How much points are worth is relative, but generally speaking, you should avoid redemption options that attach a value of less than a penny per point. That means while you certainly can redeem your points for Marriott or Walmart gift cards, you’ll be getting fewer than .7 cents per point, which is not optimal.You’ll get better value booking flights through American Express Travel, where roughly 50,000 points gets you a flight worth $500 (a penny a point). Redemption levels on hotel rooms tend to be lower, back in the .7 cents/point range. It’s worth noting that Business Platinum Card holders receive 35 percent of their points back when paying for economy flights with points on a selected airline — meaning that the same $500 ticket costs just 32,500 points.Dollar for dollar, the greatest value in redemption comes when you transfer points to flight partners like Etihad Airways, Singapore Airlines and ANA. It’s up to the individual traveler, though, to decide what he or she values most. If you like redeeming your points for splashy, once-in-a-lifetime experiences, like a luxurious trip from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City to Singapore Changi Airport in a private suite on Singapore Airlines, 240,000 points will get you that round-trip ticket (and all the lobster thermidor you can handle). At a cost of roughly $13,000 or $14,000, you’d be squeezing five or six cents out of each point — a very high value. But value is in the eye of the traveler — you may prefer to take that same number of points and use it for three round-trip flights in economy on that same Kennedy-Singapore route.The Chase Ultimate Rewards family of cards includes their two Sapphire cards (Sapphire Preferred and Sapphire Reserve), their Freedom and Freedom Unlimited cards, and their Ink Business Cash and Ink Business Preferred cards. Only the Ink Business Preferred and two Sapphire cards allow transfer to travel partners and a bonus when redeeming through the Chase Ultimate Rewards portal (they also don’t have foreign transaction fees).Many of the same principles as American Express apply to Chase: While you can redeem your points for things like gift cards or a statement credit (one cent per point) or purchases on Amazon (less than one cent per point), that’s not your best value proposition. Sapphire Preferred cardholders can redeem points toward travel at a value of 1.25 cents per point; Sapphire Reserve cardholders fare even better, getting 1.5 cents out of each point, or a 50 percent bonus. That means a $600 flight will cost you only 40,000 points — not bad.Amassing value becomes even easier when you use multiple cards in tandem for everyday purchases, like a Sapphire Reserve card with a Chase Freedom or Freedom Unlimited card. The Chase Freedom earns quintuple points (up to $1,500) on rotating quarterly categories that can include department stores, PayPal, and gas stations. The next part is a little tricky: Freedom cards are technically cash back cards that earn points redeemable at a penny each. But those points become much more powerful when you transfer them to a Sapphire or Business Preferred card (which is done easily on the Chase website), as you can then redeem them for a bonus in the travel portal and transfer them to travel partners.This quarter (April through June), for example, those categories include grocery stores. That means $100 worth of groceries earns you 500 points, or five percent back on your spending. But those points can be transferred to your Sapphire Reserve and redeemed for travel at a 50 percent bonus, meaning it’s an effective return rate of 7.5 percent. The Freedom Unlimited, which is uncapped and gives you a 1.5 percent return on all categories, can also transfer points to the Sapphire Reserve, earning that 50 percent bonus. This equates to a 2.25 percent return on all spending when you redeem for travel. The Citi Prestige is the centerpiece of the ThankYou Rewards suite of cards, and it has some fantastic perks: It has trip delay insurance benefits that are significantly better than those of its competitors, and offers a unique free fourth night hotel benefit that can pay for the card’s annual fee by itself. That means your fourth night of a consecutive four-night stay is completely free, from fleabag motels to the Four Seasons, provided you book through Citi. That’s the good news.Now, the not-so-good: Citi isn’t quite on the level of American Express and Chase when it comes to its transfer partners which, as we know, offer the best points redemption value. Whereas Chase has United and Southwest Airlines as points transfer partners, and American Express can claim Delta, Citi doesn’t claim a major American legacy carrier. Partners Avianca (Star Alliance) and Asia Miles (Cathay Pacific) can still offer good redemption values, but cardholders may find less value in partners like Garuda Indonesia and Malaysia Airlines, which don’t fly to North America. Finally, while Chase has four hotel transfer partners, including IHG and Hyatt, Citi has zero.As with American Express and Chase, I’d generally recommend forgoing the use of points to pay for purchases, merchandise and gift cards. Unless you’re putting tons of spend on your credit cards every month, the most efficient way to get points quickly is through sign-up bonuses — the Chase Sapphire Reserve, for example, currently offers a 50,000 point bonus (possibly higher if you apply in-branch) when you spend $4,000 in the first three months of having the account open. I monitor forums and travel blogs (Doctor of Credit is good) to see what offers are out there.A couple of things to keep in mind: Some cards have high annual fees — Chase Sapphire Reserve is $450, American Express Platinum is $550 — that only are offset if you manage to collect the bonus. Always make sure you can hit the target spend amount before signing up. Most importantly, I don’t recommend juggling a bunch of new credit cards to anyone who can’t pay their balance in full every month. The point is to make money, not give it back to the banks.I’m fastidious about avoiding interest and late fees, and don’t feel guilty canceling high annual fee cards once I’ve collected my bonus, thus I rarely hesitate to jump on a good sign-up offer. If the banks want to help pay for my next trip, at little or no cost to me, I’m all for it.Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTravelerAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byExplorerOn a father-daughter trip to see primates in Volcanoes National Park in Rwanda (strenuous hike required), it’s all about connection.By Shivani VoraEight of us, including my dad, clung to tangled vines to steady ourselves against the slippery undergrowth along a slope in Rwanda’s Volcanoes National Park. We were there to spot gorillas, and the forest was eerily quiet while we waited. Roger Amani, one of our guides, looked at us with a finger to his lips, reminding us that we couldn’t make a sound. If we did, we might scare the primates away.We scanned the thick vegetation of African redwood trees. We knew from our trackers that the family we had hiked three hours to see, the Agashyas, were in the vicinity.One of my fellow hikers, an older gentleman from Boston, looked at me and whispered, “You know that movie ‘Gorillas in the Mist’? I feel like we’re living it.” A few minutes later, there he was: the silverback Agashya, the head of the family, sleeping underneath a redwood and surrounded by a half-dozen gorillas. I grabbed my dad’s hand and squeezed it so hard that his skin turned deep red.This moment was why I had come to Rwanda.Rwanda was a father-daughter trip, the first my dad, Vikesh, and I had taken together. I had long wanted to track mountain gorillas, a critically endangered species that lives only in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Uganda and Rwanda, and my sights were set on Rwanda.My interest was driven by the country’s recent news about gorilla tourism: Last May the Rwanda Development Board, a government agency, doubled the price of a daily gorilla tracking permit to $1,500 to generate more revenue for gorilla conservation. The increase received international attention.A month later, Wilderness Safaris opened Bisate Lodge, a six-room sustainable property next to Volcanoes National Park. The lodge is the first luxury property in the heart of the gorilla-trekking area and the first in a line of high-end accommodations coming to the region — One & Only is scheduled to open a property in 2018 while the upscale safari brand Singita has one in the works for 2019.Dr. Dian Fossey, the American who spent close to 20 years studying Rwanda’s gorillas, was a motivation, too. She was murdered in 1985 — her death remains unsolved (“Gorillas in the Mist” is about her life). Dr. Fossey’s namesake nonprofit operates the Karisoke Research Center, dedicated to gorilla conservation and research (the exhibit there that details her work is worth a visit), and in 2017, the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International celebrated its 50th anniversary.With so much happening in Rwanda around the gorillas, how could I not go? I wanted a companion for the trip and, much to my surprise, my dad, a retired human resources consultant, volunteered. We weren’t especially close. In following the traditional way of fatherhood in India, where I lived as a child, he had taken a hands-off approach to my upbringing. And yet, here I was, at 39, off with him for a week to the country Rwandans call “a land of a thousand hills.” Most trips to Rwanda begin in Kigali, the country’s capital. We spent two nights there seeing sights like the Kigali Genocide Memorial Center and the NIYO Art Gallery, which shows works by contemporary Rwandan artists. Midmorning on our third day, our driver, Amos Tega, drove us two hours northwest toward Volcanoes National Park, home to five of the eight volcanoes in the thickly forested Virunga Mountains — Karisimbi, Bisoke, Muhabura, Gahinga and Sabyinyo.Our plan was to spend two nights at Bisate Lodge followed by two more at Virunga Lodge, a 10-room property that opened in 2004.Bisate was spectacular. Built near an eroded volcanic cone, the lodge has dramatic views of the park’s volcanoes and is surrounded by a village with the same name. Wilderness Safaris is reforesting the 103-acre concession in which the property is situated and hopes to plant 10,000 trees a year for the next several years. Guests can get involved — Bisate’s agronomist, Jean-Moise, who is in charge of the reforestation effort, helps them plant a sapling of an indigenous tree such as the African redwood. (Those who participate get the GPS coordinates of their tree so that they can track it from home.)That afternoon, we went on an hourlong walk through the property’s nature trail, where we spotted at least six species of birds, including the yellow-bellied waxbill and the olive woodpecker. The terrain was relatively flat, and we chatted as we strolled. I was going through a rough patch at home, and it was a relief to be away from the stress. I shared this thought with Dad, and he replied that he understood. “We all need a break from our lives,” he said. Such open conversation might be the norm between many fathers and daughters, but for my dad and I, it was a first. In the evening, we had pre-dinner drinks by the fireside and then it was onto a delicious dinner. Our server presented us with different menus, each customized for our dietary restrictions — I have celiac disease so anything with gluten is off limits, and Dad is allergic to dairy. The care the staff took with our meals was remarkable. I ate a simple mixed salad composed of leaves grown in the property’s gardens, beef kebabs and local roasted sweet potatoes, and meringues and creamy milk chocolate from a chocolatier in the nearby city of Musanze. Dad had a dairy-free risotto, roasted chicken, dairy-free vanilla ice cream and spongecake. Bisate’s rates include all meals and drinks so we could eat and imbibe as much as we wanted.That night, we slept in twin beds, but before drifting off, we discussed our excitement about the day to come. Dad said that he was looking forward to the day, but confessed that he was slightly nervous. “What if I won’t be able to keep up with the trek?” he asked. He was 65 and exercises regularly. I wasn’t worried.We awoke at 5:30 a.m. and ate a hearty breakfast before heading to Volcanoes National Park headquarters to make the 7 a.m. gorilla-tracking meeting time. The 40,000-acre national park, established in 1925, is Africa’s oldest. Prosper Uwingeli, the chief park warden, told me that it is home to 305 mountain gorillas; there are around 880 of these primates left in the world today — the rest live in parks in Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo.In Rwanda, the $1,500 permit per person to track gorillas allows for an hour’s interaction with the animals. These permits should be purchased well in advance — 96 are available each day, and they sell out, particularly during peak season from June through September.Mr. Uwingeli said that hikers are permitted to track 12 of the 20 gorilla families that inhabit Volcanoes; hikers are divided into groups, limited to eight people, and each group tracks one family. The families live in different areas, and the hikes range from two to eight hours. Hiking groups are classified as easy, medium and difficult, and Mr. Uwingeli told me we could request the level. Always game for a workout, I was keen on a difficult hike. Dad asked for the easy one. We compromised with medium.At the park headquarters, we met our guides, Mr. Amani and Oliver Mutuyimana, and the six other hikers in our group. Mr. Mutuyimana said that we would be tracking the Agashya family, which lives between Mount Sabyinyo and Mount Gahinga. “The family has more than two dozen members, making it one of the largest in the park,” he said. He explained that the clan was initially led by a silverback called Nyakarima and had 13 members, but that Agashya had challenged and deposed him in 2003.Once we were informed of gorilla don’ts — not touching them or making eye contact was especially important — it was time to go. Our warm-up was a 30-minute walk through flat maize fields to the park’s entrance. From there, we were in the wild. I have hiked all over the world, but this was different because there were no paved trails. All we could see was dense forest, and at many points, Mr. Amani and Mr. Mutuyimana used machetes to clear a semblance of a path. The vegetation zones in Volcanoes change depending on the altitude, and the varying topography — an intermingling of lush green, massive redwoods, slender mountain bamboo trees, red mud underfoot and streams — made the hike all the more scenic.We followed our guides through the bamboo trees that grow at the park’s lowest and highest elevations. A tracker with a rifle — in case we encountered forest buffalo or other dangerous wildlife — walked ahead.It was November, Rwanda’s rainy season, and the ground was muddy. We climbed over uneven rocks, looking for secure spots to place our feet; at an elevation of around 9,000 feet, we hit a vegetation zone replete with African redwoods — glorious with their twisted trunks and emerald green, feathery leaves. Some of our fellow hikers were out of breath from the exercise and ever thinner air, but we were holding up.An hour later, Mr. Mutuyimana received a message on his radio from another tracker that the Agashyas were about 20 minutes away. We scrambled over stinging nettle plants that poked through our clothing, and clutched tree trunks to keep going forward. A few times, Dad and I supported each other by holding hands. And then we saw Agashya sleeping, encircled by some members of his clan.Up a slight slope, we could see two gorillas poking their heads above the nettles. “The gorillas won’t move until Agashya wakes up,” Mr. Amani said. “We have to wait.” Ten minutes later, Agashya arose, and we took in his enormity — Mr. Uwingeli said that like most silverbacks, he was around six feet tall and weighed between 400 and 500 pounds. I was struck by his face: humanlike, kind. In that moment, I understood what Dr. Fossey meant when she spoke about her first encounter with gorillas: “Immediately I was struck by the physical magnificence of the huge jet-black bodies blended against the green palette wash of the thick forest foliage.”Our group followed Agashya up a slope to a flat area. Here, just 20 feet from us, two groups of females playfully hit each other, grunting. Two young ones rolled on the forest’s floor. Above, another baby swung from a bamboo tree, and several others stomped over scattered leaves, softly hooting. They were a spirited, tight-knit bunch, and I was again reminded of Dr. Fossey, who said, “You take these fine, regal animals. How many fathers have the same sense of paternity? How many human mothers are more caring? The family structure is unbelievably strong.”I alternated between observing in awe and desperately trying to take pictures on my phone. At one point, a young gorilla got so close that he brushed against my father’s leg. And then Agashya, who Mr. Amani had said likes to exert his power, pounded his chest again and again. I felt no fear. Triggered by a deep recognition of our proximity on the evolutionary tree, I simply felt warmth and affection.By the time we walked back through the forest, five hours had passed; scrapes from the nettles and a few bruises from a minor fall or two were evidence of the adventure.The pampering in store for us at Bisate was a welcome way to end the day: massages and a meal of vegetable tarts, fried lake tilapia fillets and chocolate mousse cake, all dairy- and gluten-free. And there was free-flowing wine and scotch. “I think, Dad,” I said, as we unwound over our drinks, “today is going to be one of those days that we look back on and can’t believe that we actually lived.” We continued to talk about the paths our lives had taken. He shared some regrets and a few of the lessons he had learned along the way. I was certain that we had talked more these past few days than we had over the course of my lifetime.Itineraries to Rwanda tend to include only a two-night stay in the Volcanoes National Park region. Travelers do one gorilla trek and leave. But there is plenty more to appreciate.Dad and I moved on to Virunga Lodge, where we would spend another two nights. I had met Virunga’s owner, Praveen Moman, a few months earlier, when he visited New York, and he had said that a walk to Sunzu village from the lodge to watch Rwandese women cook traditional food like beef stew with steamed cassava was a must. We were also keen on doing the steep two-hour climb to Dr. Fossey’s tomb in Volcanoes National Park, next to the original Karisoke Research Center.But then I was hit with a stomach virus that left me nearly incapacitated. After I found myself on the stone bathroom floor, I called out to my father, who rushed in and carried me to bed. (We would both laugh a few days later when he remarked that he hadn’t picked me up me since I was a young child.)We did not make it to the village or the tomb, but with antibiotics I was soon well enough to make our trek to see the park’s golden monkeys. They’re also an endangered species, and while around 22,000 people a year track the gorillas, Mr. Uwingeli said that just 5,000 track the monkeys. A permit costs $100, and the hike, limited to the low-lying bamboo forest, doesn’t require the stamina of a gorilla trek.Travelers shouldn’t miss the chance to see the photogenic apes with their round faces, long tails and thick, reddish-gold furs. Three families, with a total of around 80 monkeys, live in the forest. Although the groups to find them can reach up to 20 people, we had just six others in ours.We spotted our family a half-hour into our fast-paced walk. Although there was no restriction on how close we could get to the primates, they wouldn’t stay still. They jumped from tree to tree and swung on branches. Occasionally, we were lucky enough to glimpse their faces. We didn’t have to cling to vines to see them, and it wasn’t as dramatic as our encounter with Agashya. But it was a delightful coda.It’s advisable to book a trip to the Volcanoes National Park area through a tour operator that specializes in Rwanda. An operator can arrange accommodations, tours and transfers and secure permits to track gorillas and golden monkeys. We used Travel Beyond, based in Wayzata, Minn., and our agent was Jenny Mikkelson, who is an expert on Africa, including Rwanda. jennym@travelbeyond.com or 800-823-6063.Travelers can also apply for gorilla and golden monkey permits through the Rwanda Development Board by emailing reservation@rwandatourism.com. Gorilla permits cost $1,500 a day; golden monkey permits are $100 a day.Where to StayBisate Lodge Located a 30-minute drive from Volcanoes National Park headquarters, the meeting point for all park activities, including gorilla hikes, this sustainable property has six rooms. A stay can only be booked through a tour operator or travel agent. Nightly rates begin at $2,300 for two people, inclusive of meals, alcohol and several activities like bird-watching walks.Virunga Lodge A 45-minute drive from Volcanoes National Park headquarters, this 10-room property is built on a ridge and has spectacular views of the Virunga volcanoes. Nightly rates begin at $1,000 for two people, inclusive of meals, alcohol and several activities, such as a guided visit to the local village. Book by emailing virunga@volcanoessafaris.com. AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe 52 Places TravelerThe pre-Incan ruins of Kuélap share similarities with their more famous cousin. But getting there can be a herculean effort.By Jada YuanI was standing in a cloud forest in northern Peru, 10,000 feet above sea level. Quiet cloaked the more than 400 cylindrical homes and ceremonial buildings that make up the most important settlement of the Chachapoyas, or “Cloud Warrior” culture. Farther out were limestone walls up to 65 feet high. Tropical greenery sprang through cracks in the stone, while red bromeliads clung to moss-covered trees. In every direction was a backdrop of patchwork farmland clinging to the sides of mountains, above the Utcubamba River Valley. This visit to the pre-Incan ruins of Kuélap was the first time on my yearlong trek through every destination on the 52 Places to Go in 2018 list that I’d had company — two female colleagues from New York. And for several hours wandering through those ruins in the mist, we barely spoke. None of us cared that we were drenched in rain that hadn’t stopped since our arrival. “I think I like this better than Machu Picchu. Way better,” said one of my companions. Part of me worries about ruining a good thing by recounting that. There are indeed some parallels. Both sites were homes to ancient civilizations and both are high in the Andean mountains of the same verdant, dramatically craggy country. But despite Kuélap, which The Times had named No. 29 on the list, sometimes being referred to as “the Machu Picchu of the North,” it had 60,000 visitors last year, up from 30,000 in 2009. Machu Picchu had a record 1.4 million in 2016, and has had to restrict its entrance policies. Think of Kuélap as a similar kind of spiritual space, minus the lines and the aggressive souvenir hawkers. That said, don’t skip one of the New Seven Wonders of the World just to be different or to deal with smaller crowds. Kuélap may be best appreciated on a second Peruvian visit; getting there can be a herculean effort and signage is so minimal you’ll need a guide to understand what you’re looking at. Archaeologists have explored only 20 percent, if not less, of the site — and tourism here didn’t begin in earnest until around 2012. Getting there can be a bit of a slog. Budget travelers typically make their way to the city of Chiclayo, on the country’s northwestern coast, and then take a 10-hour overnight bus through the mountains. Low on time and worried about bus robberies we had been warned about, we instead flew into the jungle town of Jaén, where the airport recently started receiving one LATAM flight from Lima per day. From there, we still had a three-and-a-half-hour car ride through the Andes to our year-old hotel, Casa Hacienda Achamaqui, a colonial villa nestled in a river valley, with wooden balconies and red brick walkways built for contemplative strolls. Another 50-minute car ride on a mostly unpaved road got us to the tiny town of Nuevo Tingo, where a cable car to the base of Kuélap opened in 2017. It took us 20 vertigo-inducing minutes to go two and a half miles across multiple ravines, a distance that used to require a two-hour drive or a four-hour hike. From there — from there! — we had a 15-minute horseback ride up a muddy mountain path to the ruins themselves. The indigenous woman who was guiding my horse tackled the mud barefoot. When I asked her if my horse was feeling O.K., she laughed and responded, “He doesn’t talk! He’s a horse!” Outside the walls, locals had set up booths selling grilled plantains filled with cheese. Inside, we spotted one of three llamas, which our guide, Michel Richard Feijóo Aguilar, told us had been brought in around five years ago for the sake of tourists. He pointed out diamond-shaped stone patterns that he said represented the eyes of sacred animals such as jaguars, serpents and condors, and showed us how to spot human bones placed in the walls of homes. “The Chachapoyas liked to share their spaces with their ancestors,” he said. The most important discovery among those bones has been evidence that the Chachapoyas performed trepanation, a form of brain surgery that involved drilling into the skull to relieve pressure after warriors received bangs to their heads. Archaeologists believe Kuélap was populated from 500 to 1570. The Chachapoyas survived an Inca occupation in the late 1400s, but abandoned the settlement after the Spanish Viceroy Francisco Álvarez de Toledo introduced an evangelical program that forced the displacement of indigenous populations from their native communities and into colonial towns. The site has remained largely untouched ever since. Spaniards never lived there and the remaining Chachapoyas returned only to bury their dead. “Kuélap is a big cemetery,” said Mr. Feijóo Aguilar. (Los Sarcófagos de Karajía, consisting of seven anthropomorphic funerary sculptures containing mummies in a remote river gorge, is another area draw.) The region’s capital city of Chachapoyas may seem like an ideal base, but we much preferred Achamaqui. Meals got boring since our hotel had the only restaurant for miles around, but we had breakfast every morning in view of a river, and even treated ourselves to massages for around $30. Those massages proved to be essential after a six-hour, seven-and-a-half-mile, round-trip hike we took to the Gocta waterfalls, also in torrential rain, through mud, mud and more mud. Technically two falls, they are among the highest in the world. The awe began at the beginning of the trail, which affords dramatic views, rickety bridges and visits with horses, alpacas and sheep. A stray dog decided to join us halfway there, and followed us the rest of the way, like a Peruvian Lassie. I spent three uphill hours of the return hike moaning “I’ve lost all motivation!” and the next three days was barely able to walk because my calves were so sore. But I wouldn’t trade a year of comfort at home for what it felt like to be there, unable to hear anything but the roar of water, twirling around what looked like the inside of a cloud at the end of the world. Almost all points of travel in Peru go through the Lima airport, the most chaotic I’ve encountered in a month and a half of solo travel through the Americas. (Miami’s would be second.) First, beware the traffic getting there, which took two hours on a Friday night, covering a distance that my driver said takes 20 minutes in the middle of the night. Getting on our flight to Jaén, we were forced to check our bags — then watched plenty of other passengers take theirs onboard. The massive crowds are mostly families saying goodbye; maneuver around them and breathe easier.Jada Yuan will be traveling to every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.Previous dispatches:1: New Orleans2: Chattanooga, Tenn.3. Montgomery, Ala.4. Disney Springs, Fla. 5. Trinidad and St. Lucia6. San Juan, P.R.7. Peninsula Papagayo, Costa RicaNext dispatch: Bogotá, ColombiaAdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byTrendingLobbies and rooftop bars are popular with people who don’t book rooms. So properties are creating spaces like libraries that are open only to guests.By Elaine GlusacIn an industry challenged by Airbnb and other home-sharing competitors, hotels are happy to attract local laptop tappers and cocktail crowds to their lobbies. But public popularity risks frustrating guests, who may be forced to retreat to their rooms, leading to an expansion of guest-only areas including meeting spaces, libraries, quiet rooms and bars.For hotel operators, these private spaces are similar to the concierge-floor perks, where guests pay a premium for access to a lounge with business facilities and food, but expanded and fee-free.“It’s similar to when hotels offer a ‘club level’ lounge, but in this case, the ‘club’ is open to all guests,” said Henry H. Harteveldt, a travel analyst and the president of Atmosphere Research Group. “Business travelers, in particular, enjoy these facilities as they can provide a quiet place to meet, away from the hotel’s public spaces.”Some also function as private clubs in the Soho House mold, making amenities enjoyed by club members, such as private restaurants and meeting spaces, available to overnight guests. “We’re big believers in creating a sense of exclusivity,” said Michael Achenbaum, the managing partner of the new Curtain hotel in London, which also functions as a membership club. Its meeting facilities, available to guests and members, includes a boardroom and work tables. “You see people sitting in hotel lobbies working in spaces not designed for the purposes of work. We set up the space functionally.”Other hotels are opening less defined spaces for quiet time. The Kimpton Hotel Monaco Portland in Oregon hosts a Quiet Room available to guests who request the key for 30-minute timeouts. There’s no fee to access the room, furnished with an armchair and reading lamp, which provides “a moment of privacy,” according to the hotel general manager Ryan Kunzer, for guests to pray, meditate, nurse or read.Hotel libraries stake out territory between boardrooms and meditation rooms, exclusively giving guests a shared residential-style room to relax in. The Betsy-South Beach in Miami Beach added a library in December 2016 when it expanded. The Kimpton Hotel Palomar Philadelphia furnishes its 25th-floor library in a 1929-vintage building with floor-to-ceiling bookshelves, binoculars and tufted leather chairs. The guests-only library at the Faena Hotel Miami Beach includes cocktail service.“Libraries provide a ‘third space’ for a guest to go to work or read,” Mr. Harteveldt said. “I see the libraries as a small way that hotels can attempt to compete with home sharing.”Pushed by overcrowding, some hotels are forced to take public amenities private. When the Silo Hotel in Cape Town opened in March 2017, crowds flocked to the rooftop, home to a pool and bar, for views over the waterfront. Shortly thereafter, management closed half of it just to ensure that guests of the 28-room hotel could have access. Thronged by afternoon tea takers and bar goers in Ireland’s capital, the Shelbourne Dublin hotel plans to open a private bar for guests only this spring.The new Duniway in Portland, Ore., plans to make its rooftop guest-only beginning in May. Management will offer yoga classes there on Saturdays, and guests will be able to text for food and drink while sitting around the fire pits.“The space is intended to be very Zen and relaxing which is a nice alternative to our bustling lobby, which is open to the public,” wrote Eric Walters, the general manager of the hotel, in an email.Credit the trend to millennial travelers, said Chekitan S. Dev, a professor of marketing at Cornell University’s School of Hotel Administration. Millennials, he said, “are interested in what I call ‘private public’ spaces where private spaces can be secluded giving them a feeling of exclusivity while, at the same time, public in that they can socialize with a group of friends.”Luxury hotels have a freer hand to cordon off spaces for guests only. The Ivy Hotel in Baltimore makes its spa and ground-floor restaurant available to the public, but reserves the majority of the 1889 property, including a conservatory, library, game room and bar, for residents of its 18 rooms.“The concept was always to have the feel of a private house,” said the hotel’s general manager, Rob Arthur. “With that, you don’t want random people traipsing through the mansion.”Not all private spaces are hushed. The Eldorado Hotel & Spa in Santa Fe runs a nightclub, Casa España, on Friday and Saturday nights open only to members who pay an annual fee and hotel guests.AdvertisementAdvertisementSupported byThe Travel Desk would like to solicit your ideas of what an actual Wakanda trip would look like. We will feature 10 of the most innovative submissions in a future Travel issue. By John L. DormanIn the film “Black Panther,” the mythical African nation of Wakanda, known to outsiders as a small and mostly agrarian country, is protected by a holographic camouflage, which shields its advanced society from the rest of the world. Among the many great things about the film is its emphasis on Wakanda’s technological gems, along with showcasing the landscape of the modern country. However, to the casual filmgoer, there is a lot that can be left to the imagination.The Travel Desk would like to solicit your ideas of what an actual Wakanda trip would look like. Do you see Wakanda as a series of magical neighborhoods floating in midair? Would the magnetic levitation subway in Wakanda travel around its capital city like a graceful roller coaster? Maybe you might see the Wakanda countryside as a collection of broad valleys and lakes, with the glimmer of the distant metropolis as a backdrop? What kinds of things would you do in Wakanda? Would there be an abundance of infinity pools and virtual reality bowling alleys? The possibilities are truly endless.In a future Travel issue, we will feature 10 of the most innovative submissions, so start brainstorming and have fun!Share your ideas on our Facebook page or as a comment on this article. Advertisement