By ANDREW KNOLLMARCH 21, 2015
ANAHEIM, Calif. —  The Anaheim Ducks have a young roster, an enviable salary-cap situation, immense resilience to adversity and the N.H.L.’s best record, yet none of that seems to matter in their dressing room.“You can look at it from a business standpoint, the young players we have and all that, but it’s the expectations we have as a group for ourselves, that’s the main thing,” defenseman Cam Fowler said last week. “We feel like we’re close and we’ve tasted it.”The Ducks play the Rangers on Sunday at Madison Square Garden in a matchup of two teams from a surprisingly broad field of contenders for the Presidents’ Trophy, awarded to the team with the league’s best record in the regular season. Their 99 points led a pack of eight teams with 90 or more through Friday.“I’ve won the Presidents’ Trophy before, and it got me nowhere,” said Anaheim’s coach, Bruce Boudreau. “Three days after you win it, no one cares who won it because the playoffs start.”AdvertisementBoudreau’s reluctance to celebrate regular-season milestones is understandable. In addition to the Presidents’ Trophy in 2010, he has secured a top seed in his conference three times and is cruising toward a seventh division title in a career that has included just six full seasons as a head coach.AdvertisementYet his teams in Anaheim and Washington lost playoff series in which they had home-ice advantage each postseason.His Ducks have much reason to think this season will be different. They have withstood considerable pressure and tribulations, thriving in tight contests to win 29 of 36 one-goal games and surmounting deficits after two periods a league-leading 12 times. Four of those comeback victories came against the Los Angeles Kings, who eliminated them at home last season after the Ducks led that conference semifinal series, 3-2.In five of those 12 rallies, Anaheim scored three or more goals in the third period, including a franchise-record five against the Calgary Flames, the league’s next best team when trailing after 40 minutes.“If you look at our season, anytime we get a goal, we usually get another one,” said center Ryan Getzlaf, the team’s captain. “It’s always about breaking through, getting that first goal and not getting frustrated.”Getzlaf, a 2014 finalist for the Hart Trophy as the league’s most valuable player, and Corey Perry, the 2011 Hart Trophy winner, lead the team in scoring. But the Ducks have kept improving because of the depth provided by their young players on the back end.On defense, Hampus Lindholm has become a mainstay and earned the best plus-minus rating of any defenseman in the N.H.L. during the past two seasons, at plus-53. Sami Vatanen, who returned from injury Friday against Colorado, has had a breakout season as a brilliant offensive defenseman who can join the rush or quarterback the power play with equal aplomb. Despite having missed 15 games, he still leads Anaheim in scoring by a rear guard.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Hall of Fame defenseman Scott Niedermayer, now an assistant with the Ducks, lauded the dedication and adaptive nature of Lindholm. Vatanen’s teammates compared him stylistically to Ottawa’s Erik Karlsson and Los Angeles’s Drew Doughty. Niedermayer said Vatanen’s offensive instincts, risk assessment and competitiveness would be an asset to any team.In net, Frederik Andersen had been one of the top goalies statistically, tying Bill Durnan as the goaltender to reach 50 wins the fastest in N.H.L. history, until a neck injury sidelined him. That opened the door for John Gibson, a rookie, to earn most of the starts down the stretch as Anaheim has continued to pace the league.AdvertisementIn much the same fashion as last season, when the veteran Jonas Hiller gave way first to Andersen and then to Gibson, the Ducks have a bit of a goaltending controversy brewing, a rarity for a team that is so high in the standings.“I know we both have to battle for it — it’s going to be a long season,” Andersen said. “You saw it last year; we had three goalies playing due to different circumstances. I think we are both really talented goalies that can carry this team really deep.”All four players combined — Lindholm, Vatanen, Andersen and Gibson — earn less than Getzlaf and Perry make individually, and also less than the defending Stanley Cup champion Kings’ top defenseman, Doughty, and their top goaltender, Jonathan Quick. If there exists a clear limitation in the Ducks’ window of contention, it may be that those four young stars will all become restricted free agents in the summer of 2016.That financial flexibility also allowed Anaheim to bring in center Ryan Kesler via trade last off-season. The Ducks hoped that Kesler could strengthen their depth up the middle by providing a productive scorer and a shutdown pivot.Kesler has played on a defensive-minded line with Jakob Silfverberg and Andrew Cogliano at times, and he has skated alongside the offensive-oriented Kyle Palmieri and Matt Beleskey. Kesler has thrived in both roles and also brought Anaheim prosperity against its crosstown rivals with team highs of five goals, 7 points and a plus-six rating in five games against Los Angeles.“He’s got the versatility that you dream of to have in a center,” Palmieri said of Kesler. “He plays in all situations for us, a lot of heavy minutes and a lot of minutes against the other team’s top guys.”In a league competitive enough to have so many clubs vying for its top spot and with a rigid salary cap that fosters parity, the Ducks find little comfort in what they have accomplished, or could accomplish.“Hopefully, this is the year, this year,” Cogliano, a left wing, said. “You play for the playoffs, you play to get there and you play to win the Stanley Cup, and, really, all the stuff you do during the season doesn’t matter at that point.”A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Using Their History as a Guide, the Ducks Are on a Tempered Roll.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.