By BEN ROTHENBERGMARCH 21, 2015
INDIAN WELLS, Calif. —  The BNP Paribas Open has long been known for the strength of its doubles field, and this year was no exception, with nine of the top 10 singles players entered. But few ATP Tour events are as fortunate.Steve Simon, the tournament director, noted that although the sport’s popularity in Southern California gave doubles a knowledgeable audience, it was the tournament’s spot on the calendar that was most responsible for the strong field. The Indian Wells event is held over 10 days, giving players a day off between most rounds of singles. It also runs two weeks, so most players who lose here have to wait more than a week before playing again in Miami.“I think that they would rather play doubles than sit around and just practice,” Simon said. “It’s a good way to do that. When you couple that along with the fun that they’re having with it, I think that combination makes it that we just happen to be in the right spot with the right deal. If we were a one-week event, I’m not sure you’d see as many players playing doubles.”The crowds come out for the stars, with Novak Djokovic, Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Andy Murray drawing overflow crowds to their doubles matches. But with the stars rarely aligning for doubles any other week, the tour is looking for ways to increase the discipline’s popularity the rest of the year.Advertisement“What we see here is that there’s a massive following for the likes of Andy Murray in doubles,” said Dominic Inglot, a British player ranked 38th in doubles. “There was a whole crowd. But how much of it is the sport of doubles and how much is the names?”AdvertisementDoubles unexpectedly found itself in the spotlight Thursday evening after the withdrawal of Bernard Tomic from a singles quarterfinal match left tournament organizers scrambling to fill the night session. They inserted a doubles match between the American twins Bob and Mike Bryan and the Wimbledon champions Jack Sock of the United States and Vasek Pospisil of Canada. The crowd of 13,827 did not seem disappointed.But the match was not televised or streamed online. In the time slot in which ESPN had planned to show the singles match, it instead rebroadcast recent singles matches.As they work to increase television exposure and online streaming, players past and present are also hoping to raise the profile of doubles players among fans and the news media. Ross Hutchins, a retired doubles specialist who became the ATP’s vice president for player relations last year, is encouraging doubles partners to stick together longer so that fans can develop a connection with them. The Bryan brothers, not surprisingly, are the most recognizable team in the world, a result of persistent marketing but also longevity.“This is what we’re saying to players, that it’s very difficult to market them if people change,” Hutchins said. “We want people to stay together and build units together. I know grass often seems greener on the other side, but we want to push guys to stay together and try to build relationships.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hutchins also organized a pro-am event between top doubles players and reporters to strengthen connections with the media. Several players expressed a willingness to play pro-ams more frequently, as golfers often do on the PGA Tour.Eric Butorac, a doubles specialist who was elected president of the players’ council last fall, is intrigued by the pro-am idea but is not convinced it would translate well from golf to tennis.“The fact remains that people will pay huge sponsor money to be in a golf pro-am, and tennis doesn’t seem to bring in the same numbers,” Butorac said. “However, we need to explore this more, because the idea is good and it could lead to more exposure and more money down the road. One main problem is that golfers can actually practice while playing the pro-am. For tennis players, it’s more hit and giggle than practice.”Doubles players express a willingness to work harder for the attention that singles stars attract more easily, and several point to the popularity of the Bryans as a blueprint.Advertisement“Some guys get it and some guys don’t,” Butorac said. “Luckily for us, we have a team, the Bryans, who lead with the perfect example. They do every pro-am, clinic, autograph signing etc., and they do it with a smile on their face. Hopefully, the younger doubles stars will understand the importance of this.”Inglot, the British player, was more blunt about the debt that other doubles players owe to the Bryans.“There should be gratitude toward those guys,” he said. “We still have a sport that we can play because of them.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.