

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
MARCH 21, 2015
It may seem odd to suggest that the clock is ticking for Anthony Davis to make the playoffs in just his third season. But when a player as talented as Davis comes around, the wait for the postseason is generally rather short.Davis, a forward for the New Orleans Pelicans, has been an unstoppable force since he entered the league. His offensive game is more polished than many expected, and he is an elite rebounder and a top shot blocker. He seems to have the potential to wrest the title of best player in the N.B.A. away from LeBron James and Kevin Durant.But in his first two seasons, Davis missed time to injury, and a collection of subpar teammates failed to help him reach the playoffs. Now, as his game has seemingly taken another leap, he is still on the outside looking in, two games behind the Oklahoma City Thunder through Friday for the final playoff spot in the Western Conference.In consideration of players who enjoyed immediate success on a similar level to Davis over their first three seasons, a theme emerges that Davis’s inability to get to the postseason is already highly unusual.AdvertisementDavis has a career player efficiency rating of 26.6. Should he keep that up through the end of the season, it will be the sixth best mark for a player through his first three years, trailing only Wilt Chamberlain, Michael Jordan, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, David Robinson and Shaquille O’Neal. Of that group, only O’Neal had to wait until his second season to reach the playoffs.AdvertisementEven if you go far beyond Davis, it is hard to find top players who endured similar struggles in reaching the playoffs. Of the top 25 players in PER over their first three seasons, just four other than Davis had to wait beyond their second season. Chris Paul and James qualified in their third seasons, Walt Bellamy and John Drew in their fourth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This season, Davis has pushed his PER to an astronomical 31.2, which would be the eighth best mark in N.B.A. history. The only players to have recorded a higher PER are Chamberlain, Jordan and James. Of the 17 times a player has had a PER of 30 or higher, there have only been two instances in which his team did not make the playoffs: Dwyane Wade with the 2007-8 Miami Heat and Wilt Chamberlain with the 1962-63 San Francisco Warriors. In what is one of basketball’s greatest statistical oddities, Chamberlain set the record for PER that season at 31.82, averaging 44.8 points and 24.3 rebounds a game, but the Warriors went 31-49 and finished three games behind the Detroit Pistons for the last playoff spot in the Western Division.Chamberlain’s 1962-63 season would seem to be the exception that proves the rule. The large number of teams that qualify in the N.B.A. creates a window for an extraordinary player to propel a lesser team into the mix. Working against Davis is that his team plays in the ultracompetitive Western Conference, where a team with a winning record can often find itself missing the playoffs. Despite Davis’s increased production, this season has still been difficult for the Pelicans. Jrue Holiday, the team’s second-best player, has been out since Jan. 12 with a leg injury. A number of other Pelicans, including Davis, have been nursing smaller injuries, which has led to a number of strange lineups.The opportunity is certainly there for New Orleans, with Oklahoma City having shut down Durant indefinitely and Serge Ibaka remaining out after knee surgery, but Russell Westbrook has stepped up his game, averaging 32.9 points, 10 rebounds and 11 assists a game in 14 starts since Durant last went out, nearly keeping pace with Davis in PER this season.The individual accolades are nice, and Davis seems like a player with a Most Valuable Player trophy or two in his future, but in a sport where championship rings often turn into a shorthand for greatness, getting some playoff experience would be crucial to his development. He just has to find a way to get there, and the road goes through Oklahoma City, with or without Durant.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Wonderful Player Yet to Reach the Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »