By RICHARD SANDOMIRMARCH 21, 2015
You have probably seen many of the films. There was “The Fab Five,” about the rise and fall of a fabled Michigan basketball recruiting class, and “The U,” which told the story of Miami football so well that its director made a sequel. More recently, “Of Miracles and Men” described the 1980 Olympic hockey tournament from the less familiar Soviet team’s point of view, and Duke-loathing basketball fans were treated to the analytic probing of “I Hate Christian Laettner.”All those stories, and many more, have been injected into the bloodstream of sports fans since 2009 through ESPN’s “30 for 30” series and its various offshoots like “30 for 30 Shorts,” which are shown online at Grantland.com and SEC Storied. The success of “30 for 30” has, in only a few years, created a growing industry on television for sports documentaries. Their proliferation and profitability, even as a formerly dominant player in the market has markedly retreated from the field, has quickly brought a niche market into the mainstream.“I can do basically a film a year and have millions of people see it without having to fight and claw for distribution and funding the way we used to,” said the director Jonathan Hock, whose ESPN credits include “Of Miracles and Men” and “Survive and Advance,” about the North Carolina State team, coached by Jim Valvano, that won the 1983 N.C.A.A. men’s basketball title.Hock added, “This is a golden age for sports documentaries.”Sports documentaries have been around for decades, but they were more often special events, like Bud Greenspan’s Olympic films, or occasional television or theatrical presentations. When ESPN introduced “30 for 30” in 2009 — 30 films to celebrate the network’s 30th anniversary — it was a thunderclap in the industry.AdvertisementQuickly, ESPN became the dominant force, and since then, the ambitions of ESPN and HBO, which once dominated the genre by producing four films a year, have shifted drastically. ESPN committed heavily to documentaries, releasing 142 films since 2009 — so many, in fact, that it now qualifies as a de facto documentary studio.AdvertisementHBO Sports, meanwhile, shuttered its in-house documentary unit in November 2011 and struggles to maintain its relevance in a transformed market in which many networks, including Showtime, Epix, CBS and Fox Sports 1, are active at various levels. The NBC Sports Group is close to announcing the formation of an internal unit to produce four documentaries a year starting in 2016.George Roy, whose HBO documentaries were among its most honored, said: “ESPN has created a brand that is more powerful than HBO’s.”ESPN and other media companies have quickly learned that sports documentaries offer a reliable audience and a viable business model: They are a bargain to produce — ESPN’s cost about $500,000 each — when compared with the soaring prices of live sports rights, and they can be repeated for years.In its 2011 debut, “The Fab Five” attracted 2.7 million viewers; a replay three years later was watched by 476,000.“I Hate Christian Laettner,” the newest “30 for 30,” is an example of how a provocative title about a provocative subject can generate success. Released on the eve of this year’s N.C.A.A. tournament, the film was directed by Rory Karpf, whose goal was to explain Duke haters’ special loathing for Laettner, one of the stars of the Blue Devils’ 1991 and 1992 championship teams.The film examines Laettner’s arrogance, good looks, bullying style and seeming sense of privilege — often humorously — and it was done with his full cooperation, if not his full embrace of its title. At a screening this month in Manhattan, Laettner watched it with a smile that did not seem forced. He occasionally leaned forward — apparently entranced — and regularly glanced to his right at his former teammate Grant Hill to see if Hill was equally amused. When the film made its premiere on ESPN on March 15, it attracted 2.3 million viewers. Another 573,000 watched when it was replayed later that night on ESPN2.Done well, documentaries can be the sort of programming that fits the landscape of changing viewing habits, in which fans watch what they want, when they want, untethered to the television schedule for live events. The “30 for 30” films, for example, are available on iTunes and Netflix and can be watched on WatchESPN and bought in DVD sets.Advertisement“Long-form storytelling is growing,” said Connor Schell, vice president and executive producer of ESPN Films. “You can tell people in-depth stories, and they can consume it when they want. Sit people down and tell them a good story.”Showtime and Epix have recognized the same thing.“Kobe Bryant’s Muse,” a vanity project on Showtime, stars Bryant, who was also the executive producer and is the only person interviewed. Epix has shown documentaries on Dwight Howard, the integration of the N.F.L. and college sports, and it carries the series “Road to the N.H.L. Winter Classic,” which was created by HBO.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Our mission is different from ESPN’s,” said Stephen Espinoza, the executive vice president of Showtime Sports. “We want to appeal to the sports fan and the non-sports fan.”Every network is benefiting from the talent diaspora spread far and wide by HBO. Ross Greenburg, a former president of HBO Sports, has worked for both Showtime and Epix. Joe Lavine made “Playing for the Mob,” about the Boston College point-shaving scandal, for ESPN, and Jason Hehir directed “The Fab Five” and is in postproduction for another about the Sacramento Kings’ near-departure for Seattle. “I used to watch Joe Lavine’s documentaries in school,” said Hehir, who added that he had more freedom to make the films he wanted at ESPN than he did when he was with HBO.For Greenburg, his latest project is a collaboration with Steve Stern and Roy, whose HBO work earned them eight Sports Emmys. “Dean Smith,” about the late North Carolina basketball coach, will debut Wednesday on Showtime.“Networks realize there’s thirst for this kind of entertainment,” Greenburg said. “They also realize the younger demographics eat this up, not just the 50-somethings who’ve lived a life in sports.”Ken Hershman, the president of HBO Sports, said the company had not abandoned sports documentaries but wanted to create a “different space” for experimentation, rather than have a largely in-house group of filmmakers, like the one that won 31 Sports Emmys for HBO from 1991 to 2012. Those films, “were nice stories and nice projects,” he said, adding, “But we wanted to break the mold.”To fill the gap, he has been relying on Peter Berg for an issue-oriented series called “State of Play” — hybrid documentaries and panel discussions and the acquisition of films with production or talent connections to personalities like Jay Z, 50 Cent and the agent Ari Emanuel.In discarding a successful documentary-making model for one that seeks deals with well-connected outsiders, HBO is trying, in its own way, to imitate ESPN. But ESPN has clearly found a productive formula in hiring an eclectic group of independent, well-credentialed directors like Barry Levinson and Alex Gibney, and first-timers like the rapper Ice Cube and Marquis Daisy, a former HBO staff member who made a documentary about Randy Moss. Before she made “Selma,” Ava DuVernay directed “Venus VS.” as part of an ESPN Title IX series in 2013.And this month, six short films by Errol Morris, who won an Oscar for “The Fog of War,” debuted online and on ESPN. Morris worked for ESPN on an advertising campaign called “It’s Not Crazy, It’s Sports” a few years ago, and he used that title for his short films, each focused on different types of fan passion.Advertisement“Sports is just a way in, a portal, to tell a whole range of stories,” Morris said. “You can call them obsessives or stories about obsessiveness. But sports is a perfect breeding ground for them.”A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Once Specials, Documentaries Are Now TV Staples.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.