By BEN ROTHENBERGMARCH 21, 2015
INDIAN WELLS, Calif. —  In a stark change from 2001, Serena Williams was cheered upon her exit from the Indian Wells tournament on Friday night. Unlike 2001, when she was booed mercilessly, she did not win the tournament, but had to withdraw from the semifinals of the BNP Paribas Open with an injury to her right knee.Her injury rekindled bitter memories from 14 years earlier when Williams’s sister Venus withdrew shortly before a semifinal the two were set to play, citing knee tendinitis. The crowd booed the announcement, which was made only minutes before the match was to start, and Serena was harangued throughout the next day’s final. The Williams sisters then boycotted the tournament for 13 years.Serena decided to play the tournament this year (without Venus) and received a warm reception upon her return on March 13. But after winning four matches, Serena withdrew shortly before her semifinal match, as Venus had in 2001, inciting the crowd. Her withdrawal, however, was handled with more conciliation by the player and tournament officials, and the crowd’s response was far more supportive.Williams had been dealing with knee pain leading up to the tournament, but she aggravated the injury after a serve during practice on Thursday.Advertisement“She’s had pain in the knee for a few weeks already, but she really wanted to play here,” her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, said Friday. “It was under control. She was playing with pain, but the pain was acceptable. And then yesterday in practice, after a serve, it became really, really too much, so we stopped the practice.”With only hours to go before her match with third-seeded Simona Halep, Williams had an anti-inflammatory injected into her knee in attempt to make the injury bearable, but it did not provide enough relief for her to proceed with the match.“Either you can play or you can’t,” Mouratoglou said.The decision was especially difficult for Williams, Mouratoglou said, because of the unusual circumstances of the week.Advertisement“There was a different pressure,” he said. “The emotion she showed when she went on the court the first day speaks for itself. I don’t think she expected to feel that much emotion, but then it stayed the whole week. It was really special.”Williams informed tournament organizers of her decision to withdraw during the second set of the evening’s first semifinal, which Jelena Jankovic won in three sets over Sabine Lisicki. The tournament announced her withdrawal on its social media channels at the end of the second set, which would have given some in attendance more warning than was possible in 2001. Additionally, Williams asked to explain her decision to the crowd, which had been supportive of her throughout the tournament.“Serena really wanted to address the fans,” Steve Simon, the tournament director, said. “She didn’t want to be going out the back door. She wanted to address them, and we agreed with that. I think it was the right thing to do.”Williams, Simon, and the assistant tournament director Dee Dee Felich discussed how to go about the announcement with the stadium announcer and M.C. Andrew Krasny.Krasny said he recognized the delicacy of the situation.“We met, we talked about it with the whole gang, and wanted to present it in the most positive light as possible,” Krasny said. “She was very, very concerned about how it would be perceived.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When Williams took the court she walked slowly with her arms crossed and wore sweatpants instead of her competition dress.Followed closely by Simon, Williams made her way to Krasny, who stood in the middle of the court and put his arm around her when they met.“How about a round of applause for this young lady, who we love very much,” Krasny said. “Serena Williams suffered an injury a couple days ago. And I’m going to ask you a question in a second, Serena, but the triumphant, the courageous return of you the other night, I want to first say: Welcome home. You belong here, we love you, and welcome back to Indian Wells.”As the crowd applauded, with a few sporadic but audible boos, Williams put her hand over her heart, and then waved.AdvertisementWhen Krasny extended his microphone to Williams, she began speaking with some hesitation.“Yes, a couple of days ago in my practice, I just really injured my knee, and I fought through it and I kept playing,” she said. “Today, I just was struggling just to walk.” She added: “It’s been a wonderful journey. I have to say that I’m so excited to have been able to come out here and to start to build so many wonderful new memories, and I can only promise to come back next year and play right here on this court in front of you guys. It will be my pleasure, so thank you so much.”As the crowd applauded more, Krasny resumed his ebullient praise of Williams.“Serena, on behalf of everybody here at Indian Wells, we wish you a speedy recovery,” he said. “We love you, this is always home, and please know that there’s an invitation for you. Ladies and gentlemen, the No. 1 player in the world: Serena Williams!”As the crowd slowly filed out of the stadium, Williams went up to the media level of the stadium to speak with the news media. She was asked if she saw any parallels between the events of that night and the angry scenes of 14 years ago.“I don’t make anything of it,” she said. “I feel that was 14 years ago and this is now. I did the best that I could at this event, and I really am happy to have put a lot of that behind me. I feel like if I would have known I had to pull out I would have played anyway just to have an opportunity to be back at this tournament and to be able to play.”Her most enthusiastic answer came when she was asked if she planned to return the Indian Wells next year.“I think it’s going to be a must,” she said with a broad smile. “I think it’s going to be a must.”A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: This Time, Williams Is Cheered as She Leaves.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.