By RAY GLIERMARCH 21, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  This time, pluck was no match for pedigree, as U.C.L.A. turned to one extraordinary offensive player after another on Saturday to thwart another upset bid by the University of Alabama at Birmingham.The 11th-seeded Bruins, who were making their 46th appearance in the N.C.A.A. tournament, crushed the 14th-seeded Blazers inside the lane to win, 92-75, in the round of 32 in the South Region. Tony Parker, a 6-foot-9 junior center, led U.C.L.A. (22-13) with 28 points, and all five Bruins starters finished in double figures. U.C.L.A. advanced to the round of 16 in Houston next Friday.Before the tournament, Steve Alford, the U.C.L.A. head coach, insisted his team was much improved from the squad that was humiliated by Kentucky on Dec. 20, when the Bruins scored just 7 points in the first half of an 83-44 loss that was not as close as the final score indicated. They backed up Alford’s assessment here in the KFC Yum! Center by outscoring U.A.B. (20-16), 52-16, in the paint.“In December, you watch tape, and you watch tape of us now, and it is totally different-looking team,” guard Norman Powell said. “We were taking quick shots, highly contested, we weren’t working the ball around, we were still trying to figure out our roles. The team got going in conference, and everybody got comfortable in their roles, and we started playing better.”AdvertisementThe Bruins shot 60.3 percent from the field and outrebounded the Blazers by 41-26. The complaints over the Bruins’ being included in the tournament despite their 13 losses should be muted after their impressive win over the Blazers.“The selection committee thought we were good enough to play in this tournament, and I think we proved it,” Parker said.Jerod Haase, the U.A.B. coach, was struck by the cohesiveness of a U.C.L.A. team that often played selfishly early in the season. On Saturday, the U.C.L.A. player with the ball would draw a double-team, then skip the ball quickly to the open man.Advertisement“They have five guys that are all unique that all can, again, hurt you,” Haase said.Robert Brown led U.A.B. with 25 points. The Blazers stayed competitive for 35 of the 40 minutes by making 12 of 26 shots from 3-point range.“We knew that the rebounding part of it was going to be a huge factor in the game, and we got beat up on the boards,” Haase said. “There were some deep post-ups where we didn’t get around, and they were able to feed it directly to them.”In the game’s first 15 minutes, U.A.B. showed that it would not consent to being pushed off the stage by one of college basketball’s most renowned programs. The Blazers made 6 of their first 9 attempts from beyond the 3-point arc — uncharacteristic for a team that ranked 238th in 3-point shooting among Division I teams (32.7 percent).At least for a while, the Blazers’ 3-point shooting trumped their major issue in this matchup, which was trying to contend on the boards with U.C.L.A. The Bruins had a 21-8 rebounding advantage in the first half and did not let U.A.B. get to the offensive glass the way the Bruins did in their upset of third-seeded Iowa State in the round of 64.The Blazers held an 18-13 lead early, but on the defensive end they had trouble containing Parker, who made 8 of 9 shots in the first half. Parker was averaging 10.9 points a game on a team with five starters averaging double figures in scoring.U.C.L.A. shot 61 percent in the first half, then roared out in the second half to take a 54-40 lead.Still, U.A.B. kept making shots and kept making a game of it. It trailed by 72-64, with 6 minutes 42 seconds to play, before U.C.L.A. finally pulled away.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: U.C.L.A. Romps Past U.A.B. With Unselfish Play and Domination in the Paint.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.