
MARCH 23, 2015

Feel like you need a breather from club soccer? Well, you're in luck. The next nine days are a FIFA international break, so you can exchange your favorite parochial rivalry for a shiny new international one. Soccer Editor — and shameless Ajax supporter — Andrew Das tells you what to watch.

Feel like you need a breather from club soccer? Well, you're in luck. The next nine days are a FIFA international break, so you can exchange your favorite parochial rivalry for a shiny new international one. Soccer Editor — and shameless Ajax supporter — Andrew Das tells you what to watch.
The United States will play Denmark on Wednesday (3 p.m. ET, ESPN2) in Aarhus, which the Internet reveals to be the second-largest city in Denmark and, at first glance, quite a lovely place.
 Coach Jurgen Klinsmann has called up an interesting collection of young
 players (Julian Green, 22-year-old Mexican league defender Ventura 
Alvarado, Galaxy forward Gyasi Zardes), so it's probably worth a look if
 forecasting 2018 World Cup rosters is your thing.If forecasting possible 2018 World Cup semifinals is your thing, try a sexier friendly — France vs. Brazil on Thursday in Paris (4 p.m., ESPN2).Qualifying for the 2016 European Championship resumes Friday with nine matches. The kickoff is Spain hosting Ukraine in Seville (3:45 p.m., ESPN2), a game that has a bit more juice since both surprisingly trail Slovakia in their group as qualifying hits the halfway point. England
 plays Lithuania at Wembley at the same time (Fox Sports 2). Although it 
probably won't be as competitive, it's worth a look-see if only to see 
if striker Harry Kane, who looks like a 'Downton Abbey' extra but scores
 like an Argentine, can carry over the excellent form he's shown in a 
Tottenham shirt to his England one. Often, something is lost in that 
change.Saturday's easiest-to-find TV match is Netherlands-Turkey in Amsterdam (3:45 p.m.,
 ESPN2). The game will include several players from Ajax, the greatest 
club in the world and one you should consider supporting, but it will 
not feature Arjen Robben, who was injured playing for Bayern Munich — 
actually injured, not a dive that got out of hand — and will be out 
several weeks. But if you can find it online, keep an eye on 
Israel-Wales in Haifa. The Israelis, who also play Belgium during this 
break, lead their qualifying group and would desperately like to play in
 France next summer.Saturday
 night brings the first head to head faceoff between the Red Bulls and 
New York City F.C., but it's not on the field. Instead, the teams will 
battle for viewers: N.Y.C.F.C. hosts Sporting Kansas City at 7 p.m. (YES) 
while the Red Bulls visit Columbus at 7:30 (MSG2). May the best team win. The league's Sunday
 night doubleheader (Chicago-Philadelphia and Real Salt Lake-Toronto 
F.C.) is seriously weakened by bad matchups and national team call-ups. But don't fret: there's always basketball. Advertisement