AdvertisementSupported byEast: Louisville 66, Northern Iowa 53By Marc TracySEATTLE — Early in the second half on Sunday night at KeyArena, Northern Iowa center Seth Tuttle — the senior around whom the offense revolves — screamed “Run it again!” to Deon Mitchell.Though Tuttle was referring to a play in which he sets a screen at the top of the key for his guard, one could sense in his desperate tone not only his team’s double-digit deficit against fourth-seeded Louisville, but a broader desire to keep things going into one more round, one more weekend.But the fifth-seeded Panthers, the Missouri Valley Conference champions, failed to advance, falling to Louisville, 66-53. This will be the Cardinals’ fourth consecutive trip to the round of 16. They became the fifth and final Atlantic Coast Conference team to advance that far this year; the second-place conference, the Pacific-12, has only three.The game promised a contrast in styles. Louisville entered as a stingy defense — it had the fifth-best adjusted defensive efficiency in Division I, according to the statistics site KenPom.com — with a more fallow offense. Northern Iowa, by contrast, sported one of college basketball’s best offenses, albeit one that operates very slowly.Northern Iowa was able to play at its deliberate pace. And it shot a respectable 39.1 percent from the field against the best defense it had faced all year. For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.The real difference was in the Cardinals, who outscored the Panthers with impressive athleticism and individual shot creation.Louisville (26-8) was led by the sophomore guard Terry Rozier, who scored 25 points and shot 8 for 13, supplementing the scoring with 5 rebounds and 7 assists while playing the entire 40 minutes. The veteran big man Montrezl Harrell scored 14 points and grabbed 6 rebounds.Tuttle had 14 points and 7 rebounds. Though there was rarely a possession during which he did not touch the ball, Louisville’s size, and its tactic of sending help when he received the ball down low, limited him. Guard Paul Jesperson scored 10 points and had 6 rebounds.The analysis may sound simple, but Louisville was simply the more talented team.On Saturday, Coach Rick Pitino highlighted the extent to which a team’s destiny is dictated by its personnel — as opposed to its coaching, its schemes, even its attitude — when he was asked about his son, Richard Pitino, and his team, Minnesota.“Once you get better players, you win those games,” Pitino said.At one point, the Panthers orchestrated a beautiful series that concluded with forward Nate Buss down low with the ball and a clear shot. His layup was batted away in an athletic leap by the Louisville sophomore Mangok Mathiang. The Northern Iowa fan section, ordinarily given to berating the referees over every perceived Louisville foul and three-second violation, just fell silent.The Panthers fought hard and had the obvious advantage in the crowd, which exhorted the team as it drew to 6 points behind with less than three minutes left and booed uproariously as the referees declined to give Panthers players the benefit of the doubt on several close calls.More eloquent were Tuttle’s tears as his coach, Ben Jacobson, pulled him from the game with 16.3 seconds left. He made his way down the bench, hugging each of his teammates and coaches at the end of his final college game.Advertisement