By JONAH BROMWICHMARCH 22, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.San Antonio at Dallas, Tuesday, 8 p.m. Eastern, TNTThe N.C.A.A. tournament usually provides a respite from some of the least exciting basketball of the N.B.A. season. But this year, there is still plenty at stake in each conference, and teams seem unusually focused for March.Four of the top eight in the Western Conference entered Sunday within a game of one another. The last of those teams — the Dallas Mavericks, in seventh — was a mere three-hundredths of a percentage point behind the sixth-place San Antonio Spurs.Despite their snug position in the standings, however, the two squads find themselves tracing separate trajectories as they prepare to face each other twice this week. As they approach the stretch run, the Spurs are finally rolling while the Mavericks are still trying to adjust to roster changes.AdvertisementCoach Gregg Popovich may have mastered the art of resting his players, or luck may just smile on San Antonio each spring. In either case, the Spurs always seem to shift into top gear about a month before the playoffs start, and this season is no exception. Kawhi Leonard, finally free of injury, has been a juggernaut in March, scoring significantly better than he has all season while remaining one of the best individual defenders in the league.AdvertisementTony Parker, too, looks to have turned a corner. Having averaged less than 15 points a game for most of the season, he is again reaching 20 with relative ease.Even so, the Spurs do not look to be as strong a contender as they were last year. The team’s road record was only .500 this season entering Sunday, down from .732, and that includes losses in some easy games, including an embarrassing defeat to the Knicks last week. Half of the Spurs’ remaining regular-season games are road matchups, and the team’s performance in those games will be especially important because San Antonio is likely to be a low seed for the postseason, without home-court advantage.The Spurs’ schedule in that time would be tough even if they were staying at home, with a combined four games against the top three teams in their conference (the Golden State Warriors, the Memphis Grizzlies and the Houston Rockets). The Spurs may be playing their best basketball of the season, but they will have to maintain that level; given how competitive the West is, there is still at least some chance that they could miss the postseason entirely.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That possibility looms larger for the Mavericks, who had gone 5-5 in their last 10 games entering Sunday. Dallas, which will also play at San Antonio on Friday, has earned some good wins over the last couple of weeks, but it has also been beaten badly by some of the best teams in the West, and it, too, faces a challenging schedule.Among the Mavericks’ acquisitions this season is Amar’e Stoudemire, who joined the team in mid-February and seemed an odd choice for a squad in need of defense and rebounding; he is a worse-than-average defender and a bad rebounder for his size. A third problem of the Mavericks’, though, is depth, and Stoudemire has helped to shore up their attack. Playing only 16 minutes a game, he can attack the basket without exhausting himself.Still, the roster sometimes seems loosely glued together. Rajon Rondo, Dallas’s most significant pickup this season, is no longer publicly arguing with Coach Rick Carlisle, but he does not look entirely comfortable, either. He continues to score inconsistently and commit needless turnovers.Before Rondo joined the team, the Mavericks had the most efficient offense in the league. While Rondo is not the sole reason for their attack’s downturn in recent months, his struggles reflect a lack of chemistry that the team too often shows.Carlisle is known as a kind of N.B.A. MacGyver, a coach who can form a coherent system out of seemingly mismatched parts. When the Mavericks are clicking, they do justice to his reputation. Monta Ellis, Tyson Chandler and Dirk Nowitzki form a sturdy core, and if Rondo, Stoudemire and the other role players are able to find a rhythm with them, Dallas could finish out strong.As the situation stands, though, it is pretty late for a team to be searching for a uniform beat, and if the Mavericks do not find it soon, their season will come to a disappointing end.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.