By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 22, 2015
HARRISON, N.J. —  Bradley Wright-Phillips scored a goal and set up another one as the Red Bulls defeated D.C. United, 2-0, on Sunday in their home opener as disgruntled fans chanted support for the former Coach Mike Petke, who was fired after last season.Lloyd Sam scored the Red Bulls’ other goal, which was his second of the season, and Luis Robles recorded a shutout with five saves.Chris Pontius sent a penalty kick about five feet over the cross bar during injury time of the second half, keeping D.C. United scoreless.The biggest surprise came at the start of the game, which was Coach Jesse Marsch’s home debut, when a group of Red Bulls fans behind their goal chanted “Michael Petke” over and over and held up a banner with the message “Legends Deserve Better.”Petke led the Red Bulls to the playoffs in both of his seasons as coach, guiding them to the Supporters’ Shield, given to the team with the league’s best record, in 2013 and to within a round of the M.L.S. Cup final last season.Wright-Phillips, who tied the M.L.S. season record with 27 goals in 2014, got his first of 2015 in the 25th minute. He took a long pass from Dax McCarty on the edge of the box, took a touch to settle the ball and then shot it into the corner of the net beyond goalkeeper Bill Hamid’s reach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Felipe Martins stole the ball, then sent Wright-Phillips toward the goal with a pass in the second half, and Wright-Phillips found Sam on the right side of the penalty area. Sam’s shot beat Hamid on the near side in the 71st minute.The Red Bulls, who lost Thierry Henry to retirement after last season and underwent a roster overhaul, had the better performance in the opening half, taking nine shots.Before its penalty kick, D.C. United had two excellent chances, with the better one coming in the 33rd minute when Robles made a sprawling save on a shot in the box by Chris Rolfe. McCarty then had to make a sliding tackle to clear the rebound.Pontius also connected with a good header on a United corner kick in the 37th minute, but it was right at Robles, and he had no problem catching it. Rolfe had one more good chance in the second half after Sam’s goal, but United could not beat Robles.A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Bulls Get a Victory and Criticism From Their Fans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.