AdvertisementSupported bySouth: Gonzaga 87, Iowa 68By Marc TracySEATTLE — Ever since its improbable run to the round of 8 in 1999, since which it has played in the N.C.A.A. tournament every year, Gonzaga has existed in the popular imagination as an undersize, scrappy midmajor doing damage to bigger, better squads with quickness, agility and 3-pointers. But of late, it has become a favorite: This year, it is a No. 2 seed; at one point, it was singled out in the Associated Press poll as the best non-Kentucky team. It led Division I in effective field goal percentage. And it has bulked up, in part by finding tall talent overseas.The Bulldogs’ 87-68 dismantling of seventh-seeded Iowa on Sunday night was as much the product of size up front as it was of crafty guard play. It left them well positioned to face U.C.L.A. — a team they beat, 87-74, in December in Los Angeles — on Friday in their first appearance in the round of 16 since 2009. A win in that game would send Gonzaga to its first regional final since 1999 and its first during Mark Few’s 16-season tenure as head coach.“A lot of people doubted us,” said guard Gary Bell Jr., who scored 10 points and had 4 assists, hinting that a chip remained on Gonzaga’s shoulder. He added: “We have a great team. We’re clicking right now.”Iowa, which had won its previous game by bullying Davidson, a much smaller opponent, put up a fight in the second half but ultimately proved no match for Gonzaga’s size and multidimensional attack.Despite having to sit out a substantial amount of time because of foul trouble, Gonzaga forward Kyle Wiltjer, who transferred from Kentucky after the 2012-13 season, finished with 24 points and 7 rebounds; he shot 10 of 12 from the field and 4 of 6 from 3-point range. The freshman Domantas Sabonis had 18 points and 9 rebounds. The 7-foot-1 center Przemek Karnowski led his team in first-half assists, with four — a mark of the European flavor of Gonzaga’s inside-out, pass-oriented flex offense.Kevin Pangos, a wavy-haired Canadian point guard who is often compared to Steve Nash, ran that offense during the first half in an approximation of the “seven seconds or less” style that Nash, who announced his retirement Saturday, made famous with the Phoenix Suns. Pangos ended with 16 points, including four 3-pointers, and facilitated the offense, his positions several feet beyond the 3-point line reflecting expansive, N.B.A.-style spacing. For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.“Our guys had more room to operate,” Karnowski said of the team’s first-half spacing.Gonzaga took advantage of those open looks, shooting 62.1 percent from the field in the first half and, amazingly, even better — 70 percent — from deep. With Wiltjer out with two fouls, Few subbed in the traditional power forward Sabonis, another reflection of the importance Gonzaga places on brawn.Perhaps most telling: Gonzaga’s 18 field goals in the first half came off 13 assists, a ratio that would make even pass-happy N.B.A. teams proud.In the second half, Gonzaga’s offense slowed down. Iowa switched to a zone defense and played more physically and aggressively; early in the second half, Iowa forward Aaron White picked off two ordinary perimeter passes, taking one all the way back and getting fouled for good measure. Gonzaga at times looked uninspired and, his team playing in his half of the court, Few appeared to call more set plays.But Iowa could not sustain the pressure, and in the second half, its deficit was never smaller than 11 points. The Hawkeyes’ standout player was White. He finished his final college game with 19 points and 3 steals. Forward Jarrod Uthoff had 20 points and 8 rebounds.After the game, Few said he was “personally” happy to break the program’s streak of not making it to the tournament’s second weekend.“It’s interesting to see the corner that we’re painted into,” he said, noting that the program over all had made just six rounds of 16 (he apparently was counting).“It gives us another week,” he added, explaining, “You want to stay in it as long as you can, ’cause it’s so much fun, so exciting.”His players seemed to share the sentiment. With a little more than five minutes left and up by 18, the reserve guard Kyle Dranginis dribbled aimlessly as the shot clocked ticked down. He managed to pass to Wiltjer, who scored on a shot from about 24 feet that hit only the bottom of the net. The shot confirmed that this was not a game Gonzaga was going to lose.Advertisement