AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim CaseySTORRS, Conn. — With more than 900 career victories and a place in the Basketball Hall of Fame, C. Vivian Stringer, the Rutgers women’s coach, has achieved more than nearly anyone in her sport’s history.Stringer is the first men’s or women’s college basketball coach to lead three programs (Cheyney, Iowa and Rutgers) to Final Four appearances. She is accustomed to winning.Still, the few times Rutgers has defeated Connecticut, Stringer has shown more emotion than usual. She has even danced after the victories, which she almost never does in public or, she said, private.“I have no rhythm,” Stringer said. “When the kids get me to move a little bit, that’s something. When we beat Connecticut, I danced. Obviously that’s when you want to. That’s the moment.”For Stringer, those moments have been few and far between. UConn is 33-6 against Rutgers during Stringer’s tenure and has a 12-game winning streak against the Scarlet Knights heading into a second-round N.C.A.A. tournament game Monday night at the Huskies’ on-campus arena, Gampel Pavilion.The top-seeded Huskies (33-1) are ranked first in the polls, are outscoring teams on average by more than 42 points per game and are expected to have little trouble against Rutgers, the No. 8 seed in the Albany Region, which advanced with a 79-66 victory over Seton Hall on Saturday night. But UConn Coach Geno Auriemma knows Stringer will have the Scarlet Knights ready to compete and play their typical tight defense and methodical offense, as she always does against the Huskies.“I’ve always said when you do it and you do it for a long time, that’s the sign of somebody who’s really, really good,” said Auriemma, who will turn 61 on Monday. “There aren’t very many people that have done it for a long time, and she’s one of them. I think everybody in the coaching profession has tremendous respect for Vivian.”Women’s N.C.A.A. bracket.Stringer, 67, has a long history with Auriemma, another Hall of Famer and 900-game winner. On Jan. 18, 1979, when Stringer was the head coach at Cheyney, in Pennsylvania, and Auriemma was an assistant at St. Joseph’s, Cheyney won, 66-58, in the first matchup between the coaches.They did not start talking, though, until the late 1980s, after Auriemma had taken over at UConn. Stringer was at Iowa, and Auriemma called her to schedule two games. The Hawkeyes won both: by 81-49 in Iowa on Nov. 26, 1989, and by 58-41 on Nov. 29, 1990, in Connecticut.Stringer’s rivalry with Auriemma and UConn began in earnest in 1995 when she went to Rutgers. The Scarlet Knights were under .500 during Stringer’s first two seasons, but they were a different team when they faced UConn on Feb. 10, 1998. That night, Rutgers won, 74-70, to end the Huskies’ 53-game Big East winning streak.“When we first started the program, UConn was the team that you needed to beat in order to establish yourself,” said the Rutgers assistant Tasha Pointer, who was a freshman guard on the 1997-98 team. “The first time we had an opportunity to beat them, it was a wonderful experience. At the end of the day, our team felt confident. We felt like we belonged nationally ranked and one of the national teams you talk about.”During a stretch from 2005 to 2008, Rutgers won five of eight games against UConn, including a victory in the 2007 Big East tournament final in Hartford. Since then, though, the Huskies have dominated the series, winning the last 12 meetings by nearly 25 points per game. UConn has made the Final Four each year since 2008, while Rutgers has not advanced past the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament since 2009.Under Auriemma, the Huskies have won nine national titles and made 15 Final Fours. They have lost only once in their last 80 games.“He not only gets very, very good players to begin with, but they improve in their time there,” said Jim Foster, the coach of Chattanooga, who has won more than 800 games and is one of Auriemma’s best friends.Foster added: “He also gets the players that really want to be pushed and really want to be challenged. That’s an art form unto itself. I don’t think he gets enough credit for recruiting who he recruits. He has a process of determining who he wants in his gym.”On Monday, the Scarlet Knights will face a huge challenge against a UConn team that leads Division I in points per game, points allowed per game, field-goal percentage and field-goal percentage defense. Rutgers will also be without the senior guard Syessence Davis, the Big Ten defensive player of the year, who tore the medial collateral ligament in her left knee. Still, Stringer said the Scarlet Knights would not be intimidated.“Geno has said this a thousand times, and I know this,” Stringer said. “Any team that comes in and is in awe is down by 20 points right from the beginning. He knows that we don’t come in in awe. Now, we might be down at some particular point, but it’s not because we’re in awe of UConn. Period.”Advertisement