AdvertisementSupported byWest: Wisconsin 72, Oregon 65By Pat BorziOMAHA — Oregon broke out the green jerseys with enormous gold letters on Sunday for its game in the round of 32 against Wisconsin, the top seed in the West Region. By comparison, the red letters on Wisconsin’s white uniforms resembled the bottom line of an eye chart. Eliminated in the same round by the Badgers a year ago to the day, the No. 8-seeded Ducks had something more to play for: sending Coach Dana Altman back to Eugene with pleasant memories of returning to the state where he grew up. When Dwayne Benjamin bagged a game-tying 3-pointer with 5 minutes 54 seconds to play, all of that seemed within reach.Then the methodical, relentless Badgers nudged ahead with 6 consecutive points. Wisconsin never gave the lead back, winning, 72-65, to advance to the round of 16 for the fourth time in five years. The Badgers (33-3) face North Carolina (26-11) on Thursday in Los Angeles.“These guys definitely have had the kind of season where they’ve earned every inch of this,” Wisconsin Coach Bo Ryan said. “Hopefully, we can go out to L.A. and get something done.”The 6 points started a 10-2 Wisconsin run, with half the points coming from Sam Dekker, who hit a 3-pointer moments after a timeout that Ryan called in midplay wiped out his thundering one-handed dunk. Dekker scored 17 points with three 3-pointers, and Frank Kaminsky added 16 points. They topped four Badgers in double figures.Ryan said he had called time because Kaminsky, the Big Ten player of the year, looked sluggish on the previous possession and needed a break. The officials did not grant the timeout immediately. “Sam was open for a reason,” Ryan said. “I think they saw me call timeout.”Said Dekker: “At first I gave Coach a look, like, What are you doing? But we just set up our offense again. Maybe Coach knew something that I didn’t, and the basketball gods worked in our favor there.” For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Though Oregon made four more baskets than the Badgers and hit eight 3-pointers, Wisconsin’s significant advantage at the foul line — 21 for 29, to Oregon’s 5 for 7 — particularly annoyed Oregon’s fans courtside. Many let the officials hear about it in the final minute. Joseph Young led the Ducks (26-10) with 30 points.“We were still in the ballgame, but we just didn’t make plays,” Young said. And it was not the first time. A year ago in Milwaukee, Oregon took a 14-point lead over Wisconsin late in the first half before the Badgers clamped down, stopping the Ducks’ fast break cold and outscoring them by 13-5 in the final 3:05 to win, 85-77. On Sunday, with Wisconsin committing only six turnovers, the Ducks never led at all. “Well, it hurts,” Altman said. “We couldn’t get them to turn it over against our press. We expended a lot of energy trying to get a few turnovers, but their experience and their guards handled it very well.”Altman and his wife, Reva, are both Nebraskans. Altman was raised in Wibler, a Czech enclave about 90 miles southwest of Omaha. His father, Lyle, still lives there; his mother, Barbara, died last September. Altman played and coached at Southeast Community College in Beatrice, Neb., and later coached for 16 seasons at Creighton, a few blocks west of the CenturyLink Center in Omaha. He left Creighton for Oregon in 2010. In the end, Oregon could not do enough, and the experience Wisconsin gained in last year’s Final Four run carried the Badgers down the stretch.“We’re a No. 1 seed for a reason,” Kaminsky said. “We have a good team this year. We have a good body of work, so we’re going into games expecting to compete and play hard and come out on top. So when you get to a stage like this, you know we were able to do it last year. That’s not an issue for us.” The Badgers led by 31-28 at the half, with Nigel Hayes, the spelling champion of Madison, contributing 12 of his 14 points. Hayes caused a sensation Saturday, having some fun with the media stenographer at Wisconsin’s off-day news conference by rattling off long, difficult-to-spell words to test her. A member of the media staff noticed Hayes, Kaminsky and Dekker eyeing the stenograph machine after their game late Friday and invited them to check it out.Advertisement