By BILLY WITZMARCH 22, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Among the people to whom Alex Rodriguez has reached out in his return to the Yankees is his former manager Joe Torre, with whom he had an uncomfortable relationship at times.Torre, now a Major League Baseball executive, said he met with Rodriguez when he visited the Yankees’ camp in Tampa, Fla., recently. Torre said that Rodriguez sent him a text message of condolence after Torre’s brother Frank died in September and that they had spoken or texted on several occasions since.“The first thing I said to Alex was, it’s baseball — just play,” Torre, who attended Sunday’s spring training game between the Mets and the Yankees, said of Rodriguez’s return from a yearlong suspension.Rodriguez, along with several veterans, did not make the 160-mile trip for Sunday’s game, a 6-0 Mets victory. Instead, he remained in Tampa to get at-bats in minor league games Sunday and Monday.AdvertisementHe and Torre had a somewhat uneasy relationship during their time together with the Yankees, highlighted during the 2006 playoffs when Torre dropped a struggling Rodriguez to eighth in the batting order.AdvertisementIn “The Yankee Years,” the 2009 book Torre wrote with the Sports Illustrated reporter Tom Verducci, Torre said of Rodriguez: “We never really had anybody who craved the attention. I think when Alex came over he certainly changed just the feel of the club.”But Torre said Sunday that his difficulties with Rodriguez were overstated.“When I had him as a player, there were a lot more stories than reality on our relationship,” he said. “I never really had any problems with him other than trying to figure out the baseball end of it.”Torre is unsure how effective Rodriguez can be this season after missing most of the last two seasons, one because of injuries and the other because of his suspension for his involvement in the Biogenesis drug scandal.Torre said it was unlikely that Rodriguez could avoid creating news outside the lines, in part because “I don’t know if anybody in New York could do that.”CECIL TO CLOSE FOR JAYS Toronto Manager John Gibbons said his closer would be the left-hander Brett Cecil, who missed the start of camp with the flu and then had inflammation in his rotator cuff, which has kept him out of every game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Gibbons said the competition came down to Cecil and the prospect Aaron Sanchez. But when starter Marcus Stroman sustained a season-ending knee injury last week, Sanchez moved into Stroman’s rotation spot. (AP)TWO TIGERS RETURN The Detroit sluggers Miguel Cabrera and Victor Martinez had their first Grapefruit League at-bats this year, with Cabrera 1 for 3 in a 7-7 split-squad game against the Washington Nationals and Martinez 0 for 3 in a 5-3 loss to Atlanta.Cabrera had off-season surgery to remove a bone spur from his right ankle and repair a stress fracture in his right foot. Martinez had surgery to repair a torn meniscus in his left knee in February.AdvertisementTigers Manager Brad Ausmus offered no guarantees about Cabrera’s status for opening day but said the chances that he would play were better than 50-50. (AP)DARVISH RECOVERING Texas’ ace, Yu Darvish, said he was feeling great after having surgery on his right elbow. Darvish, back in Arizona with the Rangers, was speaking publicly for the first time since his season-ending procedure five days earlier.“When I had elbow problems last year, pitches weren’t coming out the way I wanted,” said Darvish, whose final appearance was Aug. 9 because of elbow inflammation. “After I rehab, I’m going to come back stronger than before.” (AP)GAME BEFORE THE GAME The Boston Red Sox squared off in an obstacle course challenge, with the losing team having to take a long bus ride for a spring training game against the Philadelphia Phillies. David Ortiz served as the referee, complete with a whistle.The event’s tasks included sprinting a short distance with a 40-pound sandbag, moving medicine balls and stepping through ladders placed on the ground.Mookie Betts led his team to a win. The losers included Dustin Pedroia and Hanley Ramirez. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Rodriguez Reconnects With Torre.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.