AdvertisementSupported byRangers 7, Ducks 2By Allan KredaThe elite Anaheim Ducks are eager to turn a successful regular season into a bona fide playoff run for the first time since they won the Stanley Cup in 2007.Also vying for the league’s best overall status, the Rangers surely have visions of avenging their five-game loss to Anaheim’s close rival, the Los Angeles Kings, in last June’s Stanley Cup finals.Thus, a meeting between two of the league’s superior squads provided an especially compelling backdrop Sunday at Madison Square Garden with less than three weeks remaining in the regular season.A scoring eruption from the Rangers in a 7-2 win surely had not been expected, as the Rangers had not scored more than four goals since a wild 6-5 win over the Islanders on Feb. 16. And Anaheim, which leads the Western Conference with 99 points, had never yielded more than six goals this season.But the home team scored three times in the first 10 minutes 16 seconds of the contest, causing Anaheim to pull its starting goaltender, Frederik Andersen, and replace him with John Gibson. Corey Perry answered twice for the visitors, and the frenetic first period concluded with the Rangers leading, 3-2.The Ducks were starting a five-game trip to close out March, while the Rangers — with games in hand on nearly every team as they chase the Presidents’ Trophy, which is awarded to the regular-season points leader — continued to ride the hot play of goaltender Cam Talbot.Talbot, 27, who has been stellar in place of the injured Henrik Lundqvist, stopped 36 shots as he improved to 15-3-3 since Lundqvist last played on Feb. 2. He heard cheers of “Talbot! Talbot!” after denying Perry from point-blank range late in the game.“They are the best in the West, and we knew this would be a statement game,” Talbot said. “I just wanted to stay focused and keep playing my game. These were big points for us.” The Rangers are 17-3-3 over all without Lundqvist, who sustained a vascular injury in his neck when he was struck by a shot in a game against Carolina on Jan. 31. What has resulted is something few would have predicted when the team’s franchise player found out he would have to miss significant time.Chris Kreider ignited the home crowd quickly, jamming a rebound past Andersen just 1:24 into the game for his career-best 18th goal of the season.Perry quickly evened the score with a wrist shot past Talbot at 2:50.With Anaheim’s Patrick Maroon penalized for boarding two minutes later, Andersen made a tremendous pad save to deny Rick Nash.But Rangers center Derek Stepan blasted a shot from the point past Andersen at 5:43 before Carl Hagelin’s tip-in extended the lead to 3-1, resulting in Andersen’s trip to the bench.Less than a minute after Gibson entered the fray, Perry scored his team-leading 31st goal at 11:12 to narrow Anaheim’s deficit to 3-2.Perry fought with Rangers defenseman Dan Boyle — his 2010 Team Canada Olympic teammate — near the team benches at 12:06. The Ducks held a 17-11 advantage in shots after the first.J. T. Miller restored the Rangers’ two-goal advantage with his ninth goal at 2:38 of the second, finishing off a slick passing sequence with Keith Yandle and Mats Zuccarello. It was the third assist of the game for Yandle, a defenseman who joined the Rangers in a trade from Arizona on March 1.Stepan scored again at 16:01 of the second, his 13th goal, to make it 5-2 before Jesper Fast and Derick Brassard added third-period scores to complete the barrage.“We weren’t very good from the goaltending on out — I hope it was an anomaly,” Ducks Coach Bruce Boudreau said. “We were playing a team right behind us in the race to be No. 1, and we looked more like No. 30. I’m embarrassed by it.”Last season, the Ducks had 116 points, 1 behind Boston for tops in the N.H.L. But they were upended in the second round of the playoffs by the Kings, the eventual champions. It was only the second time in the past seven years that Anaheim had reached the Western Conference semifinals.Led by Perry, who won the Hart Trophy as the league’s most valuable player in 2010-11, and by the captain Ryan Getzlaf, the Ducks want this spring to mimic 2007, when they beat the Ottawa Senators to win the Stanley Cup.But on this night, the Rangers had differing ideas as they continued a rampage that started with a home win over Pittsburgh on Dec. 8. Beginning with that overtime victory, the Rangers are 35-8-3. They are now tied with the Ducks and the Montreal Canadiens atop the league standings with 99 points — but the Rangers have played two fewer games than the Canadiens and three fewer than the Ducks.Advertisement