By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 22, 2015
Liverpool’s captain, Steven Gerrard, was sent off less than a minute after coming on, and Manchester United secured a 2-1 road victory in the Premier League with two goals from Juan Mata.Gerrard, the most experienced player on the field, was shown a straight red card for stamping on Ander Herrera after replacing Adam Lallana at the start of the second half.“The decision was right,” Gerrard told Sky Sports 1. “I have let my teammates and manager down today; even more importantly, I let all the supporters down, and I take full responsibility for my action. I tried to jump his tackle, I saw his studs and I reacted wrong.”Gerrard, who is set to leave for the Los Angeles Galaxy in the summer, was playing his last match against United.AdvertisementMata scored in the 14th minute and doubled the lead with a spectacular scissor kick in the 59th on an assist from Ángel Di María. Daniel Sturridge scored in the 69th for Liverpool, which fell to its first league defeat since losing by 3-0 at Old Trafford in mid-December.AdvertisementWayne Rooney’s penalty was saved by Liverpool goalkeeper Simon Mignolet in added time after Emre Can’s foul on Daley Blind. But United could afford the missed opportunity.Liverpool defender Martin Skrtel incensed United in the closing moments of the game for what appeared to be a nasty challenge on goalkeeper David de Gea.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fourth-place United strengthened its grip on a Champions League spot, moving 5 points clear of fifth-place Liverpool.CHELSEA BOUNCES BACK Chelsea, receiving a lift from Loïc Rémy off the bench, avoided another setback in its pursuit of the Premier League title by clinching a 3-2 victory at Hull. A week after Chelsea was held to a 1-1 draw by Southampton, Remy scored a fortuitous winner when his shot squirmed through goalkeeper Allan McGregor in the 77th minute.Chelsea is 6 points clear of Manchester City at the top of the league with a game in hand.BAYERN LOSES AT HOME Bayern Munich fell to a rare home loss after a poor display from goalkeeper Manuel Neuer helped Borussia Mönchengladbach to a 2-0 win. Raffael scored both goals.ROBBEN IS INJURED The Bayern Munich winger Arjen Robben was ruled out for several weeks with a stomach muscle tear after his comeback lasted only 24 minutes against Borussia Mönchengladbach. Robben went off after a rough challenge from Tony Jantschke, and Thomas Müller replaced him.Robben could be in doubt for Bayern’s Champions League quarterfinal first leg against Porto on April 15. (REUTERS)JUVENTUS WINS Carlos Tevez scored again to help host Juventus beat Genoa, 1-0, in Serie A and maintain its 14-point advantage over Roma, which secured a 1-0 victory at Cesena. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: United Beats Liverpool, and Gerrard Is Tossed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.