AdvertisementSupported byBy Robert HarmsCHAPEL HILL, N.C. — In this season of many returns — to health, to basketball, to the N.C.A.A. tournament — Sylvia Hatchell has embraced a saying. “I tell people, ‘This is my 40th year,’ but in a lot of ways, it feels like my first,” Hatchell, the 63-year-old coach of the North Carolina women’s basketball team for the past 29 years, said of her coaching career after her fourth-seeded Tar Heels survived No. 13 Liberty, 71-65, in the first round of the N.C.A.A. tournament on Saturday at Carmichael Arena.Hatchell, women’s basketball’s winningest active coach, who was inducted to the Hall of Fame in 2013, learned she had leukemia in October that year. She underwent treatment and missed all last season, which ended for North Carolina with a loss to Stanford in the quarterfinals.A year ago at this time, Hatchell said, she was “probably at my weakest point.” She begged doctors to let her watch North Carolina’s first-round N.C.A.A. tournament game against Tennessee-Martin at Carmichael. They said no, that her immune system was too weak.So Hatchell watched the Tar Heels’ win from her house, four miles from the arena.“Here they were just a few miles away, and I couldn’t even come watch them,” she said.This season, though, after completing rounds of chemotherapy treatments, Hatchell is free of cancer. And with a new perspective, she has led North Carolina to a 25-8 record and a berth in the second round of the tournament, where the Tar Heels will play fifth-seeded Ohio State on Monday night.“It’s not all about basketball,” Hatchell said.This season, Hatchell said, she has placed more emphasis on building relationships and teaching her players life lessons. She has more conversations with their parents, telling them how their daughters have matured. She has organized several nonbasketball team activities and loves to spend time with her players in the locker room, she said, “listening to their music.”Hatchell squinted her eyes in mock pain as she said this, because the musical tastes of a 63-year-old basketball coach do not typically parallel those of a 20-year-old college student.“They always make sure they got the good stuff on when I’m in there,” she said, smiling.Her players, some of whom had never got to know Hatchell before this season, have welcomed her return. “It’s like, ‘Oh, man, my mom’s here now,’ ” said the sophomore forward Stephanie Mavunga, who played her first N.C.A.A. tournament game under Hatchell on Saturday. “She’s like a mama bear around us. She really takes care of us, on and off the court.”Women’s N.C.A.A. bracket.Hatchell said: “I am — I’m like a mama bear. And sometimes, I have to call them in and straighten something out, but they know I’m always there for them. I’ve got their back.”If she’s getting pounded by an opponent under the basket, Mavunga said, Hatchell will make sure the referees are aware.“Your mom’s coming out there, and it’s like, ‘Yo, you’ve got to watch it. They’re hitting my kid,’ ” Mavunga said, laughing. “She’s not going for that.”When she gets really mad, Allisha Gray, a sophomore guard, said, Hatchell will peel off her jacket and curl back her hair behind her ears. Mavunga compared it to the fictional character Horatio Caine of “C.S.I.: Miami,” taking off his sunglasses.“That’s business right there,” Mavunga said. “Don’t let her take off that jacket.”Latifah Coleman, a senior guard, said North Carolina has used Hatchell’s return as motivation to make a deep run in the tournament. “Every time we think about the tournament and last year, we get filled with emotion,” Coleman said, adding that having Hatchell back adds “fuel to the fire.”“It’s more purpose behind what we do and why we do it,” she said.Gray concurred.“You want to make an impact her first year back,” she said. “You want to make it great.”Mavunga recognized this burden during a game earlier this season, when the Tar Heels were playing poorly. From the sideline, Hatchell, her voice quavering, yelled, “Can you guys at least do this for me?”“That really hit home,” Mavunga said, as Coleman whispered those same words and softly pounded her chest twice in the seat next to her.Hatchell may want to win for her players even more than they want to win for her.“I just don’t want to let these kids down,” she said.That is because this, her 40th season, which feels like her first, has taught her to treasure simple conversations with players and intense tournament games.“Trust me, I don’t take it for granted, not one bit,” Hatchell said. “You know, I’ve been smiling for the last five or six months. Everything that I do — you would think it would be old to me. But no, it’s special. This is really, really special.”Advertisement