AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Harvey AratonA basketball guy walks into a Jersey City bar, looks around and can’t believe his luck. The N.B.A.’s most valuable player is perched on a stool, watching World Cup soccer.Such a fortuitous encounter occurred during the summer of 2006, months after Steve Nash had claimed the second of consecutive M.V.P. awards, placing him at the height of his premier point-guard prowess, when he happened upon an establishment called Rosie Radigan’s with a couple of friends.Richie McKeever, the owner of the now-closed bar in the heart of the district colloquially known as Wall Street West, picked up the telephone and called his good friend Bob Hurley Sr.“Why don’t you come down?” McKeever said. It was about 12:30 on a Friday afternoon, the lunch crowd settled in, when Hurley sat down at the bar. Two seats away was Nash, who during the off-season lived in Manhattan’s TriBeCa neighborhood and was on in his way to the Newark airport for a flight to Phoenix.The bartender mentioned to Nash that the gentleman sitting nearby happened to be Hurley, a basketball legend in his own right as the (now Hall of Fame) coach at St. Anthony High School and the father of a pretty fair former Duke point guard of the same name.“He slides his lunch down the bar, moves right over and we sit there talking for 45 minutes,” Hurley said. “He’s telling me how when he was growing up he watched and studied how Bobby played at Duke, about his workouts and drills and everything he’s had to do to compete at that level. “After 45 minutes, he apologizes that he has to go, goes and thanks Richie, leaves the waitress a nice tip and leaves. I’d say there were about 40 people in the place and I don’t think one of them besides me, Richie and the bartender knew that the M.V.P. of the N.B.A. was sitting there the whole time.”An ultimate team player, Nash blended in even as he stood out. Now he is officially gone from the N.B.A., having announced his retirement at 41 on Saturday after almost three seasons undercut by age and frailty with the Los Angeles Lakers. Hurley said it was important that Nash’s genius from his career prime not be obscured by his endgame misfortune; that we remember him most for his four seasons at the helm of Coach Mike D’Antoni’s speedball offense with the Phoenix Suns.In the eye of a high school coach who was never in it for the money, Nash’s artistry during that period was the essence of individual expression connected to the welfare of the team.“I remember once seeing him trapped on the baseline, and I’m thinking, What can he do here?” Hurley said. “All of a sudden, he makes this lefty, behind-the-back pass to a guy wide open for a 3 at the top of the key. I mean, your jaw drops. “And I remember telling him that day how amazing it was that he could do everything with his right hand and left hand equally well. How he always had the presence on his drive to not pick up the dribble until he had a play to make.” While not exactly an example of the best way to win an N.B.A. title, Nash and his Suns were a much-needed reminder of how much fun basketball could be. They were a breath of antithetical air following the stultifying and point-challenged scrums that threatened the popularity of the sport. Stylistically, the Suns were an accelerated version of basketball that the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson, dean of triangle studies, believes has become an all-too-common strategy: spreading the floor, playing off the high-screen-and-roll, breaking down the defense, shooting the 3. But even he would admit that Nash conducted it symphonically and spectacularly, to the rhythms of his floppy hair and magnetic dribble.In paying tribute, in trying to do right by a great player’s legacy, we sometimes overdo. It is fair to question whether Nash’s career contributions were really as impressive as or significant to the current era of maestro point guards like Chris Paul and Stephen Curry as, say, Jason Kidd’s. Nash is third on the career assists list, one ahead of Mark Jackson and 1,756 behind Kidd. But in the 2001-2 season, Kidd reinvented a terrible Nets team overnight into an N.B.A. finalist, albeit in a weaker conference.D’Antoni’s teams — and Nash, in particular — could never shake the reputation of being defensively soft. They could never rise to the postseason occasion against Jackson’s Shaq-and-Kobe Lakers or the Tim Duncan-led San Antonio Spurs, who also became more pleasing to the purist’s palate with the additions of Manu Ginobili and Tony Parker. The Suns’ credo — Seven Seconds or Less — was a catchy theme ultimately exposed as an entertaining gimmick. But who would argue that Nash, for most of his N.B.A. years, would have excelled within any offensive concept? He was celebrated for his work ethic, but let’s also note that such rare court vision is not practiced as much as it is a birth blessing. Born in South Africa, reared in western Canada by parents who couldn’t live with apartheid, Nash instinctively embraced expression. Back in 2003, he was a rare professional athlete to question the war in Iraq and later spoke out against Arizona laws that he thought were discriminatory against Hispanics.Applaud him for that courage and for his court vision, and remember that this unimposing physical specimen was recruited by one college (Santa Clara) when considering his historical place among the pros.Never won a title; never made the finals. Yet no less a teacher of teenagers than Bob Hurley Sr. uses Nash’s workout videos — just the point guard alone in a gym, dribbling and firing up as many shots as he can in a fixed time period — as an annual learning tool.“Since I met him, I have the kids watch it,” Hurley said.As legacies go, championships aside, what’s better than that?Advertisement