AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenCOLUMBUS, Ohio — It did not take long for the West Virginia players to be asked the “K” question. The Mountaineers had just defeated Maryland, 69-59, to advance to the round of 16 of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament, where their opponent will be the undefeated Kentucky Wildcats.The players had barely settled into their chairs when someone asked about Thursday night’s game against Kentucky.“It’s another team,” forward Devin Williams said. “They put their drawers on the same way we do,” he added.West Virginia Coach Bob Huggins, asked a variation of the same question, dispelled the notion that Thursday’s showdown was just another game, though not because of the opponent.“It’s not another game,” he said. “It’s in the Sweet 16. It’s in the N.C.A.A. tournament, and it’s one-and-done. So you just can’t say it’s another game.”The first two rounds of this year’s tournament have been among the most evenly matched in years, with every team seemingly capable of beating any other.With one exception: Nobody seems good enough to beat Kentucky.As I’ve watched the smorgasbord of close games and gritty performances, one question keeps popping up: Are any of these teams really good enough to beat Kentucky? Some have the size but lack the speed and quickness. Others may have the speed and quickness but lack the depth. Some, like West Virginia, have the toughness but not the size.This is the first time in nearly 25 years that the entire field except for one team can be considered the underdog. Whether it’s Michigan State or Arizona, U.C.L.A. or Notre Dame, North Carolina or North Carolina State, in a matchup against Kentucky, the Wildcats would be the prohibitive favorite. The persistent question going into the Midwest Regional next weekend in Cleveland is whether anyone can push the Wildcats.The only entity with any success so far has been the oddsmakers: Kentucky has failed to cover the spread in two successive tournament games.On the Wildcats’ two most recent trips to the national championship game, there was at least uncertainty. Could a freshman-heavy team long on talent but short of experience withstand the pressure of a national championship game?The 2012 team succeeded, beating Kansas in the final. But last year’s Kentucky team was schooled by UConn, a defeat that may have been the impetus for several top players, including the twin guards Aaron and Andrew Harrison, to return for another shot. That has made this year’s unbeaten and top-ranked Kentucky squad, bolstered by a new crop of star freshmen, seem like the perfect storm in basketball: youth, experience and talent.The only time I can remember a college team entering the tournament with this aura of invincibility was 1991, when the U.N.L.V. Runnin’ Rebels arrived at the Final Four as the defending national champion and with a comfortable regular-season victory over their top title challenger, Arkansas, in hand.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.In fact, they rolled as the winners of 34 consecutive games that season, and 45 straight over all.Grant Hill, who is part of the CBS broadcast team for this year’s tournament, was a freshman on the Duke team that ran into that steamroller in the semifinals that year.A year earlier, U.N.L.V. had set a record by defeating Duke, 103-73, in the final — the largest margin of victory in championship game history. When Duke and U.N.L.V. met again in the semifinals in 1991, many expected a similar beating.“When you go back and look at that team, they were dominant, they didn’t have a close game,” Hill said. “They didn’t have a close moment that year.”In the rematch, the Blue Devils came up with a plan that did not involve trading punches.They would try to keep the game close, with the idea being that they had played several close games during the Atlantic Coast Conference season while U.N.L.V. had more or less coasted, at one point winning by an average of 32 points a game. When the game got tight late, they hoped, the experience of having been in close games might swing the result.“Our strategy was let’s just keep it close,” Hill remembered. “Let’s come out, hit ’em first, let them know this is not last season. Let’s manage the game and when we go down the stretch, we had been in close games, they hadn’t.”Duke won, 79-77.Unlike this Kentucky team, which has not yet won a championship, the 1991 U.N.L.V. team was virtually the same team that won the title a year earlier. That would be unheard-of in the current era of one-and-done college stars. It also made them more fearsome.Kentucky, despite its unbeaten record and top ranking, might not have that advantage.“I don’t know if the field fears this Kentucky team as much,” Hill said. “I think they are feared, but it’s not like everyone was against U.N.L.V.”Great teams find a way to win, and Kentucky throughout this season has found ways to win while opponents have found a way to lose.“Every team they play thinks they’re going to be the one to beat Kentucky,” L.S.U. Coach Johnny Jones said after a close loss last month.The Wildcats have greater and better depth than that 1991 U.N.L.V. team — or any other team, for that matter. But are they beatable?If so, will undersized West Virginia be the one to take Kentucky down? “They didn’t think we’d get past Buffalo,” guard Juwan Staten said. “We got past Buffalo. They didn’t think we’d get past Maryland. We got past Maryland. I’m pretty sure nobody in the world thinks we’re going to get past Kentucky besides the 1.2 million that’s in West Virginia.”There is a growing consensus that the Wildcats are excellent, though short of unbeatable.But there is a lot of brave talk in postgame news conferences about what should have happened, or could have happened, during a loss to Kentucky.Until some team proves differently, the entire field is fighting for the right to be this year’s runner-up.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement