AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseORLANDO, Fla. — The golf treadmill was turned up another notch at the Arnold Palmer Invitational, and Henrik Stenson was struggling to keep pace. Still, he managed to create enough momentum to carry him to a runner-up finish, and a third consecutive top-five showing, two days later. After the first six holes of his second round at Bay Hill, Stenson was even for the day and losing ground steadily to a lead pack that included the eventual winner, Matt Every. It was hot and humid, perfect conditions to wilt a golfer’s will. At four under par for the tournament, Stenson could have let his concentration lapse, lost a few more shots to par and slipped off the treadmill. He could have spent the weekend with his feet up, in his air-conditioned home a few miles from the course.But Stenson was not just trying to win this tournament; he was grooming his game for next month’s Masters, where he will try for the 10th time to become the first Swede to plant his flag at Augusta National. Winning that tournament requires unbroken concentration and infinite patience. So instead of going through the motions, Stenson treated each shot on the back side Friday as if he were grinding for a green jacket. He finished with six birdies and never stopped pushing.Stenson played his final 48 holes in 14 under, including a two-under 70 on Sunday. Holding a two-stroke lead at the day’s start, Stenson missed a 21-foot birdie putt on the 72nd hole that would have forced a playoff with Every, who closed with a 66 for a total of 19-under 269 to secure a spot in the Masters.Every, also the Arnold Palmer Invitational’s 2014 champion, is the third player to repeat here, after Loren Roberts and Tiger Woods, an eight-time winner who missed the event this year because he has taken an indefinite leave from competition.Referring to Woods, Every joked, “I actually told him, Don’t worry, man; I’ll hold it down for you until you get it back.”With his victory last year, Every secured his place on the PGA Tour for two years, but that was not the impetus, he said, for the changes to his swing that he instituted shortly thereafter.“I’m thinking about getting better and winning again, not will I have a job for two more years,” Every said, adding, “I want my good shots to be really good shots, you know, and my bad shots to be what my good shots used to be.”He made strides toward that goal, finding 41 of 56 fairways and 58 greens. Every, who played two groups ahead of Stenson, made three birdies on the back nine, including a 17-footer on 18.Stenson played with Morgan Hoffmann, who was five under after eight holes but struggled down the stretch. Hoffmann carded a 71 to finish fourth at 15 under. The two played in 3 hours 58 minutes and were put on the clock a couple of times for falling out of position. The first time was on the sixth hole, Stenson said, and it happened again on the 15th. He three-putted the next two holes, for a bogey on the 15th and a par on the par-5 16th.He said he rushed on those holes because he was hyperaware that an official was watching with a stopwatch in hand. “I wasn’t in the right frame of mind on a few of those putts, and it cost me,” Stenson said glumly.Despite the loss, Stenson said he felt as if he had gained a lot by playing his way into contention. It is rewarding, he said, to know the grinding that he did Friday paid off in a pressure-filled back nine two days later.“I just tried to refocus, dig a bit deeper,” Stenson said. He added: “I’m trying to get into that mind-set, because you can’t be just average and then all of the sudden try to turn it on when you get to Augusta. You’ve got to try to push yourself to get to be where you want to be with your decision making and routine, patience and all the rest. I’m trying hard, and hopefully I can keep it and make it better going into Augusta, and if I do that, I know I’ll give myself better chances to succeed.”With a win at Augusta, Rory McIlroy would complete a career Grand Slam. But after winning in Dubai in February on the European Tour, McIlroy has broken 70 just once in 10 rounds on the PGA Tour. He closed with a 70 on Sunday to finish tied for 11th at 11-under 277.McIlroy’s next start will be the Masters. Until then, he plans to work on his wedge play and his putting. Sunday’s round included a few misses from inside 6 feet. His concentration was not as keen as it will need to be, but McIlroy did not sound worried. Like Stenson, he saw enough good signs to believe he was headed toward a peak performance at the Masters.“I sort of like that I have some things to work on,” McIlroy said. “If I had played really well the last few weeks, it’s almost like, how do I keep this going? It’s nice to be able to try and build yourself up.”For Every, it was nice to know that his rebuilt swing held up. “I just found a way today,” he said.Advertisement