By RAPHAEL MINDERMARCH 22, 2015
BARCELONA, Spain —  Last October, Luis Suárez made his debut for F.C. Barcelona in a disappointing 3-1 loss to Real Madrid. He was substituted during that game after a long ban that had prompted questions over whether he could return to form and justify the record transfer fee that brought him here.On Sunday, Suárez repaid at least part of Barcelona’s investment by scoring a spectacular and decisive goal in a 2-1 victory over Real Madrid in the latest Clásico between the two giants of Spanish soccer. With the win, Barcelona opened up a 4-point lead over Madrid at the top of La Liga, with 10 games remaining in the season.For long spells of a pulsating game, Madrid seemed in control. Despite having been welcomed by deafening boos from the sellout crowd at Camp Nou, Cristiano Ronaldo started the match brightly, hitting the post with a narrow-angle, close-range shot off a perfect cross from Karim Benzema.But it was Madrid’s defense that eventually conceded a relatively soft goal, with Real Madrid defenders Dani Carvajal and Sergio Ramos allowing the French defender Jérémy Mathieu to score his first Liga goal for Barcelona. Mathieu glided past Carvajal and Ramos to head a free kick from Lionel Messi beyond the reach of Madrid’s goalkeeper, Iker Casillas.AdvertisementAfter Neymar missed a chance alone in front of the goal for Barcelona, it was Madrid’s turn to regain the momentum and score a deserved equalizer. Luka Modric found Benzema, who once more set up Ronaldo, this time with a brilliant back-heel. Ronaldo’s goal was his 31st in the Liga, one behind Messi’s total.AdvertisementIn fact, traffic at the end of the first half was mostly one way, with Madrid getting close on at least three occasions. In the 39th minute, a goal by Gareth Bale was ruled offside. Three minutes later, Barcelona goalkeeper Claudio Bravo flicked a long-distance strike from Ronaldo over the bar. Bale then missed another great chance, sending his shot just wide after Barcelona’s defense failed to clear a corner kick.The first half also confirmed the importance of Modric, recovered from an injury, to Real Madrid. Modric, a diminutive Croatian playmaker, dominated the midfield and distilled several brilliant passes. In the second half, however, he ran out of steam — as did the rest of his team. He was eventually substituted.After a stunning start to the season, in which it won a club-record 22 matches in a row, Real Madrid started 2015 by losing to Valencia and then had several disappointing performances. That bad spell coincided with an injury to Modric in November that kept him on the sideline until this month.The second half started with Madrid again in command. After another superb exchange of passes with Ronaldo, Benzema forced Bravo into a great save.Then, however, came Suárez’s moment of brilliance. Dani Alves lofted a long ball from well within his own half of the field, and Suárez somehow controlled it on the run and fired into the opposite bottom corner of the net.After the match, Luis Enrique, Barcelona’s coach, said that the goal would have been “within the reach of only a few.” He added: “That is why we paid what we paid for Suárez.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was the kind of goal that had made Suárez such an outstanding player at Liverpool, but also one that bore little resemblance to the trademark short-passing style that Barcelona had relied upon under Enrique’s predecessors, when its midfield was often dominated by Xavi. Xavi, who came on as a late substitute, made his 42nd appearance in a Clásico, equaling the record.Suárez’s goal not only put Barcelona back in the lead but also appeared to deflate Ronaldo, Modric and their Madrid teammates. Madrid produced only one other clear-cut chance, when Benzema hit a powerful shot that was inadvertently deflected by Javier Mascherano, forcing Bravo to pull off another fine diving save, low to his left.AdvertisementAfter the match, Modric told journalists that Suárez’s strike had unraveled Madrid’s game plan. “After the second goal, we weren’t a team anymore,” he said.In fact, with Madrid forced to push forward in search of an equalizer, Barcelona started to find more open spaces on the counterattack and had a handful of chances to seal the contest. In the final minutes, Jordi Alba and Messi forced Casillas to make several fine saves.After the game, Enrique insisted that Barcelona’s victory over its archrival was “in no way decisive” for the league race. He also paid tribute to Madrid, acknowledging that it could have scored more goals in a first half that it dominated.Carlo Ancelotti, the Madrid coach, also noted the seesaw nature of the game, as well as the decisive role of Suárez, as reasons to hope that Madrid could still rebound in the league race. “For one hour, we played better,” he said, “but in the final 30 minutes, the counterattacking of Barca was frightening.”A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Stunning Strike Cushions Barcelona’s Lead and Redeems a Star .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.