AdvertisementSupported byBy Viv BernsteinCHARLOTTE, N.C. — Few men’s basketball programs have been as successful as Duke in recruiting talented players who come to the university for one season before they are allowed to collect an N.B.A. paycheck.Last year, the Blue Devils featured Jabari Parker, who stopped by for a year before being drafted No. 2 over all. In 2012, it was Austin Rivers. Kyrie Irving came and went in 2011.This year’s Blue Devils include Jahlil Okafor, a projected top-three selection, along with two other so-called one-and-done players: forward Justise Winslow and guard Tyus Jones. They have helped Duke earn a No. 1 seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s South Region and a top-five national ranking. Having waited the requisite one year out of high school before being allowed to declare themselves eligible for the draft, as per N.B.A. rules since 2005, all three are likely first-round selections in June if they opt in, as some expect they will.Whether it was fair to oblige them to play a year of college basketball is another matter. Or no matter at all, as Winslow pointed out on Saturday as Duke prepared for Sunday’s South Region game against No. 8 seed San Diego State in the round of 32 at Time Warner Cable Arena, which Duke won, 68-49.“Whatever the rule is, that’s what you’ve got to follow,” Winslow said. “The rule is right now, one year. Whatever we think is fair, whatever, doesn’t really matter. Just abiding by the rule is the biggest thing.”Indeed, the athletes most directly affected by the rules created through negotiation between the N.B.A. and its players’ association are not members of the league or the union. They have no say about the rule that forces them to wait a year after high school before being eligible for the draft.So it is up to others to speak for them. But some of the most informed voices on the subject — college coaches — remain mixed. The latest to join the fray is Rick Pitino of Louisville, who suggested during a radio show last week it was time to get rid of one-and-done once and for all.“It’s not about education,” Pitino said. “It’s not a good system.”Pitino believes the N.B.A. should revert to its previous rule, which allowed players to go directly from high school to the pros. Those who do not make it right away can go to the N.B.A. Development League. Those who choose college would have to stay for two or three years, similar to the rule for baseball players, who are allowed to weigh their options in high school after being drafted but must stay with a program for three years if they opt for college.Pitino made clear this was not a criticism of rival Kentucky, a program that has thrived with one-and-done players and is the top seed in this year’s tournament. As Pitino points out, Kentucky can win under any system. As can Duke.Not surprisingly, though, Kentucky Coach John Calipari disagrees. He does not think there should be a long-term commitment to a university.“I say this: Every decision we should make — which we hadn’t for 40 years — should be about these kids,” Calipari said in Lexington last month. “Somebody came up with the baseball rule. Well now let me ask you this: So your son is 6-5, skinny, and over the summer he grows seven inches and gains weight and becomes Shaq, but he had to go to college because at the time he was 6-5 and 120. He should stay in school three years because of the baseball rule? Now is that good for the program, the coaches? Or the players?”San Diego State Coach Steve Fisher, who once coached the famed Fab Five at Michigan, takes a simpler approach. He believes the N.B.A. should let athletes turn pro when they want, whether it’s in high school or after a year or two of college. Just the way it used to be.“I like the way it was before the one-and-done,” said Fisher, who pointed to the damage done when college athletes were seriously injured and lost their opportunity to earn a living as a professional because of the one-and-done rule. “I think if you’re talented enough and somebody’s coming and saying we want you and we will pay you millions to have you, they should be allowed to do it.“Nobody bats an eyeball when a 16-year-old turns pro in tennis or other sports. So there’s value to be gotten obviously from going to college, but I don’t think you should say you have to stay X number of years if you’re talented enough.”But not everyone agrees with that, either. Michigan State Coach Tom Izzo wonders how many high school athletes have turned pro only to find out too late that they are unprepared and wind up with few or no options.“My biggest worry is what’s happening to these guys,” Izzo said. “Someday, 10 years from now, there’s going to be a study of how many kids came out and ended up on the streets. That’s the crime of this whole thing.”What would Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski prefer? He said the most informed voices were as powerless as the athletes.“It really doesn’t matter what I want, it’s what the players’ union and the N.B.A. would decide on,” said Krzyzewski, who said the N.B.A. may be considering everything from reverting to the old way to a two-and-done rule.The N.B.A. collective bargaining agreement can be renegotiated in 2017, and the issue could be addressed at that point. But it is not likely that those affected most by whatever is decided will be party to those conversations.“Players, we don’t make the rules,” said Jones, the Duke freshman. “So just kind of the new era. Ten, 15 years ago, players were used to being able to come out right after high school, but it’s just something that’s changed in this day and age.“It’s one of those things where you can’t focus on it, can’t worry about it and that’s, personally, that’s not where our focus is at this point.”Advertisement