By MATT HIGGINSMARCH 22, 2015
TORONTO —  The pulsating beat of dance music boomed across the visitors’ locker room at Air Canada Centre after a St. Louis Blues practice this month.Amused teammates and reporters turned their attention to a corner, where the source, a grinning Vladimir Tarasenko, quickly lowered the volume again.“I try to switch it sometimes,” said Tarasenko, who cannot abide the country music favored by some of his teammates.“This is Russian,” he said of his selection.A 23-year-old right wing from Novosibirsk on the Siberian plains, Tarasenko has emerged as a budding star for the Blues, who have the second best record in the Western Conference. Revamped with several off-season free-agent signings, St. Louis is the second-highest scoring team in the Western Conference, led by Tarasenko’s 35 goals and 35 assists.AdvertisementAn All-Star this season, Tarasenko has embraced the exacting structure of Coach Ken Hitchcock’s defensive systems. Still, he owes much of his success to familiar sounds from home.AdvertisementTarasenko consults regularly with his father, Andrei, who coached him with Sibir Novosibirsk, a professional team in the Kontinental Hockey League. After games, he phones his grandfather, who helped raise a young Vladimir while Andrei was playing professional hockey in the Russian Superleague, in which he was the 1997-98 scoring champion.“My grandpa and my father helped me a lot,” Vladimir Tarasenko said, adding that his sports pedigree came with increased pressure. “I think it’s more tough, mentally. When your father plays really good, he expects it from you, too. My father told me: ‘You’re going to be better than me. That’s going to be your goal.’ That’s what I try to do.”At 6 feet and 219 pounds, Tarasenko is built like a tank, and fans started calling him Tank after he was selected by the Blues with the 16th overall pick in the 2010 N.H.L. draft. But teammates refer to him as Vladdie, or Vova, Russian shorthand for Vladimir.In Russia, his father’s teams employed defensive and neutral-zone strategies similar to those favored by Hitchcock, and Tarasenko sought out Hitchcock’s former players for advice before arriving in St. Louis. Still, the transition to the smaller dimensions of N.H.L. rinks, and a schedule with 20 more games than are played in Europe has not been easy, he said.In his first season with the Blues, in 2012-13, Tarasenko scored eight goals in 38 games. Last season, he raised his total to 21 goals in 64 games. This season, he has thrived with center Jori Lehtera and left wing Jaden Schwartz on the Blues’ second line.Lehtera, a 27-year-old Finn who signed with the Blues in the off-season, played with a teenage Tarasenko for Sibir Novosibirsk, and he was eager to be reunited in St. Louis, where he occupies an adjacent locker.“When I signed, I was hoping to get to play with him because I’m kind of a passer and he’s a goal scorer,” Lehtera said. “I like to give pucks to him, and he has an unbelievable shot. He can score a lot of goals.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lehtera has behaved like a big brother to Tarasenko, Hitchcock said.“Lehtera really took him under his wing,” he said. “They were linemates together, and Jori’s helping him along. He helps him in a good way by keeping him focused and calm, not allowing him to get too high or too low.”AdvertisementThe Blues were a team of wild fluctuations during Tarasenko’s first two seasons, each time finishing in the top four in the Western Conference and seizing a 2-0 advantage in the opening round of the playoffs before ultimately collapsing.Those Blues teams tended to play a grinding defensive style, relying on offensive contributions from David Backes, their center and captain, and wings T. J. Oshie and Alex Steen. Those three again make up the Blues’ No. 1 line, drawing a checking role while trying to outscore the opposition’s top scorers with a simple strategy that sets the tone for the team.“They are just a blue-collar team, whether going to the net, skating hard, forechecking hard, shooting the puck,” Toronto Maple Leafs defenseman Roman Polak said.Yet Hitchcock said new personnel permitted his perennially stingy team to attack more. In addition to Lehtera, the Blues added the free agent Paul Stastny, a leading two-way center who grew up in St. Louis, where his father, the Hall of Famer Peter Stastny, played and worked for the Blues.Paul Stastny, who has scored more than 20 goals six times in his career, plays on the third line, creating matchup headaches for opponents.“This is a different group,” Hitchcock said. “This isn’t the same team.”He added: “We do more off the rush than we’ve ever done. We have more ability to quick strike. We don’t play on the grind like we did before. This is a team that’s never out of a game.”Steen, too, has noticed a difference, with the top two lines complementing each other. With nine games remaining in the regular season, Steen is on pace for a career high in points, and so is Schwartz.“It’s a two-way street,” Steen said. “Their work has helped us, and I think our work has helped them.”Tarasenko turned philosophical when discussing this season’s results.“When you try for a long time to win something and it doesn’t work, you try something different,” he said. “Right now, we know we can’t win without unbelievable team spirit. A team that doesn’t have team spirit will never win. That’s why we try to keep it up in the locker room and try to be — not close friends — but try to be good to each other, nice to each other.”AdvertisementFor a team with a blue note as its crest, that includes sometimes tolerating others’ taste in music.A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: In Defense-First St. Louis, the Score Gets a Rewrite.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.