By BILLY WITZMARCH 22, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  At the crack of the bat, Yankees center fielder Jose Pirela raced toward the center-field wall in pursuit of the ball. When left fielder Ramon Flores saw Pirela, a converted second baseman, still sprinting as he approached the warning track, he called out to him.“I yelled, Be careful with the wall,” Flores said. “I guess he didn’t hear me.”Pirela leapt and crashed into the wall, the ball fell to the ground, and by the time Flores retrieved it and threw it back toward the infield, the Mets’ leadoff hitter, Juan Lagares, had circled the bases for a home run.It was the first batter of the day for the Mets, but the play tipped off what kind of day Sunday would be for both teams, when the Mets’ 6-0 victory left the home portion of an announced crowd of 8,205 at Tradition Field exhilarated and the visitors wondering about their health.Lagares’s home run was one of four hit by the Mets, including blasts by David Wright and Lucas Duda off Yankees starter C. C. Sabathia, which accompanied another dominating pitching performance by Matt Harvey in his return from elbow surgery.AdvertisementBut the rare exhibition between the teams — who have met only one other year (2012) since the Yankees moved their spring base to Tampa from Fort Lauderdale in 1996 — was most notable for Pirela’s first-inning crash.AdvertisementAfter sitting on the ground for several minutes, Pirela, who complained of dizziness, was helped onto a cart, which took him from the field. He was then taken to a nearby hospital for tests and observation, and was later discharged. A CT brain scan and a cervical magnetic resonance imaging exam came back normal, according to a team spokesman.“He did not feel good,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “Even though there’s padding, he hit it pretty hard.”Pirela, who signed with the Yankees as a 16-year-old out of Venezuela, blossomed last year at Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre as a hitter. A second baseman throughout most of his minor league career, Pirela has played in the outfield this spring, mostly in left, in the hope that he could emerge as a utility player. He has consistently hit line drives with his short, quick swing and runs the bases aggressively.“Right now, I like to play second base, but I play everywhere,” Pirela, who is batting .370 in the exhibition season, said last week in an interview. “If I play the outfield good that may make them put me in the lineup. I want to play every day.”With two weeks left before the Yankees head north to start the season, Girardi said it was possible that Pirela’s spring training could be over.Even with increased awareness of head injuries and more attentive testing — Major League Baseball administers neurological tests before the season to use as a baseline — the effect of these injuries may not be fully appreciated. An American Journal of Sports Medicine study published last week suggests that position players in the major leagues who sustain concussions do not hit as effectively in their first weeks back from the injury.“A lot of times, players don’t talk about that because they want to stay in, but he was honest and he didn’t feel good,” Girardi said of Pirela. “We are much more aware of signs and when a player might need some time off than we were before because of all the tests that we have done and the communication and the studies that we have done.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pirela was in the lineup Sunday because most of the Yankees’ outfielders — including Brett Gardner, Carlos Beltran, Chris Young and the injured Jacoby Ellsbury — stayed in Tampa rather than make the 160-mile trip, which began at 7:30 a.m.AdvertisementThe Yankees did bring their starting infield: third baseman Chase Headley, shortstop Didi Gregorius, second baseman Stephen Drew and first baseman Mark Teixeira. But they were still no match for Harvey, who allowed two singles and struck out four in five and two-thirds innings.“That was a good test,” said Harvey, who threw 60 pitches in his fourth start of the spring as his earned run average fell to 1.26. “Obviously, the workload is increasing. I felt pretty good into the sixth inning and was commanding pretty much everything.”It was a good day all around for the Mets. Wright, in addition to his home run, made a diving stop of Teixeira’s hard grounder to start an inning-ending double play in the seventh. Eric Campbell hit another homer in the eighth for the Mets, and Ruben Tejada nearly followed him when his drive to left field landed just below the top of the wall.The Mets fans in the sold-out stadium so enjoyed it that they began breaking into “Let’s go, Mets” chants. It is not often that the teams play in the spring. They played twice in 2012 after a 16-year hiatus but had not played since until Sunday. The teams play Wednesday in Tampa.There were few people in attendance Sunday who were not aligned with one of the New York teams. One of them was Tina Ivany, who spends the winter nearby with her husband, John, escaping Vancouver.“We root for the Blue Jays,” she said. “I’m here to listen to all the New York fans yelling at each other.”INSIDE PITCHThough C. C. Sabathia allowed three home runs in two and two-thirds innings, he was not displeased with his second start of spring after missing most of last season with a knee injury. His velocity was solid again, hitting 94 miles per hour, according to the pitching coach Larry ROTHSCHILD, who said he was focused on Sabathia’s health and arm strength. “If he’s encouraged, I’m encouraged,” Rothschild said. ... Alex Rodriguez and Carlos Beltran each had two hits in five plate appearances in a minor league game in Tampa. Rodriguez played third base.Peter Kerasotis contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: From First Inning, Yanks Are Rattled by the Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.