By PETER KERASOTISMARCH 22, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Just months after he signed with the Mets out of high school, Steven Matz felt pain in his elbow. He tried to shake it, to massage it, but the pain persisted.A doctor’s visit led to tests that led to the grimmest of diagnoses for a pitcher: a torn ulnar collateral ligament. Tommy John surgery was required, and on May 18, 2010, while still only 18, Matz joined a long line of Mets pitchers who have felt the same pain and endured, or will endure, the same surgery.Matt Harvey. Jacob deGrom. Bobby Parnell. Josh Edgin. Jenrry Mejia. And, most recently, Zack Wheeler.The standard timetable for recovery from the surgery is 12 to 14 months. But the reconstruction of Matz’s elbow carried a different narrative. Twelve to 14 months stretched into a year and a half and, eventually, two years. DeGrom, who rehabbed regularly with Matz, recalled feeling his newfound friend’s frustration; but more tellingly, he noticed his fortitude.Advertisement“I saw a toughness in him,” deGrom said of Matz. “It showed me what kind of person he is. He wasn’t going to give up.”AdvertisementThat is one reason the Mets, who optioned Matz to their minor-league camp on Saturday, expect to see him pitch his way onto the major league roster this season.That would not surprise the two people who know Matz best — his parents, Ron and Lori. Growing up in Stony Brook, N.Y., Matz would show up at his older brother Jonathon’s Little League games wearing a team jersey that dangled below his knees, all but willing himself onto the field to play with the older boys. Once he did, his competitive nature was obvious.“I would not say Steven was a sore loser; that wasn’t him,” Lori Matz said. “But he wanted to win. If he didn’t, he’d get upset.”He could pitch a no-hitter, she said, but if he struck out, he would return to his Long Island home and work on his swing until dark.Ron Matz, who coached a travel baseball team, tethered a ball to a pole in the family’s backyard for Steven to practice hitting. If Steven was not on that after striking out, he was asking someone to toss him baseballs, which he would hit into a backyard net.“I spent a lot of hours sitting on a bucket, throwing him soft toss,” Lori said. “We all did.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Matz’s work ethic blossomed at Ward Melville High School in East Setauket. The baseball coach, Lou Petrucci, routinely opens the school gym weekday mornings at 6 so that his players can get in a workout before classes. He recalled the time Matz, on the varsity as a sophomore, called him one morning at 5:30.“Coach, where are you?” he asked.“That is the heart of who Steven Matz is,” Petrucci said. “He’d be there a half-hour early, and he was always the last guy to leave practice, taking extra grounders, getting in extra hitting. I remember many times his dad waiting for him because he was the last one to leave.”AdvertisementBut Matz’s dream of a professional career appeared headed for an early end when his left elbow continued to ache long after his surgery.Seeking answers, Matz visited James Andrews, the orthopedic surgeon, who told Matz that he had either scar tissue or another tear that would require a second operation.Andrews told Matz there was only one way to know for sure: throw a baseball as hard as he could.“He told me to air it out,” Matz said.So he did.“And I felt — nothing,” Matz said. “Absolutely nothing. No pain.”Excited, he sent his father a text message saying he had thrown 98 miles per hour and felt great. “And I haven’t had any pain since,” Matz said.He finished the 2012 season playing rookie league ball, pitching 29 innings for the Mets’ affiliate in Kingsport, Tenn., going 2-1 with a 1.55 earned run average. Since then, he has risen steadily through the Mets’ system. After going 10-9 last year between Class A Port St. Lucie and Class AA Binghamton, Matz was named the organization’s pitcher of the year, a signal that he had moved ahead of another top Mets prospect, Noah Syndegaard.Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson would not rank either prospect, but said of Matz, now 23: “He’s been outstanding. He hasn’t done anything in this camp to undermine the impression he’s made the last couple of years. It’s only reinforced the general impression.”And that general impression is that Matz, who was optioned to Class AAA Las Vegas on Saturday after posting a 2.08 spring-training E.R.A., will get called up sometime this season. Dan Warthen, the pitching coach, said as much — “I would not be surprised if sometime this year we see Steven Matz” — and Manager Terry Collins was effusive.“I happened to be the field coordinator when we signed this guy,” he said. “When you saw his arm coming out of high school, you had to think that if he could ever control it, he was going to be special. And he’s special. We certainly think the sky’s the limit. There is a huge, huge ceiling for him.”A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets See Much Potential in Demoted but Tenacious Pitcher.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.