AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Huw RichardsLONDON — Ireland will go to this year’s Rugby Union World Cup as the European Six Nations champion after taking the title on one of the wildest, highest-scoring days in the 132-year history of the tournament.Its captain, Paul O’Connell, was handed the tournament trophy in Murrayfield stadium in Edinburgh more than two and a half hours after it had completed a 40-10 victory over Scotland.That win was enough to take Ireland (4-1) past Wales (4-1) on points differential. But with matches staggered so that they could all be shown live on television, Ireland had to wait to see if England (3-1 before kickoff), which was playing last at home to France at Twickenham Stadium in London, could overtake it. Thousands of Irish fans stayed at Murrayfield to watch the match on the stadium screens.England failed, but only just. That it was pressing for the score that would have made it champion was a suitable finish to a day that saw 221 points, including 27 tries, scored in the three matches.Ireland completed back-to-back championships for the first time since 1949. Both have been won on points differential over England, which became the first team ever to finish second in four consecutive seasons.“I've never received a trophy in such a bizarre situation,” O’Connell said after receiving the trophy. “It’s strange. In some ways it’s better than last year.” Ireland’s players were dressed in their street clothes as they cavorted and sprayed Champagne on the presentation podium.It was far from clear their wait would be worth the trouble as England and France played out a 90-point roller-coaster of a contest. England began needing a 26-point margin of victory — something it had achieved only once in the last 100 years against France.It had the perfect start when its scrumhalf Ben Youngs — later voted Man of the Match for scoring two tries and creating two more — crossed after two minutes, but within 20 minutes it was trailing, 15-7. By halftime it led, 27-15, and was two converted tries from the margin of victory it needed.England was to score four converted tries in the second half. Its problem was that France also scored four times. But because one of those French scores was a penalty, while it failed to convert two out of three tries, the excitement of an 82,000 crowd ratcheted ever higher as England inched toward the margin it needed.When Jack Nowell crossed for his second try with five minutes left and George Ford landed the conversion that took his personal tally to 25 points, England led by 20 points, 55-35. It pressed frenziedly for the try it needed, at one point putting 13 of its 15 men into a combined drive for the French line, but was unable to force a score.“It was tumultuous — exhausting. I share a thought for England,” said Ireland’s coach, Joe Schmidt, who had been watching, powerlessly, in Edinburgh and conceded that, “They were superb today and probably deserved a share of the spoils.”England’s 55 points were the most it has ever scored against France. The French equaled their own championship record, set against Wales in 2001, of 35 points by a losing team.“I want to congratulate Ireland on the championship,” said Stuart Lancaster, the coach of England, who has yet to claim a trophy despite winning 16 of 20 championship matches. “I’m sure it was a tense affair for them watching up in Scotland, pretty tense here, if I’m being honest,” he said. “I’ve never seen such a courageous performance from a group of players.” France’s defeat meant a fourth consecutive bottom-half finish, its worst run since the 1920s.“This was a fantastic, incredible match,” said its under-pressure coach, Philippe Saint-André. “But we needed a little more control and a lot more clear-headedness.”Yet France at least produced some of the dazzling attacking play for which it is traditionally renowned. An 80-meter attack ending with a prop forward, Vincent Debaty, crashing joyfully yet exhaustedly over the line after 60 minutes was possibly the best single moment of a day crammed with highlights.Schmidt has won championships in his first two years as Ireland’s coach. The winning margin of 30 points at Murrayfield, where Ireland has a better record than any other Six Nations visitor, equaled its previous best for an away championship match. O’Connell became its oldest ever scorer with his first international try since 2006, while back-row forward Sean O’Brien, who missed last season with a shoulder injury, crossed twice.Combined with England’s exploits, Ireland’s victory meant that Wales’s 61-20 win in Rome, its highest-ever championship score, was sufficient only for third place. Its seven-try, 47-point second-half deluge included three tries inside 10 minutes by its powerful winger, George North.Yet it could have won by more and set its pursuers a truly formidable target. Its reserve scrumhalf, Gareth Davies, fumbled close to the line in the closing minutes, then Italy wing Leonardo Sarto scored a try on the game’s final play.But as England’s ever-philosophical Lancaster said, “Championships are never lost or won on one moment. You can’t go looking for ifs, buts and maybes.”Advertisement