By ROB HUGHESMARCH 22, 2015
LONDON — Out of all European competition, England’s clubs got back to doing what they do best over the weekend — promoting their league as the most competitive on earth, lauding a young man who seems ready to take on the world and baiting the referees.The young man is Harry Kane — Citizen Kane as some know him. Last Thursday, Kane was called up for the first time by the national team, and on Saturday he celebrated by scoring a hat trick in Tottenham Hotspur’s 4-3 Premier League victory over Leicester City.His three goals were built on sheer effort and opportunism, and rounded off by a penalty kick that provoked Leicester’s manager, Nigel Pearson, to call the referee “one of the most arrogant men I have ever met.”Pearson’s team runs on defiance. It is new to the Premier League and is fighting tooth and nail to stay there on a budget nowhere near that of the Spurs, much less that of the financial giants in Manchester or at Arsenal, Chelsea and Liverpool.AdvertisementPerhaps Pearson should have given himself 10 minutes after the final whistle to bite his lip. Instead, he put himself in front of the TV cameras and spoke the personal criticism that is highly likely to bring a hefty fine and possibly a ban from the dugout in some crucial games to come.AdvertisementThe pity is that referees are protected from speaking in the aftermath of games, but coaches and players are contracted to speak while emotions are still running high. The penalty award that Kane’s trusty right foot dispatched turned the contest after Leicester had fought back from two goals down to 2-2 at Tottenham’s stadium.The referee, Mike Dean, decided that David Nugent had fouled the Spurs’ Danny Rose. Pearson saw it as nothing more than a collision between two players going for the ball.As players do, Rose fell theatrically, and if anything he initiated the collision.But the Leicester manager went too far when he was asked on television if he had spoken to the referee about it.“What is the point in talking to him?” Pearson replied. “The arrogance of the man is frightening.“I really do feel at the moment that we continue to be short-changed,” he said. “I am not suggesting, of course, that it is deliberate. But we can’t be on the receiving end of so many poor decisions.”Pearson’s remarks are in the same category of the claim recently by José Mourinho, who broadcast his belief that there is a refereeing conspiracy against his Chelsea team. Quite possibly Mourinho — and maybe Pearson, too — think there is a favorable tradeoff in paying a fine for misconduct in exchange for galvanizing a bond of the coach and his team — a kind of siege mentality of the locker room against the world.Sadly, though, the sound and the fury detract from the wholesome message of Harry Kane for England. Here is a young Londoner who had risen through the academy at Spurs and, after being sent out on loan to lower division teams over the years when Tottenham paid fortunes for imported strikers, finally got his chance to play for his boyhood club.AdvertisementIn this, his first full season at the age of 21, he has scored 29 goals in all competitions. Only Diego Costa and Sergio Agüero, two world-class strikers purchased by Chelsea and by Manchester City, are on his level.Tottenham has renowned playmakers to create chances, but Kane at times has carried the Spurs. His strength in holding the ball with his back to tough defenders and his instinct to turn and strike for goal draw comparisons to Jürgen Klinsmann, who led the Spurs attack in the 1990s, and to the former England center forward Alan Shearer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kane is in line for his senior England debut either in Friday’s game against Lithuania or, more likely, in a friendly against Italy in Turin the following Tuesday.He, rather than refereeing disputes, deserves to be the story.Alas, there was more fuss on Saturday concerning the referee at Manchester City in its match against West Bromwich Albion. This time it concerned a correct decision by referee Neil Swarbrick, but unfortunately he dismissed the wrong player.The match was less than two minutes old when Swarbrick saw a West Brom defender barge into City’s Wilfried Bony just outside the penalty box. Bony stumbled but stayed on his feet until he was fouled by a second defender inside the area.However, the ref had already blown for the first offense which he judged to be a foul preventing an obvious goal-scoring opportunity. FIFA deems that a mandatory red card infringement.It distorted the game to the extent that City, the better team anyway, won 3-0 with goals from Bony, Fernando and David Silva. Indeed, City ran up 43 shots (16 on target) to West Brom’s token three shots (none on target).During halftime, referee Swarbrick realized he had made a terrible case of mistaken identity. The first foul on Bony was by No.25 Craig Dawson. The second offense, after the referee had blown his whistle, was by No.23 Gareth McAuley. After being surrounded by players, he showed the red card to McAuley.The handicap to West Brom was the same either way, but Swarbrick’s mistake was embarrassing. It is the third case of mistaken identity in the Premier League in a year, and it does nothing for the reputation of referees or support they are supposed to receive from their assistants.Human error is understandable, but it is not helped by the antics of players. In this case, as so often, the culprit stood back while others confronted Swarbrick, arguing that it was “too early” in the game to send anyone off. Belatedly, Dawson did seem to gesture his guilt, but even if Swarbrick saw or heard him, why would he change his mind?AdvertisementThis ref needed help from his professional colleagues rather than take the word of players who, more often than not, are out to deceive him. The players, and their managers, have fomented this mistrust.A version of this article appears in print on March 23, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.