AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzVIERA, Fla. — For the first month of spring training, the Yankees’ Chris Young did two notable things: He struck out against Iron Mike, the pitching machine, during an intrasquad game, and he lost his glove over the outfield wall while trying to catch a home run, prompting his teammate Brett Gardner to scale the fence and retrieve it.On Monday, Young made a more fulfilling impression.He hit two home runs, his first of the exhibition season, and made a splendid running catch deep in the left-center-field gap in the Yankees’ 7-6 loss to the Washington Nationals. It was the type of performance the Mets had in mind last year when they signed Young to a one-year, $7.25 million contract, but one he rarely delivered as their starting left fielder. In August, the Mets released Young, who was hitting .205.The Yankees signed him to a minor league contract, and Young had a solid September with the major league club, hitting .282 with three homers and 10 R.B.I. He signed a one-year deal with the Yankees for $2.5 million with incentives.“I came in knowing what the situation was,” Young said, noting that Gardner, Jacoby Ellsbury and Carlos Beltran would be the regular outfielders if they were healthy. “In my time here last year, I loved it here. I loved all the energy that comes with playing here, and it’s something I wanted to throw myself back into.”Young found it hard to explain the discrepancy in his performance last season.“I happened to play better over here, but it was nothing obvious,” he said. “I had a fresh start with a new team and was able to make some adjustments that I should have made with the Mets. I don’t have anything better to say about the Yankees than the Mets.” With the regular-season opener two weeks away, Young, like a number of Yankees, cannot be accused of peaking too early at the plate. Mark Teixeira is batting .229 this spring, Stephen Drew .161, Gardner .132, Beltran .200, Ellsbury .222 and Garrett Jones .206. Young was batting .226 before his home runs raised his average to .265.Though the Yankees scored only 633 runs last season — 13th in the American League and their lowest total since 1990 — veterans do not usually concern themselves with results during spring training. The goal is simply to be sound physically and mentally once the season begins. “If you’re feeling good, then that’s what matters,” said catcher Brian McCann, who hit a two-run homer. “You just keep working on your craft. You want to peak on opening day.”INSIDE PITCHJOSE PIRELA, who sustained a concussion when he crashed into the center-field wall against the Mets on Sunday, remained with the Yankees as they traveled to Monday’s game against the Nationals. He was in uniform and sat on the bench, but he did not play. Pirela will have concussion tests before he is able to return, Manager JOE GIRARDI said. ... BRYAN MITCHELL, who is contending for one of the 12 expected pitching spots on the opening day roster, allowed four hits, three walks and two runs in three and a third innings. Mitchell said he would like to improve the consistency of his curveball.Advertisement