AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy Scott CacciolaAnother day for the Knicks meant another pregame news conference for Coach Derek Fisher to churn through the team’s expanding list of injuries. The latest ones, belonging to Alexey Shved (rib contusion) and Travis Wear (sore lower back), meant that the Knicks wound up dressing just nine players for their game against the Memphis Grizzlies.On a different planet, or perhaps on a different night, that might have been enough for the Knicks, who at least forced Memphis to expend a decent amount of energy in its 103-82 victory at Madison Square Garden on Monday.Given the rate at which the Knicks (14-57) are barreling toward franchise records for futility, moral victories count for something these days. The game also provided another chance for bit players like Langston Galloway, who scored 19 points, and Lance Thomas, who finished with 15, to advertise their skills in hopes of future employment.But amid the monotony of the Knicks’ season on the sport’s frayed margins, only their opponent changes with any regularity. Everything else — the losing, the overpriced beers, the late-game pall that seems to settle over the Garden crowd — largely stays the same.The Knicks were hoping for something unexpected, a reprise, perhaps, of their victory last week over the San Antonio Spurs, which was the basketball equivalent of finding a shiny quarter under a filthy car mat: a surprising treat, something to be savored. The Grizzlies, who own the second-best record in the Western Conference (50-21), made sure that did not happen.Memphis’s Marc Gasol, who will be a free agent this summer, needed mere minutes to showcase his collection of talents. He posted up defenders. He dropped bounce passes to Zach Randolph. He rebounded and defended. The Grizzlies led by 14 in the first quarter.Thanks to some effective back cuts and serviceable defense, the Knicks took a short-lived lead in the third quarter before the Grizzlies turned to Gasol (who finished with 21 points) and Randolph (23) late in the game. With the win, the Grizzlies clinched a playoff berth. They also cracked the 50-win barrier for the third straight season.The Knicks, who have won 50 games once in the past 15 seasons, are expected to be among the teams that chase Gasol in free agency. Before the game, Gasol said he had not ruled any teams out — but only because he had not spent any time thinking about it.For the Knicks, that was probably good news.CELTICS 110, NETS 91 Evan Turner had 19 points, 12 assists and 10 rebounds, and visiting Boston beat the Nets to end a three-game losing streak that had dropped it out of playoff position.Avery Bradley scored 20 points to lead the Celtics, who are now a half-game ahead of Charlotte for the No. 8 seed in the Eastern Conference. Tyler Zeller and Kelly Olynyk each had 18 points for Boston. (AP)BULLS 98, HORNETS 86 Nikola Mirotic scored 14 of his 28 points in the fourth quarter, and host Chicago clinched a playoff spot with a win over Charlotte.Pau Gasol had 27 points and 12 rebounds as the Bulls moved into a tie with Toronto for third place in the Eastern Conference.Kemba Walker had 29 points, and Mo Williams scored 15 for the Hornets, who were without Cody Zeller (right shoulder) and shot just 34.6 percent from the field. (AP)ROCKETS 110, PACERS 100 James Harden scored 19 of his 44 points in the fourth quarter, and Josh Smith added 18 as visiting Houston topped Indiana, handing the Pacers their sixth straight loss.The Rockets have won four of five.Indiana’s sinking playoff hopes took another big hit despite 23 points from C. J. Watson. George Hill added 20 points for the Pacers. (AP)Advertisement