AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe Los Angeles Kings’ chances of reaching the playoffs to defend their Stanley Cup title may depend on their current five-game trip. The opener against the Devils got them off to a good start.Anze Kopitar had a goal and two assists, lifting the Kings to a 3-1 victory in Newark on Monday night. Andrej Sekera and Tyler Toffoli also scored for Los Angeles, which is outside the Western Conference playoff picture heading into the final weeks of the regular season.Marian Gaborik added two assists, and Jonathan Quick made 19 saves as the Kings won for the second time in five games. They will visit the Rangers on Tuesday and the Islanders on Thursday.“Every time you go on a long road trip, the first game is obviously very important,” Kopitar said. “It sets the tone.”Scott Gomez scored for the Devils, who lost their second straight and moved closer to being eliminated from the Eastern Conference playoff race for the third straight season.Cory Schneider made 30 saves for the Devils.The veteran center Mike Richards returned to the Kings’ lineup after spending 16 games in the American Hockey League. He did not register a point but set up a good chance by Trevor Lewis in the second period.Kopitar was instrumental in ending the Kings’ two-game skid. He earned the primary assist on the opening goal by Sekera and sealed the win early in the third period, giving Los Angeles a 3-1 lead by putting the rebound of a Jake Muzzin shot past Schneider for his 15th goal.Minutes before Kopitar’s goal, Quick kept the Kings in front, stopping the recent call-up Reid Boucher with a glove save and denying Jordin Tootoo and Travis Zajac in close on a power play.The Kings took a 2-0 lead in a one-sided first period as Kopitar assisted on goals by Sekera and Toffoli.On Sekera’s goal, his first in 19 games, Kopitar skated from the Devils’ left circle to the blue line and left the puck for Sekera, a defenseman, who skated back to the circle and ripped a shot into the top of the net.Toffoli’s 21st goal came with the Kings on a five-on-three power play late in the period. Gaborik held the puck in the right circle and made a cross-ice pass to Toffoli, who snapped a shot into an open net.BLACKHAWKS 3, HURRICANES 1 Andrew Shaw scored twice, and Chicago held off host Carolina to give Coach Joel Quenneville his 750th N.H.L. victory. Corey Crawford made 43 saves for the Blackhawks, who have earned at least a point in 18 of their last 21 games and are fourth in the Western Conference. SENATORS 5, SHARKS 2 Mika Zibanejad had two goals, leading Ottawa to a home win over San Jose. The Senators earned their seventh straight victory and jumped 1 point ahead of Boston for the final wild-card spot in the East with a game in hand.WILD 2, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Devan Dubnyk had 35 saves as he made his 32nd straight start, leading Minnesota past Toronto for its ninth straight road win. The Maple Leafs lost their sixth in a row. STARS 4, SABRES 3 Jamie Benn scored two goals and assisted on another as host Dallas edged Buffalo.DUPUIS OUT FOR SEASON Pittsburgh Penguins forward Pascal Dupuis, who has been receiving treatment for blood clots, was ruled out for the rest of the regular season and the playoffs.Dupuis, 35, has not played since November and is prohibited from contact while taking blood thinners to treat the condition. The Penguins initially hoped that he could return in time for the postseason. Coach Mike Johnson said in a video posted on the team’s website that it would be up to Dupuis and team doctors to determine when he could take contact. General Manager Jim Rutherford said he was confident that Dupuis would be back for the 2015-16 season.Advertisement