By TIM ROHANMARCH 23, 2015
JUPITER, Fla. —  The Mets’ starting middle infielders hobbled through the clubhouse Monday morning. Daniel Murphy had his right leg heavily wrapped, and Wilmer Flores’s left foot was wrapped.The two are considered among the team’s shakiest defenders, but for the foreseeable future, double-play practice will wait.Murphy, the Mets’ second baseman, is expected to be out for the next week or so with a pulled hamstring, and Flores, a shortstop, is out for at least a few days with a bruised foot, having fouled a ball off it on Sunday. The Mets have indicated that if Murphy does not heal fast enough, he will start the season on the disabled list; Flores’s injury is not considered to be as serious.“It’s a little swollen,” Flores said Monday. “I’m having a problem walking right now. I’m just going to go day by day, and we’ll see how it goes.”AdvertisementAs Flores and Murphy recover, the Mets are evaluating three middle infielders with varying reputations within the organization. Two prospects, Matt Reynolds and Daniel Muno, are considered the front-runners to replace Murphy. The former starting shortstop Ruben Tejada is still trying to carve a role for himself.AdvertisementReynolds, a 2012 second-round draft pick, is the most intriguing of the three. For the last two years, the Mets have invited him to their winter workouts with Mike Barwis, the team’s fitness adviser. Last year with Class AAA Las Vegas, Reynolds hit .333 with a .385 on-base percentage over 68 games.His coaches have praised him as a pro’s pro, the type of player whom the Mets could slide seamlessly into the lineup and count on to make the right play when needed.Muno, an eighth-round draft pick in 2011, has more experience at second base in the Mets’ organization, though, and he is a switch-hitter. In Monday’s 12-3 victory over the Miami Marlins, he batted 2 for 4, with a triple and a home run. He has a .400 batting average in 35 at-bats this spring.To make the team, “I just have to play the way I’ve been playing,” Muno said.Tejada at least offers the Mets experience. He was once considered their shortstop of the future, but he acquired a reputation for a poor work ethic. Mets Manager Terry Collins has tried several times to inspire him, and this spring, Tejada has at times looked like his old self. In 13 games, he has a .297 average and 10 R.B.I.By all indications, though, the starting job at shortstop is Flores’s as long as he is healthy, and it appears that his bruised foot will not keep him out too long.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m not worried at all,” Flores said. “I hope it will just take a few days — that’s it.”COLON TO START OPENING DAY Mets Manager Terry Collins revealed that Bartolo Colon — not Matt Harvey or Jacob deGrom — would be the Mets’ opening day starter.It was a surprising decision if only because, of all the Mets’ starters, Colon was the least glamorous choice. Collins tried to play down the announcement’s significance.Advertisement“It’s just one start,” he said.Still, being the opening day starter is generally considered an honor. By statistics alone, Colon could be considered deserving. He earned 15 wins last season and threw more than 200 innings. The Mets still tried to trade him, and he probably would have been dealt, too, if not for his age — he turns 42 in May — and his pricey contract.Now Colon is set to become the fifth opening day starter in five years for the Mets, as well as the oldest in franchise history and the oldest in the majors since 2006.As a sort of consolation prize, deGrom, the reigning National League rookie of the year, is scheduled to start the Mets’ home opener on April 13 against the Phillies. Collins said Harvey had not been considered, even though he is the team’s ace, because he missed last season.The Mets might also have been concerned that Harvey would be so excited to pitch on opening day that he would have overexerted himself, although Collins denied that.“No disrespect to Matt at all,” Collins said. “He is our ace. We know that. He knows it. I told him that he’s going to pitch a lot of big games this summer. They all count.”Harvey is set to make his much-anticipated debut in the third game of the season, on April 9 at Washington.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Tejada and Two Prospects Vying for Infield Postings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.