AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter MayBOSTON — Coach David Quinn had just presided over the worst men’s hockey season in 51 years at Boston University when he sat down with Jack Parker, who had personified the program for four decades before Quinn replaced him.Quinn had played for Parker at Boston University. He had been an assistant under Parker. After B.U.’s final game of the 2013-14 season, a 3-2 loss to Notre Dame, an exasperated Quinn, whose team had gone 10-21-4, said to Parker, “Tell me, when does this get fun?”Parker, who coached at B.U. for 40 years, laughed. It had not been fun for him, either, when he stepped down in 2013 amid controversy. And it had not been fun watching the worst Terriers team since 1962-63 in his new position as special assistant to Robert A. Brown, the university president, and unofficial sounding board for Quinn.Quinn laughs now in retelling the story. He can because Year 2 has been a complete turnaround. Helped by an infusion of 10 freshmen, including the sensation Jack Eichel, the Terriers took the Hockey East regular-season title, winning 21 games and spending some time at No. 1. On Saturday at TD Garden, they won their eighth Hockey East tournament championship. They are the No. 3 seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament, opening Friday against Yale. “It’s fun now,” Quinn said. “But for a while last year, I thought I might be better off selling insurance.”Quinn not only succeeded a coaching legend but also inherited a program trying to restore its reputation. Two arrests on sexual assault charges during the 2011-12 season prompted Brown to organize a task force to investigate the team. In the absence of football, hockey is the undisputed top sport at the university. After the arrests, normally revered players found themselves under unwanted and, some felt, unjustified scrutiny because of allegations against two teammates, who were quickly removed from the program. The case against one player was dropped, and the other pleaded guilty to assault and battery.Cason Hohmann, one of two seniors on this year’s team, was a wide-eyed freshman from the Dallas area during that season. “It was like we were under a big microscope,” he said. “They grouped us all together as if we were these terrible people. You’d hear things like: ‘Oh, you’re on the hockey team. You must be a horrible human being.’ It was a tough time.”The task force released its findings in August 2012, just before Parker’s final season. It concluded that there was a “culture of entitlement” surrounding the hockey team. Its recommendations included having the players receive annual training sessions on preventing sexual assault, integrating them more into the regular student body and showing sufficient evidence that they could handle B.U.’s academic rigors.Parker moved to put the recommendations into effect before stepping aside. Quinn, a co-captain of the 1987-88 team, established monthly sessions to educate the players about sexual assault. The program has been free of controversy in his two years as the head coach. “I know what B.U. is about,” Quinn said. “I played here. I coached here. And it’s not about what happened that season.”Quinn said prospective players and their families felt the same way. He said he had not encountered any antagonism because of the arrests and the task force’s findings. Eichel, who committed to B.U. as a high school freshman while Parker was the coach, said he had never wavered in honoring his commitment.“My parents had a little bit of concern, but at the end of the day, it was up to me,” Eichel said. “I’ve wanted to go to B.U. pretty much my whole life, and I’m glad I did.”Eichel and the other nine freshmen have given the program a jolt of youth, talent and energy. Seven, including Eichel, are 18. The Terriers have the youngest roster in Division I, with an average age of 20.4 at the start of the season.“They’re all true freshmen, and they really bring an upbeat attitude,” said Evan Rodrigues, the other senior on the team. “They’re young. They’re hungry. They didn’t go through what we went through last year. They don’t know any better.”Eichel has delivered as promised. He led Division I in points, with 20 goals and 41 assists, and is widely expected to be one of the top two picks in the 2015 N.H.L. draft. His future at B.U. is a continuing topic of discussion on campus. Quinn said he last addressed the issue with Eichel in December.“He didn’t strike me as someone who was racing out of here,” Quinn said.Eichel has been noncommittal, saying his focus is on helping Boston University win a sixth N.C.A.A. championship.Quinn was Parker’s right-hand man when B.U. last won the N.C.A.A. title, in 2009. He had thought he might succeed Parker at that point, but he said, “That championship got Jack rejuvenated.” While Parker stayed, Quinn spent the next four years in the Colorado Avalanche organization, coaching its American Hockey League affiliate for three years and serving as an assistant to Coach Joe Sacco, a B.U. teammate, in 2012-13.The Terriers’ title in the Beanpot tournament this year — their 30th, a record — is evidence that the team is where it should be. The Hockey East regular-season and tournament titles did not hurt, either. Further riches await: a chance to reach the Frozen Four, which is taking place in Boston this year, and then another highly acclaimed group of freshmen committed for next season.Quinn and Parker still talk frequently, but one topic no longer comes up. The job is now undeniably fun.Advertisement