By TYLER KEPNERMARCH 23, 2015
CLEARWATER, Fla. —  Mike Schmidt and Paul Molitor watched an exhibition game Monday from opposite dugouts here at the Philadelphia Phillies’ spring training camp. Historically, they belong to the same team, as Hall of Famers with plaques in Cooperstown, N.Y. But on an issue that divides so many in baseball, Schmidt and Molitor disagree.Pete Rose, the career hits leader, has applied for reinstatement to Major League Baseball, which barred him for life in 1989 for gambling on games played by the Cincinnati Reds, the team he was managing. Rose’s request will be reviewed by the new commissioner, Rob Manfred, who succeeded Bud Selig in January.Selig never ruled on the Rose case, effectively upholding the agreement Rose had signed under Commissioner Bart Giamatti, who died of a heart attack eight days later. Fay Vincent, who served between Giamatti and Selig, believes Manfred will not bring Rose back.“I really don’t think it’s very difficult at all, and I don’t think Manfred is going to think of it as very difficult,” Vincent said in a telephone interview. “He’s going to think of it only in baseball terms.”AdvertisementThat lens, Vincent said, is the only one that matters to a commissioner. To view the issue from Rose’s point of view, he said, would miss the critical point.Advertisement“The issue is the deterrent,” Vincent said. “The reason the deterrent works is that nobody has ever been let back.”Schmidt grew up in Dayton, Ohio, when Rose was a young star for the Reds. Schmidt’s grandmother hung a Rose poster on the back of her bedroom door so she could tailor her grandson’s uniform to look like Rose’s. Later, Schmidt and Rose were teammates on the Phillies. He believes the purpose of the ban has been met.“I think they have proven a point, through Pete, very strongly, to the players,” Schmidt said here Monday. “If there was ever a player that thought he might place a bet on a game, or his team, I think that the Pete Rose example has driven it home. I don’t think we’ll ever see a player consider betting on a game that he’s involved in, or any other game, if he’s a major league baseball player.”In November 2002, Schmidt flew to Milwaukee to accompany Rose, who had steadfastly denied betting on baseball, to a meeting with Selig. Whatever momentum that meeting might have generated died when Rose later made his first public admission of betting on baseball, and the Reds, in a book — a revelation that upstaged the announcement of the new Hall of Fame class in January 2004.The class included Molitor, who now manages the Minnesota Twins. Molitor said Rose’s accomplishments should be recognized at the Hall of Fame, but he stopped short of endorsing Rose’s reinstatement.“The one rule that is read in every clubhouse, every spring training, for I don’t know how many decades, has been made clear that if this is violated, this is the consequence,” Molitor said. “Now, if they decide to make a change in the stance that they’ve taken to this point, you are going to say that every time we read that, we really didn’t mean it.”Molitor said it was worth asking if Rose had done enough time and paid enough penance. He said he understood that many people loved Rose, 73, and he acknowledged that Rose had handled things better since the 2004 admission.Advertisement“And we all know he’s not getting younger,” Molitor said. “But to me, that’s the question that baseball has to face. We have tried to make this such a clear-cut thing. But you’re going to say, If you’re the all-time hit leader, it might not be like that? That’s the debate. That’s why, I think, it’s tough for baseball to change it.”Rose did not respond to a request by telephone for comment, and Manfred, through a spokesman, declined to comment beyond his statement in Arizona last week that he would consider Rose’s application on its merits.Tony Clark, the executive director of the players’ union, has said that many modern players support Rose, and one player here noted the incongruity of the career leader in hits, the career leader in home runs (Barry Bonds) and the career leader in Cy Young Awards (Roger Clemens) not being enshrined in Cooperstown.Bonds and Clemens have links to performance enhancers and have fallen far short of election on the writers’ ballots for the Hall of Fame. Rose has never been considered.The Hall of Fame passed a rule in 1991, just before Rose would have appeared on the writers’ ballot, that said anyone on the permanently ineligible list was also barred from the Hall. That rule could be reversed by the Hall of Fame’s board, but there has been no push to do so.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If Rose were reinstated, the Hall of Fame said, the earliest he would be considered would be December 2016, by the veterans’ committee, which is partly made up of Hall of Famers. Schmidt said he sensed that most members would now favor including Rose.“There are some older, hard-line guys — surely about P.E.D. users there are — that say, ‘He lied, he broke the cardinal rule in the clubhouse,’ and they still have that grudge,” said Schmidt, a guest instructor in spring training. “Is it a handful, 10 or 20? If I’d have said 15 years ago it was 50-50, I’d say now it’s getting to be more like, probably, 70 percent of the guys would welcome Pete.”Rose was never accused of betting on the Reds to lose, but betting on them to win was dangerous enough to the game’s integrity. In theory, Rose might have managed differently if he had a lot of money riding on a game. And he might have tacitly sent a signal to bookmakers about his lack of confidence in the Reds in games on which he did not bet.In any case, it is hard to argue that Rose’s actions directly affected more games than the actions of some users of performance-enhancing drugs did. Ryan Braun, the Milwaukee Brewers star, tested positive after a victorious 2011 playoff game in which he went 3 for 4. Braun served a 65-game ban in 2013 and has been a member in good standing ever since.AdvertisementDallas Green, Rose’s former manager, asked, rhetorically, which misdeed was worse for the game. Green said that it was time to lift the ban and that Rose could still be a useful ambassador for baseball.“He can certainly talk the talk about what he’s done,” Green said. “There’s not a lot of guys that are P.E.D. guys or alcoholics or wife-beaters or whatever that come out and preach against it, and I think Pete would. I would see some value in that.”Green, now a senior adviser to the Phillies, said the good that Rose had done for baseball should still outweigh the bad. Rose has appeared on major league fields only sporadically since his ban, always with permission from Selig, and spends most days selling autographs and meeting fans in Las Vegas.“If you know him, he eats, sleeps and drinks baseball, 24/7, even today,” said the Phillies coach Larry Bowa, a former teammate of Rose’s. “He’ll tell you stats. He’ll look at players and say, ‘I like this guy,’ or ‘This guy’s a dog.’ He knows the game. If an owner can overlook that — and, hey, it might be hard — but you mean to tell me he couldn’t come in and be a guest instructor and help some young kids out?”Green said baseball would be better if more players followed Rose’s example of passionate, hard-nosed play. Yet Vincent said the other side of Rose, the hubris to think he was above the game’s most sacred law, should not be forgotten. Vincent said Rose’s lawyers had told him that it would be baseball’s loss if it barred Rose.“But we’re here 26 years later, and baseball is booming,” Vincent said. “Baseball hasn’t missed Pete Rose at all.”Maybe not, but Rose’s family and fans have missed him and would like to see him back. That will not be what drives Manfred’s decision, but it is a backdrop as he deliberates.“I have the exact same opinion about this that all Pete Rose supporters have: Enough is enough,” Schmidt said. “We should forgive. We have forgiven other people for things you could argue are very similar.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: 4,256 Hits and a Big Error.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.