By KEN BELSONMARCH 23, 2015
Phoenix — Woody Johnson, owner of the Jets, said he was not concerned about an existing N.F.L. investigation into whether his team broke league rules on tampering before it signed the free-agent cornerback Darrelle Revis.In his season-ending news conference on Dec. 29, Johnson commented on Revis, saying, “I’d love Darrelle to come back.”“It’s just something the league is looking at,” Johnson said during the three-day N.F.L. owners’ meeting here. “I’m not worried about anything. I’m worried about getting better.”This month, the Jets, who went 4-12 last season, signed Revis to a five-year contract worth $70 million, including about $39 million in guaranteed money.AdvertisementRevis helped the New England Patriots win a Super Bowl title in February, and his return to the Jets, where he began his career, was considered a coup for the team because it strengthened its weak defensive backfield and came at the expense of a division rival.AdvertisementJohnson, though, said he did not think adding Revis would necessarily close the gap between the Jets and the Patriots.“We’re trying to get us better,” he said. “He’s one player. One player can’t lift a franchise.”Johnson gave lukewarm support to quarterback Geno Smith. Although he declined to say whether the team was interested in drafting Marcus Mariota or another top quarterback prospect, he said Smith would have to compete to retain his job.“We’ve got from now until the beginning of the season to address every position, not only quarterback,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Johnson spoke, the league’s competition committee said it did not support allowing instant replay reviews of penalties because “it would have unforeseen negative effects for on-field officiating.”The owners will vote on the committee’s recommendations this week. The committee’s decision to not recommend replay reviews of penalties may be an acknowledgment that it would not have been approved.“Basically, anything that extends the length of the game, we’re probably not for,” Johnson said. “The game is long enough.”In a statement, the competition committee said that the replay reviews were not meant to replace subjective calls by referees.Advertisement“While instant replay was designed to be an aid to on-field officiating, it is not the panacea that some believe it to be,” the committee said.The committee members said that they were also discussing various proposals to revise the extra point, but that there was no chance it would be eliminated.The competition committee said it was also considering another proposal to allow independent injury spotters to stop a game to check a player who may have sustained a concussion. The proposal comes after Julian Edelman of the Patriots received a big hit during the Super Bowl and appeared to be disoriented but did not come out of the game.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets' Owner on Tampering.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.