By KEN BELSONMARCH 23, 2015
PHOENIX — The N.F.L. will begin experimenting with streaming games worldwide next season as it searches for more broadcast revenue and ways to reach the growing number of consumers who do not pay for cable and satellite television.The owners of the league’s 32 teams, who are holding their annual meeting here, were told that the Buffalo Bills-Jacksonville Jaguars game Oct. 25 in London would be available for free to viewers around the world.The game will still be shown on television in the Buffalo and the Jacksonville markets. But by live-streaming the game on its website, the league will be able to bypass cable and satellite companies that traditionally take a cut of the revenue from broadcasting games.The N.F.L., joining other content producers who are seeking to reach consumers directly, is looking for ways to reach consumers who do not have cable subscriptions.Advertisement“We’re testing alternative ways to distribute games,” said Brian Rolapp, the executive vice president of media at the N.F.L.AdvertisementHe said that the league’s current model of showing games on network television remains solid, but there are millions of homes without pay television packages and that could accelerate.“If the world ever changes, we want to be prepared,” he said.By streaming the game itself, the league can also reach fans in markets overseas where it is expensive to set up individual broadcast deals with local cable and satellite companies to carry games, according to Marc Ganis, a consultant to several N.F.L. teams. (An N.F.L. spokesman said the league was studying whether to hold the 2017 Pro Bowl in Brazil.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Streaming games could also give the league more leverage with CBS, NBC and other networks when they negotiate television rights deals because the league would have the capability of showing more games itself, Ganis said.The N.F.L. is still seeking an Internet distributor for the game, and that distributor is expected to keep the advertising revenue, Rolapp said. It is unclear whether the league will expand the number of games streamed and how soon, he added.Separately, the league said that it would not black out games in local markets when teams failed to sell out their stadiums next season. This so-called blackout policy began in 1973 as a way to encourage fans to buy tickets to games rather than watch them free on television. Under the policy, a home game could be shown in a team’s local market if the game was sold out 72 hours in advance of kickoff.As team ticket sales have improved, the number of games blacked out fell to zero last season and to two in 2013. The owners voted Monday to suspend the policy for the 2015 season and evaluate the results.The N.F.L.’s decision comes after the Federal Communications Commission in September repealed its sport blackout rules, which prohibited cable and satellite operators from importing the signal of a game when it was blacked out locally.The F.C.C.’s ruling did not affect the league’s ability to enforce its blackout policy through contractual arrangements.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Streaming Experiment.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.