By KEN BELSONMARCH 23, 2015
PHOENIX — Roger Goodell, the commissioner of the N.F.L., told the league’s 32 owners on Monday that he would soon appoint the departing director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives as the new chief disciplinary officer.B. Todd Jones, 57, took over the top spot at the bureau in 2011. He was also a United States attorney in Minnesota. The bureau said Friday that Jones would leave at the end of March.Under pressure for the way he handled the suspensions of Ray Rice, Adrian Peterson and Greg Hardy, Goodell said in December that he would create a new position to oversee the investigation of player misconduct and any discipline that would stem from those investigations.The new special counsel would allow Goodell to no longer have to discipline players accused of drug offenses, domestic violence and other off-field issues.AdvertisementWhen the full scope of that job became apparent, Goodell decided to split the job into two positions. Jones is expected to be in charge of disciplining players, while Lisa Friel, who works for the N.F.L. as an adviser on domestic violence issues, will be in charge of investigating allegations of off-field misconduct. Jones and Friel will report to Goodell.AdvertisementThe N.F.L. also created an owners committee, led by Michael Bidwill, a former federal prosecutor who owns the Arizona Cardinals, to oversee the league’s personal conduct policy.The owners, general managers and coaches began their annual three-day meeting in Phoenix on Monday.After Goodell suspended Rice, a former Baltimore Ravens running back, for two games after he punched his fiancée in an elevator a year ago, he was widely criticized for being arbitrary and opaque in the way he penalized players.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In August, a month after that suspension, Goodell apologized for not doing more to recognize the seriousness of domestic violence and said players who committed domestic violence would automatically be suspended for six games.Less than two weeks later, after more graphic video of Rice punching his fiancée was published, Goodell suspended Rice indefinitely, a decision that was later overturned by a former federal judge in arbitration. The former judge, Barbara Jones, criticized the N.F.L. for the way it handled its disciplinary procedures.In February, a federal judge in Minnesota also overturned Goodell’s suspension of Peterson, who pleaded no contest to charges that he beat his young son. The N.F.L. has appealed that decision.Once they are formally appointed, Jones and Friel are likely to have to decide what to do with Hardy, who remains suspended with pay after he was convicted of domestic violence.His case, though, was overturned on appeal. The Cowboys this month signed Hardy, a defensive lineman, to a one-year contract even though it was unclear whether he would be suspended.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Goodell to Split Jobs of Disciplinarian and Misconduct Investigator.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.