AdvertisementSupported byCricketBy Huw RichardsIt will be an upstart vs. a dynasty for the Cricket World Cup championship, no matter how the semifinals turn out this week.The first semifinal — in Auckland, New Zealand, on Tuesday — matches New Zealand and South Africa, two teams that have never made the final. Australia will take on India on Thursday in Sydney, a matchup between winners of six of the last eight tournaments. The final four are, without a doubt, the best teams in the tournament. In 28 matches so far, those four have lost a total of three times, with two of those losses coming against each other. New Zealand and India are still unbeaten, while Australia has lost only to New Zealand. South Africa has lost twice, to India and Pakistan. Fans will be hoping that the semifinals are more competitive than the quarterfinals, which were marked by blowouts.The only time a quarterfinal seemed in doubt was when Bangladesh suffered an unlucky umpiring call against India, and when the Pakistan fast bowler Wahab Riaz unsettled Australia’s batting at the top of its order in their match.South Africa and New Zealand are both looking to overcome historic jinxes at the World Cup. South Africa already has done its share when it won a knockout match for the first time at a World Cup when it won its quarterfinal.“I think we like being called chokers. We’ll keep that tag as long as we keep winning,” the South African captain AB de Villiers told reporters after his team beat Sri Lanka by 9 wickets in the quarterfinals. “It was a big pressure game, and we showed everyone that we can do it.”The term “chokers” has rarely been applied to New Zealand, which has reached the World Cup semifinals six times previously, quite an achievement for the smallest of the 10 Test-playing nations. Still, going 0-for-6 in the semifinals is no reason to celebrate. It is not a case of “now or never” for New Zealand. A country that has reached seven semifinals in 11 tournaments has every reason to hope for more. There is, though, a sense of “if not now, then when?” when it comes to the Black Caps. New Zealand is at home. It will play its semifinal in the stadium where its rugby team, the All Blacks, has won two World Cups. It has perhaps its best team ever in the one-day format played at the Cricket World Cup, and it is supremely confident right now. Previously reliant on the quality of its bowlers, it won its quarterfinal through spectacular batting and was inspired by a player, Martin Guptill, who had struggled earlier in the tournament.“If one of them doesn’t come off, the group’s confident someone else will,” New Zealand Coach Mike Hesson told reporters after Guptill batted his team into the semifinal with a World Cup record of 237 not out against West Indies. “The biggest thing is they’ve shown themselves to be quite selfless, putting their own personal targets or milestones behind what the team needs to do. There’s been lots of cameos.”New Zealand’s collective endeavor at this tournament — it has played in front of packed and enthusiastic home crowds — was epitomized when Daniel Vettori, usually a safe rather than a spectacular fielder, made a leaping catch to dismiss the dangerous Marlon Samuels as West Indies chased 396 to win its semifinal.In South Africa, it will face an opponent looking for more after its jinx-breaking victory in the quarterfinal. “We feel strong and confident going into the semifinals, but on the other hand it means nothing because the hard work starts now,” said de Villiers. “We didn’t come all this way just to make it to the semifinals; we want to go all the way.”While nobody is surprised to see India in the semifinal — it is the reigning champion — the way it got there was unexpected. There were doubts before the tournament about the quality of its faster bowlers, yet it is the only team to have bowled out its opponent in every match so far.Paceman Mohammed Shami’s 17 wickets make him the leading right-arm bowler in a tournament dominated by left-armers. The newcomer Mohit Sharma has drawn praise from the former Australian captain Ian Chappell, who also credits MS Dhoni’s captaincy and strong fielding for India’s consistent performances.India traditionally has been strong in spin bowling, and the play of Ravichandran Ashwin and Ravindra Jadeja could leave Australia regretting that the semifinal will be held in Sydney. “India have got a chance because they are playing in Sydney, and the Sydney pitch, everybody knows there’s a little bit for the spinners, and both their spinners are bowling well,” said Pakistan’s captain, Misbah-ul-Haq, after his team lost to Australia in the quarterfinals. He described Australia as a balanced team but added, “I think playing in Sydney, they might just miss a good spinner. That could be the difference there.”“We’d obviously like some grass on it to suit our quicks,” the Australia pace bowler Josh Hazlewood said when asked how he would like the field prepared for Thursday. “It would help with them having a couple of spinners and us favoring the quicks.”Advertisement