By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 23, 2015
UNIONDALE, N.Y. —  Pat LaFontaine has always been a popular Islander, though in recent years he has not been seen much at Nassau Coliseum.Since he left the franchise during the turbulent summer of 2006, after the abrupt departure of Neil Smith as general manager, LaFontaine, the team’s gregarious former center, has primarily concentrated on his charity work and, more recently, working for the N.H.L. as vice president for hockey development and community affairs after a brief job as an executive with the Buffalo Sabres.Before the Islanders leave for Barclays Center, however, LaFontaine will finally return to Nassau Coliseum, which he called home from 1984 to 1991. A Hall of Famer, he was happy to be invited back by the team owner Charles B. Wang and General Manager Garth Snow to greet fans and be recognized on the ice before Tuesday’s game against the Minnesota Wild.“I haven’t been in the building for a long time, so I’m excited to see it again,” LaFontaine, 50, said. “I cherish those times and the players I played with. And the Islander fans have always been great. I’m honored to come back to where it all started for me.”AdvertisementLaFontaine was a sensation from the moment he arrived late in the 1983-84 season when the Islanders were trying to win a fifth consecutive Stanley Cup. Fresh off the Winter Olympics in Sarajevo, LaFontaine, who had played for the United States, and Pat Flatley, who had played for Canada, were injected into a veteran lineup including Bryan Trottier, Mike Bossy, Clark Gillies, John Tonelli and Denis Potvin.Advertisement“I was 15 when I watched Bobby Nystrom score the overtime winner in 1980, so to be playing with those guys four years later was incredible,” LaFontaine said. “The building has certainly seen a lot of great teams and great players. Some real magic took place there. I’ve always loved the Coliseum.”Nystrom, Gillies, Bossy, Trottier, Potvin and Billy Smith have been similarly honored by the Islanders in this farewell season.Gone for LaFontaine is any possible lingering animosity over the events of almost nine years ago. Neil Smith, a former general manager of the Rangers who built their Stanley Cup-winning team in 1994, was hired by Wang, and LaFontaine was installed as an unpaid adviser to the owner. But Smith’s tenure lasted only six weeks before he was fired and LaFontaine promptly resigned.Wang then hired Snow, a backup goaltender who had just retired from the team, as general manager.“It was a really nice gesture on behalf of Charles and Garth to invite me back,” LaFontaine said. “It’s all about the positive and moving forward in life.”LaFontaine’s Long Island roots go beyond hockey. He met his future wife, Marybeth, in his first summer there; her family lived next door to his Islanders teammate Lorne Henning. Pat and Marybeth have two daughters, Sarah and Brianna, who work in early education, and a son, Daniel, who will be a freshman and will play hockey at Canisius College in Buffalo in the fall.LaFontaine scored 287 goals for the Islanders and had 566 points — still sixth best in team history — before a contract dispute led to his trade to Buffalo in October 1991. He became captain during six seasons with the Sabres, a tenure cut short because of concussions.LaFontaine played one season with the Rangers in 1997-98 before another concussion led to his premature retirement. He jokes that since he played only for the three N.H.L. teams in New York, he never had to switch license plates.AdvertisementThe former Islanders general manager Bill Torrey, who took him with the third overall pick in the 1983 draft, said he had always had a fondness for LaFontaine, who scored 104 goals for the junior team Verdun of the Quebec league.“Pat was terrific, on the ice and off the ice,” said Torrey, the architect of the four Cup-winning squads from 1979-80 to 1982-83 and now a special adviser to the general manager for the Florida Panthers. “He was a special player with a great personality. Every time he touched the puck, you could hear the excitement in the crowd.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.LaFontaine’s father, John, 76, who still lives in the Detroit area, where Pat grew up after the family moved there from St. Louis, speaks fondly of his son’s Islanders days.“The Islanders were a championship team when Pat got there, and they welcomed and promoted him,” he said. “He’s always been grateful for that. He’s thankful for the career he had.”John LaFontaine recalled a postgame scene at Nassau Coliseum in those early years of Pat’s N.H.L. career.“I waited for him like I always did, and when he finally came out of the dressing room, I was ready to get home,” he said. “But he said: ‘Dad, I have to greet the fans who have waited for me. They pay my salary.’ That’s the way Pat always was. He knew he was blessed and that it was important to thank people along the way.”Even though LaFontaine left the Islanders when he was 26, Torrey is not surprised where the speedy scorer settled with his family.“I always knew where Pat’s heart was because he came back to live on Long Island,” Torrey said.It was also the base from which, in 1997, he started the successful venture Companions in Courage, which builds interactive recreation rooms in children’s hospitals across North America.AdvertisementLaFontaine also constructed a hockey rink at his Lloyd Harbor, N.Y., home so that he and hockey friends could gather for intense pickup games through the years.But there was a caveat in playing with LaFontaine’s teams: He would not score. Even if his team needed a goal, he would only pass the puck so that his teammates could savor the same thrill he did 468 times in the N.H.L.“I’ve scored enough goals,” LaFontaine said. “Everything I do now is about assists. The best feeling in life for me is helping people.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Former Islanders Star Is Set to Return to Where His Career Began.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.