AdvertisementSupported byCricketBy Vaibhav SharmaAUCKLAND, New Zealand — New Zealand has always been a rugby nation. The All Blacks, the world champions in the sport and perhaps the most successful international team in any competition, dominate the country’s imagination, along with its headlines. For as long as anyone can remember, cricket has been a distant second.Or at least it was until this week.On the eve of New Zealand’s Cricket World Cup semifinal on Tuesday against South Africa, things couldn’t be more different for the national team, the Black Caps. With fans galvanized by the charismatic team captain, Brendon McCullum, cricket is dominating conversations in the country. Coverage about the sport fills local newspapers, with rugby pushed to the margins, something unthinkable in the past. On Monday, the lead story in the New Zealand Herald, the nation’s most widely read newspaper, was about an injury to Adam Milne, a player on the national cricket team. It helps that this year’s team is New Zealand’s best ever and has not lost in the tournament. Opponents have not just been defeated — they have been blown away. New Zealand’s aggressive style of cricket has more in common with Australia, its more successful neighbor across the Tasman Sea, than any team from its own past. Suddenly, the Black Caps are being spoken in the same breath as the All Blacks. “I’ve never been compared to an All Black,” the New Zealand bowler Trent Boult recently said with surprise. The atmosphere in the stadiums, too, has had more in common with rugby than cricket, most evident when New Zealand took on its biggest rival, Australia, on Feb. 28 in the group stage. England had been humiliated by the Black Caps the previous week in Wellington. At Auckland’s Eden Park, where New Zealand won two Rugby World Cup titles, the hostile atmosphere no doubt contributed to Australia’s loss. “You’re worse than England,” the crowd taunted as Australia totaled only 151 runs in a tournament where scores of 300 have been commonplace.Gerome Powell, 30, a fan who attended the Australia game, compared the atmosphere to the 2011 Rugby World Cup final at the same venue, which he also attended. “The fervor and the noise was right up there with the rugby final,” he said.McCullum’s leadership is reminiscent of when Arjuna Ranatunga led an underdog Sri Lanka team to its only title, at the 1996 Cricket World Cup, and his confidence has rubbed off on his Black Caps teammates. Last Friday, in the quarterfinal against West Indies, Martin Guptill, a batsman with a modest career, smashed 237 runs, the highest individual score in World Cup history. The entire West Indies team managed only 250 runs.New Zealand stands on the cusp of the game that could define its legacy for years to come. The Black Caps have reached the semifinals six times before but have never progressed to the final. They came the closest in 1992, the last time New Zealand co-hosted the tournament. That semifinal also took place at Eden Park, the venue for Tuesday’s game against South Africa. New Zealand started as the favorite 23 years ago but lost to the eventual champion, Pakistan. The current team is better than 1992’s, but McCullum knows they can ascend to greatness only if they can finally get past the semifinals. The fervor has also brought with it the burden of high expectations. Black Caps Coach Mike Hesson has been speaking to his counterpart on the All Blacks, Steve Hansen, looking for tips on how to deal with the kind of pressure that the cricket team has never faced before.McCullum admitted some of his players were nervous. “Some guys get nervous, yeah,” he said. “But I think over all the general feeling is one that we just can’t wait to get out there and display our skills.”Powell, a real estate manager, is taking Tuesday off to attend the semifinal. He was one of the lucky ones; dozens of fans hovered outside Eden Park on Monday, in the vain hope of securing a ticket to the sold-out match.Powell, who described McCullum as a “legend,” was confident that New Zealand would defy history to reach its first Cricket World Cup final. “This is our greatest team ever,” he said. “And the whole nation is behind these boys now.”Advertisement