AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — Two days after crashing into an outfield wall and being taken to a hospital, Jose Pirela sat in the dugout in shorts and a T-shirt as the Yankees worked out before their game against the Detroit Tigers on Tuesday night. Manager Joe Girardi said Pirela had sustained a concussion, but Pirela said his head felt fine. The dizziness he had experienced Sunday was gone.“The only thing I have is a little bit of soreness in my neck and my back — my entire back,” Pirela said through an interpreter. Still, there is no timetable for when Pirela, who is trying to win a spot on the opening day roster with his productive bat (a 1.063 on-base plus slugging percentage) and tenacious effort, might be back. He met with a doctor Tuesday and was scheduled to undergo neurological testing later in the day.The next step, Girardi said, would be to have Pirela exercise to accelerate his heart rate and see whether the dizziness returned. “Hopefully, it doesn’t,” Girardi said. The head injury, sustained in a game against the Mets in Port St. Lucie, was not Pirela’s first, nor his most severe. Pirela said he had suffered headaches and vomiting after being hit in the head by a pitch in 2012 in a minor league game. He missed nearly six weeks before the symptoms went away.Under Major League Baseball’s policy on head injuries, players are given neurological exams in spring training to provide doctors with a baseline to compare against later injuries. Catcher Francisco Cervelli sustained at least three concussions during his years with the Yankees. The most severe occurred on Sept. 8, 2011, when Cervelli was involved in a home-plate collision. He had mild symptoms, but they did not subside in time for the playoffs, and he was left off the postseason roster.Pirela said his wife, who is with him at training camp, and his family in Venezuela were frightened when he was carried off the field on a cart and taken to a hospital in Port St. Lucie. But he contacted his family as quickly as possible to let them know he was nothing worse than dizzy and sore. “I tried to relax and stay positive,” Pirela said. “I knew I’d be all right.”In Tuesday’s game, the Yankees defeated the Tigers, 9-8, on Ramon Flores’s two-out, three-run homer in the bottom of the ninth.INSIDE PITCHJACOBY ELLSBURY, who has been sidelined since March 15 with a mild abdominal strain, has begun to do light exercise. JOE GIRARDI said that as long as Ellsbury was able to play in exhibition games by Monday, he should be in the lineup on opening day. ... ESMIL ROGERS, who is competing for a spot in the starting rotation, had his second consecutive shaky performance, allowing five runs and five hits and committing a fielding error in the first two innings against the Tigers. “I think it’s a big start for him,” Girardi said before the game. Advertisement