By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 25, 2015
Zach Parise scored the tying goal midway through the third period, then added another in a shootout to help the Minnesota Wild beat the Islanders, 2-1, on Tuesday night for a 10th consecutive road win.Parise’s shootout attempt hit the post to the right of Jaroslav Halak and trickled in after it bounced off Halak’s leg.Devan Dubnyk made 37 saves for the Wild.The Islanders’ John Tavares opened the scoring at 19 minutes 36 seconds of the second period, jamming his team-best 34th goal of the season past Dubnyk. Kyle Okposo and Anders Lee assisted. The point was the 300th of Okposo’s career.Tavares, Okposo and Frans Nielsen all failed to convert in the shootout for the Islanders.Parise tied the game at 11:45 of the third with his 29th goal. Jason Pominville and Mikko Koivu had the assists.AdvertisementThe Islanders had the better play for most of the game, outshooting the Wild by 16-5 in the first period and finishing with a 38-32 advantage.AdvertisementPREDATORS 3, CANADIENS 2 Filip Forsberg scored a power-play goal at 1:54 of overtime, and Nashville rallied at home to beat Montreal.Pekka Rinne made 27 saves in his 39th win. He pulled one victory behind Montreal goalie Carey Price in a showdown between the league’s leading goalies in wins this season.Mattias Ekholm and Ryan Ellis scored for the Predators, who stayed a point behind first-place St. Louis in the Central Division. Mike Ribeiro had two assists.BLUES 3, PENGUINS 2 Alexander Steen redirected Zbynek Michalek’s shot from the point into the net 35 seconds into overtime, lifting St. Louis to a win at Pittsburgh.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.St. Louis ended a three-game losing streak. The Blues rallied from a two-goal deficit on scores from the former Penguins Robert Bortuzzo and Marcel Goc. Steen scored his 24th goal of the season on a pretty deflection of a slick feed from Michalek, who spent two seasons in Pittsburgh earlier in his career.COYOTES 5, RED WINGS 4 Mark Arcobello scored his second goal of the game in overtime, and Mike Smith made 33 saves to lead Arizona to a road win over banged-up Detroit.The victory ended an eight-game skid for the Coyotes, who have the worst record in the Western Conference. The Red Wings have lost seven of 10 and are clinging to third place in the Atlantic Division.BLUE JACKETS 5, DUCKS 3 Scott Hartnell had his eighth career three-goal game, and Columbus rebounded from a two-goal deficit to beat visiting Anaheim.AdvertisementSergei Bobrovsky made 36 saves, stopping the final 18 shots after the Ducks took a 3-2 lead.LIGHTNING 4, PANTHERS 3 Ryan Callahan and Nikita Kucherov scored in the third period, leading Tampa Bay to a win at home over Florida.Kucherov tied the score at 3-3 with a wraparound for his 27th goal at 1:30. Callahan skated from behind the net and snapped a shot past Panthers goalie Roberto Luongo from the left circle with 2:28 left.EARLY ARRIVAL FOR A RED WING Red Wings center Darren Helm was driving to the hospital with his girlfriend early Monday when their baby, Rylee-Klaire, was born in the car.Helm said that the experience was “pretty intense” and that he was “extremely proud” of his girlfriend for how she had handled the situation. He said his girlfriend had delivered the baby on her own while he drove to the hospital. Rylee-Klaire, weighing in at 6 pounds 10 ounces, arrived a week earlier than expected.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Parise Gives Wild All They Need to Top the Islanders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.