AdvertisementSupported byKings 4, Rangers 2By Pat PickensThe Los Angeles Kings have scuffled through a Stanley Cup hangover this season, but in a rematch of the Cup finals on Tuesday, the Kings looked more like the team that dispatched the Rangers in five games last spring than the one that has struggled for months to earn a postseason bid. Los Angeles controlled possession for large stretches, and Jeff Carter netted the game-winning goal early in the third period in the Kings’ dominant 4-2 win at Madison Square Garden. “Coming into this game, everybody knew what we were up against and that it was going to take a real strong effort and our ‘A’ game,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “We didn’t have that.”The Rangers dropped their second game in regulation to a Western Conference opponent (the Blackhawks were the other) in their past four.Mats Zuccarello and Kevin Hayes scored for the Rangers, and Cam Talbot had 31 saves. Rick Nash, who has been stuck on 39 goals since March 10, led the Rangers with five shots on goal. The Connecticut native Jonathan Quick stopped 34 shots as Los Angeles pulled into a tie with idle Calgary for the Pacific Division’s third playoff spot.Marian Gaborik, who spent parts of four seasons in New York before being dealt to Columbus in 2013, scored his 23rd goal of the season to give the Kings the lead for good at 4 minutes 35 seconds of the second period, drawing boos from the capacity crowd.“Playing in that building is special, and I was fortunate enough to play here four years,” Gaborik said. The teams split the season series. The Rangers claimed a 4-3 victory in Los Angeles on Jan. 8 — part of the Kings’ 4-7-6 swoon from late December through early February that appeared to damage their playoff prospects. Los Angeles is hoping to avoid joining dubious company, the 2006-7 Carolina Hurricanes and 1995-96 Devils, as the only teams since 1970 to miss the postseason the year after winning the Cup.Hoping to further dash their cross-country rivals’ playoff hopes, the Rangers struck first when Zuccarello scored just 51 seconds into the game. The newly minted line of Zuccarello, Derick Brassard and J. T. Miller created the play. Miller won a battle through Gaborik and the standout defenseman Drew Doughty, finding Zuccarello for his 13th of the season.“We want good starts, and we scored 51 seconds in — that’s usually a good start,” Derek Stepan said. “I don’t think we did a very good job from then on.”But after that sluggish start — indicative of a team that had played the night before — it was all Kings. Los Angeles swarmed Talbot, peppering 17 first-period shots on goal. “We knew we were going to come out against a desperate team tonight,” Talbot said. “They’re fighting for their playoff lives over there.” Seconds after Talbot robbed Trevor Lewis on a breakaway, Los Angeles tied the game when Robyn Regehr’s point shot hit defenseman Keith Yandle and trickled between Talbot’s legs at 10:38.It was Regehr’s second goal of the season and his first since Nov. 18, a span of 41 games.With the score 2-1 after two periods — despite Los Angeles’s 31-21 shot advantage and 56-35 shot-attempt margin, the Kings pulled away in the third. Carter’s 26th goal of the season at 1:05 — his eighth in the past 12 games — made the score 3-1, and Jake Muzzin lifted the advantage to three just 4:23 later. Quick, making his N.H.L.-most 63rd start of the season, stopped 30 straight shots after Zuccarello’s goal before surrendering Hayes’s tally. Slap ShotsThe Rangers’ No. 1 goalie, Henrik Lundqvist, who has been sidelined since Feb. 6 with a vascular injury in his neck, took shots against teammates in practice for the first time since being placed on injured reserve. Lundqvist said his goal is to return Saturday on the road against the Bruins or Sunday at home against the Capitals.Advertisement