AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Ever since he became the Mets’ general manager after the 2010 season, Sandy Alderson has generally taken three approaches in discussing the team’s financial limitations.He has been disciplined in rarely, if ever, showing frustration with the modest payroll he has had to operate with, a situation that was created when the team’s owners became entangled in the Bernard L. Madoff financial scandal. He has, at times, been willing to tell jokes at his and ownership’s expense, as when he said on Twitter several years ago that he would attempt to drive downhill to Florida for spring training so that he could save the team gas money.And, at times, he has been fairly blunt in stating that the Mets needed to put more fans in the seats at Citi Field if there was to be a realistic chance of pushing the payroll significantly higher.It was the third approach that emerged again Tuesday, when Alderson acknowledged that one reason the Mets decided not to start Matt Harvey in the Mets’ home opener Monday, April 13, against Philadelphia — that honor will instead go to Jacob deGrom — was to hold Harvey back until the following day and hope to get more people to come to that game.Home openers are akin to a homecoming party and generally sell out no matter how good or bad a team has been in recent seasons, or who is on the mound. But that second game at home can be a lonely affair, especially when it is a school night, a work night and the weather is cold and windy, which is often the case at April night games at Citi Field. But if Harvey is on the mound that night, in his first appearance at home since undergoing Tommy John surgery in October 2013, a lot more fans than usual might show up. At least that seems to be the Mets’ reasoning.“Look, we take a lot of things into account,” Alderson said. “I think the first and foremost is: Does any pitcher deserve to pitch in a game of that sort? And I think that was the primary focus. But you’re assuming that people are more interested in seeing Harvey pitch than Jacob. That’s probably true.”At one point, Alderson was asked if ticket sales were among the reasons that the Mets lined up their pitching rotation at the start of the season so that Harvey would pitch the second game at home. “Could be,” he said, smiling.The Mets’ first six years at Citi Field have been marred by one losing season after another and hemorrhaging attendance. In Citi Field’s inaugural season in 2009, the Mets sold 3,168,571 tickets, according to the Baseball Reference website. But by 2013, that figure had fallen by a third to 2,135,657, putting the Mets 21st in baseball, which was dismaying for a big-market team. The Mets’ average attendance did tick upward in 2014, but only by 162 fans a game. Harvey’s home debut on a Tuesday night can only help the team’s attendance inch up a little more.Harvey is not pitching the season opener, either. That game, on Monday, April 6, in Washington, will be pitched by 41-year-old Bartolo Colon. Then comes deGrom in the second game of the season, followed by Harvey in Game 3, a Thursday day game against the Nationals. All along, there was a feeling the Mets might not want Harvey to open the season in Washington because he might have gotten too amped up and overextended himself in his first regular-season outing since his surgery. But had he been slotted for Game 2 in Washington, instead of deGrom, he would have been in line to pitch the home opener. In any case, Harvey did not make a fuss about any of this Tuesday.“For not throwing at all last year, I’m happy to be playing again,” he said. “So whatever is decided on when I get to throw, I’m going to be all excited and all for it.” Harvey did have one small adjustment to make. During a radio appearance last year, he more or less guaranteed he would win on opening day against the Nationals in 2015. That is not happening, unless Harvey pitches in relief. And that is probably not happening, even if the game lasts 25 innings.Asked about the vanishing guarantee, Harvey responded that “Bartolo’s got that covered.”Colon has made six starts on opening day over his long career, and has generally succeeded, according to the Elias Sports Bureau, compiling a 4-1 record and a 2.79 earned run average. But he has not started on opening day since 2006.Now he will, with deGrom then opening at home and Harvey trying to sell some tickets for Tuesday, April 14. Advertisement