By KEN BELSONMARCH 24, 2015
PHOENIX — The coaches’ round table is an annual ritual at the N.F.L. owners’ meeting. Reporters have an hour to meet new coaches, become reacquainted with veteran ones and try their best to draw something out of New England Patriots Coach Bill Belichick.In theory, Belichick should have had a lot to crow about this year. The Patriots won the Super Bowl in stunning fashion, and the title, Belichick’s fourth, cemented his legacy as one of the most accomplished coaches in N.F.L. history. Even after losing stars like Darrelle Revis, Vince Wilfork and Brandon Browner, the Patriots will remain the team to beat next season.Yet in his session with reporters, which began more than 15 minutes late, Belichick remained a master of efficiency, rarely offering more than a sentence in reply to a question.Asked for his feelings on losing Revis, who signed with the division rival Jets, Belichick said, “It’s N.F.L. free agency.” Asked about what Revis meant to his team last season, Belichick said, “I don’t talk about the players that aren’t on our team.”AdvertisementWith his forehead veins popping and his right foot twitching, Belichick shrugged when asked how he would replace running back Shane Vereen, who signed with the Giants. “I don’t know,” he said. “We’ll see how it goes.”AdvertisementBelichick told reporters to speak to the N.F.L., not to him, about when the report on the deflated game balls in the A.F.C. championship game would be issued. And he had no appetite to talk about his relationship with quarterback Tom Brady. “That’s been talked about ad nauseam before the Super Bowl,” he said.The scene to Belichick’s left and right could not have been more different. One table over, reporters crowded the new Jets coach, Todd Bowles, who seemed genuinely thrilled to be there. He was happy that the Jets had made several key acquisitions, including Revis; Antonio Cromartie, another cornerback; and wide receiver Brandon Marshall. He was also respectful of Belichick.“The Patriots are the Super Bowl champs, and everybody else is going to have to fall in line behind them until somebody can beat them,” said Bowles, who wore a light green shirt. The new players are “all well and good for the off-season, but during the season you have to line up and play, and the W’s and the L’s count more than the names.”Bowles has reason to be cautious. Although the Jets now have top-flight wide receivers and defensive backs, quarterback Geno Smith remains a work in progress, and per league rules, Bowles has not had a chance to work with him yet.“It’s hard because you can’t talk to him and you can’t sit him down and see what he knows, what he doesn’t know, his philosophy, how he thinks and how he sees things,” Bowles said, adding that Smith was the presumed starter.“There’s nobody else we have,” he said. “He’s our guy right now.”To the other side of Belichick, the new Buffalo Bills coach, Rex Ryan, held court. Eager to please, Ryan showed up before the 7:15 a.m. start time and began talking as soon as he sat down. And with characteristic bluster, Ryan wasted no time in picking a fight.“New England is perched up there, they’ve won like 14 of 15” division titles, Ryan said. “They’re clearly the team to beat, but we’re coming after them.”AdvertisementWith the draft weeks away and with months to go before training camp, coaches seldom make news in March. But they do give their thoughts on the state of the league.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One topic of interest was the retirement last week of Chris Borland, a San Francisco 49ers linebacker who left the N.F.L. after one year because of concerns about the long-term health effects of playing football. Kansas City Chiefs Coach Andy Reid did not think Borland’s departure represented the beginning of an exodus. The league, he said, is paying a lot more attention to reducing injuries and addressing the concerns that Borland raised.“It’s too personal to make anything about it,” Reid said. “The league has put so much emphasis on cleaning it up, protecting the players.”Pittsburgh Steelers Coach Mike Tomlin said he had not heard directly from any players concerned about their long-term health, and he did not believe there was anything shocking in Borland’s exit. “In any line of work, if a successful investment banker wants to retire at 40, that is his right,” he said.One player perhaps seeking to return to the N.F.L. is Ray Rice, the former Baltimore Ravens running back who was cut by the team last season after video surfaced of him knocking out his fiancée.Ravens Coach John Harbaugh said he hoped Rice would be able to return to the league. “I still support him and his family,” he said.One table over, the new coach of the Denver Broncos, Gary Kubiak, grappled with a happier issue: how to coach Peyton Manning. Kubiak, who played his entire nine-year career as a quarterback for the Broncos, said Manning would continue to play his style of football.“I’m the one who has to adjust and figure out how to mesh everything together,” Kubiak said. “There’s 17 years of investment in what he’s done, and we’re not going to change that.”NEW RULES ON INJURIES The owners approved five rule changes aimed at identifying and preventing injuries. The most significant addition will allow trainers to tell officials to stop a game if a player “displays obvious signs of disorientation or is clearly unstable” and he remains in the game and is not seen by the club’s medical staff.AdvertisementIf a trainer saw a player who might have a concussion, he would contact an on-field official and the team’s medical staff using an in-stadium wireless system. The official would then stop the game, go to the player and make sure he was escorted off the field. The game clock would be stopped until the player was removed. The player must sit out at least one play and be evaluated before returning.Defensive players will also be prohibited from pushing a teammate at the line of scrimmage into the offensive line during a punt or a field goal. Teams that do this will lose 15 yards.Players will be penalized if they approach an opponent from behind and block him on the side or below the waist or hit an opponent in a defenseless posture, like a receiver trying to catch a pass.The league also banned chop blocks, when a defensive player is blocked in the thigh or below while a second offensive player blocks him above the waist.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: In Short, Belichick Takes Questions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.