AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensThe Rangers have been on a roll with goalie Cam Talbot in net, winning 17 of 24 games since he became their starter in early February.But even with Talbot’s success, Henrik Lundqvist is still the Rangers’ unquestioned No. 1 goalie, and they are close to getting him back.Lundqvist took shots against his teammates for the first time since he was placed on injured reserve with a vascular injury in his neck Feb. 6, and said he hoped to return to game action this weekend.Lundqvist was cleared last Tuesday to return to practice, but he had not taken the ice with his teammates because of the Rangers’ hectic game schedule, with four games in seven days, and the birth of his second child Friday.“It felt really good,” Lundqvist said. “It’s been a long wait for me to get out there. It was a lot of fun to see the guys, get out on the ice and work on my game.”Talbot started against the Los Angeles Kings on Tuesday night in a rematch of the Stanley Cup finalists, his 22nd start since Lundqvist’s injury. But at the morning skate, Lundqvist was across the ice, battling shots, both high and low.Center Derick Brassard said he was hesitant to fire a high shot at Lundqvist out of fear for the goaltender’s well-being, but that sentiment quickly waned.“If he wasn’t fine, they wouldn’t have him on the ice with us in a full practice,” Brassard said. “Obviously, he’s fine, and he made some good saves there, and after that the guys were trying a little harder and shooting a little higher.”Lundqvist reiterated that sentiment.“I’m fine,” he said. “They can go high and hard, and I’m not worried about it.”Lundqvist said his goal was to return either Saturday in Boston against the Bruins or Sunday at home against the Washington Capitals. Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said that “it would be a stretch” for Lundqvist to play Thursday against the Ottawa Senators, but that he would face live shots again Wednesday in practice.“For Hank to find his rhythm and his style of play, he doesn’t think it will be a long time,” Vigneault said. “I don’t exactly know the exact time frame.”Lundqvist said he thought he was close to where he needed to be physically, but needed a few more skates to work on his timing and his mental state.“I feel like, for the last four weeks, it has been really good,” Lundqvist said. “The fact that I have been able to skate and stay in shape — that’s going to help me speed up this process. For each practice, I feel more and more comfortable. The first practice I had last week, just a couple of coaches shooting, it was a little uncomfortable. But for each day that goes by, you get more and more comfortable with the high shots and the speed and everything.“Playing goal, the biggest part is the mental aspect — to have your focus right and to see the game the right way.”To support his neck, Lundqvist has been wearing a brace while skating since he returned to the ice four weeks ago. He said he was unsure whether that would be part of his equipment whenever he retook the ice for games.“I might use it, I might not,” Lundqvist said. “I think I’ll keep it for the next few days, and we’ll see how that goes.”Lundqvist was confident he could play a full game, adding, “This time of the year, I’m probably in better shape than a long time.”But a baby girl in the house is also affecting his focus.“I’m working on it,” Lundqvist said with a laugh when asked about how his sleep had been. “It’s been great. Everybody is healthy, and that’s the most important thing.”Advertisement