
Keeping Score By                     
JONATHAN CZUPRYN

MARCH 24, 2015
Alabama State Coach Freda Freeman-Jackson’s play call to open the second half against Florida State on Saturday could not have been drawn up any better.In execution, the play did not pan out the way Freeman-Jackson had envisioned; a missed jumper compounded by an ensuing missed layup left her shaking her head on the sideline.But the call itself was appropriate, given the Lady Hornets’ predicament.“Mercy! Mercy! Mercy!” Alabama State guard Brittney Smith shouted.The plea fell on deaf ears. The Seminoles forged onward.If Florida State Coach Sue Semrau and the second-seeded Seminoles had stopped scoring at 50 points, they could have punched their tickets to the round of 32, as Alabama State’s offense sputtered to a total of only 49.AdvertisementBut by the time Florida State reached 50, there was still 16 minutes 23 seconds left in the contest. The officials could have installed a lid on the Seminoles’ basket only a few minutes after halftime, and the Seminoles would still have been declared the winner.AdvertisementUnfortunately for Freeman-Jackson, the referees were not that generous. The final score was 91-49.N.C.A.A. tournament matchups that pit a No. 2 seed against a No. 15 seed often follow a similar script. Since the women’s game adopted a 64-team postseason format in 1994, second-seeded squads are 88-0 against No. 15 seeds.The No. 14 seeds are no luckier. They are winless against their third-seeded counterparts during the round of 64.Although the tournament committee appropriately rewards the country’s best teams with the best seeds, its final rulings on the bottom-tier squads resemble a death sentence more than anything else. While the men’s bracket has made a tradition of embracing underdogs, the women’s side of the sport has been busy burying them in the first round, year after year. It did not help that the top 16 seeds were allowed to host first- and second-round games this year, returning to an earlier format.However, it is hard to place blame on the selection committee. In the case of Alabama State’s seeding, the Lady Hornets squeaked their way into the postseason by winning the Southwestern Athletic Conference tournament. Had Alabama State failed to secure its league’s championship, Freeman-Jackson and her squad would most likely have been at home watching the N.C.A.A. tournament rather than participating in it.So when the committee handed the Lady Hornets a No. 15 seed, there was no controversy. But for casual fans searching for an inspiring story, the right call could still leave them wanting more — more suspense, more entertainment.Underdog EffectTeams like Florida Gulf Coast and George Mason encapsulated the underdog theme during their tournament runs in the men’s bracket, and in the process, they gained notoriety on and off the court.The Dunk City effect on Florida Gulf Coast helped prompt a$6 million expansion proposal for the on-campus Alico Arena, a tenfold increase in merchandise sales and even a spike in freshman applications submitted to the university.AdvertisementGeorge Mason’s run to the Final Four during the 2006 N.C.A.A. tournament was worth $677 million in free publicity, according to the university’s website.Still, there is little difference in the arc of development of men’s and women’s college basketball. The women’s game is still in its comparative infancy. And it can be argued that it is more difficult for UConn to win now than it was for U.C.L.A. then. For instance, not until 1975, the year of John Wooden’s last title, was more than one men’s team per conference allowed into the N.C.A.A. tournament.But women’s college basketball is not even close to achieving parity in the tournament. Smaller programs like Alabama State have a hard time just keeping up on the court.Crushing LossesSeven programs lost by 30 points or more during the round of 64 in the women’s tournament. Only two games in the men’s bracket ended with a margin of 30 or more.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a whole, the women’s round of 64 has been one-sided since it was introduced 21 years ago. The median margin of victory during the opening games is 18.2 points, and it reaches as high as 22.1 in some years.On the other hand, the median margin of victory for the men’s round of 64 during the same stretch is 12.95 points. It has never risen above 18 and has dipped into the 10-point range in four seasons.Two seasons ago, with a 68-point rout of the No. 16 seed, Idaho, Geno Auriemma’s powerhouse Connecticut squad illustrated the breadth of the talent gap. Even when pitted against Louisville, a seemingly on-par opponent, in the championship game, the Huskies breezed to a 93-60 victory.But in the process, Auriemma proved that dominance is not popular. Neither of the Huskies’ last two national title games featured a capacity crowd, including the 2014 championship matchup against Notre Dame, which for the first time showcased two undefeated teams.Tournament JuggernautAfter nine championships in 20 years, UConn has eliminated much of the chaos that usually accompanies a one-and-done tournament. And it is not just that the Huskies seem to win every year. It is the fact that when they win, the Huskies are not even in the same ballpark as their opponents.AdvertisementUConn has participated in 107 N.C.A.A. tournament games since 1994. In four of those matchups, the scoring margin between Auriemma’s Huskies and their opponent has been 3 or fewer points.In other words, in 97 percent of UConn’s postseason matchups during the past two decades, fans could have left the arena early, knowing which team would win. And it has been nearly a decade since the Huskies last faced a one-possession contest in the tournament.To put that into perspective, the round of 64 in this year’s men’s bracket included 10 contests that ended in margins of 3 or fewer points.While the margin of victory in the first 32 games of the men’s tournament has shrunk in the past three years, the giants of the women’s game, like UConn, continue to do their part to widen the already gaping divide.Auriemma is not the only one to blame for the game’s disparity, although his having contributed to 71- and 72-point margins of victory in the round of 64, as he did in 2000 and 2001, made him an easy target. Tennessee had Pat Summitt, Baylor has Kim Mulkey, and Notre Dame has Muffet McGraw.In the game of women’s college basketball, those coaches are the 1 percent.Dreams of ParityFor many fans of the sport, the dominance of that 1 percent is a lot less appealing than 1-point thrillers, which the women’s bracket has featured 14 times in the round of 64 in 21 years. The men needed only the last seven years to match that total. (Although, in contrast to the men’s tournament, where a 16th seed has never beat a No. 1 seed, that happened in the women’s tournament in 1998, as Harvard defeated Stanford.)Of all the people pushing for a more competitive playoff bracket in the women’s game, Semrau, Florida State’s coach, might be the strangest. For all intents and purposes, she is a member of the 1 percent after having earned three Atlantic Coast Conference Coach of the Year awards and having been named a finalist for the Coach of the Year Award this season.Still, she agreed that deep tournament runs by smaller programs, or even just more competitive games, would help advance the popularity of women’s basketball.But Semrau said that if parity was to become a reality in the women’s N.C.A.A. tournament, she had only one condition: “Not in this one.”AdvertisementOn Monday night, the Seminoles thwarted yet another potential underdog story in women’s basketball when they defeated seventh-seeded Florida Gulf Coast, 65-47.A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: For Underdogs at Women’s Tournament, an Invitation to Heartbreak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »