By BRIAN SCIARETTAMARCH 25, 2015
AARHUS, Denmark — The United States national team endured yet another late-game collapse Wednesday, losing on a cold, rainy night by 3-2 to a Denmark team that was far superior in nearly every aspect of the game.Denmark held the possession edge throughout and won with a late equalizer and an even later winner from striker Nicklas Bendtner, who finished with a hat trick.Jozy Altidore scored the opening goal and assisted on the Americans’ second, which gave them a 2-1 lead in the second half. But the late collapse was the latest in a line of poor results from the United States, which has now stumbled late in five straight FIFA exhibition games: draws against Ecuador and Honduras in October, and losses to Colombia and Ireland in November.The Americans will try to snap out of their funk — which also includes a loss at Chile in January — when they play at Switzerland on Tuesday.AdvertisementPlayer ratings, from 1 (diabolical) to 10 (world class):STARTING LINEUPNick Rimando: The Real Salt Lake goalkeeper was hung out to dry on Bendtner’s first goal but probably could have made a play on the initial cross that resulted in Denmark’s second. Rating: 5.5AdvertisementTimothy Chandler: Aside from his fortunate assist to Altidore in the 19th minute, it was a game to forget from Chandler, who was beaten on multiple occasions and turned the ball over frequently. His inability to connect with his passes hurt the team’s ability to generate offense. Rating: 3.5Michael Orozco: The Liga MX-based central defender worked hard in the back line and came up big on more than one occasion. One such moment came when he made a nice clearance off the line early in the second half. His passing wasn’t as sharp as that of his defensive partner, John Brooks, but it was a decent outing, and he left in the 80th minute with the United States in front, 2-1. Rating: 5.5John Brooks: After a series of good performances in the Bundesliga, Brooks had a night to forget in Denmark. His positioning was a mess at several important moments, including ball-watching on Bendtner’s first goal and being outhustled on the winner. Rating: 4.0 Greg Garza: Garza was unable to contain Denmark’s attack up the wing, in particular from Lasse Vibe, and was beaten multiple times. He also was ineffective getting forward and added little in the attack. Rating: 4.0 Gyasi Zardes: A new face on the national team, he earned the start at right wing instead of his more customary role up front and had difficulties adjusting to the game’s speed. He was not involved with many dangerous offensive opportunities and did not help his team maintain possession. Rating: 3.5Alejandro Bedoya: He had a few turnovers in the first half, but his defensive effort was one of the biggest reasons why the United States was able to escape the first half only surrendering one goal. His partnership with Michael Bradley was not cohesive, and the Americans lost the midfield battle handily, but Bedoya’s work rate was commendable. Rating: 5.0Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michael Bradley: In his first start as national team captain, Bradley turned in one of the better United States performances despite dealing with an opponent that enjoyed an overwhelming majority of possession. Bradley made a beautiful pass to start the play that led to Aron Johannsson’s second-half goal, which gave the Americans an undeserved 2-1 lead. Rating: 6.0Fabian Johnson: Earning the start at left midfield, the versatile Johnson was mostly invisible in the first half and was substituted at halftime. Rating: 4.5AdvertisementAron Johannsson: It was a difficult game to be an American forward, since Denmark’s possession gave the team few chances. His goal in the 67th minute came after he made a smart run to get into position to slot home Jozy Altidore’s pass. Rating: 5.5 Jozy Altidore: While the United States did not deserve to be even close to Denmark on the scoreboard, Altidore did his part to nearly lift his team to an improbable result. His first goal was a fantastic effort to beat two defenders to get on the end of a long cross, and his pass to Johannsson gave his team the 2-1 lead it soon squandered. Rating: 7.5SUBSTITUTESBrek Shea: The Orlando SC wing replaced Johnson at halftime, but fared no better. In fact, he might have been a downgrade from the invisible Johnson. Rating: 4.0Alfredo Morales: After replacing in Bedoya to start the second half, he helped the Americans briefly earn some more possession. But his decent outing was not nearly enough. Rating: 5.5Rubio Rubin: After replacing Johannsson in the 67th minute, Rubin had a few nice touches but no real opportunity to get involved. Rating: 5.0DeAndre Yedlin: Unable to find minutes at Tottenham, Yedlin replaced Zardes in the 67th minute but did not offer much on the wing and was not quick enough defensively as Denmark stepped up its game. Rating: 4.5Ventura Alvarado: It was a rough first cap for Alvarado, a rising Mexican league player who replaced a fatigued Orozco in the 81st minute. Just a minute after entering the game, Denmark tied the score on a defensive breakdown in the box when Alvarado had a chance to clear. Moments later, Bendtner scored the winner after getting behind the back four. Rating: 4.0We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.