AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinCLEVELAND — In March, the differences between the pulsating energy of a basketball arena during the N.C.A.A. tournament and the quiet chill of a Midwestern collegiate baseball field could not be more stark.One throbs with electricity. The other is often a frosty exercise in endurance. Pat Connaughton loves both. A charismatic swingman who has led his Notre Dame basketball team into the round of 16, Connaughton was also a star right-handed pitcher for the Fighting Irish and is now a minor leaguer for the Baltimore Orioles — a two-sport star in an era of increased athletic specialization. “I have enough trouble with just basketball,” Notre Dame forward Eric Katenda said. “He’s doing two and might play both professionally? That’s crazy.”As intoxicating as it may feel to bury the key 3-pointer in a tournament win on national television, Connaughton carried the same intensity into his baseball games, even when most of the fans were his shivering basketball teammates, like Katenda, out to lend their support.“When you’re on the mound and there’s not many people there, it’s a cold, rainy spring day in South Bend, Ind., you can still find yourself in jams,” Connaughton said. “You can still find yourself in competitive situations where you need to step up in order to put your team in position to win that game.”Connaughton, a senior, did that brilliantly on Saturday when he blocked a shot attempt by Kellen Dunham of Butler with the score tied and two seconds left in regulation. Then he broke a tie in overtime with his only 3-pointer of the night. The victory propelled Notre Dame to the round of 16, where it will play Wichita State on Thursday night in the Midwest Regional.His plays at both ends of the court were pivotal, but Connaughton’s impact was also seen when he got in the face of the junior forward Zach Auguste, who had committed a critical turnover. Connaughton implored his teammate to stay focused on the game because the Irish needed him. It was a demonstration of the leadership qualities that Connaughton’s coaches praise.“I’ve not had anyone better,” Notre Dame Coach Mike Brey said. “He’s one of the all-timers, maybe the best I’ve ever had.”At 6 feet 5 inches and 218 pounds, Connaughton may be too small for the N.B.A. He is, however, the perfect size for a pitcher. He throws a fastball regularly at 91 or 92 miles per hour but can bump that up to 95, and he has a drop-down curveball and an effective changeup. The package was good enough for the Baltimore Orioles to draft him in the fourth round of June’s amateur draft, 121st over all.In July, Connaughton pitched in six games for Baltimore’s Class A Aberdeen club and compiled a 2.51 E.R.A. Then it was time to get back to school.“He loves to play basketball, and he’s intrigued about what the N.B.A. thinks about him,” Brey said. “So there was never any wavering.”For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.When Brey sought to recruit Connaughton out of St. John’s Prep in Danvers, Mass., he knew he would have to make allowances for baseball and was willing to do so. Jeff Samardzija, a Chicago White Sox pitcher, had successfully played both football and baseball at Notre Dame.Connaughton led St. John’s to a state championship in basketball but did not generate much recruiting attention until he started playing in showcase tournaments in Orlando, Fla. Soon, coaches from all over the country were calling Jim O’Leary, the St. John’s athletic director, to ask about him.O’Leary recalled that U.C.L.A’s. coaches were interested but that when he told them that Connaughton wanted to play baseball as well, they said he was not good enough to make U.C.L.A.’s baseball team.“The next day I got a call from the U.C.L.A. baseball coach,” O’Leary said. “He heard about the conversation: ‘Forget what the basketball coach said.’ He knew all about Pat. He could definitely play baseball at U.C.L.A.”Until Connaughton arrived at St. John’s, where the former N.H.L. center Bobby Carpenter played, it was widely known as a hockey school. Basketball was an afterthought. “Pat single-handedly changed the culture,” O’Leary said. When Brey came around with offers from Notre Dame, Connaughton told him he already knew the Irish baseball coach, Mik Aoki, a fellow Massachusetts native who had tried to recruit Connaughton to Boston College when Aoki coached there. Brey told Aoki that Connaughton remembered him. “He better remember me; I offered him a scholarship to B.C.,” Aoki said. “And I told Mike, I would love to have him, but he legitimately has to be allowed to play both sports if that is what he wants. “There’s obviously a lot more pressure on the basketball coach at Notre Dame than the baseball coach, but Mike was true to his word. It was never once an issue.”For three years at South Bend, Connaughton negotiated the two-sport balancing act. He played fall baseball until basketball started in October, and he traded in his spikes for high-tops. In February, when he was not playing basketball and his academic schedule allowed, he would join the baseball team and start throwing, ever so gently.When the basketball season ended in March, he would move full time to baseball, but he would throw only an inning or two as he strengthened his arm. As he increased his pitch count, he would move to the front of the rotation.Connaughton’s stuff would translate to the major leagues, Aoki said, adding that what made him so intriguing was that he had thrown far fewer innings than most pitchers his age, because of his basketball schedule. “He’s got some work to do,” Aoki said, “but he’s got plenty of pitches stored up in that arm, and I would not be surprised at all if four years from now I’m watching Pat on TV throwing 100 miles per hour. This kid has it all.”On the basketball floor, with his Batman socks and chin beard, Connaughton has a reputation for a sweet jump shot to go along with the ruggedness to defend and rebound and the ability to drive athletically to the basket. This season he has averaged 12.5 points per game. His rebounding mark (7.3 a game) is the 10th-best in the Atlantic Coast Conference, and he leads the conference in 3-point shooting percentage, at .427. He is not certain how many basketball games he has left, but he joked that the Orioles were probably rooting for Wichita State. Whenever Notre Dame’s basketball season ends, he will probably head to Florida for extended spring training, with an eye also on the dwindling shot clock. “I’ve been playing both of them my whole life,” Connaughton said. “I don’t want to burn a bridge before I see what’s across that bridge, and I made a promise to myself that I wouldn’t give up on one before I saw it through.”Advertisement