AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanTAMPA, Fla. — Masahiro Tanaka stood with his back to the wall, his right elbow and shoulder heavily wrapped. He frowned, fidgeted and shook his head while a group of reporters asked why the velocity on his fastball appeared to be down.Whenever a pitcher is coming back from an elbow problem, even the slightest sign of distress can cause panic. And for the foreseeable future, the fate of New York’s major league baseball teams could hinge on the stability of two right elbows. Tanaka, the Yankees’ ace, is pitching with a partly torn ulnar collateral ligament and is trying to prove he does not need Tommy John surgery. Matt Harvey, the Mets’ ace, is returning from Tommy John surgery and is trying to prove he is as good as new. So far in spring training, both of them have looked mostly like themselves.On Sunday, Harvey shut out the Yankees for five and two-thirds innings. On Wednesday, Tanaka had a mixed outing against the Mets. He recorded seven strikeouts in four and two-thirds innings, but he also allowed three runs in a 7-2 loss at the Yankees’ spring training complex. The runs were not nearly as worrisome as the speed of his fastball.Speaking through an interpreter, Tanaka said he was intentionally throwing more sinkers, a slower pitch with more movement, because he felt his four-seam fastball was hit hard last year. He also indicated that he was trying to relax this spring and not overthrow. “I’m O.K. with it; I feel fine with it,” he said of his velocity. “I’m not a pitcher that would throw 95 miles per hour every pitch. I may get that once or twice in a game. Given that, I’m O.K. with where I’m at right now, as far as velocity goes.”His performance this spring has been encouraging. In three starts, he has compiled a 1.74 earned run average and 12 strikeouts in 101/3 innings. And he is still building his arm strength. On Wednesday, he threw only about 60 pitches. He is expected to make one more exhibition start, and he will probably start the season on a pitch count. Asked about the Yankees’ opening day starter, General Manager Brian Cashman said, “I hope it’s the one we’re planning on having.” Tanaka is widely expected to get the start. If Harvey had not missed last season, he would have been the Mets’ opening day starter. Instead, he will start third in the rotation — and the order is not exactly random. His home debut is expected to be such a spectacle that the Mets have penciled him in to pitch the second home game of the season, on a Tuesday — normally a lazy April night — in part to help ticket sales. Harvey has fueled the hype this spring. His fastball has touched the upper 90s. His slider looks as sharp as ever. In four starts, he has compiled a 1.26 E.R.A. and 12 strikeouts in 141/3 innings. But on Wednesday, almost as a reminder of how fragile pitchers can be, the Mets announced that Zack Wheeler had undergone successful elbow surgery. His flexor pronator tendon was repaired and his U.C.L. reconstructed, and he was expected to make a full recovery. But he will be out of action for about 14 months.At the Mets’ complex in Port St. Lucie, Fla., Bobby Parnell, the team’s former closer, also made a step in his recovery from Tommy John surgery by pitching in another minor league game. Like Tanaka, he threw fastballs that were reportedly slower than normal, and he gave a similar explanation: He was throwing more two-seam fastballs and was trying not to overthrow. “I hope to return in May,” Parnell said in a statement, “but I’ll let my body and arm tell me when I’m ready to come back.”For all his strikeouts, Tanaka looked hittable at times against the Mets. Juan Lagares and Matt Reynolds doubled against him, and John Mayberry Jr. hit a solo home run.Still, at least one observer was upbeat about Tanaka’s prospects. “He’ll continue to get better and better,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. Collins added: “What you’re seeing, you can just imagine him throwing the ball seven or eight miles an hour harder and how dominating he could be.”For the rest of the spring and into the early part of the season, both the Mets and the Yankees will be watching their young aces closely. For years to come, they could be shadowboxing each other across town. INSIDE PITCHDellin Betances, one of the candidates to be the Yankees’ closer, allowed a home run to Juan Lagares and has now allowed a run in each of his last four appearances. Betances’ spring E.R.A. is 6.75, and his fastball velocity appears to be lower. Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said that his velocity picked up later in the spring last year. “If it’s the last week, the last day,” Girardi said, “I might have a little more concern.”Advertisement