AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick MaksCOLUMBUS, Ohio — On Friday night at Nationwide Arena here, the most pivotal moment in a contest between Dayton and Providence to advance to the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 32 was not a 3-pointer feathered in at the last second. It was not a thunderous dunk that brought the fans to their feet. It was not a stirring defensive stand. Instead, it was a technical foul. Late in the game, Friars Coach Ed Cooley brought his team together for an on-court huddle during a timeout. Providence was trailing by 50-42 with 3 minutes 42 seconds to play, and Cooley was upset with his club after a backbreaking 6-1 run by the Flyers. Inside this enclave was a scene of frustration in which Cooley barked at his players, stared them down and finally flipped over a folding chair that he had brought with him from the bench. He did all of this without looking at, talking to or interacting with the game’s officials, who hovered outside the huddle. So when Providence was called for a technical foul, it was met with fierce criticism from Cooley and others, who deemed the call an overreaction. “You’re coaching your team; you’re trying to put some emotion into your team,” Cooley said after the game. “It was one of those things — it was more emotion, trying to fire my team up.” He added: “That to me was wrong, in my opinion, from my seat. I’m coaching my team.”The foul against Cooley was one of several instances in which controversial officiating seemed to influence games’ outcomes in the opening rounds of the tournament. It was also the defining moment in an unattractive and choppy game that reflected the state of a sport in which scoring and the pace of play are down.In a statement provided to the news media, the N.C.A.A. coordinator for officiating, John Adams, defended the call, citing officiating guidelines. In another statement, Peter Roby, a men’s basketball selection committee member in Columbus and Northeastern’s athletic director, added: “It was a violation of one of the rules regarding unsportsmanlike conduct. He threw the chair out of the huddle, which precipitated the call.”Still, the decision to assess a technical foul at a critical juncture in a game of such high stakes remains a contested matter. “I thought it was as bad of a moment in officiating as we’ve seen in the N.C.A.A. tournament in a long time,” the CBS sports analyst Doug Gottlieb said. He added: “He didn’t throw a chair, he wasn’t looking at the refs, he wasn’t intimidating anybody. He was just mad because his team was playing poorly. His best players couldn’t hit a shot. His point guard, who is an N.B.A.-caliber talent, wasn’t playing particularly well. They couldn’t figure out Dayton’s defense. And the chair tips over, and they give him a technical foul at the end of the game? Like, what are you doing?”Gottlieb, who was part of the network’s broadcast team in Columbus, said: “It was a really bad moment. It was just a bad moment. And look: We all have bad moments. I have bad moments, coaches have bad moments, players have bad moments.” At the beginning of the Providence-Dayton game, Kris Dunn, a sophomore guard for the Friars, was whistled for a questionable flagrant foul in the first minute after tossing an elbow, seemingly inadvertently. Gottlieb said the foul essentially changed “the whole tenor and tone to the game.”With its best player soon in foul trouble, Providence — which made 34 percent of its shots from the field and turned the ball over 16 times — unraveled. “Providence’s players just started — every time there was a foul, they threw up their arms, and it was like they thought the whole world was against them,” Gottlieb said.Earlier Friday in Columbus, West Virginia outlasted a feisty Buffalo squad in a game of 49 fouls and a late off-the-ball call that Bobby Hurley, the Bulls’ coach, described as “tough to swallow.”“I just can’t get into it other than — in this type of game, at that point in the game, in a possession that really wasn’t going anywhere — it was just surprising,” Hurley said. For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.After Maryland’s 65-62 win over Valparaiso here a few hours later, Crusaders Coach Bryce Drew was asked to address what one reporter called a “pretty clear picture” of the sophomore guard Keith Carter being fouled on a last-second attempt to tie the score. “I think the game of basketball,” Drew said, “there’s a lot of ups and downs, a lot of things that go on.”On Thursday in Louisville, Ky., U.C.L.A. nipped Southern Methodist after a controversial goaltending call on a 3-pointer that gave the Bruins a 57-56 lead with less than 15 seconds to play.“I never saw a game end like that,” S.M.U. Coach Larry Brown told reporters after the contest. Brown was also critical of what he perceived as a lack of review over the call. “That’s pretty heartbreaking,” he said. “It’s not crying over spilled milk, but why would you have all these TV people and take five seconds and review a goaltending? It might have been goaltending. It probably was. But we’ve got all these cameras. It happened so fast.”In West Virginia’s 69-59 victory against Maryland on Sunday night here, Melo Trimble, the star freshman guard for the Terrapins, was knocked to the floor on a screen. There was no call, and Trimble left the game in the second half with a head injury. “The worst part about that one was there were two officials looking at the play, and they just missed it,” Gottlieb said. “They went over to the monitors to see if it was flagrant and apparently they walked over to Maryland’s bench and said they missed it.”An inalienable truth about basketball is that fouls are as woven into the fabric of the game as shooting and rebounding. Gottlieb, however, warned of “overzealous” officiating and inconsistencies in interpretations. And though he is one voice, his concern seems to be part of a larger chorus which has been critical of some of the officiating in this year’s postseason — a time that is supposed to be a celebration of a sport that some say is at a crossroads. “College basketball is super, super fast; it’s super physical,” Gottlieb said. “And I respect that it’s a hard game to officiate and certain games are harder to officiate than others because they’re more physical or the plays’ importance is heightened. I understand that. I sympathize with that.”He continued: “On the other hand, we hold coaches and players and, frankly, broadcasters accountable for how you perform in those heightened circumstances. You can’t overreact.”Advertisement