AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonIn a decision that may prompt a financial settlement, a federal judge in Minnesota on Wednesday denied an N.H.L. motion to dismiss a case brought by retired players who accused the league of concealing from them the risks of repeated head trauma and promoting violence on the ice.Judge Susan Richard Nelson of United States District Court ruled that the N.H.L. had not convinced her that a statute of limitations applied to the players’ complaints, that the players’ claims of fraud should be dismissed or that there were issues of jurisdiction that applied.“In opposition, Plaintiffs argue that they properly alleged that the N.H.L. concealed information about long-term neurodegenerative risks in the face of a duty to disclose,” the judge wrote.The league has also argued that the case should be dismissed because the hockey players’ claims were governed by the collective bargaining agreements they signed. The judge has yet to rule on this motion, which the N.F.L. has argued with frequent success in other settings.Still, Judge Nelson’s ruling increased pressure on the N.H.L. to reach a financial settlement rather than risk having another motion denied or eventually facing a trial.“There’s no doubt that the judge’s refusal to dismiss puts a little more pressure on the league and forces them to question whether they want to roll the dice and go to trial or settle with the players,” said Warren Zola, who teaches sports law at Boston College.In 2013, the N.F.L. settled with more than 5,000 former players before a federal judge ruled on the league’s motion to dismiss. But Mr. Zola said the N.F.L. had a lot more revenue than the N.H.L., so it was better able to come up with the money to settle its case.The judge overseeing the former football players’ case, Anita B. Brody of United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, is expected to give final approval to that settlement — which includes up to $5 million for players with severe neurological diseases, as well as medical monitoring benefits — in the next month or two.The N.H.L. issued a statement by Deputy Commissioner Bill Daly that said, “While we would have hoped for a different result on this motion, we understand that the case is at a relatively early stage, and there will be ample opportunity for us to establish our defenses as the discovery process progresses.”Advertisement