AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyCLEVELAND — In all of sports, no event may combine so much spectacle with so little meaning as the jump ball. It is competition at its purest: two players trying to jump higher than the other to get the ball. Once it is done, though, all that has happened is one team has the ball; the next team will soon enough.In college basketball, almost every jump ball situation is decided not with another jump ball, but rather by the possession arrow, which begins pointed in the direction of the team that lost the jump ball, and then flips each time it is invoked. (True jump balls begin each overtime period.)Nobody ever won or lost a national title on a jump ball. Still, as observers celebrate Kentucky’s 36-0 record and excellence in seemingly every facet of the game — defense, height, even offensive efficiency — it is worth noting that jump balls are yet another thing at which the Wildcats are the best in Division I men’s basketball this season. And it is hardly close.According to numbers provided to The New York Times by the statistician Ken Pomeroy, Kentucky has won 34 jump balls this year and lost five, for an 87 percent success rate. The five that beat Kentucky are Kansas, South Carolina, Louisiana State, Alabama and Mississippi (in overtime).The figure reflects which team gains possession after a jump ball, not necessarily which team literally won it — although, Pomeroy said, the extent of Kentucky’s statistical dominance very strongly suggests skill at “winning” the jump ball. And, anyway, gaining possession is the whole point.Illustrating Kentucky’s dominance in the category, the gap between it and second place — San Diego State, with 82 percent — is roughly equivalent to the gap between second place and 10th place (Arizona).The player doing the jumping for Kentucky is the freshman Karl-Anthony Towns, who at 6 feet 11 inches is only the third-tallest Wildcat.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.“I just go out there and try to win every jump ball and give us the ball first, and hopefully we can have a momentum right from the get-go,” Towns said earlier this month.Height is not everything, he added. Referring to a hypothetical opponent, he said: “You’ve still got to win the tip. He still jumped.”Marcus Lee, a 6-9 sophomore, jumps against Towns in practice. He insisted that he beats Towns “most of the time.” “And he gets mad,” Lee said. “And cheats.”Told what Lee said, Towns replied: “No, it’s not true. Why would he lie?” As for cheating, Towns added: “He tells our coach to throw the ball to his side so he can get it. And he still loses.” (The assistant John Robic typically throws the jump ball in practice.)The sophomore Dominique Hawkins confirmed that Towns was usually the winner, though “sometimes Marcus gets it.”On Thursday night, when Kentucky faces West Virginia in the round of 16, Towns will go up against Devin Williams, a 6-9 sophomore forward for the Mountaineers. At 31st, with 69 percent, the Mountaineers are a respectable jump ball team.Neither height nor leaping ability win jump balls, Williams said.“They probably are the best at it, just because they want it,” he said of Kentucky. “At the end of the day, from whatever we do — taking a charge to diving on the floor to getting the jump ball — they’re just all going to come down to who wants it.”Advertisement