By KEN BELSONMARCH 25, 2015
PHOENIX — N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell may be relieved that last season is over, but he is still grappling with the fallout from domestic abuse scandals and the league’s botched attempts to penalize players who dominated the headlines in 2014.The league must still determine whether to suspend Greg Hardy, the former Carolina Panthers defensive end whose conviction for domestic abuse was overturned on appeal, and whether to allow Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson, who pleaded no contest to beating his son, to return.The league’s decisions in these cases will provide insight into how serious Goodell is about confronting players who were said to have committed abuse and defending the enhanced penalties and programs that the league installed late last year.Speaking at the conclusion of the three-day owners’ meeting here, Goodell said Wednesday that the league was continuing to investigate Hardy’s case to determine if he should be suspended. Under the league’s strengthened guidelines, any player found to have committed domestic abuse will receive an automatic six-game suspension. This month, Hardy signed a contract with the Dallas Cowboys, who could be without him for a significant period, depending on the league’s decision.Advertisement“We are trying to get as many facts as we can to make the most informed decision we can,” Goodell said.AdvertisementEarlier Wednesday, Coach Jason Garrett said that the Cowboys had done their due diligence on Hardy and that they had structured Hardy’s contract to reduce the team’s exposure if Hardy got in trouble again.“We want the right kind of guys on our team,” Garrett said. “If we didn’t believe he could become the right kind of guy, we wouldn’t have signed him.”Peterson, Goodell said, will be evaluated in mid-April to see if he had met the league’s request to seek counseling. A judge overturned Peterson’s suspension, but the N.F.L. has appealed that decision. Peterson is ineligible to play but is still being paid.Aware of the focus on the league’s handling of abuse cases, Goodell said he was frank about the league’s hopes for new players when he met this month with Jameis Winston, the Florida State quarterback who was accused of raping a fellow student in 2012 but was never charged. Winston is a potential top pick in the draft.“We were incredibly clear about our expectations of anyone who enters the N.F.L.,” Goodell said.In December, Winston was cleared of violating Florida State’s student code of conduct.The controversies confronting Goodell are not limited to player misconduct. He has yet to decide whether to penalize Cleveland Browns General Manager Ray Farmer, who texted team officials on the sideline during a game, a violation of league rules. Goodell also said there was no timetable for the release of a report on game balls’ being underinflated during the A.F.C. title game between the New England Patriots and the Indianapolis Colts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Goodell said the investigation, led by Ted Wells, a lawyer who investigated reports of bullying within the Miami Dolphins organization in 2013, was not designed to embarrass the Patriots.“I made it clear we were not making any judgments” in looking into the matter, Goodell said.It has been 20 years since the N.F.L. had a team in Los Angeles, but Goodell said there was no rush to return there, despite interest from the St. Louis Rams, the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders. Several owners, including John Mara of the Giants, said this week that two teams could be playing in Los Angeles in 2016.Advertisement“We’re focused on doing this right,” Goodell said. “We’re not focused on 2016.”Goodell said he would receive updates in April from the St. Louis Rams, the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders about their stadium proposals in Los Angeles as well as reports on the efforts by leaders in those three cities to build new stadiums to prevent their teams from leaving.The owners of the league’s 32 teams will receive updates at their next meeting in May, and a vote on relocating a team or teams could be taken as early as October, depending on the development of stadium construction plans and any formal applications to move that may be filed by the Chargers, the Raiders and the Rams.The owners, meanwhile, put off for at least a year plans to expand the playoffs by adding two more teams. They also approved several changes in on-field rules.This season, ineligible receivers must line up in the tackle box, the area between the two offensive tackles. The change was made to eliminate the confusion created last season by the Patriots, who deployed ineligible receivers in different formations.Teams will also be able to open the roofs of their stadiums during halftime, and unsportsmanlike behavior penalties can be carried over to the second half.The owners rejected a proposal to allow each team at least one possession in overtime.The owners did not vote on changing the point-after kick, but Rich McKay, who runs the league’s competition committee, said he expected the owners to vote on a proposal in May.“There’s a clear sentiment to change and change this year,” he said.McKay said that proposals included narrowing the goal posts and eliminating the extra point. Some teams proposed moving the extra point to the 1-yard line to give teams more incentive to try a 2-point play, and another team suggested giving the team on offense the choice of trying a 2-point play from the 1-yard line or a 1-point kick from the 15-yard line.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: At N.F.L. Owners’ Meeting, Goodell Confronts the Aftermath of Abuse Cases.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.