By MARC TRACYMARCH 25, 2015
CLEVELAND —  When Kentucky’s basketball team emerges from timeouts, the last coach to speak to players tends to be not John Calipari but John Robic, his assistant. As the huddle breaks up, Robic grabs as many players as he can and shows them a diagram of the court on a whiteboard, walking them through what is about to happen one more time.Robic is hands-on before games, too. He sits and watches both teams warm up. He runs drills for the guards, throwing hard passes in suit pants and dress shoes. He takes copious notes on his copy of the opponent’s roster. Calipari, by contrast, usually emerges only a few minutes before the national anthem.These roles partly reflect the personalities of the two coaches, who are in their 17th season together. Calipari is extroverted and boisterous; Robic is introverted and dry. Calipari’s expressions are dynamic; Robic has a steady gaze. Calipari has carefully slicked-back black hair; Robic has a mop of blond and gray.The division of labor is partly strategic. If Calipari had tried to do it all, he might not have led Kentucky to three of the past four Final Fours or to a 36-0 record this season entering the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 16.Advertisement“When you have a veteran like John Robic on the staff, it takes stuff off Cal’s plate so he can be the best Cal possible,” said Orlando Antigua, a former Kentucky assistant who is now the coach at South Florida.AdvertisementTechnically, Robic is in charge of scouting opponents. He has surely spent many hours studying West Virginia, Kentucky’s opponent Thursday night. Mountaineers Coach Bob Huggins, as it happens, was Robic’s coach at Walsh College in Ohio 32 years ago.But those close to Calipari say that Robic’s value goes well beyond X’s and O’s.“Robes is, I want to say, he’s the control of everything,” the sophomore forward Marcus Lee said.Lee continued: “You can call him — how do I explain it? — I guess you can just call it the order. He’s the one who makes sure you’re everywhere at the right time. He’s the one that’s always with us and always there to talk to us. He’s that middleman for us.”Blending InAll coaches delegate, but Calipari might do it more. As the face of a wildly popular team that begins every season with gigantic expectations, he holds one of the most trying jobs in sports. His success depends on recruiting top players, which requires significant pageantry (witness his friendships with Jay-Z and Drake) and travel, as well as living room charisma, among other things. Consistently landing top prospects requires him to recruit more players; his rosters are often depleted by the N.B.A. draft.Calipari has other highly admired assistants, but Robic is the one he leans on for the basics. When Calipari was ejected from games in 2010 and 2014, Robic stepped in as coach. This month, he filled in for Calipari on a weekly radio show and for news media availability. Those who know the program say Robic takes care of many smaller, unheralded details.“He’s Cal’s right-hand man,” John Wall, a Washington Wizards guard who played at Kentucky, said, adding, “Robes does the other things — allows Cal to be as efficient as he wants.”Larry Brown, a Hall of Fame coach who mentored Calipari and Robic, said of Robic: “He does a lot of things. He basically allows John to do his job, and that’s something that’s really vital.”AdvertisementWhat makes Robic especially rare is his combination of experience, talent and competence and the inconspicuous way in which he blends the three. (Through a spokesman, Robic and his family declined to comment for this article.)Most top assistants see themselves as future coaches, and the best coaches see assistants the same way. The branches of Calipari’s coaching tree include Bill Bayno, a former Nevada-Las Vegas coach who is now a Toronto Raptors assistant; Drexel Coach Bruiser Flint; Massachusetts Coach Derek Kellogg; and Antigua.This once seemed like Robic’s destiny, too. In 1996, when Calipari became the coach of the Nets, Robic, then 32, told The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette that he was weighing whether to follow Calipari or stay behind at Massachusetts.“The question for me is, do I want the N.B.A., or do I want to be a college head coach?” Robic said at the time.He chose to stay at Massachusetts, becoming the associate head coach under Flint, and three years later, he became the coach at Youngstown State. It did not work out.Bayno believes he will not try again.“He’s Cal’s lieutenant,” Bayno said. “I don’t think he wants to be the general.”Climb to the TopCalipari, 56, and Robic, 51, both grew up outside Pittsburgh, and they met at a western Pennsylvania institution, the Five-Star basketball camp. Robic began as a player — “he was a nice player, nice little point guard,” recalled Howard Garfinkel, a Five-Star founder — before graduating to counselor.In the early 1980s, the counselors constituted an informal fraternity. One recalled that they spent their $125 weekly pay at a diner down the road to avoid camp food. Members included Bayno and Herb Sendek (recently Arizona State’s coach). Calipari, older and charismatic, was the pledge-master.AdvertisementRobic was “quiet, very meticulous, diligent, businesslike,” said Tom Konchalski, a longtime scout who worked at Five-Star. “He wasn’t a character the way some of the other guys were.”Robic played college basketball at Walsh and then transferred to Denison University in Ohio, where, as a point guard his senior year, he was a Division III all-American.In 1986, he was hired as a graduate assistant at Kansas. In 1988, with a team coached by Brown and led by Danny Manning, Kansas won the N.C.A.A. championship. (Robic has two rings to Calipari’s one.)That year, Calipari became the Massachusetts coach, and he hired Robic and Bayno. Robic stayed 11 years.In 1999, Youngstown State hired Robic as its coach. The program was not Kentucky, or even Massachusetts. In Division II as recently as 1981, Youngstown State competed in the Mid-Continent Conference (now the Summit League) when Robic joined the program. It had never made the N.C.A.A. tournament. But in his second season, Robic led the team to a 19-11 record, good for third place in the conference and an N.I.T. berth.“We were always very, very well prepared,” said Craig Haese, who played for Robic there. “We definitely weren’t the most talented team. But we were a smart team.”Robic ran the same offense that had carried Massachusetts to the Final Four in 1996. He would tell Haese, a shooter, that his role was similar to Allen Iverson’s with the Philadelphia 76ers — a team with whom, at the time, Brown was the coach and Calipari was an assistant.“There was an aura about him — that confidence that you’re going to win,” Haese said.In 2001, the Penguins moved to the Horizon League, which was populated by more formidable midmajors like Detroit, Milwaukee and Butler. The program’s resources did not measure up.Advertisement“It was a totally different level,” said John Doneyko, Youngstown State’s head athletic trainer. “We never adjusted our budget while he was here to be competitive.”In Robic’s remaining four seasons, the Penguins never had a winning record; twice, they were 5-23. Youngstown State fired Robic in 2005. The next day, Robic later told Scout.com, Calipari called and asked him to join Memphis, where Calipari had been coach for five seasons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That was a decade ago. Not accounting for a few vacated wins related to N.C.A.A. violations, their teams’ record since has been 325-87, with four Final Four appearances and a national title.Scout’s HonorKentucky has one of the youngest teams in Division I. The starting five includes two freshmen, and only one upperclassman plays serious minutes.Yet the defensive prep work functions according to a rhythm that has been in place for years.Robic typically runs the team’s pregame film session, said Devin Booker, a freshman guard. “Then we do a little walk-through, with our scout team being their offense,” Booker said.He added, in reference to Kentucky’s historically stout defense, “It’s definitely working, so we’ll stick with that.”For example, this month in Nashville, before the Southeastern Conference tournament championship game, Robic gave the team a rundown on Arkansas.“They really don’t run any plays; they’re five-out; they spread the floor a lot; they do a lot of running around and penetration,” the sophomore center Dakari Johnson said of Robic’s report after the game — a victory, of course.If Robic completes some aspects of his job out of a sense of duty, this part is a pleasure. Robic is like a gym rat, except that he lives for watching tape.Advertisement“I can only imagine how much film he studies because he always has it down, what they’re doing,” Tyler Ulis, a freshman guard, said. “When we go out there, it’s exactly how he said. He’s always right.”Doneyko, the Youngstown State trainer, said Robic “would sit in his office all day long and just watch tape — it was probably tape back in those days.”Doneyko added, “He would have these meticulous plans about what this guy was going to do and what they were going to do up 4 with three minutes left in the game.”Joe Dunleavy, a Five-Star veteran who used to be a Hofstra assistant, recalled a four-team tournament in December 1992, one or two harmless midseason, nonconference games. Massachusetts beat Hartford and would play the winner of Hofstra-Maryland the next day. Maryland won.After the game, Dunleavy stopped by the Minutemen locker room. Robic greeted him with a piece of paper — his take on Hofstra.“Well, we won’t be needing this,” Robic said with a sigh.Dunleavy said: “It was incredible. A detailed report on a team he never played. He knew all the sets, all the players, their strengths, their weaknesses.”Settled in LexingtonRobic could probably be a coach again. Craig Esherick, a former Georgetown coach who now teaches sport management at George Mason and who does not know Robic, said he would make an attractive candidate.Robic’s friends agree.“He hasn’t had a lot of opportunities to move forward,” said Brown, whose daughter Alli inspired the name of one of Robic’s daughters. “There’s no doubt in my mind that if he wanted to, if somebody gave him a chance, he’d be an unbelievable head coach.”AdvertisementHad his Youngstown State experience not happened, Robic’s trajectory might have been different, Bayno argued, saying: “That was the opportunity that presented itself. Looking back, he should’ve waited.”At this point, Robic might stand pat. His salary, $375,000, not including bonuses, is in line with head-coaching salaries at prominent midmajors. He is able to focus on scouting and not travel too much away from his wife, Heidi, and three daughters, one of whom is a student at Kentucky.Doneyko said, “I’m not sure he really enjoyed being out recruiting all the time — he had three baby girls, he liked to be at home.”Kentucky players say that Robic is a good complement to Calipari.“They’ll start arguing, and they’ll say, ‘It’s O.K.; we’ve been doing this for how many years,’ ” Lee, the forward, said, playfully rolling his eyes. “We hear it nonstop.”Robic is adept at playing the good cop and at deflating tense situations with a sense of humor universally described as dry.“Cal might be tough on you,” Brandon Knight, a former Kentucky player now with the Phoenix Suns, said. “Robes might try to pick you up.”Knight offered an example: “You miss a lot of shots, he might say, ‘You had a good shooting night!’ ”Robic is competitive about all endeavors. A fan of Pittsburgh teams, he once bet Flint, a Philadelphia native, that in the following 20 years, no major Philadelphia professional team would win a championship. (He lost — barely — when the Phillies won the World Series in 2008.)AdvertisementIn Calipari’s book “Players First: Coaching From the Inside Out,” he compared Robic to “one of those old-school gym teachers who just knows how to play everything.” He listed golf, table tennis, croquet and bowling as among Robic’s areas of dominance.The freshman forward Karl-Anthony Towns said Robic was the best on the team at hitting half-court shots in practice.When Robic is asked whether he would like to be a coach again, his standard line, friends say, is something akin to what he told Scout.com after he arrived at Kentucky in 2009: “It would have to be a really good situation to do so, but I could also see me being Cal’s assistant as long as he will have me.”Still, Bob Ghiloni, Denison’s coach, recalled that Robic added to that standard line last fall when he spoke to a few dozen athletes at his alma mater.“You know what? I’m going to tell you guys this right now,” Robic said, according to Ghiloni. “I wasn’t a very good head coach. I’m a darn good assistant coach.”A picture on Thursday with an article about the Kentucky assistant basketball coach John Robic was published in error. The photograph, provided by Denison University, showed Billy Hoyer playing for the school, not Robic.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: An Assistant Happy to Sweat the Small Stuff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.