By ALLAN KREDAMARCH 25, 2015
GREENBURGH, N.Y. —  In the surest sign that goalie Henrik Lundqvist is close to returning, the Rangers assigned the rookie Mackenzie Skapski to Hartford of the American Hockey League on Wednesday. That will allow Lundqvist to serve as the backup to Cam Talbot on Thursday against the Ottawa Senators.Lundqvist, who has not played since Feb. 2 because of a vascular injury in his neck, was back in form in practice Wednesday, stopping nearly every shot. And he did not hesitate to playfully fire a puck in the general direction of Mats Zuccarello after Zuccarello, a speedy forward, managed to score on him.“It’s hard to know exactly what to expect from yourself when you’ve been out for almost two months, but it’s good that physically I feel good,” said Lundqvist, who also took shots from teammates before Tuesday night’s loss to the Los Angeles Kings. “I’m not getting tired out there.”He is likely to start at least once this weekend, when the Rangers head to Boston to meet the Bruins on Saturday afternoon and play the Washington Capitals at home on Sunday. Lundqvist, 33, said he had to work at being patient in his approach with two-plus weeks left in the regular season. The Rangers, who lead the Eastern Conference’s Metropolitan Division, have 10 games remaining.“I can feel that every day is a step in the right direction,” said Lundqvist, who is 25-11-3 this season with five shutouts. “It’s important I don’t overthink it and just go out and play. I don’t expect myself to be perfect right away. I’m just going to go out and battle.”AdvertisementRangers Coach Alain Vigneault said he expected to determine on Friday which of the weekend games Lundqvist might start.Advertisement“He looked real sharp with a lot of enthusiasm,” Vigneault said. “I haven’t really sat down and asked him how he’s felt. I expect to do that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Vigneault also said the injured forward Martin St. Louis (lower body), who has not played since March 15, might participate in the team’s practice Thursday in Ottawa.Talbot is 15-4-3 since Feb. 4 in place of Lundqvist; Skapski, 20, had two victories. Vigneault praised Talbot but made it clear that Lundqvist would be his top choice heading into the playoffs.“There’s no doubt that Cam has done extremely well for us,” Vigneault said. “But if you look at the body of work Hank has done for this team over the years, there’s no doubt he’s the No. 1 guy. And looking forward, he will be the No. 1 guy.”A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Hockey; Rangers’ Lundqvist Nears Return.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.