By KEN BELSONMARCH 25, 2015
PHOENIX —  Maybe it was a coincidence, but on Wednesday, Philadelphia Eagles Coach Chip Kelly sat in the same chair that New England Patriots Coach Bill Belichick did Tuesday.Belichick and Kelly, though, could not be more different. Belichick showed up 15 minutes late to the A.F.C. coaches’ round table Tuesday and was as curt and dismissive as ever. Kelly arrived on time to the N.F.C. segment Wednesday and was expansive on a range of topics, engaging reporters who lobbed question after question his way.Surrounded by a semicircle of television cameras, Kelly explained the flurry of moves the Eagles had made this off-season, including trading away running back LeSean McCoy and acquiring the injured quarterback Sam Bradford, and he also discussed the possibility of drafting Oregon quarterback Marcus Mariota.McCoy, Kelly said, had asked for too much money, and the Eagles were able to sign DeMarco Murray and Ryan Mathews for less money this season. Kelly said that he expected Bradford’s knee to be fully healed but that he had not seen Bradford play yet. Drafting Mariota would be nice, Kelly said, but he would be unwilling to trade many draft picks to get him.Advertisement“If you gut yourself for one year, one guy, philosophically, I don’t think that’s the right thing to do,” said Kelly, who is entering his third season as the Eagles’ coach.AdvertisementKelly even cracked a joke or two. Asked what it was like to call the St. Louis Rams to make the trade for Bradford, Kelly said: “It was scary. I didn’t know how to operate the phone.”Giants Coach Tom Coughlin held court at the next table, but he was a world away from the circus surrounding Kelly. A half-dozen beat reporters listened quietly as Coughlin explained that the star receiver Victor Cruz, who injured his knee last season, would be ready to start the season.Coughlin also said that although quarterback Eli Manning was heading into the final year of his contract, he was confident the team would give Manning a new deal and ensure that he finished his career with the Giants.“I don’t know why he would even be concerned about it,” Coughlin said of Manning and his uncertain status beyond 2015.The drama returned at the next table, where Cowboys Coach Jason Garrett was asked repeatedly why his team had signed Greg Hardy, whose conviction for domestic abuse was overturned on appeal but who may be suspended by the N.F.L.After the league was accused last season of being insensitive to the severity of domestic violence, Commissioner Roger Goodell established stiff penalties for anyone in the N.F.L. involved in domestic abuse cases. By signing Hardy even though he may be suspended, the Cowboys appeared to complicate an already thorny problem for the league.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Garrett, though, said that the Cowboys had done their due diligence on Hardy and that they had structured Hardy’s contract to reduce the team’s exposure if Hardy got in trouble again.“We want the right kind of guys on our team,” he said. “If we didn’t believe he could become the right kind of guy, we wouldn’t have signed him.”AdvertisementNearby, New Orleans Saints Coach Sean Payton explained why Jimmy Graham was not necessarily the right guy for his team. The Saints made one of the boldest moves of the off-season when they traded Graham, one of the game’s best tight ends, and a fourth-round pick to the Seattle Seahawks for center Max Unger and a first-round draft pick.“You trust your gut and instincts in terms of something of that magnitude,” Payton said, adding that he had to do what was best for the team.At another table, Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll described how he had trusted his gut when he called a pass play in the Super Bowl that was intercepted by the Patriots and cost his team a chance at consecutive titles.“I coach the way I coach,” Carroll said in what sounded like a well-rehearsed defense of his decision. “That’s based on years of experience and extraordinary preparation. I don’t have all the answers; I have my answers; I have the answers of my staff. We try to stick to that as best we can.”Carroll could not escape questions about the Super Bowl, but he appeared as jovial and energetic as ever, and as comfortable with reporters as any coach in the room.The new coach of one of the Seahawks’ division rivals, Jim Tomsula of the San Francisco 49ers, might take note. Speaking with a smaller group of reporters Wednesday, Tomsula said that he was still getting used to the extra attention of being a head coach instead of a defensive line coach, his former job.“I understand the job you guys have to do,” he said with apparent earnestness. “This is me. I can’t fake it.”Perhaps Belichick cannot either.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Coughlin Is Confident on Cruz.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.