

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
MARCH 25, 2015
The University of Massachusetts has put a magical punctuation on a magical season for Coach John Calipari.A few weeks ago, Massachusetts officials announced that they would retire a jersey in honor of Calipari to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the university’s 1996 appearance in the men’s basketball Final Four, when he was at the helm of that team.Calipari now coaches the Kentucky Wildcats, who have a 36-0 record and will play West Virginia (25-9) in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 16 on Thursday night.This was a deeply sweet gesture by UMass, an act that encompassed gratitude and forgiveness and insisted on no chaser of shame. In discussions of big-time athletics, shame is the very definition of a useless emotion.Calipari, the university noted in a statement, “catapulted” the university to “national prominence.” That is true, as is this: That Final Four appearance by Massachusetts does not officially exist in the record books.AdvertisementThe N.C.A.A. found years ago that Calipari’s star player, Marcus Camby, had accepted large sums of cash and services, not the least the ministrations of a prostitute, from a couple of scalawag agents. The N.C.A.A. fined the university $151,000 and forced the Minutemen to vacate postseason victories and the Final Four appearance. Calipari at the time pronounced himself shocked and horrified — the N.C.A.A. held him guiltless — and immediately signed a $15 million contract to coach the Nets, a vagabond franchise then in New Jersey.AdvertisementCalipari, a voluble Chevy salesman of a recruiter, later moved to Memphis, which ended up vacating a lode of victories because of violations of N.C.A.A. rules, all of which Calipari said shocked him. Then he decamped to Kentucky.Of late he has been nominated for the Basketball Hall of Fame.A throat clearer of disclaimers is in order. Calipari is an ace recruiter and coach. Coach has stacked talent like cordwood on his bench. Coach has persuaded these players to glory in defense and passing. And all accept fewer minutes of playing time than they would have received had they chosen to major in medieval literature and star for East Sheboygan State.In return, he hands out tickets to professional agents and encourages his best players to depart for the N.B.A. after their freshman seasons. He encourages those in his next tier of talent to depart for the N.B.A. after their sophomore years and, time permitting, three semesters’ worth of academic credits.The N.C.A.A. fined the university $151,000 and forced the Minutemen to vacate postseason victories after finding that Marcus Camby, far left, had accepted gifts from an agent.Derrick Rose, near left, played while academically ineligible — his SAT score was ruled invalid — so the N.C.A.A. stripped Memphis of a season’s worth of victories.A handful of less physically endowed, along with the occasional talented kid with an interest in zoology, remain for four years and graduate. Coach and his employers claim that the resulting graduation rate — the rate does not count recruits who leave early or transfers — offers proof that Coach cares profoundly about academic achievement.Even universities that no longer employ Coach take refuge in such claims. By way of example, would UMass step to the courtesy desk?I asked to speak with university officials about their decision to honor Calipari. The UMass press office answered by emailing me a statement and advised me to do with it what I wanted. One sentence read:“Fifteen of his final 18 seniors at Memphis earned their bachelor’s degrees, and all 10 players at U.K. who were eligible to graduate by the end of their senior years walked away with a degree in hand, while two earned a degree in just three years.”This parsing, in which some students are counted and others are artfully elided, was impressive. It offered prima facie evidence that officials possessed advanced degrees in hairsplitting.AdvertisementThe Boston Globe, in a fine series in the mid-1990s, found that UMass’s most prominent stars, including Camby, were on academic probation, a fact not shared with the general public. Calipari battled to ensure that his sports department, rather than the university’s academic arm, maintained control of player academics.Eventually, the lead tutor, Steve Satell, raised a ruckus about corners cut and papers manufactured for academically troubled athletes. He said he had taken his case to university officials. “Coach Calipari could have created a great academic program, but he ruined it,” Satell told me. “And the university was absolutely complicit.”An Amateur Athletic Union coach in Connecticut who had sent many players to Massachusetts described Calipari’s recruiting philosophy this way: “If you qualify, we want you. If you don’t, we still want you.”(A Boston Herald reporter once asked Coach how he failed to notice that his players were wearing diamond studs. “I don’t walk around carrying these jeweler’s glasses,” Coach replied.)Coach Calipari has proved admirably consistent. At Memphis, he reeled in Derrick Rose, a wondrously talented point guard. Rose, it turned out, passed his SAT because someone else took the test for him.The N.C.A.A. stripped Memphis of a season’s worth of wins. Rose left for the N.B.A., where he should have been allowed to go all along. Calipari said these allegations hit him with the force of revelation. The N.C.A.A., again, held him guiltless.Another throat-clearing disclaimer is in order. Calipari is not unusual. The N.C.A.A. is filled with talented coaches who cut corners with practiced ease. So there is Jim Tressel, who coached the Ohio State football team. One of his teams won a national championship. Then he got a tip that his star players were trading memorabilia for tattoos from a fellow who was being investigated in a drug trafficking case.Tressel kept this to himself, saying later that he did not know to whom he should report the violations.AdvertisementReally, that’s what he said.This story has a happy ending. Tressel resigned and returned to Youngstown State, where he had coached football. This time the Youngstown State trustees appointed him university president.Ohio State hired Urban Meyer, a brilliant coach who, in a previous gig at Florida, had seen 31 of his players arrested from 2005 to 2010. Meyer’s Buckeyes won the national championship this year.The University of Massachusetts deserves the final word. Two decades ago, its investigators talked to Calipari. He assured them all was fine; they cleared him. And those questions The Boston Globe raised about academics?That was media caterwauling. As university officials noted in their email to me:“To argue that the University of Massachusetts should not honor these accomplishments because of press reports speculating about improper behavior flies in the face of the actual history. Furthermore, Calipari has not been found to have violated an N.C.A.A. regulation at any time in his career.”Coach Cal, you have a wonderful life.Email: powellm@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Don’t Look at Him.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »