By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 15, 2015
Drew Brees passed for 312 yards, Ben Watson racked up a career-high 127 yards receiving to go with a fourth-down touchdown catch, and the New Orleans Saints handed the Atlanta Falcons their first loss of the season with a 31-21 win on Thursday night.Desperate for a victory, the Saints (2-4) enjoyed big plays in all phases. Michael Mauti, who grew up near New Orleans after his father, Rich, played for the Saints, blocked a punt and recovered it for a touchdown, delighting the Superdome crowd with a play reminiscent of Steve Gleason’s well-known block against Atlanta in 2006.Mark Ingram ran for two short touchdowns, and New Orleans’s defense recovered three fumbles — two inside its own 20.LEAGUE SUSPENDS OFFICIAL The N.F.L. suspended the side judge Rob Vernatchi for one game for not managing the clock properly in the fourth quarter of Pittsburgh’s victory at San Diego on Monday night.AdvertisementAfter a kickoff that was not returned, 18 seconds ran off the clock. The side judge is in charge of monitoring the game clock, which is kept on the stadium scoreboard.AdvertisementVernatchi “will not officiate in Week 6 as a result of the failure to notice that the game clock was incorrectly started,” said Michael Signora, a spokesman for the league. Signora added that Vernatchi would return to the referee Pete Morelli’s crew for Week 7.The N.F.L. rarely reprimands game officials in public. Vernatchi could file a grievance through the officials’ union.Signora said the status of the San Diego clock operator, an N.F.L. employee, was also under review.SEATTLE FULLBACK SUSPENDED Seattle suspended fullback Derrick Coleman after the police arrested him amid an investigation of a hit-and-run, but his lawyer insisted that if Coleman had left the scene, it was only because he was dazed.Coleman was booked into King County Jail in Seattle early Thursday and denied bail until his first court appearance, which was expected Friday. Officers in Bellevue, a Seattle suburb, said they had arrested him because he left the scene of a two-car accident Wednesday evening.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Steve Mylett, the Bellevue police chief, said that finding out why Coleman had left would be a focus of the investigation.“Regardless of the reason why, he has a duty to remain at the scene and provide certain information and render aid if he’s able to,” Mylett said.Coleman’s agents said in a statement, “It seems Derrick may have fallen asleep while driving home from a Seahawks facility.”AdvertisementRAM’S SEASON IS OVER St. Louis guard Rodger Saffold must have surgery on his injured right shoulder, which will end his season.Saffold, a second-round pick in 2010, was the most experienced player on the offensive line, which has two rookie starters.Coach Jeff Fisher said that Saffold received a second opinion on his latest injury and that doctors agreed surgery was necessary.The Rams (2-3) have a bye this week. Fisher said tight end Lance Kendricks, who had surgery this week on a his finger, was questionable for next weekend’s game.Tight end Justice Cunningham, who had been on the practice squad, was elevated to the active roster.TITAN TEARS LIGAMENT Deiontrez Mount, a rookie outside linebacker for Tennessee, will miss the rest of the season after tearing his right anterior cruciate ligament at practice.Coach Ken Whisenhunt said Mount was injured during practice Wednesday in a noncontact drill.Mount was the Titans’ sixth-round draft choice this spring out of Louisville. Mount intercepted a pass from Jameis Winston in Tennessee’s 42-14 win at Tampa Bay to open the season.The injury will force the Titans to make the first change to their roster since the opening week. Whisenhunt said a move will likely be made Saturday.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Saints Score on Blocked Punt and Send Falcons to First Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.