AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy George VecseyThree weeks into the M.L.S. season, two New York teams are leading the Eastern Conference.Is this, finally, the crackling metropolitan rivalry that Commissioner Don Garber envisioned for his league — a derby (pronounced “darby,” English-style)?Knowledgeable fans, singing and chanting (with any luck, without any European tinge of menace), will surge into the industrial flatlands of New Jersey on May 10 for the first derby between the expansion team New York City F.C., still without a nickname, and the Red Bulls, a team on its second nickname but still looking for its first championship.In its 20th season — three more than the old North American Soccer League attained, let it be noted — M.L.S. is trying to reach the highest levels of world soccer. This is the blessing, this is the curse, of soccer in North America, unlike many other sports, in which most great players in the world make their way to the United States and Canada.In North America, many fans know Cristiano Ronaldo’s smirk and can recognize Didier Drogba in a commercial. Maybe they know too much for the good of M.L.S.When something is blatantly obvious, I think of the immortal koan of the Zen master Herman Edwards. When he coached the Jets, Herman used to preach, “The eye / don’t lie.”The eye, in this case, is the ubiquitous camera, bringing the best soccer in the world flashing into our homes, our pubs, weekends, midweek.I love Major League Soccer, covered the first game in 1996 in a funky stadium in San Jose, and I applaud just about every move that its commissioners, Garber and Doug Logan, have made.I was there for the first game of the wretchedly named MetroStars, when a former Juventus player, Nicola Caricola, plunked in an own goal in a 1-0 defeat — with 12 seconds left in the game. (When Caricola played for Juve, some friendly referee would have found an excuse to whistle off the miscue by La Vecchia Signora.) On that fateful day in 1996, some of us immediately understood what had just been born: the Curse of Caricola, now transferred to the pleasant, compact Red Bull Arena.New executives of the team, now the Red Bulls — perhaps operating on a high from the owners’ combustible beverage, as well as a heavy dose of ego — fired a popular, and successful, coach, Mike Petke, this past off-season. Now it’s the Curse of Caricola and Petke. Couldn’t Garber have saved management from this huge gaffe?Then there is the product on the field. In the past week, still hunkering down from winter, I stayed indoors to watch soccer.Last Wednesday, I watched a Champions League match in the round of 16 between Barcelona and Manchester City. With a 2-1 lead from the first leg, Barça displayed the crisp, knowing passes that have ruled Spanish soccer for a decade.Up to now, I have resisted talk of Lionel Messi among the very greatest players — dismissing him, in a way, as a finisher — but last week Messi dodged and darted, began plays, Steve Nash without the hands. He nutmegged two defenders, poking the ball through immobile piano legs, and like some hard-working mouse, Messi never celebrated, not even a twitch.Neymar! Luis Suárez! Andrés Iniesta withdrawn to a supporting role, for goodness’ sakes! Barcelona beat Man City, 1-0, to advance, and I considered myself thoroughly entertained.On Saturday, I watched New York’s latest team, on the road in Colorado. New York City F.C. had been trying to build a stadium in a park in Queens until it was pointed out that thousands of working people use that precious space for recreation. Now the club is operating in the Big Theme Park in the Bronx, with no soccer stadium, no nickname and, from what I could tell, no clue.N.Y.C.F.C. is depending on its Spanish elder, David Villa, 33, while waiting for Frank Lampard to be released by the parent club, Man City. Expansion clubs are always dodgy, especially in soccer, a sport that relies on flow, group will, muscle memory.Villa, who played 97 times with the great Spanish national team, couldn’t make up his mind what to do. I had a flashback to the early days of the hideous MetroStars, when they brought in Roberto Donadoni from Milan and the great Azzurri national squads. Donadoni, a highly unselfish midfielder, began hesitating whether to swing the ball left or right; without a dollop of ego, he seemed to realize that neither was a very good option, by which time the opportunities had passed in a 0-0 draw.Donadoni’s Syndrome, I called it. Now David Villa is suffering from it. In the second half, he began peppering tepid but almost accurate shots near the goal. Lampard may be here in May, or June, or July, but Lampard is 36, surely a candidate to catch Donadoni’s Syndrome. Apparently it is a New York thing.On Sunday, I watched the ancient regional derby between Liverpool and Manchester United, each fighting for a place in the Champions League next season. It is always puzzling in soccer why teams with comparable ability come out so differently. United brought discipline and urgency, with Juan Mata scoring once after a brilliant through ball from Ander Herrera and another time on a beautiful scissor kick, in a 2-1 victory.The shocker for me was watching Steven Gerrard, whom I have always regarded as the ideal English sportsman (the anti-John Terry), come on as a halftime substitute and almost instantly stomp on Herrera’s ankle, earning him a red-card ejection within one minute.Therein lies the good and the bad about watching European soccer in the States. The ubiquity of television has made it ours. (My London rellies are always stunned by how much Premier League we get over here; they have to pay dearly for matches in England.) We know European stars, know their skills, know their personalities, the way we know LeBron James and Tom Brady and David Ortiz and Sidney Crosby.Example: On Monday, I received an email from a reader, Joel Berger, who wanted to know if I had seen the goal by Suárez for Barcelona in the Clásico against Real Madrid the day before. The reader said it reminded him of a goal by Dennis Bergkamp of the Netherlands against Argentina in a 1998 World Cup quarterfinal — long pass, great control, thumping shot. I missed it, but the point was, we all know these guys now. How do we put that in context with our North American league, perhaps the eighth- or 10th-best league in the world?We should, and we do, take M.L.S. seriously. Time is on its side. There will be vibrant crowds on May 10, desperately wanting their domestic league to be as good as they know soccer can be. They are building something, the owners, the players, the fans. Two teams from the New York region are currently one-two in the East. Bring on the darby.Email: geovec@nytimes.comAdvertisement