By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 15, 2015
The Chicago Cubs will send Jon Lester to the mound for Game 1 of the National League Championship Series on Saturday night, and Javier Baez will start at shortstop after Addison Russell was sidelined by a left hamstring injury.Russell, a rookie, was hurt while legging out a triple in Game 3 of the Cubs’ division series against the Cardinals. He said he had felt the hamstring grab while he was rounding second, and Manager Joe Maddon said Russell had a moderate strain.“Addy right now will not participate in this next round,” Maddon said Thursday. “We’re not going to utilize him. Continue to work on him. Hopefully if everything plays properly and we have another opportunity to play in another round he might be available at that time, but for sure not this one.”Maddon said the Cubs had not decided who would replace Russell against the Dodgers or the Mets.Baez replaced Russell and hit a three-run homer in Chicago’s series-ending 6-4 victory in Game 4. Baez, 22, has big-time power but has struck out 119 times in 309 regular-season plate appearances.AdvertisementAfter Lester pitches in the opener, Jake Arrieta will start in Game 2 on Sunday night. Lester is 6-5 with a 2.66 E.R.A. in 15 career postseason games, including 13 starts.AdvertisementFAN ARRESTED IN TORONTO Major League Baseball will review security at Rogers Centre in an effort to prevent a repeat of the fan disturbance during Game 5 of Toronto’s division series win over Texas.Spectators littered the field with debris during an 18-minute delay.“The highly unfortunate reactions of a group of fans at Rogers Centre in Wednesday’s game represented a major source of concern,” the league said in a statement Thursday. “We appreciate the response of the local authorities and the Blue Jays stadium operations staff in identifying, ejecting and — in some cases — arresting the offenders.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A man was charged with mischief after a baby was hit by the spray of a thrown beer can. The police said he was arrested Wednesday night and had since been released. He is due in court on Nov. 24. The baby was not harmed, the police said.The Blue Jays will open the American League Championship Series at Kansas City on Friday. The Royals are starting Edinson Volquez in Game 1, while Toronto is countering with Marco Estrada.SURGERY FOR MOLINA Cardinals catcher Yadier Molina will have surgery for a ligament injury to his left thumb. General Manager John Mozeliak said Molina was expected to be restricted from baseball activities for two to three months after Thursday’s operation.Molina was hurt while tagging a runner in Chicago on Sept. 20. He played the first three games of the division series with a splint and a bat shaped more like an ax handle, but did not play in Game 4.ASTROS POSTPONE RENOVATION The Astros postponed a planned renovation of center field at Minute Maid Park that would have removed Tal’s Hill and shortened the distance from the plate to 409 feet from 436.Houston said its playoff run, coupled with an international cricket match in November, would make it difficult for the project to be completed by next year’s home opener.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Baseball; Cubs’ Russell Is Sidelined.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.