AdvertisementSupported byWest: Arizona 68, Xavier 60By John BranchLOS ANGELES — In a tournament in which one loss means elimination, Arizona’s situation is as close as a team can get to a do-over.A year ago, the Wildcats were cruising through the N.C.A.A. tournament bracket as a title contender, a potent blend of youth and experience, when they arrived in Southern California for the round of 16. On a Thursday night in Anaheim, the Wildcats eliminated San Diego State. Two nights later in the regional final, Arizona, trying to reach the Final Four for the first time since 2001, lost to Wisconsin, 64-63, in overtime. “When you lose, it’s like a car crashes,” Coach Sean Miller said that night. “You’re done.”Now, Arizona (34-3) has a rare chance to repair some of the emotional damage that has lingered for a year. The Wildcats, seeded second in the West Region, narrowly beat No. 6 Xavier, 68-60, on Thursday night to reach the regional final. The Musketeers clung to small leads through much of the second half, but Arizona outscored Xavier, 21-7, over the final 7 minutes 25 seconds to advance. Arizona and Wisconsin, a 79-72 victor over North Carolina earlier Thursday, are heading for a rematch — at the same point in the tournament, in the same region, in the same metropolitan area, with the same 1-2 seedings (though reversed) and with most of the same lineups. “After we lost to them, it gave us a long time to think about it,” Arizona guard T. J. McConnell said after his team-high 17 points helped beat Xavier. “We watched them go to a Final Four and lose at the buzzer to Kentucky. We thought that should have been us. But that’s driven all of us to work as hard as we did in the summer and as hard as we did this season to be as good as we are.”Getting past Xavier (23-14) proved sticky for the Wildcats, and personal for their coach. Miller was Xavier’s coach for five seasons before he went to Arizona in 2009, leaving the Musketeers’ job for Chris Mack, his longtime assistant. Until the final two minutes, Arizona never led by more than 6 points. Against Xavier’s 1-3-1 zone defense, McConnell missed five 3-point shots before making one with 4:18 remaining, lifting the Wildcats to a 4-point lead. They scored 8 of their final 10 points on free throws to clinch the victory.“Our guys competed their tails off,” Mack said of his Xavier team. “We gave one of the best teams in the country everything they wanted and more.”The moment the game ended, the collective gaze shifted to Saturday’s game between Arizona and Wisconsin (34-3). The teams are similar to those of a year ago — an unusual situation given today’s frequently changing rosters in top-level college basketball. Three of Arizona’s expected starters are back from last year’s game — center Kaleb Tarczewski and guards McConnell and Gabe York. Rondae Hollis-Jefferson, who played 31 minutes last time off the bench, now starts for the Wildcats.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Missing out on a second chance are guard Nick Johnson and Aaron Gordon, a star freshman who left for the N.B.A. This year’s Arizona team has another star freshman, Stanley Johnson, who is expected to leave soon, too. The team on the other side will look familiar. With Wisconsin’s Traevon Jackson back from a broken foot that had sidelined him since January, this Badgers team will have players who accounted for 59 of the 64 points against Arizona last year, including four starters. The likely fifth starter, Nigel Hayes, was a key reserve last year, playing 16 minutes in the victory over Arizona.“Feels like we’re back home,” Wisconsin Coach Bo Ryan said Wednesday. “The gentleman that escorted me around last year in Anaheim greeted me today and is escorting us. Then who do I run into but Sean Miller? And I’m like: ‘Wait a minute. Weren’t we just doing this a year ago?’ “Arizona has lost its last four regional finals, in 2003, 2005, 2011 and 2014. The last two times were under Miller, who, in his sixth season, is increasingly asked about the pressure of reaching the Final Four. “Usually you have to knock at the door a few times before you break it down,” Miller said.Blocking the door, again, is Wisconsin. Last year, Arizona could not stop forward Frank Kaminsky, who had 28 points, including 6 in overtime, and 11 rebounds. The Badgers fell to Kentucky in the national semifinals, 74-73, a game that was in doubt until Jackson’s 3-point attempt at the buzzer missed. For Kaminsky, the Arizona game was like a rocket launch to his senior year. The victory over the Wildcats was the second time in his career that Kaminsky had double digits in points and rebounds. He had 12 double-doubles this season, was the Big Ten player of the year and was a first-team all-American. The Wildcats, by contrast, lost their best players from last year’s game. Nick Johnson (now with the Houston Rockets) led the team with 16 points, and Gordon (now with the Orlando Magic) had 18 rebounds. But Arizona looks better than ever. Stanley Johnson, a 6-foot-7 freshman with a chiseled body and a mature all-around game, led the Wildcats with a 14-point average during the regular season, and he had 12 points and 6 rebounds against Xavier. Four teammates averaged at least 9 points per game, making Arizona one of the most balanced teams in Division I. Three players — Johnson, McConnell and Hollis-Jefferson — were selected to the Pacific-12 Conference’s first team. To beat Wisconsin, though, Arizona will have to be sharper than it was against Xavier. The teams were tied, 28-28, at halftime. McConnell and the sharpshooting York combined to shoot 1 of 7 from the 3-point line, and Arizona went scoreless for the final 3:51 of the half. Xavier was no better from long range — 0 for 7 in the first half — but found leaks inside Arizona’s normally staunch defense. Xavier center Matt Stainbrook, playing with emotion and muscle, had 10 points and 7 rebounds in the first half, drawing support from about half of the Staples Center crowd. Stainbrook, known for driving an Uber car around Cincinnati in his spare time, finished with 17 points and 10 rebounds. But Xavier’s chance to become the tournament’s latest underdog darling fizzled in the final minutes as Arizona pulled away. The game will not be remembered for long. Arizona has something bigger in mind, and it will all look and feel very familiar.Advertisement