AdvertisementSupported byN.C.A.A. Tournament NotebookBy Bill PenningtonSYRACUSE, N.Y. — Louisville Coach Rick Pitino, a former assistant to Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim, defended the embattled Boeheim on Thursday before Pitino’s fourth-seeded Cardinals practiced for their East Regional game Friday against No. 8-seeded North Carolina State in Syracuse.“There’s not an ounce in him that would ever break the rules knowingly,” Pitino said of Boeheim, with whom he said he was having dinner Thursday. “He is a man of great integrity and sometimes, in today’s culture, anything can happen.”The N.C.A.A. recently levied a variety of sanctions against Syracuse and Boeheim, suspending the coach for nine conference games next season, vacating more than 100 of his victories and taking away 12 scholarships from the Syracuse men’s basketball program over the next four years.Pitino said the Syracuse program would never seem the same without Boeheim.“It will be difficult, sort of like St. John’s without Louie,” Pitino said of the former St. John’s coach Lou Carnesecca. “You can’t imagine those programs without that person at the helm and on the sideline.”For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Pitino also chided the N.C.A.A. for its multiyear investigation into Syracuse.“Look, we want to keep our game regulated the right way, but not in an eight-year time span,” he said. “Hire more people. We’ve got a lot of money from March Madness. Hire more people and get the job done in a shorter period of time.”Pitino was also asked if returning to Syracuse brought back any memories of his time as a Boeheim assistant in the 1970s. Seated inside the Carrier Dome, which protected coaches and players from a heavy rain outside, Pitino answered: “When I left 37 years ago, it was still raining, so yes, there is that memory.”A BAHAMA CONNECTION Buddy Hield of third-seeded Oklahoma and Lourawls Nairn of No. 7-seeded Michigan State are friends from the Bahamas who attended the same Kansas academy as teenagers. Friday, they face each other in an East Regional semifinal game.Hield said he treated Nairn, whose nickname is Tum Tum, like a brother. “I will be playing against someone very close to me and one of us will lose,” Hield said. “Hopefully not me.”Michigan State Coach Tom Izzo said Nairn looked up to Hield.“I’m all cool with that,” Izzo said. “But I’ve got to tell Tum that he can’t think that way for the two hours of our game.”Advertisement