By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 26, 2015
Chris Kreider had two goals and an assist, and the Rangers clinched a playoff spot with a 5-1 victory over the host Ottawa Senators on Thursday night. Dan Boyle, Mats Zuccarello and Tanner Glass also scored for the Rangers, who have 101 points.Cam Talbot made 23 saves for the Rangers, who gave Ottawa’s Andrew Hammond his first loss in regulation. Hammond was pulled in the second period after allowing five goals on 22 shots and is 14-1-1 to start his N.H.L. career. Curtis Lazar scored for the Senators as they failed to collect at least 1 point for just the second time in their past 18 games.The Rangers (47-19-7) have reached the playoffs in five consecutive seasons and in nine of the past 10 seasons.Kreider opened the scoring at 12:38 of the first after a fantastic pass off the boards from Derek Stepan.AdvertisementThe Senators tied the game just 19 seconds later when Lazar gained control of a bouncing puck in the Rangers end and beat Talbot with a quick shot from the faceoff circle.AdvertisementBoyle gave the Rangers the lead at 16:40, and with one minute left in the period Kreider got his second goal of the game off a Stepan rebound that bounced straight up after Hammond made the initial save.“You have to be able to handle momentum swings and to be able to answer with a goal is a big,” Kreider said.At 1:42 of the second period, Zuccarello scored on a one-timer for a 4-1 lead before Glass scored his first goal as a Ranger at 16:02 just five seconds after emerging from the penalty box.“It’s one of many hopefully,” Glass said.KINGS 3, ISLANDERS 2 Anze Kopitar scored with 4 minutes 23 seconds remaining, defenseman Alec Martinez had two assists, and Los Angeles won its third straight with a victory over the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum. Jonathan Quick made 25 saves in his 400th N.H.L. game. On this road trip for the Kings, which has two games left, he has won against the Devils, the Rangers and the Islanders. Nick Shore netted his first career goal in his 28th game.CAPITALS 3, DEVILS 2 On a quiet night for Alex Ovechkin and Nicklas Backstrom, host Washington got rare goals from Matt Niskanen, Karl Alzner and Eric Fehr, along with 29 saves from Braden Holtby, to beat the Devils in overtime.Niskanen is a defenseman, and his fourth goal of the season came 73 seconds into the extra period, off an assist from Alzner.The Devils began the day in 12th place in the East and appear to be on their way to missing the playoffs for the third consecutive year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.COYOTES 4, SABRES 3 Sam Gagner scored 56 seconds into overtime to lift Arizona to a win over host Buffalo, earning cheers from the last-place Sabres’ fans who presumably were hoping to get the No. 1 overall pick in the N.H.L. draft.AdvertisementJordan Szwarz, Oliver Ekman-Larsson and David Moss also scored for Arizona. Tyler Ennis, Brian Gionta and Rasmus Ristolainen scored for the Sabres.PREDATORS 3, LIGHTNING 2 Pekka Rinne made 28 saves for his 40th win, and Nashville moved into first place in the Central Division with a win over host Tampa Bay.Mike Ribeiro, Paul Gaustad and Mike Santorelli scored for the Predators, who took a one-point lead over St. Louis. Tampa Bay got goals from Vladislav Namestnikov and Brian Boyle.SHARKS 6, RED WINGS 4 Patrick Marleau scored twice and Antti Niemi made 30 saves to help visiting San Jose top Detroit. Marc-Edouard Vlasic, Matt Nieto, Chris Tierney and Logan Couture also had goals for San Jose, which ended a two-game skid. Detroit got goals from Tomas Jurco, Tomas Tatar, Stephen Weiss and Henrik Zetterberg.DUCKS 3, BRUINS 2 Ryan Getzlaf scored 3:09 into overtime to lift Anaheim to a win over host Boston in overtime. Getzlaf, who also assisted on Corey Perry’s tying goal late in the third period, beat Bruins goalie Tuukka Rask from the slot with a wrist shot over his shoulder to end the Ducks’ two-game skid.Perry tied it with 39 seconds remaining in regulation. Loui Eriksson and Ryan Spooner scored for the Bruins. Rask had 29 saves.PANTHERS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Brandon Pirri scored twice, and visiting Florida earned a win over Toronto. The loss was the seventh straight for Toronto, which is 6-28-3 in 2015.The Panthers have 82 points, 3 behind Ottawa and Boston for the second Eastern Conference wild-card spot.HURRICANES 5, PENGUINS 2 Eric Staal had a goal and two assists, and Carolina beat visiting Pittsburgh. Ryan Murphy, Jay McClement, Alexander Semin and Andrej Nestrasil scored for Carolina. Brandon Sutter and Ian Cole scored for the Penguins. Carolina goalie Cam Ward had 27 saves, and Pittsburgh’s Marc-Andre Fleury made 23.A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Clinch Playoff Spot With Rout of Senators.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.