AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerJUPITER, Fla. — The most captivating thing about Jason Heyward may also be the most confounding. He could be any type of player you imagine, and it is almost time to put a price on his future.Heyward, the new right fielder for the St. Louis Cardinals, is 25 years old and will be eligible for free agency after this season. He has shown an unusually wide range of skills in his five-year career. Dream of his future, and anything seems possible.“He’s been a premier defensive player from Day 1,” said John Mozeliak, the Cardinals’ general manager. “But when you talk about your offensive profile, he went from a power hitter to a leadoff hitter to focusing on getting on base. I think the $100 million question is, Which is he?” The Cardinals are eager to find out. In November they traded two pitchers, Shelby Miller and the prospect Tyrell Jenkins, to the Atlanta Braves for Heyward and reliever Jordan Walden, the most significant move for a team that has reached the last four National League Championship Series.Heyward is batting second for the Cardinals this spring after leading off for Atlanta last season. He did what leadoff hitters do, with a .351 on-base percentage, 20 steals and a reduced strikeout rate. But he hit only 11 home runs, a career low.Heyward introduced himself to the majors with power. He lashed a homer on the first swing of his career, at age 20 in 2010, and he has hit as many as 27 home runs in a season. His production, he said, has varied based on the structure of the lineups around him. Hitting after Matt Carpenter, and before Matt Holliday and Matt Adams, seems like a snug fit.“You can’t ask for a whole lot more than hitting in front of these three and four guys,” Heyward said before a game last weekend, referring to Holliday’s and Adams’s likely spots in the order. “I know I have the ability to hit the ball out of the ballpark; I have the ability to hit line drives; and I’ve got some speed still, so I can get some infield hits, although that’s not what you’re hoping for.“But I can do a whole lot of things, and run the bases well; that’s something, mentally, you have to stay sharp on. And that’s what you do — be a baseball player.”Statistically, Heyward is one of the best. Helped by his Gold Glove defense, Heyward has generated more career wins above replacement, as calculated by Baseball-Reference.com, than the Miami slugger Giancarlo Stanton, in roughly the same number of games.The Braves were aware of that, and knew what it meant for Heyward’s earning potential. They missed their best chance to sign him to a long-term deal after his first or second season, and doubted they could meet his price in free agency. Trading for Miller, who has only two years of service, and Jenkins, who has never played in the majors, made sense for a team in transition.“As we try to build with young arms, those two will be major factors for us,” said John Coppolella, the Braves’ assistant general manager. “It’s basically 10 years of club control for one year of club control.”For the Cardinals, the deal sprouted from tragedy. Their right-field job opened in late October when Oscar Taveras killed himself and his girlfriend while driving drunk in the Dominican Republic. Mozeliak and Manager Mike Matheny, on their way home from the funeral, discussed the grim task of replacing Taveras. Heyward topped their list.Now the Cardinals have their year of control, and so far, they like what they see. Holliday said he had been impressed by how hard Heyward ran the bases, and said he never knew Heyward was so good on defense. Matheny praised Heyward’s all-around skills.“It’s amazing how young he is,” Matheny said. “We see a guy that has even better things ahead than what he’s even seen from himself. It’s fun to be in the middle of that and see if we can create an atmosphere that allows him to foster that.”Doing so has been a Cardinals specialty for years. Mark McGwire, Jim Edmonds, Scott Rolen and Holliday went to St. Louis in trades and signed long-term contracts. Holliday went to free agency first, after his midseason trade in 2009, but his seven-year, $120 million deal ranks among the best nine-figure contracts in baseball.“The organization has done a great job of bringing in veteran guys to pass down an atmosphere that’s very welcoming and very focused on baseball,” Holliday said. “The older, more experienced players are, most of the time, the hardest workers.”Heyward helped Atlanta reach the playoffs three times, but he chafes at the memory of last September, when the Braves fell apart down the stretch and played meaningless games. He said he relished the chance to play for a team that expects to reach the World Series every year.As for a new contract, Heyward said the Cardinals, having traded for him, would probably make the first move, if they wished. Mozeliak sounded cautiously encouraged.“The initial steps together have been very positive,” he said. “Between him, his agent and the Cardinals, no one’s putting pressure on anyone. It’s not, ‘We’ve got to have a deal done by X or we’re not going to talk.’ Everyone’s remaining open-minded.”With a team like the Cardinals, Heyward said, it is easy to focus on the field. His old team never won a playoff series with him, and his new team seems to win at least one every fall. If Heyward can help the Cardinals win a few more, he might be the latest star to stay in St. Louis.“Right now, this is where I’m at,” Heyward said, “and I hope it goes so well I don’t have to leave.”Advertisement