AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — Third base is a position known as the hot corner, where it helps to be as quick as a lizard’s tongue and blessed with a razor-sharp attention span since you never know when a line drive will come screaming at you. For Chase Headley, the hot corner has been not so hot. He may as well be playing in a hammock with as little action as he has seen there this spring. Headley, through Wednesday, had played 78 innings — the fourth most on the Yankees. Yet he had only 13 chances — meaning he fields a ball an average of 1.5 times every nine innings. Shortstop Didi Gregorius had 59 chances and second baseman Stephen Drew had 45 in slightly more innings. Center fielder Mason Williams, who has been sent to the minor league camp, had the same number of chances as Headley in only 44 innings despite outfielders’ rarely having more balls hit to them than infielders. “It’s crazy,” Headley said. “I’m begging for ground balls.”Headley is in his first spring training with the Yankees, having been acquired last July from San Diego, where he had spent his entire career. He said he often had the same problem with the Padres, where it became a running joke with Glenn Hoffman, the team’s longtime infield coach. “I’ve talked with Joe Espada,” Headley said of the Yankees’ new infield coach. “And Didi and Stephen — I just want a routine, easy ground ball.”Headley, who won the National League Gold Glove in 2012, is part of what the Yankees hope is their best infield defense in years. Gregorius should be a vast upgrade over Derek Jeter, and Drew, a converted shortstop, has a strong arm for the position. Mark Teixeira, another former Gold Glove winner, is healthy after two injury-plagued seasons. The others have gotten plenty of work in this spring, but Headley has not. He is not sure why he does not get many balls hit to him. He wondered if batters’ swings are not as quick as in the regular season so right-handed batters do not pull the ball as often. Also, pitcher Chris Capuano, a left-hander who relies on off-speed pitches — which are more likely to be pulled toward third base by right-handed hitters — was hurt in his first exhibition game and will not return until next month. And Headley has played in only one start by C. C. Sabathia, another pitcher who is more likely to yield grounders his way.But it seems that no matter who has pitched, the ball has somehow been avoiding Headley’s glove. He has been involved in one of the Yankees’ 19 double plays, and at least one of his chances came when he was playing where the shortstop normally would when the Yankees were in a defensive shift.Headley said he was doing his best in practices to stay sharp, as he did Thursday when he did not travel with the Yankees to Port Charlotte to play against Tampa Bay. “Sometimes you’ll do a drill where the coach will flip the ball so you’re reading the swing and it’s a little bit more gamelike,” Headley said. “But there’s really no substitute for getting ground balls, and unfortunately that’s out of your control in spring training, so you do the best you can with it. The good thing is I’ve done it for a long time, so I’ll be fine.”INSIDE PITCHADAM WARREN, a valuable component in the bullpen last year, solidified his bid to join the starting rotation by allowing one run in three and two-thirds innings Thursday against the Rays. He gave up four hits, including a home run by EVAN LONGORIA, and struck out five along with one walk. ... The Yankees released the right-handed reliever JARED BURTON, who was in camp on a minor league contract. Advertisement