AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunSYRACUSE — As Oklahoma practiced Thursday afternoon, Kevin Pauga pulled out his laptop while he sat courtside.“Get a load of how big this file is,” he said.He flipped to a Microsoft Excel file titled “Master Schedule 2014-15,” which he calls his matrix. It was 67 megabytes, or about 13 times the entire works of Shakespeare. Pauga smiled as he read the number aloud.As Michigan State’s director of basketball operations since 2009, Pauga organizes travel logistics, maintains a budget, books facilities, and designs the team’s schedule on a yearly basis. All that takes up about two-thirds of his working time. The other third is dedicated to the K.P.I., the Kevin Pauga Index, the matrix that was loading — slowly — on his Dell Latitude’s screen. It is his own analytical spin on a ranking system for college basketball teams, the brainchild of a numbers whiz whose personal memory bank holds obscure dates, license plate numbers and telephone digits dating to his childhood, ready for retrieval at a moment’s notice. Pauga, 32, taught himself how to use Excel and built a program that assigns a value to each game played during the college basketball season. The program employs an algorithm he created and uploads data from that algorithm onto a website he runs by himself.“He’s Rain Man,” said Dave Pruder, Michigan State’s longtime equipment manager, whose cellphone number, Pruder was a little surprised to realize, is among those Pauga knows by heart.Founded officially in 2013, K.P.I. has gained traction among analysts and fans. Like Ken Pomeroy, Jeff Sagarin, Kenneth Massey and others who have popularized their own metrics for rating and ranking college basketball programs — as opposed to the traditional Rating Percentage Index, started by the N.C.A.A. in 1981 — Pauga has built a formula for just about everything, factoring in even the most trifling details, including the pace of play, the time of the tip-off and the time zone the game was played in.All of it helps calculate a number that, essentially, correlates to how valuable a team’s wins are versus how damaging its losses are. The ratings run from negative-one (bad) to plus-one (good), and combine variables that might change over the course of a season. His goal is to quantify so-called good wins and bad losses, and to assess how teams compare with one another. This year he had a list of 68 teams that he anticipated making the men’s N.C.A.A. tournament, and 66 were correct, with the two misses off by mere fractions. For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.“He’s amazing,” said Mark Hollis, Michigan State’s athletic director.As a member of the N.C.A.A. tournament selection committee, Hollis has incorporated K.P.I. into the committee’s spread of analyses used to determine the tournament’s field. Hollis and Jamie Zaninovich, the deputy commissioner of the Pacific-12 Conference, like the diversity of different metrics and particularly appreciate how K.P.I. can be manipulated and refocused to sort teams in just about any way imaginable.“He can give us specific scenarios and we can adapt them for the answers,” Hollis said. “I’ve asked him for data on game times. What does a 10 p.m. game versus a 2 p.m. game mean? Does it make a difference if it’s the first game of the weekend or the last game?”Hollis is an analytics nut, too, and his laptop contains a color-coded breakdown of the résumés of the remaining teams in the round of 16. The No. 7-seeded Spartans face third-seeded Oklahoma on Friday night in an East Regional semifinal.“You can tell why I appreciate him,” Hollis said. “We feed off of each other quite a bit.”Starting in high school, outside Chicago, Pauga designed the schedules for his county’s Little League baseball teams. He also sought patterns from Major League Baseball’s annual scheduling, littering his bedroom floor with copies of USA Today’s Baseball Weekly, always looking for better ways to match teams up.“It’s almost like cracking a code,” Pauga said. “I always wanted to crack the code.”Numbers came naturally to him, though he studied journalism as an undergraduate at Michigan State while he was a student manager for the basketball team. He stayed on as the team’s video coordinator from 2004 through 2008, and as he started charting what games he had videotaped using Excel, he began adding columns of more and more data.“I wasn’t smart enough to know what I was doing at the time,” Pauga said.Still, he developed his algorithm, not necessarily because he thought he could improve upon R.P.I. or anything else, but because he was inherently curious about why some teams ranked higher than others.The algorithm evolved, and 10 years later he is still tweaking it. Last year, he adjusted the metric for assigning value for home- and neutral-court victories after determining his previous equation was favoring one-bid leagues. The amount of data on any team now exceeds 100 columns.Pauga does not need to write down a lot of this material. As Michigan State practiced Thursday, a few student managers went to him, rather than checking their smartphones, to find out when the Spartans had last played at the Carrier Dome.“Jan. 3, 2004,” Pauga told them. “We lost, 94-83.” Actually, the score was 96-83. It’s in the matrix somewhere.Advertisement