

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
MARCH 26, 2015
MEMPHIS — Kevin Love has spent large chunks of the season camped out in corners, waiting for passes that seldom arrive. It has been his traveling act with the Cleveland Cavaliers, who have no absence of scrutiny, and no player on the roster faces more of it than Love. Considering that the Cavaliers employ LeBron James, this is no small feat.Yet if Love’s season has been a smorgasbord of questions (about his willingness to meld with James and Kyrie Irving) and not-so-subtle criticisms (about his reluctance to muck it up in the paint), his life was different for two idyllic hours against the Memphis Grizzlies on Wednesday night. He was active. He was present. He was impossible to ignore.The Cavaliers were well on their way to smashing the Grizzlies at FedEx Forum when Love worked to establish position on the low block in the third quarter. With J. R. Smith searching for an angle to make an entry pass, Love actually motioned for the ball to be reversed. Smith passed it to him, anyway, and Love scored on a soft jump hook.“It was by design to get Kevin the ball,” James said after the Cavaliers’ 22-point victory. “It’s always by design to get him the ball. Tonight, he was very aggressive.”AdvertisementAt least two of those three statements were true. But if James and his teammates have not always included Love in their fun and games and Instagram posts, the easy takeaway from Wednesday’s tour de force was that the Cavaliers — the surging, supertalented Cavaliers — are even more fearsome when he is involved.Advertisement“Just the rhythm, I guess,” Love said afterward when he was asked if anything had stood out to him. “It felt like, as a team, we moved the ball around a lot.”The Cavaliers, who improved their record to 47-26 ahead of their game Friday night against the Nets, did not exactly tiptoe into the season. Instead, they launched a Broadway spectacular as the league’s latest experiment in superstar collectives. In Miami, James won two championships alongside Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh. In Cleveland, the expectations are no less huge — and it was James, remember, who helped sell Love on the Cavaliers over the summer, greasing his exit from the Minnesota Timberwolves.The season has turned into something of a telenovela for Love, who is averaging 16.6 points and 10.1 rebounds — muted numbers for him — while he grapples with a supporting role. In recent weeks, Love has found himself in the unfamiliar position of sitting out fourth quarters. It was a nonissue against the Grizzlies, if only because the game had gotten out of hand by then. The entire evening was a reprieve for Love, who made 10 of 13 shots over all, finishing with 22 points and 10 rebounds. He even had two blocks, a bonus for an offense-minded player.“Just trying to help,” Love said in the locker room, his knees packed in ice and his bare feet submerged in an orange bucket.Everything that Love does these days seems subject to inspection. He looks uninterested on the bench? He must be upset about his role. He says that Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder would be his choice for most valuable player? He must dislike James. Then again, Love has not done himself many favors. When he acknowledged this week in a national radio interview that he and James were “not best friends,” he might as well have dropped an anvil on his foot.In fairness, the question was prompted by something James had done — or, in this case, not done, which was include Love in a photo that James posted to one of his social media accounts of him posing with six teammates.“I’m sure he’s going to have me in the next picture,” Love said on ESPN’s “Mike & Mike.”AdvertisementBefore Wednesday’s game, Grizzlies Coach Dave Joerger was asked to weigh in on Love’s season. Someone could have placed a box of plutonium at his feet, and Joerger would have looked more comfortable.“I don’t know anything about it,” he said.It was, at least, an honest assessment instead of more speculation. There has been enough of that to last several seasons, let alone one.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stu Jackson, a former coach and league executive who now works as an analyst for NBA TV, said it was natural that the Cavaliers would endure an extended period of adjustment this season. Sacrifices were going to be required of players who had not needed to make them before.“Given where Cleveland is today, and the fact that they’re playing better than any team in the Eastern Conference, it seems to be working,” Jackson said.That might be the most overlooked aspect of the season — that the Cavaliers, after their early struggles, have cemented themselves as contenders. They are 28-6 since Jan. 15, and their win over the Grizzlies made it 14 out of their last 15 against Western Conference opponents.“But even in the face of them doing well, it doesn’t mean that every player on the team necessarily likes his role,” Jackson said. “What’s important is that they perform their roles well. They’re winning. They don’t need to like one another. They don’t need to be happy with their roles. They just need to function as a team, playing unselfishly to get good results.”In fact, Love’s responsibilities may not change in the immediate future. Coach David Blatt said he was pleased with his rotations, his argument rooted in the team’s solid play.“So I don’t know that we necessarily have to go away from it,” Blatt said. “But we’ll deal with the circumstances as they come. Hopefully, things continue along the same path.”Late in Wednesday’s game, James tossed an alley-oop to Love for a dunk that extended Cleveland’s lead to 26. (Imagine the margin if they were best friends!) Afterward, James and Love lingered on the court — James for a television interview, Love donning a headset to chat with the team’s radio broadcasters.The Cavaliers could probably afford to make things easier on themselves. James might want to include Love in future photo ops. And Love might consider sticking up for James when the conversation turns to postseason awards, if only to placate the masses who are searching for fissures.AdvertisementBut when a team is playing this well, does any of that other stuff really matter?A version of this article appears in print on March 27, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Love Shows What He Can Do as Cavs See What They Can Be.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »