AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseLOS ANGELES — The people in the stands who chanted, “Your dad was better,” at the basketball games of a young Traevon Jackson knew as much about his biological father, the former N.B.A. player Jim Jackson, as he did.Traevon Jackson, a senior point guard for the Wisconsin Badgers, was not raised as a privileged prince of the N.B.A., with an all-access pass to the league’s palatial arenas. He began life with a single mother who worked two jobs to support her three children. Jackson did not mingle with the game’s ruling class until much later, as he and his father got to know each other.Those who ascribe Jackson’s basketball skills to his bloodline have no understanding of how hard he worked to transform himself into a starter for the top-seeded Badgers, who defeated fourth-seeded North Carolina, 79-72, on Thursday in an N.C.A.A. tournament West Regional semifinal game at Staples Center. Jackson’s diligence and determination have enabled him to return from a broken right foot. He came on about five minutes into Thursday’s game and hit his first shot, a 3-pointer from the baseline. He finished with 4 points. Jackson’s journey back from a broken foot was made, he said, with the aid of his trusty navigational tool, the Bible. “I honestly had a peace about me,” he said. “I’ve really just been able to surrender everything to God, trust in him and his plan.”Jackson, who is 6 feet 3 inches and 207 pounds, took a meandering path to basketball. He played football starting at age 4. His mother, Tammy Winston, was a point guard with a nose for defense on her high school basketball team in Newark, Ohio.She played H-O-R-S-E with her son when he was small, but she did not know how to advise him on layups. Jackson is right-hand dominant when he writes and eats, but he moved the ball to his left hand for layups.“It was awkward,” she said, “because I couldn’t figure out if he was right-handed or left-handed.” She laughed. “I didn’t know what to tell him so I’d say, ‘Just do a jump shot.’ ”Six months before Jackson was born, his father, a former Ohio State standout, was drafted fourth over all by the Dallas Mavericks in the 1992 N.B.A. draft, beginning a 12-team, 14-season N.B.A. odyssey.Jackson was 7 when his father found out from his mother that he had a son. They developed a bond as Jackson joined his father on the road during school holidays and at his father’s home during summers. As Jackson spent more time with his father, his love of football gave way to a passion for basketball.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.As his mother recalled, there was just one problem. “He was terrible when he first started,” Winston said. “He had no grace. He was just real physical and rough and clumsy.”Jackson’s mother, who drives a U.P.S. truck, helped him as best she could. “She’d always give me little pointers, especially at the free-throw line,” Jackson said. “She’d say, ‘You’re missing them because you aren’t bending your knees.’ I’d be like, ‘C’mon, Mom.’ ”Jackson developed into an 85 percent free-throw shooter, his success rate this season, but initially the progress was slow. At Westerville South High School in Ohio, Jackson’s mother said, she would sit in the bleachers cringing as the parents around her disparaged her son’s skills.“I’d hear things like: ‘His father was so much better. He’s nothing,’ ” she said. “There was even a cheer in high school, ‘Your dad was better.’ I would hurt for him because he could never be just Traevon Jackson. He was Jim Jackson’s son.”Jackson was not recruited by his father’s alma mater, Ohio State. He chose Wisconsin over Arizona State and Dayton, and he spent long hours in the gym working to improve all areas of his game. Jackson broke into the starting lineup early in his sophomore year and made 84 consecutive starts, including 64 victories.In last year’s N.C.A.A. tournament semifinal against Kentucky, Jackson missed the last shot, a pull-up jumper that bounced off the rim, in the Badgers’ 74-73 loss. With 16 seconds left, he was fouled while shooting a 3-pointer with the score tied, 71-71, and missed the first free throw before making the next two.His mother, who attended the game, said Jackson was devastated. “He didn’t even talk to me that night,” she said.Eventually, she said, he sent her a text message that contained a line from Scripture.“Basically I was just shocked,” Jackson said. “I really truly believed we weren’t supposed to lose.”In the months afterward, Jackson said, he did not dwell on his missed shots. He replayed his turnovers, the passes he should have made and the shots he did not take. But mostly, Jackson said, he let it go.Jackson described the adversity he has stared down in the past year — the Kentucky loss, the broken foot — as just a “part of the journey, a part of life” and said: “It’s not the end of the world. You can have some fun still.”Advertisement