AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyA new law in Indiana allowing businesses to refuse service to same-sex couples in the name of religious freedom has put sports officials under pressure to evaluate whether to hold major events in Indianapolis.The law’s passing comes as the N.C.A.A., the Indianapolis-based governing body of college sports, prepares to hold one of the most visible events on the college sports calendar, the Final Four, next week in the Colts’ Lucas Oil Stadium.Gov. Mike Pence, a Republican, signed the bill Thursday. Soon after, the N.C.A.A. president, Mark Emmert, said in a statement that the association was “deeply committed to providing an inclusive environment for all our events. We are especially concerned about how this legislation could affect our student-athletes and employees.”Emmert also hinted at the possibility of refusing to stage competitions in the state going forward, saying that the N.C.A.A. will “closely examine the implications of this bill and how it might affect future events as well as our work force.”Jason Collins, the recently retired center who was the first openly gay N.B.A. player, wrote to Pence on Twitter earlier this week, “Is it going to be legal for someone to discriminate against me & others when we come to the #FinalFour?”Outsports, the SB Nation site that covers gay issues in sports, began tracking negative reactions to the law, including from the L.G.B.T. Sports Coalition. A co-founder of the site, Cyd Zeigler, called for all sports leagues, including the N.C.A.A. and the Big Ten, to “steer clear” of the state in the future, while acknowledging it was unrealistic to expect the N.C.A.A. to move next week’s Final Four.Indianapolis is an attractive host city for major sporting events because of its central location and relatively compact downtown, which includes the N.C.A.A.’s headquarters; Bankers Life Fieldhouse, the home of the Pacers; and Lucas Oil Stadium.It annually hosts the N.F.L. scouting combine and the Big Ten conference championship in football. It hosted Super Bowl XLVI in 2012 and the Final Four in 2010. It is scheduled to host the women’s Final Four next year and the men’s Final Four again in 2021.Advertisement