By BRAD SPURGEONMARCH 26, 2015
The biggest story at the Malaysian Grand Prix in Sepang this weekend could turn out to be not what happens in the race, with the Mercedes team likely to dominate as it did in Melbourne two weeks ago and throughout last season, but whether the two Manor Marussia cars actually line up in the last row of the grid as expected.That story is the tale of a small, enthusiastic team that was struck by tragedy and then went bankrupt at the end of last season only to rise from its ashes and appear at the first race this season but fail to make it to the starting grid.The team joined Formula One in 2010 as one of three new teams attracted by the promise of a new low-budget formula with a budget cap, which would in fact never materialize. It began that first season in a partnership with Richard Branson’s Virgin company, after which the team named itself. But Branson soon became disillusioned with the costs, and the team was bought by the Russian car company Marussia, which became the team’s name.For several seasons it struggled at the back of the grid, failing to score a single point until last year at the Monaco Grand Prix, when its driver Jules Bianchi, a Frenchman, finished ninth and earned two points. Those two points eventually allowed Marussia to finish the season in ninth place, which would turn out to be worth tens of millions of dollars in prize money awarded this season to teams according to their position in the standings in the previous year.AdvertisementBut three races before the end of last season, Marussia announced that it was filing for bankruptcy and could not finish the championship.AdvertisementBy then, however, Marussia had suffered a far greater tragedy. At the Japanese Grand Prix in October, Bianchi skidded off the track during a caution flag period in heavy rain. His car rammed under a crane vehicle that was beside the track, causing a nearly fatal blow to his head. He was kept in an induced coma for weeks in a hospital in Japan, and now remains unconscious in a hospital in the south of France.Over the winter, Marussia managed to negotiate through the bankruptcy proceedings to create a new entity to take part in the new Formula One season. The team is now a combination of old and new: partly the 2014 Marussia entity that still owes money to creditors, partly the new Manor Marussia entity that is rebuilding and rehiring for the coming season.“The team that competed last year, the entrant was Manor Grand Prix Racing Ltd.,” said Graeme Lowdon, who is one of the team’s directors. “That company suffered financial issues and sought protection through administration. The process to settle the arrangement with its creditors, with unsecured creditors, was done using a ‘company voluntary arrangement,’ very standard practice.”Such arrangements are used to take care of the outstanding debts to unsecured creditors. “That allows the company then to return to trading with a fresh start,” Lowdon said.But with only a small budget again this year and problems still to be solved for last year’s team, a question for another of the team’s directors, the founder, John Booth, is what possessed him, at 60 years old, to return.“I have absolutely no idea whatsoever,” he said. “I had three months of retirement at the end of last year, so caught up on the gardening and pruning the trees and cutting trees down, and it was great for a few months.”“But you soon start to miss it,” he continued. “It’s the same every winter. Every winter you are exhausted at the end of the season, and think, ‘I’m ready for a rest.’ But when January comes back around, you can’t wait to get back again, you’re missing it. It’s what we do.”AdvertisementThe team’s resurrection was accomplished in four vital steps. The first was finding a new investor: Stephen Fitzpatrick, a British businessman who founded the Ovo Energy company and who invested 30 million pounds, or about $45 million, in the team on the condition that the 2014 prize money — won thanks to Bianchi’s Monaco result — would provide the rest of the budget.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The goal is to run the team on just over £60 million this year. But the lowest operating budget for a Formula One team is around the equivalent of £80 million for the season.The next step came in early February. Manor presented its revival plan to the Formula One strategy group, an association of strong teams that has influence with the International Automobile Federation, or F.I.A., the sport’s governing body. The plan was vetoed, based on the fact that it was too late for the team to develop a car to conform to new regulations before the season started. At the same time, the other teams knew that they could expect a cut of Manor’s 2014 prize money if it failed to race in 2015.“I had to take a deep breath, look for the way forward, if there was a way forward,” Booth recalled. “Then our chief designer, John McQuilliam, came up with one of those light-bulb moments; and that was it, we were set up in that direction again.”McQuilliam’s idea was to transform the 2014 car to meet the primary rule changes for 2015, rather than having to build an entirely new car in a few weeks. The plan was accepted.But another hurdle was to get approval for the team to use the 2014 hybrid Ferrari engine rather than the 2015 engine. It had to ask Ferrari for a new supply of engines this year, though it still owed $16 million to Ferrari for last year’s engines. The Italian manufacturer agreed.“Last year, we deal with one company, and we are still working to get back our money as everybody knows,” said Maurizio Arrivabene, the Ferrari team director. “Now we are dealing with a new company, so it’s a completely different story.”“Also, because they showed to us they stick to what is agreed to in the contract and they are serious on the project,” Arrivabene added. “Otherwise, I said to Graeme in a very simple way, and he remembers, I think: ‘Guys, we are more than open to help you, but no money, no honey.”’Finally, Manor had to find a way within Formula One rules to earn the prize money from last year. In short, to do so it had to enter the championship as the same team this year that it was last year. So it had to keep the Marussia name in some form, though Marussia no longer has anything to do with the new company.AdvertisementSome observers suggested in Melbourne that the only reason the team had shown up was to claim the prize money.“I can understand people being cynical,” Booth said. “But if it was cynical, if that was the case we wouldn’t have brought 30 tons of equipment, 40 people, fulfilled all of our contracts with all suppliers, whether it’s Pirelli, Ferrari, whoever, with our best endeavors to go round and round the circuit.”The stumbling block in Melbourne, according to Booth and Lowdon, was that they had wiped out the car software during the dissolution process and had no replacement. So despite building the cars and having them pass official scrutiny in Melbourne, they were not able to start them up. Both directors explained that it was also essential to attend the first race to complete the process of getting the team back in action under the real conditions of a race weekend and not just at the factory in England.“We’re racers and we want to race,” Lowdon said. “That’s what we want to do.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.