AdvertisementSupported byBy Emma StoneyWELLINGTON, New Zealand — Like most boys playing rugby in New Zealand, Tim Nanai-Williams grew up dreaming of pulling on the jersey of the All Blacks national team.While he has played for the New Zealand rugby sevens team, he never made it onto the All Blacks, the more prestigious 15s rugby union team. He thought his dream of playing at a Rugby World Cup or in the Olympic Games was over because of World Rugby’s strict eligibility rules in place since 2000, which said that a player could play for only one country ever, regardless of which version of the game he played.That meant that rugby players holding more than one passport could not do what is common in other sports — change their national affiliations if it meant a better chance of competing at the Olympics or other big international competitions.But rugby sevens’ addition to the Olympic docket, starting next year in Rio de Janeiro, has resulted in a relaxation of those stringent rules, and now Nanai-Williams is playing for Samoa, where his family has roots.Nanai-Williams is the highest-profile player to take advantage of rugby’s rule change so far, and he has made no secret that a big reason was his desire to play at the World Cup (where 15s is played) and the Olympics (with sevens.)“I’ve been waiting for something like this,” he said. “I’m so lucky that it’s happened now, at this point in my career.”Under the Olympic Charter, competitors who have represented one country may switch to another if they hold a passport for the new country and do not represent the former country for three years, though in some cases that time can be reduced.World Rugby, formerly known as the International Rugby Board, has adopted the Olympic Charter rules for sevens rugby. And for the Rio Games only, the stand-down period, in which players do not compete internationally as they switch nations, has been reduced from 36 months to 18.The change in the eligibility rules has opened another loophole, so players who make the switch in sevens rugby will also be eligible to play for that country’s 15-a-side national team as well. (Players still cannot switch directly from one national 15s team to another though; it can occur only via sevens rugby).Initially it was feared that many players would choose to exploit the loophole to play at this year’s Rugby World Cup in England, but that did not occur, after World Rugby made it compulsory for players changing allegiances to play in four of the nine rounds of the HSBC World Sevens Series if they wanted to be eligible for World Cup selection. The series is acting as the Olympic qualifying tournament, with the top four teams at the end of the season making it to Rio. Johnathan Malo, who was part of the New Zealand Sevens squad in 2012, has joined Nanai-Williams on the Samoa team, while Warwick Lahmert, another former Kiwi, has chosen to play for England — his mother’s country of birth — after playing for the New Zealand sevens team from 2012-13. New Zealand has a large number of people with Pacific Island or British heritage who are eligible to hold two passports, and the country is a hotbed of rugby talent, so that has made it an obvious choice for other countries looking to strengthen their teams. (In addition, making the New Zealand sevens team for the Olympics is not expected to be easy, either, with a number of Super Rugby stars expected to be in the mix.)New Zealand sevens Coach Gordon Tietjens smiled wryly when asked if he were comfortable with the rule change.“It’s uncomfortable when you’ve got some players who have actually played for you that are now playing for England and Samoa,” Tietjens admitted. “But it’s an opportunity for them to have a crack to play in the Olympics. It is what it is.“It’s disappointing to lose them,” Tietjens said. “Tim Nanai-Williams certainly would have been a contender for my side for Rio.” Even England Coach Simon Amor, who has benefited from the rule change, was not overly enthusiastic.“All I know is that these are the eligibility rules,” he said. “They are what they are.”He did concede, though that “if it give us the opportunity to bring in someone with great character and is exceptionally talented,” like Lahmert, “then that’s fantastic.” Lahmert admitted getting the phone call from Amor late last year was a shock — and also an opportunity he could not turn down.Lahmert, 28, played for England for the first time at the Wellington tournament in February and started every game, including the Cup final that England lost to New Zealand, 27-21. He started in every game again at the tournament in Las Vegas the following weekend, but he is not part of the team for this weekend’s showcase event in Hong Kong. He is, however, under contract until the end of July. The transition for Nanai-Williams has been less smooth, as he is juggling his sevens rugby with his commitments with the Chiefs, a New Zealand franchise in Super Rugby. The decision to play for Samoa was not a straightforward one.“I was born and bred here in New Zealand and wanted to be an All Black. I made the All Black Sevens but not the All Blacks,” Nanai-Williams said.“I’m a proud Samoan. The blue jersey is the same to me as a black jersey. Realistically I had to look at the lineup for the All Blacks. There’s a lot of talent in New Zealand.”Nanai-Williams, who is currently nursing a broken finger suffered in a Super Rugby game, has played in three of the Sevens World Series tournaments so far but is not likely to play for Samoa again until the penultimate Scotland tournament in May, when the Chiefs have a bye week.His Chiefs schedule also means that he has not taken part in any of the training camps in Samoa and has joined his teammates just days before the tournaments he has been involved in. “The difficult thing for us is having enough time to work together with him, especially with our plays and our moves,” Samoa captain Reupena Levasa said. “But we don’t blame him.”Advertisement