By BRAD SPURGEONMARCH 26, 2015
The inaugural Malaysian Grand Prix, in Sepang on Oct. 17, 1999, was a historic, spectacular race whose repercussions are still resounding today.It was the first Grand Prix to be added to the calendar since the Hungarian Grand Prix in 1986, and it would blaze the trail for an array of races in Asia and elsewhere as the series proceeded to expand its global footprint.The venue in Sepang was also the first of the Formula One racing palaces designed by Hermann Tilke for races around the world, from Bahrain to Shanghai to Sochi, Russia, each one more palatial than its predecessor.Drivers have always respected the layout of the Sepang track, with its huge double straights divided by a hairpin turn, even if the giant awnings that protect spectators from the sunlight offer the cars and drivers no relief from the heat and humidity.AdvertisementIn 1999, the weather played its part in the inaugural Malaysia race, contributing to the technical breakdowns of nine of the 11 cars that were forced to drop out of the 22-car field.AdvertisementBut there were other, bigger dramas. The Malaysian Grand Prix was the penultimate race of the 1999 season and it was the first driven by Ferrari’s Michael Schumacher since the British Grand Prix where he had broken his leg. It was his fourth season at Ferrari, a period during which he had helped rebuild the team, which had not won a drivers’ title since Jody Scheckter was champion in 1979 and had not won the constructors’ title since 1982.Schumacher had worked to bring Ferrari to a level where it not only won races but was ready to win titles again. But the seven races he missed because of his injury meant that he would have to help his teammate, Eddie Irvine, win the drivers’ title.Irvine trailed the championship leader, Mika Hakkinen of McLaren Mercedes, by only two points heading into the Malaysia race. But on a track where none of the drivers had raced before and in the extreme heat and humidity, Schumacher scored the pole position, lapping the circuit more than a second faster than the McLarens and nearly a second faster than Irvine, who qualified second. Hakkinen qualified fourth and his teammate, David Coulthard, was third.At the start of the race, Schumacher sped off to a 3.1-second lead until after the fourth lap, when, in a supporting role that he had never played before and would never play again, he slowed down to let Irvine take the lead. Schumacher first blocked Coulthard, but the Scot passed him on Lap 5 only to pull out of the race later with a technical problem. Schumacher, back in second place, then held off Hakkinen.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After pit stops, Schumacher took the lead again only to again slow down to let Irvine go ahead. Irvine won the race and moved into the lead in the championship, four points ahead of Hakkinen, who had finished in third position at Sepang, behind Schumacher.Schumacher had danced around the grid like a true world champion.But after the race, the stewards announced that outsized aerodynamic parts, called barge boards, on the Ferraris were illegal. The two Ferrari drivers were disqualified from the race, which made Hakkinen not only the winner of the race, but also of the drivers’ title, since Irvine could not surpass his points tally in the final race.Ron Dennis, the director of the McLaren team said: “This is not the way to win a championship. It is bad for the sport.” But his team later released a statement saying that while they “sympathize with Ferrari,” the regulations must be followed.In fact, the technical infringement was so slight that the Ferrari technical director at the time, Ross Brawn, walked out of the Ferrari garage holding up to reporters the offending part, which was a kind of wing on the side of the car. According to the complicated system of measurement used by the International Automobile Federation, the sport’s governing body, the board was deemed to be 10 millimeters, or less than half an inch, over the limit. No one considered that Ferrari had actually gained any racing advantage from the infraction.AdvertisementBefore the series arrived at the final race, in Japan, two weeks later, Ferrari appealed the stewards’ decision to the sport’s governing body in Paris.The Italian team claimed that the stewards had used a faulty system of measurement, and that the barge board by another standard was not illegal. Ferrari won the case, which meant that Irvine and Schumacher were reinstated and Hakkinen started the Japanese Grand Prix four points behind Irvine.But Hakkinen won the race, Schumacher finished second and Irvine third. Hakkinen was declared world champion, but Ferrari won the constructors’ title. And the following season Ferrari and Schumacher would begin the most dominant period by a driver and team in the history of the series, going on to win both titles from 2000 through 2004.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.