By BILLY WITZ and THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 27, 2015
CLEARWATER, Fla. —  The afternoon showers that washed away the final few innings of the Yankees’ 10-0 win Friday over the Philadelphia Phillies did not discourage Manager Joe Girardi.A week before the Yankees are set to break camp and head north to prepare for the season opener, Girardi’s world is filled with blue skies and a slender injury list.Before the game, Girardi announced that Masahiro Tanaka would be the starter on opening day, April 6 against Toronto, which is noteworthy for two reasons: C. C. Sabathia, who had the opening day assignment for six straight seasons, is no longer the ace; and Tanaka’s elbow ligament is holding up.The decision was generally greeted with a shrug. Tanaka had a more visceral reaction when he was asked if he was hoping for a more auspicious start to the season than he had a year ago. Then, in his first start as a Yankee, Tanaka surrendered a home run to Melky Cabrera, who is no longer with Toronto.Advertisement“He’s gone, so I wouldn’t have that image,” Tanaka said, with a smile, through an interpreter. “But, yes, I’d like to have a different outcome.”Girardi also revealed that Michael Pineda, Sabathia and Nathan Eovaldi would follow Tanaka in the order. Pineda rewarded his manager’s faith by throwing five shutout innings against the hapless Phillies, lowering his spring E.R.A. to 1.32. He has 17 strikeouts in 132/3 innings.As for the fifth spot, Girardi was not yet ready to name Adam Warren, who General Manager Brian Cashman said had a wide lead in the competition.If the final rotation spot was a matter for another day, there was still plenty for Girardi to glow about.He said Mark Teixeira, who has been hampered by injuries in recent seasons, looked as if he had turned back the clock, with good swings and a healthy plate discipline.Advertisement“We have Tex back,” Girardi said.Second baseman Stephen Drew, who had been batting .167 this spring after hitting .150 last season, was swinging the bat well, Girardi said, and delivered three hits on Friday. Brendan Ryan, the backup shortstop who had a late start to camp because of a back injury, had two doubles, which raised his average more than 100 points, all the way to .188.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Girardi even had the opportunity to evaluate Alex Rodriguez on the basepaths, something he had not yet been able to do this spring.“I still want to see him go from second to home, first to third,” Girardi said before the game.As it turned out, Rodriguez did both. After singling in the second, Rodriguez chugged into third on Drew’s double. And after drawing a walk in the fifth, he reached home from second on Chris Young’s double.“I thought he was moving pretty good,” Girardi said.Not quite good enough in one instance. After Rodriguez reached third base in the second inning, he was thrown out at the plate by outfielder Jeff Francoeur on a fly ball to right.The play seemed to surprise Rodriguez. He was uncertain whether to slide — he did not — or what the rules were about running into the catcher. Rodriguez pulled up so he would not run over catcher Cameron Rupp, who tagged Rodriguez out.“I told him thank you for taking it easy on me,” Rodriguez said.Girardi was also pleased that Rodriguez did not slide in an exhibition game on a wet field. There was no reason to ruin a such a bright day.RODRIGUEZ’S COUSIN GUILTY Yuri Sucart, a cousin of Alex Rodriguez’s who was a longtime personal assistant to Rodriguez, pleaded guilty to a federal drug charge, resolving issues for the last remaining defendant in a case in which a South Florida clinic, Biogenesis of America, illegally provided steroids to athletes.Sucart, 52, admitted in United States District Court in Miami that he had conspired to distribute human growth hormone to athletes. Seven others, including Anthony Bosch, the former owner of Biogenesis, have pleaded guilty and received sentences ranging from probation to four years in prison. Sucart faces eight to 14 months in prison when he is sentenced on June 4.Major League Baseball’s investigation into the use of banned substances linked to Biogenesis resulted in the suspensions of 14 players, including Rodriguez. Rodriguez will not have to testify in open court as a result of Sucart’s guilty plea. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: New Ace and Vintage Batting Lift the Yankees’ Spirits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.