By ANDREW KEHMARCH 27, 2015
The volume in professional sports locker rooms late at night tends to fluctuate depending on the result of a game. Losses demand silence. Wins inspire a joyous rumpus.“Starting lineups!” Alan Anderson said late Friday, extra loud, as he fired up an N.C.A.A. tournament game on a tablet device propped inside his locker. “Let’s go, baby!”Anderson’s Nets teammates cracked up at his cartoonish enthusiasm. The mood was light. Everything was good. The Nets had pulled off a surprising 106-98 upset of the Cleveland Cavaliers in front of a sellout crowd at Barclays Center.Laughter aside, the Nets are still a desperate team, chasing a playoff spot that dangles just out of reach. They ended the night a half-game behind the Boston Celtics in the crowded race for the eighth and final Eastern Conference playoff berth.AdvertisementSo they need the good play, and good vibes, to continue.“At this point, for us, every game is important,” said Joe Johnson, who scored 20 points and sank a late 3-pointer to stave off a potential Cavaliers comeback. “This was definitely a much-needed victory, and I was glad to see us play great here at home.”The Nets have a 13-20 record at home, compared with 18-20 on the road. It has been a matter of some debate, then, whether it will turn out to be good that eight of their final 11 games are at Barclays Center.Whatever the case, they will need to take advantage of their next three games in New York. They play the lowly Los Angeles Lakers on Sunday, the ninth-place Indiana Pacers on Tuesday and the wretched Knicks at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday. Their schedule gets considerably harder from there. “We’ve talked about it a lot lately, what every game means to us,” Deron Williams said. “We’ve been paying attention to what other teams are doing and watching the standings.”Coach David Blatt and the Cavaliers have no such anxiety about their playoff position. They are in second place, nine games behind the Atlanta Hawks and two and a half ahead of the Chicago Bulls.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’re going to be able to get in the gym, get in the laboratory, and work on some things — not too, too much — but some things that we think that perhaps we can add,” Blatt said before the game.AdvertisementBlatt’s displeasure after the game seemed reasonable. The Cavaliers’ four-game winning streak ended, and they looked out of sorts. Blatt reminded his players that the regular season was far from over. From the start of the game, the Barclays Center crowd, known for its impassive vibe and general fickleness, was buzzing and reacting to the action on the court, and the players seemed equally excited. J. R. Smith turned and glared into the crowd twice after sinking shots in the opening minutes of the game. Kyrie Irving also yelled at fans after two of his own baskets.LeBron James, who was called for two offensive fouls early on, seemed to play the entire game annoyed, slamming the ball after one Nets basket.Bruce Reznick, a Nets fan who calls himself Mr. Whammy, said that James had complained to arena security about his normal heckling routine, which involves incessant yelling from the beneath the basket whenever an opposing player takes a free throw. Reznick was asked to remain seated all game.Taking free throws with just over a minute to play, James, who led the Cavaliers with 24 points, was heartily booed. But the same crowd, which included many Cavaliers fans, erupted when James finished a tomahawk alley-oop dunk with 22.4 seconds left.Reznick and the rest of the Nets’ fans nevertheless left pleased. With seconds left before the buzzer, Reznick walked from his seat over to a group of seated reporters and whispered, “You don’t mess with the Whammy.”A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Playing for Playoff Spot, Nets Grab a Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.