By SCOTT CACCIOLAMARCH 27, 2015
Kevin Durant, the N.B.A.’s reigning most valuable player, has played his final game of an injury-marred season. Durant is scheduled to undergo a bone graft next week on his ailing right foot, the team announced Friday, and is not expected to resume basketball-related activities for four to six months.It will be the third surgical procedure on Durant’s right foot this season, a worrisome development for one of the league’s most dynamic scorers — and for the Thunder, who are vying for a playoff spot in the Western Conference. The Thunder, who are 41-31 and increasingly reliant on Russell Westbrook, are in eighth place, which would set up a first-round meeting with the Golden State Warriors, who currently lead the conference.Durant, 26, appeared in just 27 games this season, averaging 25.4 points, 6.6 rebounds and 4.1 assists.Durant initially had surgery after breaking a bone in his right foot in the preseason. Last month, he had an additional procedure to replace a screw that was causing discomfort in his foot. At the time, Coach Scott Brooks expressed optimism that Durant would return to the lineup.AdvertisementBut as a result of what the team described as persistent soreness, Durant and team personnel consulted two specialists in the past week: Dr. Martin O’Malley in New York and Dr. James Nunley at Duke University. It was determined, General Manager Sam Presti said in a news release, that the fracture of Durant’s fifth metatarsal was “demonstrating signs of regression” and that additional surgery was necessary.AdvertisementA bone graft is standard procedure in the rare instances when these types of fracture operations are unsuccessful, Presti said. O’Malley will perform the procedure.“While everyone is disappointed that Kevin falls into that group, we are encouraged that the bone graft procedure has historically demonstrated long-term health and stability,” Presti said in the release.Steve Kerr, the coach of the Warriors, said the news came as a blow.“I always hate hearing when anybody gets injured and is out, especially someone like Kevin, who is so good for the league and gracious and such an incredible example for the league,” Kerr said. ““Durant’s contract with the Thunder runs through next season.CELTICS 96, KNICKS 92 Isaiah Thomas scored 18 points, and Jae Crowder had 17 points and 9 rebounds as Boston held off a late rally by the host Knicks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brandon Bass scored 16 points, Evan Turner had 15 and Avery Bradley finished with 10 for Boston.Andrea Bargnani tied a season high with 25 points for the Knicks.The Celtics led by as many as 11 points in the fourth quarter, but Langston Galloway’s 3-pointer with 25 seconds left cut the Knicks’ deficit to 92-88.Jason Smith hit a 3-pointer with just over a second to go to make the score 95-92, but Bradley made a clinching free throw. (AP)HAWKS 99, HEAT 86 DeMarre Carroll scored 24 points as Atlanta clinched the top seed for the Eastern Conference playoffs with a victory over visiting Miami. The Hawks wrapped up the No. 1 seed and home-court advantage in the conference playoffs when the Nets beat Cleveland, 106-98.AdvertisementPaul Millsap had 21 points and Al Horford had 15 for Atlanta, which never trailed despite playing without the injured guard Jeff Teague. (AP)RAPTORS 94, LAKERS 83 Toronto clinched its second straight Atlantic Division title, beating visiting Los Angeles with 18 points from Lou Williams and 19 from Jonas Valanciunas.James Johnson had 17 points, Amir Johnson had 11 and Terrence Ross added 10 as the Raptors ended a two-game losing streak and beat the Lakers for the first time since Dec. 8, 2013. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Durant to Have Bone Graft and Miss Rest of Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.