By TIM ROHANMARCH 27, 2015
JUPITER, Fla. —  Matt Harvey turned 26 on Friday, and to an outsider, it might have seemed like an unremarkable moment. The Mets had a birthday cake in the clubhouse in the morning — no big deal — and Harvey pitched well against the St. Louis Cardinals in the afternoon, which, in the past, would have been no big deal, either.Harvey had much to celebrate, though. After missing last season because of Tommy John surgery, he has returned looking emphatically like himself. His fastball velocity is back. His command is sharp. His comeback tour this month, which has been pored over relentlessly, has begun to turn into one monotonous reminder of how dominant he can be.In his fifth spring-training start, Harvey held the Cardinals, who played most of their regulars, to one run in four and a third innings while compiling five strikeouts. Most important, his pitch count was increased to nearly 80, and he was able to maintain his velocity and command.“I don’t know how many three-ball counts I really got into today,” said Harvey, who has thrown 75 to 80 percent of his pitches for strikes this spring. “Probably not too many. Last time, I don’t think there was any. To have that and to know I can throw strikes with everything right now, I’m pretty happy.”AdvertisementManager Terry Collins added: “It’s all the process now. He’s obviously healthy.”Spring training is meant as a training ground for pitchers to build up arm strength and fine-tune their pitches before the games count. But Harvey seems ready for the season to begin, which it will in little over a week. Harvey’s first regular-season appearance is slated for Game 3 of the season, against the Nationals in Washington.AdvertisementHarvey also batted for the first time this spring on Friday — and, in fact, hit eighth in the lineup. Collins tinkered with batting his pitchers eighth last season — he did it 10 times in all — and he has indicated that he may do it more often in 2015.The theory behind the move — and Tony LaRussa used it in recent years while managing the Cardinals — is to have a good hitter, say, Juan Lagares, bat ninth so that he and the first and second hitters in the lineup might combine to create better situations for the middle of the order to drive in runs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it is a strategy that also needs a pitcher to be able to swing the bat with at least a little proficiency, and three of the team’s starters qualify: Harvey, Jacob deGrom and Jon Niese. In his time with the Mets, Harvey has batted .145 in 76 at-bats, with four doubles and five R.B.I., which is not terrible for a pitcher.When Harvey made his less-anticipated return to the batter’s box, he fist-bumped the Cardinals’ star catcher, Yadier Molina, and then grounded out to first. He also grounded out his second time up.Of course, his pitching is what really concerns the Mets. This spring, he threw two perfect innings against the Detroit Tigers, had a somewhat shaky outing against the Miami Marlins, blanked the Boston Red Sox and the Yankees and stifled the Cardinals.Over all, he has posted a 1.45 earned run average over 182/3 innings, with 17 strikeouts and a walk.Collins said it was after Harvey’s outing against the Red Sox that he had decided, “I’ve got nothing to worry about here.”Harvey seemed to agree, saying Friday, “I feel just as normal as I ever have.” And then he was off to celebrate his birthday with his parents. They would hang out and watch some basketball on television while opening day drew a little closer.INSIDE PITCHThe Mets indicated Friday that it had become less likely that Daniel Murphy (hamstring) would return in time for opening day. “We’ve got to get him some at-bats, and we’re running out of days for that,” Manager Terry Collins said.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Harvey Continues His Sterling Spring by Taming the Cardinals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.