AdvertisementSupported byEast: Lousville 75, North Carolina State 65By Bill PenningtonSYRACUSE — Louisville’s reserve guard Anton Gill had not played more than 12 minutes in a game since mid-February. This month, he had missed every shot he tried, five field goals and two free throws. Once a top recruit, Gill came to Louisville as a shooter, having scored 50 points or more twice in one week while in high school.But now the ball would not fall through the basket.“Wouldn’t drop no matter what,” Gill said. “The toughest year of my life.”Coach Rick Pitino took Gill aside recently and told him a story about Pitino’s unheralded 1987 Providence College team, which shockingly advanced to the Final Four. Pitino compared Gill to Providence’s Darryl Wright, who had been going through a similar difficult season until he suddenly assumed a starring role in the postseason.“Coach Pitino told me to stay ready — I might be needed like that player from 1987,” Gill said.Late in Friday’s East Regional semifinal game, Pitino’s team trailed North Carolina State by a point when the ball ended up in Gill’s hands. Gill’s first shot appeared off the mark, but a fortunate bounce sent the ball through the rim. The next time down the court, Gill made a 3-pointer. About two minutes later, he made another jumper to give Louisville a five-point lead that the Cardinals easily protected in a 75-65 victory.“Anton Gill basically went in and won the game for us,” Pitino said.Minutes after the game, Gill was still wondering how it had all happened so fast. He had barely played in this year’s N.C.A.A. tournament, and now he had not only provided the spark Louisville needed to pull away from a pesky North Carolina State team, he had done so against a team he grew up watching as a developing basketball player.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Gill lives about a 15-minute drive from the North Carolina State campus. “This is all kind of a dream,” Gill said. “I’ve been having such a rough time, and to help my teammates get to the next level with a couple of shots is very gratifying.” “Coach Pitino gave me that talk, and what I took from it was that he still believed in me,” he added. “It was my job to take advantage of the next opportunity.”Fourth-seeded Louisville (27-8) will advance to the round of eight for the fifth time in eight years. Pitino is 12-1 in round of 16 games. It was the first meeting in the tournament between the teams, and it avenges for Louisville a nine-point loss at home in February to the Wolfpack (22-14).Gill’s heroics were before and after some pivotal and pressure-packed contributions from his best friend on the team, his former prep school backcourt mate, Terry Rozier.After Gill had given the Cardinals a five-point lead with 3 minutes 37 seconds left to play, Rozier grabbed a rebound and dashed up the court, splitting two defenders before he reversed the ball in midair and banked in a circus layup. Rozier was also fouled on the play. When he sank the free throw, the North Carolina State bench slumped. Two minutes later, with 60 seconds remaining in the game, Rozier was at it again, snatching another ball in the defensive end and sprinting away for another layup-foul-shot three-point play. The combination of Gill and Rozier was too much for the eighth-seeded Wolfpack. Another underrated Pitino team would keep alive an unforeseen run deep into March.“The 1987 Providence team taught me to how to dream,” Pitino said. “It taught me that anything was possible.”While Louisville pulled away at the end, for more than 35 minutes, it had been a taut, seesaw game. Leading by two points at the half, North Carolina State came out for the second half and urgently pushed the ball upcourt, forcing Louisville to adjust to the quicker tempo. The change of pace seemed to catch Louisville off guard as the Wolfpack took a 39-31 lead.But Louisville roared back to regain the lead. But in a game that saw neither team stay down for long, the North Carolina State center BeeJay Anya turned a missed jumper by Turner into a rebound dunk. Washington then made a jump shot from the top of the key. Snider countered with a driving layup, and at the midpoint of the second half, the Cardinals led by three points, 51-48.Louisville, still working hard to keep up with the Wolfpack’s transition game, tried to slow the game down and force the ball inside. But as Louisville went momentarily cold, North Carolina State’s Trevor Lacey, who had a team-high 18 points, hit another long three and put the Wolfpack up 54-53 with roughly seven minutes to play.In the end, largely because of the clutch performances of Gill and Rozier, the Wolfpack wore down and stumbled at the crucial time.North Carolina State Coach Mark Gottfried said that guard Anthony Barber, perhaps his best-known star, had become ill overnight and was weak and unable to eat throughout Friday.“He had no zip today, no energy,” Gottfried said of Barber, who had eight points. “I though it affected him. But we had a great season. I’m very proud of what this team did.”Advertisement