AdvertisementSupported bySouth: Gonzaga 74, U.C.L.A. 62By Tom SpoustaHOUSTON — These were not the deadeye Gonzaga Bulldogs who could shoot opponents into submission without getting dirty underneath the basket. These Bulldogs were clanging balls off the rim at such an alarming rate Friday night that Coach Mark Few’s patience finally wore as thin as the lead U.C.L.A. had just cut to 1 point early in the second half. So Few called a timeout and ordered the Bulldogs to show the mettle that had earned them a No. 2 seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament. Gonzaga responded, taking control with its size and experience and pulling away for a 74-62 victory over 11th-seeded U.C.L.A. Gonzaga (35-2) advanced to the South Regional final at NRG Stadium here Sunday against either Duke or Utah, one game away from the Bulldogs’ first Final Four appearance. Gonzaga struggled to find a balance for much of Friday night, looking frustrated and out-of-sync against U.C.L.A (22-14), which many observers believed did not deserve to be in the N.C.A.A. tournament. But when the Bulldogs finally hit their stride, they arrived at a place they have reached only once before. “We didn’t play perfect and probably didn’t even play what we would consider really good, and that has a lot to do with U.C.L.A.,” Few said. “But we were tough and gritty and physical. That’s kind of how we’ve been all year.” Hammer passes inside to the 7-foot-1 center Przemek Karnowski and Domantas Sabonis, a 6-foot-10 forward, were pivotal for Gonzaga. After combining for 10 points in a lackluster first half, Karnowski and Sabonis awoke to dominate inside. Karnowski finished with 18 points, and Sabonis had 12. They were so in tune with each other that at one point, Karnowski flicked a pass behind his back to Sabonis for a dunk. Guards Byron Wesley (14 points) and Kevin Pangos (10 points) also found their shooting strokes. After shooting 35 percent from the field in the first half, well below their 55 percent clip through two tournament games, the Bulldogs shot 46.7 percent in the second.Tony Parker and Norman Powell each scored 16 points for the Bruins, who cranked up the tempo early in the second half and pulled to 35-34, when Few called the timeout that would change the game and ignite Karnowski and Sabonis. “We called a bunch of sets that pretty much demands that the ball goes in there,” Few said. “The guys did a great job getting it to them, and obviously Przemek and Domantas delivered.” The Bulldogs were suddenly in unison and slowly extended their lead to 17 points. Defensively, they held the Bruins to 38.8 percent shooting. With three seniors and two juniors starting, this Gonzaga team is considered Few’s best in his 16 years at the university. Gonzaga has now been in 17 consecutive N.C.A.A. tournaments, tied for the fourth-longest active streak with Duke, Kansas and Michigan State. But Gonzaga has advanced past the round of 16 only once, in 1999. Few was an assistant then and took over as head coach the following season, and until Friday night had yet to guide the Bulldogs to a regional semifinal. Success has yet to translate into a Final Four appearance. “I don’t feel pressure or anything like that,” Few had said. “You want it so bad for the group, it’s like you want your own kids to do well in a play or something. I want it so bad for those guys.” Gonzaga grabbed a 35-28 halftime lead despite looking tentative. The Bulldogs showed flashes of a balanced inside and outside game, but they lost their shooting touch midway through the first half, missing 11 consecutive field-goal attempts during a stretch when it could have taken command. Still, the Bulldogs managed a 20-12 lead with just under seven minutes remaining after guard Byron Wesley followed his own missed shot with a lay-in.For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.The Bruins, though, were equally inept, going 6 minutes 23 seconds without scoring. The sloppy play was puzzling for two teams boasting several sharpshooters. Neither team looked nervous. Open shots were plentiful; defenses were not particularly stout, although the Bruins’ long arms and hustle appeared to bother Gonzaga shooters on the perimeter. The Bulldogs made only 2 of 11 attempts from 3-point range. Wesley’s 4-of-11 shooting over all reflected the Bulldogs’ struggles. “The difference was board play and one team got to the free-throw line,” U.C.L.A. Coach Steve Alford said. Gonzaga (17 of 23) did shoot about twice as many free throws as the Bruins (7 of 11). The Bruins were using revenge and redemption as motivation. U.C.L.A. had been in disarray at the end of December, a stretch that included five losses in a row, including consecutive defeats at the hands of Gonzaga and Kentucky. The Bruins said that loss was a turning point in their season, and they turned into a team that should not have been regarded as a questionable participant in the tournament. “A lot of teams were on the bubble; we were the only ones that got that kind of backlash,” forward Kevon Looney said. “We want to prove everybody wrong.” After a convincing victory, Gonzaga now appears on a similar mission. Advertisement