
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
MARCH 27, 2015
CLEVELAND — Shortly after Notre Dame beat Wichita State on Thursday night, Irish Coach Mike Brey stood in a corridor just off the court and answered questions about Saturday’s opponent, which he knew would be West Virginia or Kentucky. As he spoke, the repeated roars of a partisan crowd made it clear that that opponent would be Kentucky.But Brey, true to the code of coaching etiquette, played it down the middle.“We’ll cross that bridge when we get to it,” he said.Notre Dame has arrived at that bridge. Kentucky defeated West Virginia by 39 points, and on Saturday the Wildcats, the unbeaten top seed, will play Notre Dame, the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament champ, for a place in the Final Four.“We’ve got a monumental challenge on our hands, but we play in the best conference in America,” Brey said. “Going through the teams we had to go through in A.C.C. play, I think, has us very prepared to play against a great team like Kentucky.”AdvertisementKentucky was only one more challenge in what have been some of the most challenging days of Brey’s life. The low point came a week ago, when Brey learned that his mother, Betty, had died of a heart attack only hours before the Irish were to play Butler in a second-round game.AdvertisementBrey didn’t reveal his mother’s death, even to his players, until he met the news media after Notre Dame’s victory. He then flew to Florida to be with his father, sister and brother, before returning to his team for the round of 16.After Notre Dame’s victory Thursday over Wichita State, I offered my condolences to Brey. We spoke briefly about life’s ironies: how we can work all of our lives to achieve certain things, and how often, when we achieve them, the people with whom we’d like share those moments — indeed, the people most responsible for them — are not there.Brey said that he had spent a few days after his mother’s death second-guessing himself — “I didn’t spend enough time with her, or I should have talked to her Thursday” — but in the end, he chose to praise her by describing her as “the real driving force behind everything I’ve done.”Betty Brey was an Olympic swimmer, a member of the 1956 United States team that competed in Melbourne, Australia. Mike Brey said that late in life, she had remained as competitive as ever, a Masters champion who could win three gold medals and a silver and still be angry about not winning the fourth gold.She was also his biggest critic, adviser and motivator.“There were times I didn’t want to take her phone call because I knew she would want to talk about the game or the next game,” Brey said. “Very rarely did I get, ‘Hey Mike, how you doing?’ It’s like: ‘Have you got them ready? Are they ready? I think we can best Duke, Mike.’ She was intense.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“And to be around that intensity every day,” he added, “maybe it wasn’t the healthiest, and I’ll probably need therapy later in life because of it, but I’ll tell you one thing: She made me think about competing every day.”Notre Dame’s tournament run has been a great, if temporary, distraction from his enormous loss.On Saturday, Notre Dame will play a great Kentucky team that represents a basketball program steeped in tradition. Notre Dame’s signature sport is football, though with the advent of the N.C.A.A.’s playoff system it is possible that the championship era may have passed at Notre Dame.That leaves Notre Dame basketball. The Irish have been to the Final Four only once, in 1978, and with the Kentucky matchup looming, Brey has had to stress to Notre Dame fans what the team has already achieved. Winning the A.C.C. tournament in Greensboro, N.C., a year after finishing with a losing record in its first season in the league was a huge deal, he said.Advertisement“I’ve had to educate our fans,” he said, calling the championship, capped by consecutive wins over Duke and North Carolina in Greensboro, “an unbelievable achievement for us.”Coaches are defined by their records, and Brey’s is more than respectable: 332-164 since he arrived at Notre Dame from Delaware in 2000. But they also are remembered for their success in the postseason, or their lack of it, and a victory on Saturday could help change the impression of Brey’s tenure with the Irish.Notre Dame has had four first-round exits from the N.C.A.A. tournament under Brey, including its previous two, and it has advanced to the regionals only once, when it lost in the round of 16 in 2003. Defeating Kentucky, a seemingly impossible mission if the West Virginia game is any example, would be the greatest moment of his career. “We are America’s team tomorrow,” Brey said. “There’s no question about it.”Last week, Brey credited his mother for being the inspiration for the emotional victory over Butler. With Betty Brey looking over her son’s shoulder, and more important, Notre Dame players making their shots, anything might happen.Never discount the power of the inspired moment.Email: wcr@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Hoping for a Nearly Impossible Win After a Personal Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »