By PAT BORZIMARCH 27, 2015
MANKATO, Minn. —  Everything about Mike Hastings, the coach of the Minnesota State Mankato men’s hockey team, the surprising No. 1 overall seed in the N.C.A.A. tournament, involves a story — like how his family acquired its dog, a 3-year-old golden retriever named Gracie.Hastings bought the dog shortly after taking over the Mavericks in 2012, combining a reward for his son, Hudson, with consolation for forcing his wife and two children to move for the third time in five years. In his dusty, uncluttered office this week, Hastings pulled a family photo with Gracie from a bookcase near his desk.“My son asked: ‘How many times have you moved? I’m tired of moving,’ ” Hastings said.He suggested getting a dog, and that, he said, “shifted the whole thing.”“I said, ‘If you get straight A’s next year, we can get a dog,’ ” Hastings recalled. “Didn’t think that would happen. So we got a dog.”AdvertisementHastings spent 14 seasons coaching Omaha in the United States Hockey League, winning three league titles and a record 529 games before leaving in 2008 to become an assistant at the University of Minnesota. He returned to Omaha one year later to join his friend Dean Blais at Nebraska-Omaha for three seasons as associate head coach.AdvertisementHastings’s desire to run his own program and go home to Minnesota, where he and his wife, Jean Ann, grew up, led him to Minnesota State, which at the time was easily the worst of the state’s five Division I programs. In the 16 seasons before Hastings arrived, the Mavericks compiled five winning records and one N.C.A.A. tournament appearance, a first-round loss in 2003.To his relief, Hastings discovered that the Mavericks had talented players who needed to be pushed. In his first season, Hastings doubled Minnesota State’s victory total to 24 and earned an N.C.A.A. tournament bid, losing to Miami of Ohio in the first round. Last season, the Mavericks went 26-14-2 and won the Western Collegiate Hockey Association title, but they endured another N.C.A.A. first-round loss, to UMass-Lowell.This season, with players from 11 states, three Canadian provinces and Latvia, Minnesota State successfully defended its conference title and spent five weeks ranked No. 1 in the national polls, a program first. On Saturday, the Mavericks (29-7-3) will seek their first N.C.A.A. tournament victory, against the Rochester Institute of Technology (19-14-5) in the Midwest Regional in South Bend, Ind.“We’ve had success now for a couple of years,” said the senior forward Matt Leitner, the team’s leader in points. “Coach Hastings says all the time, the bar keeps getting raised. This year we had a goal to be a No. 1 seed in the tournament. We’ve accomplished our goal, but we still have more goals in front of us.”Blais, whose Nebraska-Omaha team will face Minnesota State if both advance to Sunday’s regional final, is not surprised that Hastings lifted his team so quickly.“He was going into a program that was obviously depleted,” Blais said in a telephone interview. “He had some talent in a lot of positions, and he added to it. And he did it masterfully.”Minnesota State was among several smaller Midwest programs left scrambling in 2011 when Minnesota and Wisconsin left the W.C.H.A. for the Big Ten Conference, which added hockey in 2013. North Dakota, Minnesota Duluth and other high-profile programs formed the National Collegiate Hockey Conference. Unwanted, Minnesota State remained in a weakened W.C.H.A. Its rise to the top of the Division I PairWise rankings this season left other conference members quietly gleeful.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mavericks win with speed, discipline and puck control. Minnesota State shares the Division I lead in goals with Boston University, at 144, and leads outright in power-play goals (48) and shots-on-goal margin (plus-11.6). The junior Bryce Gervais is second in Division I with 27 goals.Advertisement“I just remember getting a lot more fatigued without the puck than I did with it,” said Hastings, 49, a former defenseman at St. Cloud State. “If something is coming at you fast, and you’ve got guys who can give it and get it back, and the puck’s moving, now you’ve got opportunities to create offense. That’s hard to defend.”And the Mavs do not allow much. Goalie Stephon Williams, an Islanders draft pick and one of the Mavericks’ five N.H.L. draftees, has the second-lowest goals-against average in Division I, 1.64.The turnaround began shortly after Hastings arrived. Hastings demanded that players eliminate the little mistakes that cost victories. In video sessions, Hastings used a laser pointer to target offenders.“The expectation level rose so much,” said forward Chase Grant, a senior captain. “If you tried to take a shortcut, you were let known right away, or he would get up and get in your face. It wasn’t going to be that way anymore. You were going to win. Losing games, while it does happen, you don’t lose two in a row. And anything less than your best was unacceptable. It was a complete culture change.”A month into Hastings’s first season, visiting Denver swept a series against the Mavericks, winning both games by a goal. Hastings saw an acceptance among the players that infuriated him. That Monday at practice, Hastings had the players skate from line to line until they collapsed.“He let us know, if we were going to get swept in our own building again in the W.C.H.A., this was going to happen,” Grant said. “When you have that sitting in the back of your mind, you’re thinking about that when you’re going in on a forecheck or looking at an empty net.”Minnesota State endured one more home sweep two months later, against Wisconsin, losing both games in overtime. The Mavericks have not been swept at home since.This weekend, Hastings will rely on his upperclassmen with tournament experience to shepherd freshmen like Brad McClure, who scored five goals in two games and was named the most outstanding player at last weekend’s W.C.H.A. Final Five Tournament.“I’m hoping those young guys have a little crust to them, and that it’s not: ‘Hey! Wow!’ ” Hastings said. “Maybe we’ll do a better job as a coaching staff preparing our guys for that moment, combined with their experiences. Hopefully that will prepare us to have a better outcome.”A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Changing the Culture at Minnesota State.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.