AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyCLEVELAND — Dakari Johnson, one of the towering big men on Kentucky’s undefeated team, played with Derrick Gordon at St. Patrick High School in Elizabeth, N.J. Gordon, who started for Massachusetts this season, announced that we was gay last year.Asked Friday about a new Indiana law that allows business owners to refuse service to same-sex couples on the basis of religious objections, Johnson cited his former teammate.“I don’t feel it’s right that people at the store would not sell someone something because of the way that they are,” Johnson, a sophomore, said, adding, “If that’s how people are, I fully support that.”Although Johnson said Kentucky had not discussed the issue as a team — and though many players, particularly ones whose teams are still alive in the N.C.A.A. tournament, have primarily had basketball on their minds over the past few days — it has attained heightened urgency because the Final Four tips off next Saturday at Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis, a few blocks from the N.C.A.A.’s headquarters.Since Thursday, when Gov. Mike Pence signed the bill into law, reaction from the sports world, which frequently finds itself in Indianapolis for events big and small, continued to trickle in.Most affected leagues and teams have either declined to comment or expressed muted concern.But one influential agent went further, strongly suggesting that officials in professional and college sports reconsider their presence in the state in light of the law.“I urge the Indiana Pacers, the N.C.A.A. and the professional sports leagues to not only condemn this blatantly unconstitutional legislation, but to take forceful action against it by re-evaluating their short- and long-term plans in the state,” Arn Tellem, the sports agent, said in an email. Tellem’s clients include the basketball stars Russell Westbrook, Derrick Rose and Anthony Davis as well as Jason Collins, the first openly gay N.B.A. player.And several basketball players who could find themselves playing for a national championship next week expressed, like Johnson, broader tolerance of people who are gay.“Every man, every woman has a right to do what they want to do with their lives,” said V. J. Beachem, a sophomore forward on Notre Dame, which is in South Bend, Ind. The third-seeded Fighting Irish play No. 1 Kentucky here Saturday with a spot in the Final Four on the line. “It’s not really my place to judge them at all,” Beachem added. “Whatever they want to do, that’s up to them.” On Thursday, Mark Emmert, the president of the N.C.A.A., said in a statement that the association was “deeply committed to providing an inclusive environment for all our events.” He added, “We are especially concerned about how this legislation could affect our student-athletes and employees.”On Friday, Greg Aiello, an N.F.L. spokesman, said the league declined to comment. “We are in the process of studying the law and its implications,” he wrote in an email.The Big Ten said in a statement that its members, which include two universities in the state, Indiana and Purdue, “believe in promoting an inclusive environment in which athletic competition can operate free from discrimination.” It added that it would review the law’s impact at coming meetings with administrators, presidents and chancellors.Indy Eleven, of the North American Soccer League, said in a statement that it had “been fortunate to win the support of a strong and accepting fan base that includes supporters from across Indiana,” adding, “Together we will continue to embrace diversity through the beautiful game that brings us all together.”Tellem echoed that sentiment, saying the measure “codifies hatred under the smoke screen of freedom and jeopardizes all that has been recently accomplished.”“Sports embodies the principles of equality, dignity and mutual respect,” he said.The law, called the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, prevents the state from “substantially burdening a person’s exercise of religion.” Although it does not mention sexuality, the law is widely seen as allowing those who run private businesses to deny services of a kind — contraception, for instance — or to people, such as those in same-sex relationships, with which their religious beliefs conflict.In a statement, Pence, a Republican, said the law was “not about discrimination,” but rather would “ensure that religious liberty is fully protected.”The Indiana Pacers and the N.F.L. players union declined to comment. Major League Baseball, the N.B.A., the Atlantic Coast Conference, the Big East and the N.B.A. players union did not immediately respond to requests for comment.Cyd Ziegler, the founder of Outsports, a website that covers gay issues and sports, and who worked with Michael Sam before he came out in advance of last year’s N.F.L. draft, called on sports leagues to “steer clear” of Indiana, although he acknowledged that it was unrealistic to expect next week’s Final Four to be moved.He pointed to generational differences in attitudes toward gay people, saying, “If the governor and state legislature of Indiana were made up of college basketball players, this law would have never been passed or signed.”Advertisement