By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 27, 2015
A week after leading St. John’s back to the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament for the first time in four years, Coach Steve Lavin has agreed to part ways with the Red Storm, the university announced Friday.“Coach Lavin returned high expectations to our men’s basketball program and represented St. John’s in a positive way,” Chris Monasch, the university’s athletic director, said in a statement. “We appreciate his commitment to the program and to our student-athletes over the past five years.”The two sides had been discussing an extension of Lavin’s contract, which had one year remaining, according to a person with knowledge of the negotiations.Another person who asked not to be named because of the sensitivity of the discussions said that Conrado M. Gempesaw, the new president of St. John’s, seeking to make a splash, might already have had his sights set on a replacement: the former St. John’s star Chris Mullin, who is an adviser for the Sacramento Kings but has never coached.Advertisement“I enjoyed celebrating our student-athletes’ accomplishments in my first year at St. John’s,” Gempesaw said in a statement. “We look forward to building on this foundation as we strive to continue the tradition of success that the St. John’s basketball program has achieved for more than 100 years.”AdvertisementAfter coaching U.C.L.A. from 1996 to 2003 and then becoming a broadcaster at ESPN, Lavin, 50, arrived in Queens for the 2010-11 season with high expectations, leading the Red Storm to the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time since 2002 — albeit with many players recruited by the former coach, Norm Roberts. Lavin followed with what was called the No. 3 recruiting class in the nation for 2011-12, which energized the fan base.Articulate and at times introspective, Lavin brought a professorial approach to the St. John’s sideline, which was not surprising, considering that his father, Cap, was a longtime English teacher in the San Francisco area, where Steve was raised.Lavin proudly maintained a close relationship with his roots. He brought on Gene Keady — the former Purdue coach who gave Lavin his start as a graduate assistant in 1988 — as an adviser. Lavin’s top assistant coach, Rico Hines, was his first recruit at U.C.L.A. Lavin used to refer to those associates, seated on either side of him on the bench, as his “circle of life.”Some of the excitement from his inaugural season waned, though, after Lavin had surgery for prostate cancer in October 2011 and coached only four games that season. He opted to recover and travel the country recruiting as a “general manager,” leaving the coaching duties for 2011-12 to his assistant, Mike Dunlap. The Red Storm finished 13-19.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After Dunlap left to coach the Charlotte Bobcats, Lavin returned, and results improved incrementally, but again the Red Storm failed to reach the N.C.A.A. tournament, souring some of the expectations of the St. John’s fan base. The Red Storm finished 17-16 in 2012-13 and 20-13 in 2013-14, earning bids to the National Invitational Tournament in both years.With a highly motivated senior class, St. John’s made strides this year, but its depth was challenged after two players, Keith Thomas and Adonis De La Rosa, were declared academically ineligible as the season began. A stretch of brilliant play in February helped Lavin to his second straight 20-win season (21-12), but the Red Storm faded down the stretch, losing their last three games by an average of 22 points.Adding to the appearance of dysfunction, center Chris Obekpa was suspended for violating team rules on March 15, the day St. John’s was selected to its 28th N.C.A.A. tournament appearance. Without him, the Red Storm lost to San Diego State, 76-64, in the first round.“In life, change is inevitable, so I take the long view,” Lavin said in a statement. “I’m grateful for my time teaching at St. John’s University.”AdvertisementSt. John’s has not won an N.C.A.A. tournament game since 2000, but its tradition, its location in New York City, its membership in the Big East Conference and its connection to Madison Square Garden, where it plays home games during conference play, will make the job an attractive one.But the roster is in flux. D’Angelo Harrison, Jamal Branch, Phil Greene IV and Sir’Dominic Pointer — all seniors and four of the team’s top six scorers this year — are leaving, and the sophomore guard Rysheed Jordan may enter the N.B.A. draft.And moments after the announcement Friday, Scout.com reported that guard Brandon Sampson, Lavin’s top committed prospect for 2015-16, had reopened his recruitment.In addition to Mullin, Manhattan’s Steve Masiello, Rhode Island’s Dan Hurley and Iona’s Tim Cluess are expected to be top candidates for the opening.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: After Tournament Berth, St. John’s and Coach Agree to Part Ways.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.