By TOM PEDULLAMARCH 27, 2015
HALLANDALE BEACH, Fla. —  The horse trainer Todd Pletcher appears to be in an enviable position before the Kentucky Derby on May 2, given the caliber and depth of talent he is sending into key prep races during the next two weekends. But Pletcher’s 1-for-40 Derby history, and the stars he has developed who never got there, underscore how perilous the days ahead may be.“It is a demanding trail, and you have to have a lot of things go right in a business where not a lot of things usually go right,” said Pletcher, who has won seven Eclipse Awards as the outstanding trainer of the year in North America.Pletcher’s talent, combined with owners who are willing to spend large sums to realize their Derby dreams, has all but made it a rite of spring that his horses are prime contenders in races used to qualify for the Kentucky Derby based on a points system employed by Churchill Downs.Pletcher’s Itsaknockout, a $350,000 purchase, and Materiality, who went for $400,000, are both perfect through a combined five races and will oppose the favored Upstart in the $1 million Florida Derby on Saturday at Gulfstream Park. Itsaknockout needed a disqualification of Upstart to be elevated from second in the Fountain of Youth Stakes in his last effort. Stewards determined that Upstart had interfered with his rival in the stretch run.AdvertisementPletcher will also send Stanford, a $550,000 purchase as a 2-year-old, to the starting gate in the $750,000 Louisiana Derby on Saturday at the Fair Grounds in New Orleans.AdvertisementNext Saturday, it will be more of the same when the accomplished stablemates Daredevil and Far From Over face off in the $1 million Wood Memorial at Aqueduct Racetrack. Carpe Diem, a $1.6 million colt who was a runner-up to Texas Red in the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile, heads the field in the $1 million Blue Grass Stakes at Keeneland Race Course in Lexington, Ky.Pletcher, 47, missed with his first 24 Derby starters. He ended the drought when Super Saver relished a muddy track and won by two and a half lengths in 2010. Although he may enjoy the same abundance of riches this year as he did when he saddled a record-tying five starters in the Derby in 2007 and in 2013, years of adversity have made him wary of assessing his prospects.“Bumps in the road can knock you off quickly,” he said.Uncle Mo, a 2-year-old champion for Pletcher in 2010, was scratched the day before the Derby with what was ultimately diagnosed as cholangiohepatitis, a rare liver disease. Shanghai Bobby, his 2-year-old champion in 2012, never made the Triple Crown races because of a pelvic fracture. Constitution, after winning last year’s Florida Derby, his third victory in three starts, sustained a hairline fracture to his right front cannon bone that sidelined him until October. Pletcher called it “one of the biggest disappointments of my career.”Pletcher, the sport’s career leader with more than $282 million in lifetime earnings, argued that his Derby record was not as dismal as it might seem.“Clearly, we would love to win the Kentucky Derby,” he said. “We try to make sense of it, and we probably throw more in there at the end than we should have. We ran horses that probably needed a miracle to make it happen.”For owners who invest heavily, merely having a starter qualify for the 20-horse Derby field represents something of a victory. Pletcher does not discourage them from sharing that experience with family and friends, no matter how little he thinks of the horse’s chances.“Todd’s job is to win big races, and he’s done that with all his big owners, and to get them to the Derby,” said Mike Repole, a high-profile client who owned Uncle Mo and whose two Derby starters failed to contend. “It’s an event. It’s probably the one race where you lose and you don’t really feel bad. It’s like making the Final Four in the N.C.A.A. tournament. It’s a big accomplishment.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pletcher is a two-time winner of the third leg of the Triple Crown, the Belmont Stakes. He captured the arduous mile-and-a-half race with the filly Rags to Riches in 2007 and with Palace Malice in 2013. Jack Wolf, who leads the group that owns Itsaknockout on behalf of Starlight Racing, emphasized the need to look beyond Pletcher’s Derby woes.Advertisement“I couldn’t be more pleased with his performance, with our winning percentage, our earnings, our horses who have become stallion prospects,” Wolf said. “On a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being the best, I’d give him a 10.”Wolf thinks Pletcher’s annual pre-Derby display of horse power will almost inevitably lead to more success on the first Saturday in May.“Give him another 15 years and see how many he gets,” he said. “I’ll bet he gets his fair share.”The hard-driving Pletcher, meanwhile, keeps faith in a program that allows him to consistently select top horses at sales and bring out tremendous speed in them at a young age.“The pressure I feel is the pressure I put on myself,” he said. “I put pressure on myself every day to win races.”For all of the major races he has won, Pletcher knows the Derby is the one race that resonates with owners and fans above the rest.“We need to do better,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: With Keen Eye for Derby Talent, Trainer Begins Chase to Finish on Top.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.