
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
MARCH 29, 2015
CLEVELAND — The most consistent lament of Kentucky’s opponents this season has been, “Almost.”Saturday night, a tenacious Notre Dame team became the most recent Kentucky opponent to say, “Almost.”Kentucky opponents and their fans have learned over the course of a long season never to count chickens before they hatch; never to count Kentucky out of any game.Whatever the situation, whatever the adversity, they’d been there before — seen it and come back. I’d watched firsthand as fans in Gainesville, Fla., and Baton Rouge, La., went delirious with expectation after their team took a lead, only to be crushed when one star Kentucky player or another came through in the clutch.AdvertisementSaturday night, with the game tied, it was Andrew Harrison who drew a foul and made the free throws to catapult Kentucky into the Final Four for the second consecutive season.AdvertisementNotre Dame led by 56-53 in the second half and stretched the lead to 59-53 after a 3-point shot by Steve Vasturia with 6 minutes 14 seconds to left. Zach Auguste’s basket maintained the Notre Dame lead at 61-56 with 5:21 to play.Too much time, too much talent and way too much Karl-Anthony Towns.Towns, Kentucky’s 6-foot-11 freshman, finished with 25 points — 17 of them in the second half, when he was virtually unstoppable and refused to allow his team to lose.“If anyone was going to do it, I wanted it to be done by me,” an ecstatic Towns said as reporters surrounded him on the court. Pressed to go further, Towns said: “I’m too excited. I can’t believe what just happened. I can’t believe the journey I’ve been on so far with my brothers.”Truth be told, as much as I was pulling for an upset — the story always comes first — I wanted Kentucky to roll into Indianapolis next weekend at 38-0 with a gigantic target on its back. Every now and then, the tournament needs to back away from parity and host a team that is unpopular and seems unbeatable.That would be Kentucky on both counts.Whether it’s the program’s phenomenal success at stockpiling talent, the air of confidence that grows after every game or John Calipari’s philosophizing after every win, Kentucky is the target.Still to be truly ranked with the greatest teams of all time, Kentucky can do nothing less than win a national championship.Teams have had their chances against Kentucky. Notre Dame had its chances.With 34.7 seconds left and the game tied at 66, Notre Dame committed a shot-clock violation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kentucky took the ball and wound down the clock as it has done in countless situations like this. Finally, Andrew Harrison drove, drew the foul, made two free throws and sank Notre Dame.AdvertisementNext up, a Final Four rematch with a veteran Wisconsin team, and the story line will surely be Badger experience against Kentucky youth and talent.We’ll see.Kentucky opponents have gotten used to establishing different metrics of success against Kentucky.Depending on the opponent, you look for mini-victories: a lead at any point; a lead at the halfway mark; a lead under two minutes.So far, no one has figured out a way to beat this team. There have been hints throughout the season about how a team might defeat Kentucky.A friend recently reminded me of a tough game Kentucky played against Columbia in mid-December. The Lions led for nearly 30 minutes, building a lead with patient play, shooting more often that night with less than 10 seconds left on the shot clock. Columbia made a high percentage of 3-point shots, and rather than drive to the basket and challenge Kentucky’s front line, Columbia pulled up for midrange shots. When they did drive, Columbia guards kicked the ball back out for 3-point shots. They played practically a perfect game and lost in what proved to be the highlight of Columbia’s season.Kentucky has been the highlight of a lot of teams’ seasons. There was an overtime victory over Mississippi on Jan. 6 and a double-overtime victory at Texas A&M on Jan. 10.And of course, there was Saturday night’s game against Notre Dame.During the course of its 38-game unbeaten streak, Kentucky has seen it all and has repeatedly found ways to overcome.And after Kentucky’s 39-point victory over West Virginia, few gave Notre Dame more than a puncher’s chance of keeping the game close, much less winning.Next up is Wisconsin, a team that, with its size and experience, will be an imposing opponent for Kentucky on Saturday.AdvertisementPerhaps.But until further notice, what has been regarded as the Kentucky Invitational still is.Email: wcr@nytimes.comWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »