By RYAN GOLDBERGMARCH 27, 2015
As the 6-year-old American gelding Well Armed shot home to win the 2009 Dubai World Cup by a record 14 lengths, he forcefully closed the book on Nad Al Sheba racecourse. Well Armed became the eighth American winner, a run beginning with Cigar’s triumph in the inaugural Dubai Cup in 1996. “It was America in the first, it’s America in the final at Nad Al Sheba … from Cigar to Well Armed,” the race-caller Terry Spargo announced after that last race.Nad Al Sheba was then torn down and replaced by the upscale, modern Meydan Racecourse. It was the beginning of an era on several counts. Among them was that instead of Nad Al Sheba’s sand-based main track, Meydan had a synthetic surface from Tapeta Footings.The synthetic Tapeta tracks, which resemble turf, had been gaining prominence at major racecourses in California and Kentucky, as well as at some in Australia, Europe and South Africa. They were considered safer and were popular for their all-weather capacity. So the Maktoum family that runs Dubai racing decided to follow suit.But Meydan officials had not foreseen a consequence of installing the new surface: a drop in participation by horses from the United States, the only major racing country where the best races are run on dirt. Speed, the essence of American-bred horses, is less dominant on synthetic tracks than on dirt.AdvertisementThe only U.S.-based horse to win the World Cup on Meydan’s Tapeta was Animal Kingdom, in 2013. The strapping chestnut was a versatile anomaly, having won the Kentucky Derby on dirt and finishing second in the Breeders’ Cup Mile on turf. But because Australia’s Arrowfield Stud had purchased a majority share in Animal Kingdom before the Dubai race, the Australian national anthem, not the Star-Spangled Banner, was played during the podium presentation. So technically, no American horse has won the Dubai race since Well Armed.AdvertisementFrom 2010 to 2014, an average of seven horses traveled from the United States for World Cup night at Meydan, compared with an average of 14 in the final five years at Nad Al Sheba. No American horses entered the Dubai World Cup last year, and only three American horses came to run in turf races.“I think it was a big deal that the Americans’ participation petered off significantly over the years,” said Patrick Cummings, who runs the website Dubai Race Night.On the other hand, European horsemen who came to Dubai enjoyed the new course, a surface similar to turf, which their horses race on almost exclusively. With the right horse, trainers could choose between Meydan’s grass or synthetic course.Nonetheless, with American horses largely staying away, Meydan replaced the course before the current racing season with a sand track similar to Nad Al Sheba’s old course.It was the end of a short-lived era in Dubai. In the United States, the tide had already turned against synthetic surfaces. The Santa Anita and Del Mar racetracks in California had reverted to dirt, as did Keeneland in Kentucky. Despite the courses’ outstanding safety records — Santa Anita saw its race-day fatalities more than double after changing from the synthetic surface — several prominent American trainers disliked running on the surfaces, and particularly on those halfway around the world.Keeneland’s change was the biggest blow. Despite record field size, handle, and attendance, the small group of elite breeders who run Keeneland were not enjoying those benefits with expensive horses that were bred for dirt racing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That is the real reason,” said Bill Casner, Well Armed’s owner. “Horses stay sounder day in and day out by training over a synthetic surface that stays flat.”Two of those elite breeders and owners, Claiborne Farm and Adele Dilschneider, sent over Lea for the 2015 Dubai World Cup on Saturday, the culmination of the Dubai World Cup Carnival, which started Jan. 8. Along with California Chrome, the American horse of the year, a flight transported 14 American horses last week, the largest contingent since Meydan opened. The group would have been even larger had there not been a few high-profile, injury-related defections.AdvertisementSince the Carnival began in January, Meydan’s new track has staged 75 races, but despite the small sample size a few themes emerged. Average field size from the Tapeta surface to dirt declined from 12.29 to 10.85. European involvement generally declined, but there were more Scandinavian runners. Predictability shot up: Of those 75 races, 21 horses won more than once. Few horses came from well behind to win — a feature of synthetic tracks.This season was the least competitive in Meydan’s short history, as five trainers won 74 percent of the races. Last season, 30 trainers had winners at Meydan, compared to just 19 this season.Doug Watson, one of the five dominant trainers, was ecstatic to see the surface change. He said he had never been able to predict how his horses, which he trains on a sand course near Meydan, would handle the Tapeta. He had never finished lower than second in the trainer standings until the move to Meydan, where it happened in three seasons.“I’d go over there thinking, ‘These horses are flying at home, we have four chances tonight,”’ Watson said. “And you’d run eighth, seventh, sixth, and last. You’d be scratching your head, and you couldn’t figure out how they could run that bad.”At first, the Tapeta surface was gray, but after five years it had turned a deep, obsidian-like black. Watson believes the desert heat, which in the summer can reach 50 degrees Celsius, or 122 degrees Fahrenheit, played a major part in the decision to remove the synthetic surface.“I think it just broke that track down so much,” he said. “It cooked all summer. They put new fibers in every year, but I think it just wasn’t holding up with the heat. It does rain every so often, but there’s no use for an all-weather track here. It’s one weather: sunny and warm.”Watson said most local trainers welcomed the change, as did handicappers. And as Cummings, of the Dubai Race Night site, noted, “the all-weather messes with our longstanding mentality of assessing horse performance and assessing the quality of a race.”“We have all this history on dirt and all this history on grass,” he added. “I think those challenges made the decision a lot easier.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.