By RYAN GOLDBERGMARCH 27, 2015
On the night of the first Dubai World Cup, in 1996, Doug Watson, an assistant to a local trainer, was in charge of driving the horse ambulance. He had taken the job so he could have a free place to watch the race and its star attraction, Cigar. He watched from inside the veterinary’s room on a small television, where he shouted for Cigar as the American champion fought off Soul of the Matter to make history. Watson never had to take out the ambulance.Under the lights at Meydan Racecourse this year, Watson will watch the race on Saturday night with far more nervousness: Now one of the most successful trainers in Dubai, he will saddle Candy Boy in the $10 million World Cup.Like Watson, the 4-year-old bay Candy Boy is an American import in the emirate. The horse was purchased after a sixth-place finish in the Breeders’ Cup Classic in November. He has come up a little short against the best of his class, among them California Chrome, the Kentucky Derby winner and American horse of the year. Candy Boy finished behind California Chrome in the Classic and in the Santa Anita Derby, where he ran third, and in the Kentucky Derby, where he finished 13th.In addition to California Chrome, Watson will be racing on Saturday against another leading American horse, Lea, a product of Cigar’s trainer, Bill Mott.AdvertisementBecause he races exclusively in Dubai, Watson, 49, is not well known in American racing circles. That could change on Saturday. Besides Candy Boy, he has five horses entered in four other races: the Godolphin Mile, Dubai Golden Shaheen, Dubai Gold Cup and Dubai Turf.AdvertisementSince Watson set off on his own in 2003, his horses have won 394 races and earned about 55 million dirham, or approximately $15 million. He has won three training championships and finished outside the top two spots in only three seasons.Watson’s career has grown alongside the rise of Dubai racing and the cosmopolitan city of Abu Dhabi. He is the only American who trains in Dubai year-round and is one of five men who train locally for the ruling Maktoum family, which finances the sport in Dubai. About half of Watson’s 80 horses are owned by Sheikh Hamdan bin Rashid al-Maktoum, the deputy ruler of Dubai, and Watson also trains for several sons of Dubai’s ruler, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum. Russian businessmen have sent him horses, and Candy Boy is owned by the leader of Chechnya, Ramzan A. Kadyrov.Watson arrived in Dubai in 1993, planning to stay one year. He has never left.He lived in New Jersey until the age of 14, when the family moved to Ohio. He played baseball in high school and then at a nearby community college. He finished his education at a small liberal arts college in the Chicago suburb of Naperville before returning to Ohio.“I had a hard time finding a job and when I did it was horrible,” he said with a laugh. He sold lawn chemicals, a job he did not hold long.One of his Ohio friends was Austin Smith, whose family owned Woodburn Farm in Centerville. When he was in high school, Watson had joined Smith and his father, George, one of the leading breeders in Ohio, at the farm and racetrack. In college, Watson had scheduled his classes around betting on the races at an off-track betting shop.Out of college and unsure of his next step, Watson called George Smith and expressed a desire to work with horses. Smith told him, “If I had to do it all over, I’d do the same thing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So Watson traveled to Arlington Park near Chicago, where he walked from one barn to another asking for a job. Finally, a trainer offered him an unpaid position. Watson mucked stalls and, in time, started grooming horses to earn $100 per week. In the fall of 1988, the stable raced at the elegant Keeneland racecourse in Kentucky.“One of the guys I was working with said, ‘You’re just a gambler, you’re not going to make it,”’ Watson recalled. “Fortunately for me, I really fell in love with racing in Keeneland. I said to myself, ‘Maybe I do want to do this.”’AdvertisementIn the summer of 1993, Watson met an assistant to Satish Seemar, an India-born trainer in Dubai, and learned that he was looking for a barn foreman. At the time, Watson was working at two racetracks near Cincinnati, Turfway Park and River Downs. Eager for the adventure, he accepted the offer to go to Dubai instantly. Then he went to find the emirate on a map.After three years with Seemar, he joined Kiaran McLaughlin, a fellow American, who was one of the most successful trainers in Dubai.“I always thought I’d be coming back to the States to become an assistant or try to train myself,” Watson said. “I knew if I got to Kiaran I could progress more. If I had never gone to work for Kiaran, I would’ve never trained a horse.”McLaughlin spent half the year in Dubai and the other half in the United States training for the Maktoum family. When McLaughlin was away, Watson would prepare the horses for the coming season. In the summer of 2003, Watson told McLaughlin that he thought it was time for him to move on. A few months later, McLaughlin told Watson he should reconsider; he had decided to return to the United States permanently.“I was outspoken about letting Doug take over,” McLaughlin said. “The Maktoums didn’t make their decision based on my encouragement alone, but it didn’t hurt. He’s made me proud.”The transition from McLaughlin to his protégé was natural. Watson won his first training championship by his third season. He has now lived in Dubai for nearly half of his life and has no plans to go anywhere else.“I really like Dubai,” he said. “As long as they’ll have me, I’ll be staying here.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.