AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseLOS ANGELES — They played a game within the game Saturday at Staples Center. During breaks in the West Regional final between Wisconsin and Arizona, the giant video screens at midcourt showed two nearly identical pictures and asked, “What’s the difference?”On the floor, the top-seeded Badgers and the second-seeded Wildcats battled in a rematch of last year’s regional final, which Wisconsin pulled out in overtime.The difference this time for Arizona and its rabid fans was that their agony was not drawn out needlessly. The Badgers eliminated the Wildcats with 12 3-pointers in an 85-78 victory. It was the third time in four years that the Wildcats had been eliminated one victory short of the Final Four.Sean Miller, the Wildcats’ coach, walked off the floor after the exchange of handshakes with his arm draped over the shoulders, and his voice in the ear, of his lone senior starter, point guard T. J. McConnell. A disconsolate McConnell said he apologized to Miller “that I couldn’t get him to the Final Four.” McConnell, who bowed out with 14 points, 5 assists and 2 steals, had nothing to apologize for, Miller said. And neither, he added, did anyone associated with the Wildcats’ program, starting with himself.“I’m not going to apologize for being 34-4, and I’m not going to apologize for not making the Final Four, and neither should these guys,” he said afterward, nodding at the two players sharing the dais with him, McConnell and the sophomore forward Rondae Hollis-Jefferson, who had 17 points and 8 rebounds.Miller noted that McConnell and Hollis-Jefferson had graced Arizona teams that won 69 games and consecutive Pacific-12 Conference regular-season titles. If that is not good enough, Miller said defiantly, “I think you know what you can do.” The Wildcats had a 3-point lead at halftime, but it was erased by Wisconsin, which fired 3-pointers in the second half as if at a shooting range. The Badgers made 10 of 12 shots from beyond the arc in the half after missing four of their six 3-point attempts in the opening 20 minutes. Their 83.3 percent success rate from 3-point range in the second half was better than their field-goal percentage (78.9).“Their offensive execution and their ability to make shots in the second half, it was like a video game,” Miller said, adding: “No team has done what they did to us in the second half. That’s to their credit.”Hollis-Jefferson — who shares a hometown, Chester, Pa., with Wisconsin’s coach, Bo Ryan — was the best player at both ends of the floor for the Wildcats. He made a number of acrobatic shots in the paint and was enlisted to help guard the Badgers’ Frank Kaminsky.Hollis-Jefferson is athletic enough to dunk on the 7-foot-6 center Mamadou Ndiaye of California-Irvine, but getting around the 7-footer Kaminsky was a taller order.Kaminsky had 13 of his 29 points in the first half. His teammate Sam Dekker collected 20 of his 27 points in the second half on the strength of 5-for-6 shooting from 3-point range. Many of those shots he made with defenders in his face.“It was tough to be playing hard on defense and trying to get a stop to win the game; he made those shots,” Hollis-Jefferson said, referring to Dekker. “It was tough to watch them go in.”McConnell and Hollis-Jefferson were asked if the loss was harder to deal with because it came against the same team that had brought their season to an end last year.“I think it’s the same feeling, regardless,” McConnell said, adding, “We played as hard as we could, and they just made more plays than we did.”Hollis-Jefferson was asked if he wanted to comment. With his eyes cast downward, he shook his head.Advertisement