By COLIN A. STEPHENSONMARCH 29, 2015
The atmosphere was different on Saturday at Yankee Stadium for New York City F.C.’s second home game. The buzz outside the stadium before the club’s March 15 home opener was missing this time, and with the upper deck closed and the stadium in its reduced soccer configuration, the match against Sporting Kansas City hardly felt like a special event.Just before the start, the news filtered out that N.Y.C.F.C.’s star player, David Villa, was out the lineup because of a strained abductor muscle that has been bothering him all season. Without Villa, the home team fell to its first M.L.S. loss, 1-0, before an announced crowd of 27,545, a soccer sellout. N.Y.C.F.C. had been 1-0-2.N.Y.C.F.C. Coach Jason Kreis said the team knew after practice Friday, when Villa declared himself unfit, that it would not have him for the game.“Every single game, we’ve come down to a point where he was very questionable about whether he was going to be available for that match,” Kreis said. “But he’s managed through the pain and swelling, and we’ve been doing treatments with him, pretty much nonstop, to give him the best opportunity to play. Every time, every week, the prior three weeks, the day before the game, he said: ‘Yep. Feels good. I’m going to go.’ And yesterday was the first time he was like: ‘No. The pain is too unbearable this time.’ ”AdvertisementVilla watched his teammates lose without him, and so did Frank Lampard, the Englishman who was supposed to be the face of the club. Lampard, who was originally expected to be in New York for the start of the season, will not join the club until the summer because N.Y.C.F.C.’s parent club, Manchester City, is keeping him in England until the end of the Premier League season.AdvertisementWith the Premier League on a break to allow for international games, Lampard had flown to New York to visit his future teammates and perhaps do some house hunting. He watched the game from a suite in the stadium but was not made available to the news media, at his direction. A team spokesman said that Lampard did not want to take attention away from the players currently suiting up for the club.With Villa unavailable, Kreis inserted Javier Calle, a 23-year-old Colombian who is on loan from Independiente Medellín, into the starting lineup. Calle created little and was substituted in the 59th minute.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kreis was asked how much talent his team was missing with Villa and the Slovakian forward Adam Nemec, who is on international duty, out of the lineup.“I was really proud of the effort the guys put in, and I don’t know that there was a moment that it falls to somebody’s foot where I say, ‘Oh, if that was Villa, that’s a goal,’ ” Kreis said.The visitors took the lead in the 12th minute on a goal by defender Ike Opara, who rose above everyone to head home a long throw-in by defender Matt Besler from the right sideline. N.Y.C.F.C. appeared to have a golden opportunity to tie the score in the 68th minute, when the referee, Edvin Jurisevic, ruled that Sporting K.C. defender Seth Sinovic had handled the ball inside the box, and awarded N.Y.C.F.C. a penalty kick. But after a long conversation with his assistant, Jurisevic reversed his decision. Television replays showed that the reversal appeared to be correct; while Sinovic’s arm did come up, it did not seem to make contact with the ball.Kreis said he had spoken to the officials after the game, and he said he accepted that the decision was correct.“At the end of the day, I’m a proponent, always, of referees doing everything they can to try to get the call right,” he said. “If that means taking their time and discussing it with people in order to get it right, I have to be a proponent of that. Certainly, it went against me today — I would have loved for him to just make the call and ignore everybody else, the whole world, but my hope would be that that would come to our benefit sometime later in the season.”A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: City F.C. Falls to Sporting K.C.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.