By HOWARD MEGDALMARCH 28, 2015
As the goals piled up for Haji Wright, a rising star for the United States’ under-17 national team, the biggest question was whether he would continue his development in M.L.S. or leave for Europe.On Saturday, Wright committed to begin his professional career in the United States, but he will do so with the New York Cosmos of the North American Soccer League, according to people familiar with the deal.The Cosmos are expected to formally announce the signing of Wright — a former Los Angeles Galaxy academy player who turned 17 on Friday — as early as Monday. He is expected to train with the Cosmos’ first team immediately. The N.A.S.L. regular season opens on Saturday with four matches, including a visit by the Cosmos to the Fort Lauderdale Strikers.The signing of Wright is the latest signal from the Cosmos and the N.A.S.L., officially the second tier in the American soccer pyramid, that the league intends to compete with M.L.S. for players, fans and attention. M.L.S. had fired its own shot in that battle last week by announcing that it would accept an existing N.A.S.L. club, Minnesota United F.C., as an expansion team in 2018.AdvertisementWright’s stock has been on the rise for several years. He had an impressive showing at the 2013 Nike International Friendlies, a tournament featuring the United States, Portugal, England and Brazil. Wright scored five goals in three games, won the tournament’s golden boot as its top scorer and earned training time with the Galaxy’s first team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That success has continued. Wright scored 18 goals in 22 games for the under-17s in 2014, including the winning goal in the Aegean Cup final, a 2-1 victory for the United States over host Turkey. And in March, he helped the United States qualify for the U-17 World Cup this summer in Chile.AdvertisementWright trained with the German club Schalke 04 this year, and many fans who follow youth national teams expected him to become part of the trend of young Americans heading to Europe. At least five members of the U-17 team are under contract with European clubs, as is more than half the U-20 squad.The U-17 coach, the former United States international player Richie Williams, raved about Wright’s talents in an interview with the website Grantland last month, saying: “He’s tall. He’s athletic. He can run. He’s strong on the ball. He can use both feet. Technically, he’s very good. He has a great ability to run at players.”On the Cosmos, he will be tutored by two experienced international players: the striker Raúl, the career leading scorer for Real Madrid, and the former Spain midfielder Marcos Senna.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rising 17-Year-Old American Is Said to Join Cosmos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.