AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Cornerback Prince Amukamara, one of the Giants’ best defenders this season, will be sidelined for the next two to four weeks with a partly torn pectoral muscle, Coach Tom Coughlin said Thursday.Amukamara injured his chest during Sunday’s victory over the San Francisco 49ers. Jayron Hosley, a four-year veteran, will replace Amukamara. When Hosley filled in for starting cornerbacks in previous seasons, he struggled to cover the top receivers. But Hosley has fared much better this season when he filled in for the other starting cornerback, Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie. “We won a game when Hosley started at cornerback,” Coughlin said. “When he’s been out there, he’s done well.”Still, Amukamara had been playing at a level that was just below Pro Bowl consideration. His absence will hamper a secondary that was just starting to jell. One safety, Landon Collins, is a rookie, and the other, Brandon Meriweather, is in his first year with the team.Amukamara, who missed half of last season with a torn biceps muscle, said he was optimistic that his absence would not be nearly as long.“The tendon is still attached to the muscle, and I can do a lot with it already,” Amukamara said. “Last year, it was completely torn. I am encouraged.”In other injury news, wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr., who strained a hamstring Sunday, did not practice in team drills Thursday, but he was running on the sidelines and in uniform.Beckham missed the preseason and four regular-season games in 2014 with recurring hamstring problems. On Thursday, Beckham said this year’s hamstring strain was not comparable.“No comparison, not even the same part of the hamstring,” Beckham said. “It’s day to day on whether I’ll practice. We’ll see.”Rueben Randle, who also injured a hamstring Sunday, did practice. Middle linebacker Jon Beason, who sustained a concussion Sunday, and outside linebacker Devon Kennard, a defensive stalwart nursing a hamstring injury, did not practice. Wide receiver Victor Cruz, hobbled by a calf strain, was not at practice, and Coughlin said there was no update on when Cruz would begin working out.The multitude of injuries, in the wake of injury-filled seasons in 2013 and 2014, comes despite the fact that the Giants revamped their training methods and the players’ work schedule.“We’ve inserted major changes, we’ve changed pretty much everything that we do, but all these soft-tissue injuries are very, very troublesome,” Coughlin said. “Occurring in games, if you will. And then being so long and trying to get people back. I’m not going to get frustrated by it, but it’s very bothersome.”Asked if he was planning more adjustments to the Giants’ routine, Coughlin shook his head.“It’s not a time to change now,” he said. “For years we did it one way; we’re doing it this way; we’re going to stay with it. We’re going to see how it goes.”Advertisement