AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelHOUSTON — Its precise origin is ambiguous. Even the man who introduced the tradition at Duke does not remember when it began or who did it first.But at some point in the 1980-81 season, during a practice at Cameron Indoor Stadium, a first-year coach named Mike Krzyzewski demanded that his players do something they had never done before. “Never,” said Vince Taylor, who played on that team.Krzyzewski told Taylor and his teammates to slap the court. The gesture would demonstrate their commitment to defensive intensity. It would affirm their pledge to one another. It would prove their readiness. It has endured, passed from team to team, from point guard to point guard, like an heirloom. It is spontaneous, an in-the-moment response to a game’s ebb and flow. It is orchestrated, inculcated as a Duke custom. It is a symbol of tenacity and fodder for mockery, beloved by its fans and reviled by almost everyone else. When Krzyzewski did it, in a game this season against Toledo, he broke his watch. “I didn’t understand how big it was,” said Quinn Cook, a senior guard.His indoctrination came during his freshman year, after he made a 3-pointer against Presbyterian. Cook pounded the floor, and soon he was besieged by people telling him, “You’re bringing the Wojo slap back.” Wojo is Steve Wojciechowski, a feisty guard who was perhaps the most visible practitioner. After getting back on defense, he would clap his hands, crouch and smack the court as if trying to close an overstuffed suitcase.His successors, like Cook, tend to unleash it more sparingly to maximize its impact. By his count, it has happened three times this season. He implored his teammates to do it only once, at home against Georgia Tech. The freshmen Justise Winslow and Jahlil Okafor initiated it the other two times. “It’s a time in the game where we need a stop, things are not going right, and it’s a breaking point,” Cook said. Other teams have adopted the practice, but Duke, which can reach the Final Four with a win Sunday against Gonzaga, has evolved. This season, the Blue Devils have started slapping the court before leaving the huddle. “We’re not trying to do it just to show the world that now we’re going to play this great defense,” said the Duke assistant Nate James, who played for the Blue Devils from 1996 to 2001. “So we do it in the huddle. Before we leave, everybody touches the floor: Hey, when we’re out on defense, we have to make this play.”The raised court and sunken benches at NRG Stadium made the synchronized sideline slap a bit tricky in Duke’s South Regional semifinal win against Utah on Friday, but the team managed. How hard it slaps the floor depends on how angry Krzyzewski is. Nostrils flaring, he might smolder, “Look, we have to stop this team right now.” Or, he might say something like, “Everybody in; everybody slap the floor.” The freshman guard Grayson Allen said: “You can’t be weak when you do it. You’ve got to be strong. It’s that thing where you’re showing the other team, like, Look, we’re here, we’re ready to get a stop — and you’re and the teammates behind you — like, Let’s get a stop.”There is pressure, players said, on having to get that stop after being so demonstrative. But Taylor said it gave his team a brief psychological advantage. “If I’m a guy coming down the court, I’m like, What are these guys prepared for? What are they doing?” Taylor, now an assistant at Texas Tech, said by telephone. “You can’t miss it. For that one moment, they’re thinking about you and not what they’re supposed to be doing.” There have been exceptions. In the 2008 N.C.A.A. tournament, when West Virginia ousted Duke, Mountaineers guard Joe Mazzulla mocked the Blue Devils by slapping the floor. And two seasons ago, when Duke was ranked No. 1 in the nation, Miami did the same during an upset victory. “The fans took it hard, we took it hard,” said Cook, who slapped the floor after making a clutch 3-pointer in the rematch. He added, “We retaliated when we played them again.” Krzyzewski, in a January interview with GoDuke.com, said his earliest and most vivid memory came during the 1986 Atlantic Coast Conference title game against Georgia Tech. Leading by a point with less than 30 seconds left, Duke needed a defensive stop. Coming out of a timeout, four Blue Devils started slapping the floor — everyone but Billy King, who, standing about 15 feet behind them all, joined in a second or two later.Together, they coaxed Mark Price, Georgia Tech’s deadeye shooter, into passing the ball to Craig Neal, who missed the outside jump shot. Greg Paulus, who played point guard at Duke from 2005 to 2009, was born four months later. He could not explain when he learned about that game, but he remembered Tommy Amaker whacking the floor. Even now, when watching his former team play, Paulus said he could sense when a floor slap was coming.“You’re seeing body language and you’re seeing emotion, and you understand that it’s a time where you can really have one of the moments that change the game,” Paulus, now an assistant coach at Ohio State, said in a telephone interview. “You can feel it.”James said coaches discussed the court slap with players, but not at great length. “It’s not like, this is the origin of the slap — this is what it means to be a Duke basketball player,” James said. “It’s just what we do.” Advertisement