By BILL PENNINGTONMARCH 28, 2015
SYRACUSE —  Rick Pitino is 62 years old and has been a basketball coach since 1974. That is old enough to have had a handful of former players grow into established, veteran coaches. That is old enough to have a son as a coaching rival. It is old enough to have first sparred with the N.C.A.A. over allegations of recruiting violations 38 years ago — when the N.C.A.A.’s first president was in office.Pitino, already the only coach to have led three institutions to college basketball’s Final Four, needs a victory Sunday against Michigan State to lead his Louisville Cardinals back into that prized concluding quartet. It would be Pitino’s eighth Final Four team.Friday night, after he improved his record in the round of 16 to 12-1, Pitino was asked what had kept him coaching through the decades.He has fame, two national championships and other interests, most notably a foray into horse breeding. How long can he do this?Advertisement“Well, because of the horses, I have to work until I’m 80,” Pitino answered with the wry snicker of a man who has endured the risks of investing in equine performance.AdvertisementBut Pitino quickly grew serious.“I keep going because of this time of the year,” he said. “I love the passion of this time of year. They call it March Madness. I must be infected with it.“I watch every game. Everything is so exciting, and it has built and built every year. I don’t really know what I would do without it.”It would be hard for anyone to build a résumé that matches Pitino’s for glitter and big-time sparkle. He is a former Knicks coach, a former Boston Celtics coach, a former Kentucky coach. And yet he insists he is not done.“I see lots of coaches all the time, and they say to me, ‘Don’t leave,’ ” Pitino said. “They say: ‘Don’t think about leaving — especially you. You’ll miss it so much.’“And I keep listening to people when they say that.”Michigan State’s Tom Izzo, his coaching counterpart in Sunday’s game, understands what Pitino is feeling.“Rick has so much passion and energy for the game,” said Izzo, who is 60. “You watch him on the sideline, and he lives with every shot attempt and every pass of the ball. It’s like he’s out there with his team.”In fact, Izzo said he thought Pitino might one day leap onto the court to assist his notoriously aggressive backcourt pressing defense.Advertisement“If he gets out there tomorrow and helps with a trap, I’m going to protest,” Izzo joked. “Because he’s been close to that.”Izzo smiled.“Other than that, I love the way his teams play,” he said.Pitino still speaks with the accent he picked up as a child on Manhattan’s East Side, and in his subsequent time living in Queens and on Long Island. When he starts to tell stories, it is like a timeworn chronicle of New York basketball. Asked for pivotal career decisions, he recalls 1985, when, on the advice of several mentors, he initially turned down an offer to become head coach at Providence College. At the time, he was an assistant under Knicks Coach Hubie Brown.“Two weeks later, Hubie comes to me and says, ‘Kid, can you still get the Providence job?’ ” Pitino said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Knicks superstar Bernard King had just torn his anterior cruciate ligament.“Hubie told me, ‘We’re not going to win anymore,’ ” Pitino continued. “He said to me, ‘Take the Providence job, kid, and protect your family.’ I’ll never forget that. Sure enough, the Knicks won 23, 24 games.”Left unspoken was Pitino’s work as a coach in Providence, where he inherited a team with an 11-20 record. Two seasons later, Providence became Pitino’s first Final Four team.Pitino was 34 years old when that Providence team stole the college basketball world’s heart with an underdog performance so virtuosic it still holds up when compared to all the other N.C.A.A. underdog stories before or since.“The 1987 Providence team taught me to how to dream,” Pitino said. “It taught me that anything was possible.”Now Pitino is back with another team that did not expect to get this far, not after a regular season in which it suffered eight defeats, including an 11-point loss to Duke and a 12-point loss to Notre Dame — both at home.Guard Chris Jones, a Louisville starter and a double-digit scorer, was dismissed from the team in February and later pleaded not guilty to sexual-assault charges.Advertisement“Adversity makes you strong unless you start pointing fingers and don’t remain accountable for your mistakes,” Pitino said.The Cardinals were fortunate to escape an upset in their first N.C.A.A. tournament game, against California-Irvine on March 20. Two days later, they were well-prepared for an unorthodox Northern Iowa team. Friday night, they shocked North Carolina State with a late run.Pitino, who appears far younger than his age, was buoyant Saturday on the verge of yet another regional final game.“The first two rounds are nerve-racking,” he said with a smile. “The fun starts in the Sweet 16. You know you’re two games away from the Final Four. Then you get to the Elite Eight, and you know you’re one win from the Final Four.“If you get to the Final Four, you can dream about how you’re just two wins from the national championship.”Pitino’s eyes lit up. For a moment, he looked younger than ever, like the 22-year-old assistant at the University of Hawaii he once was.“I just love this time of year,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Louisville’s Veteran Coach Keeps Recalling How to Dream.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.