By TOM PEDULLAMARCH 28, 2015
HALLANDALE BEACH, Fla. — No horse that went unraced as a 2-year-old has won the Kentucky Derby since Apollo in 1882. Todd Pletcher, winner of a record seven Eclipse Awards as the leading trainer in North America, may have a horse capable of overcoming that daunting history.Materiality, facing graded stakes competition for the first time in only his third career race, made up for lost time when he outslugged Upstart in a memorable stretch run to take the $1 million Florida Derby by one and a half lengths on Saturday at Gulfstream Park.Horses that do not have any experience as 2-year-olds have fared so poorly that the subject was raised with Pletcher soon after post positions were drawn for the Grade I Florida Derby last Tuesday.“I think that streak has to be broken at some point,” he said.According to Pletcher, relatively minor matters kept Materiality, a $400,000 purchase on behalf of Alto Racing, from entering the starting gate at 2. Although the horse was always well-regarded, he did not make his debut until Jan. 11, when he splashed home by four and a quarter lengths on a sloppy track at Gulfstream. He added an impressive five-and-three-quarter-length score in a $60,000 stakes race here on March 6.AdvertisementThat left Pletcher to decide whether to bring Materiality back for the Florida Derby with only 22 days between starts, a shorter time for recovery than he usually allows. Given the way the 3-year-old was acting and training, he decided to take his shot.Advertisement“We felt like he was showing us all the right signs,” he said, “but you worry about these things until they get to the eighth pole.”It turned out that Materiality, who maintained an advantage for most of the way, had ample endurance, and John Velazquez, his hard-riding jockey, helped him bring everything he had to his duel with the rallying Upstart.“I think I’m more tired than the horse,” Velazquez said, noting that the colt, a son of Afleet Alex, tended to wait for other horses once he made the lead.Materiality ensured himself a place in the Kentucky Derby, as the prep race was worth 100 points under the system used by Churchill Downs to select a field that is limited to 20 horses.Pletcher said of Materiality’s rapid rise to prominence: “You don’t see it happen very often. It takes a special one to do it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pletcher also got a strong performance from Stanford, who weakened late and placed second to International Star in the $750,000 Louisiana Derby at the Fair Grounds in New Orleans. Stanford earned 40 points for his runner-up finish.International Star broke from farthest outside, in post nine, but the jockey Miguel Mena was able to work out a ground-saving trip along the rail before tipping outside to tackle Stanford.“The fact that we could run him down speaks well for his future,” Ken Ramsey, owner of International Star, said by telephone.AdvertisementInternational Star, trained by Mike Maker, previously established himself as a contender by sweeping the $200,000 Lecomte Stakes, a Grade III event, in January and the $400,000 Risen Star Stakes, a Grade II contest, in February. The Louisiana Derby also is listed as a Grade II race.Earlier Saturday, Mubtaahij, an intriguing international star, advanced to the Kentucky Derby when he romped by eight lengths in the $2 million U.A.E. Derby at Meydan Race Course in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Mubtaahij’s fourth victory in five starts since he switched from turf to dirt was all the more impressive because the jockey Christophe Soumillon throttled him down before the finish line. Soumillon said he wanted to be certain to save something for the first Saturday in May.The U.A.E. Derby was worth 100 points to the winner, ensuring a Derby berth. Mike de Kock, a trainer based in South Africa, left no doubt concerning their plans.“This has given us a chance to get to the Kentucky Derby,” he said, adding, “We’ll be there,” and promising to familiarize himself with the words to “My Old Kentucky Home,” the sentimental song played before the race.The U.A.E. Derby was part of the undercard that led to a two-and-three-quarter-length upset victory by Prince Bishop, an 8-year-old gelding, in the $10 million Dubai World Cup. California Chrome and Lea traveled from the United States to place second and third.California Chrome, the Derby and Preakness winner last year, started from farthest outside in post nine. He and the jockey Victor Espinoza lost ground throughout and were in tight quarters on both turns.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Despite Inexperience, Materiality Wins Florida Derby With Stretch Run.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.