By BILLY WITZ, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS and PETER KERASOTISMARCH 28, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  For anyone wondering what to make of C. C. Sabathia’s spring training performances — he surrendered two homers Saturday pitching against minor leaguers after giving up three to the Mets in his past start — he had a forceful message, using profane language to say that he did not care “what stock they put in” his spring results.Sabathia could have a point about the foolhardiness of projecting anything meaningful from exhibition games, but he is also 34 years old, with a diminished fastball, and he is returning from knee surgery that limited him to eight starts last season.Sabathia said he was pleased with his health and a fastball that has hovered at a little more than 90 miles per hour. He focused Saturday on developing his changeup, a pitch Sabathia has said he wants to use more effectively.He threw three consecutive changeups to Elias Diaz, who plays for Pittsburgh’s Class AAA affiliate, the last of which Diaz belted for a three-run homer. Earlier, Alen Hanson blasted a fastball on the first pitch of the game over a 30-foot-high fence in left-center field. Sabathia said he was just trying to throw a strike and was ambushed.Advertisement“I think there should be a rule against swinging at the first pitch of the game,” he said. “That’s what I was thinking, anyway.”AdvertisementWhile Sabathia was toiling at the minor league complex, the Yankees were losing to the Baltimore Orioles, 10-2. Alex Rodriguez and Stephen Drew homered for the Yankees, but Dellin Betances, whom the Yankees are considering naming their closer, continued his uncertain spring, giving up a hit, a walk and a run in one inning.The Yankees were spared considerably worse news after Didi Gregorius left the game with a sprained wrist, sustained as he dived for a ball. Although Gregorius’s wrist was in a brace afterward, X-rays were negative and he was expected to return to the lineup Wednesday.SHOWDOWN LOOMS As enticing as Saturday’s pitching matchup was, seeing Jacob deGrom of the Mets and Stephen Strasburg of the Nationals square off in Port St. Lucie, Fla., fell a tad short of the duel that is shaping up early in the regular season: Matt Harvey versus Strasburg.Barring the unforeseen, the third game of the regular season between the Mets and Washington will pit Harvey against Strasburg, two young right-handed power pitchers who have also undergone Tommy John surgery.Nationals Manager Matt Williams announced Saturday that Max Scherzer, the team’s marquee free-agent acquisition in the off-season, would get the opening day assignment, and he will be followed in the rotation by Jordan Zimmerman.The Mets will open with Bartolo Colon, followed by deGrom and then Harvey, who has been dazzling this spring with a 1.45 E.R.A. and 17 strikeouts in 182/3 innings.Saturday’s matchup between Strasburg and deGrom was won easily by the latter. DeGrom, last season’s reigning rookie of the year in the National League, pitched seven strong innings, surrendering one run on a homer by Bryce Harper in the sixth inning. Strasburg gave up four runs in four innings, thanks to Curtis Granderson’s three-run homer, which was followed by a David Wright homer in the third, and the Mets cruised to a 10-2 victory.AdvertisementGranderson pushed his spring batting average to .447 after hitting only .157 last spring. This spring, Granderson has been reunited with the hitting coach Kevin Long, who was fired by the Yankees before joining the Mets in the off-season.“We’ve swung the bats very good with all sort of different pitchers,” said Terry Collins, the Mets’ manager. “The guys have bought into it. I’m seeing drills on a daily basis that I didn’t see before.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets have sustained a number of injuries in spring training, but on Saturday, two players took tentative steps back toward regular action.Second baseman Daniel Murphy (hamstring) got five at-bats in a minor league intrasquad game. Collins said he would continue to have Murphy hit in minor league games but not play in the field. It is doubtful that Murphy will be ready for opening day.In perhaps a bit of better news for the Mets, the right-handed pitcher Vic Black (shoulder) threw 24 pitches off the mound and said his arm “felt great.” PETER KERASOTISRANGERS GET A RELIEVER Pitching-depleted Texas acquired the left-hander Sam Freeman from the St. Louis Cardinals for a player to be named or cash.Freeman, 27, was 2-0 with a 2.61 E.R.A. in a career-high 44 relief appearances last season with the Cardinals. He pitched once against the Dodgers in the playoffs.Rangers General Manager Jon Daniels said he expected Freeman, who is out of minor league options, to make the Rangers’ opening day roster.“He’s got a good arm, and the acquisition price was right,” Daniels said. “We’ll bring him in here and give him an opportunity.”AdvertisementThe Texas pitching staff has been troubled by health problems in spring training, including a season-ending injury to its ace, Yu Darvish. (AP)SPECIAL VISITOR Seattle Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson spent a day with the Rangers and drew on his Super Bowl experience to deliver a message to the team.Wilson hit a home run in batting practice at the Rangers’ spring training camp in Surprise, Ariz. He had played two seasons of minor league ball as an infielder with the Colorado Rockies before starring in the N.F.L.In his last game in the Phoenix area, Wilson threw an interception at the goal line in the final seconds against New England, costing the Seahawks a second straight Super Bowl victory.Wilson said his message to the Rangers focused on what it takes to get back to that same opportunity. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sabathia Isn’t Sweating His Spring.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.