AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerThe Toronto Blue Jays reached the 100-game mark this season with a 50-50 record. At that point, it seemed, they were the same as always. It was the eighth time in nine seasons that the Blue Jays had arrived at that juncture with 49, 50 or 51 wins — encouraging enough to tease, but flawed enough to be doomed.What happened next transformed the landscape of the American League. Alex Anthopoulos, the Blue Jays’ imaginative and aggressive general manager, traded for shortstop Troy Tulowitzki and reliever LaTroy Hawkins. Then he dealt for an ace, David Price. To other players on the trade market, Toronto was suddenly the place to be.“I was sitting there like, ‘Oh my God, dude, they’re about to take over,’ ” said left fielder Ben Revere, who went to the Blue Jays in a trade from Philadelphia on July 31. “And finally I got that call: ‘You’ve been traded to Toronto, too.’ I’m like: ‘Thank you! Praise the Lord!’ It’s fun. I got over here, and they told me: ‘Just play your game, get on base, steal bases, and we’ll get you in.’ ”Revere hit .319 for the Blue Jays and scored 35 of their 891 runs, the runaway high in the major leagues. With an offense powered by Josh Donaldson, Jose Bautista and Edwin Encarnacion, the Blue Jays take their muscle to Kansas City for an A.L. Championship Series with the Royals, who hope to defend their league title.Both teams overcame deficits to win their five-game division series, the Blue Jays bashing their way past the Texas Rangers in a raucous finale at Rogers Centre, and the Royals surviving the wild-card Houston Astros behind Johnny Cueto and Wade Davis at Kauffman Stadium.Cueto, like Price, is probably a rental ace, with the free-agent market beckoning after the season. After struggling at times for the Royals down the stretch, Cueto re-established his elite status with eight overpowering innings against Houston. For the clincher, Toronto chose Marcus Stroman over Price, who has lost his last six playoff starts.Price, a leading candidate for the A.L. Cy Young Award, started twice against the Royals in May, when he pitched for Detroit. The first start was a complete-game, five-hit victory. In the second start, he had a no-decision and allowed a career-high 13 hits.The Royals like to swing the bat — they ranked second in the majors in hits and second to last in walks. Their contact-speed-defense-bullpen recipe carried them to Game 7 of the World Series last fall, but they lost to the San Francisco Giants.Jeremy Affeldt and Madison Bumgarner stifled the Royals that night, holding them scoreless on just three singles over the final seven and a third innings. It was a wrenching end for the Royals, and the bitter feeling helped fuel their strong follow-up season.“That’s something you really don’t ever get over,” first baseman Eric Hosmer said early this season. “It hurt. I think that’s what made us have such a good start this year is realizing how special a stage it was to play on, in October, before the whole world, to do what we did. I think it just motivated all of us to do everything we can to get back to playing in the playoffs.”They made it, with the best record in their league and a hard-fought victory in the first round. As they try to suppress the majors’ best offense, there is precedent: Last October, the Royals ousted the top-scoring team in the majors (the Los Angeles Angels) on their way to the pennant. Do it again, and they will have their chance for redemption.BOMBS AWAY The Blue Jays led the majors in home runs, with 232, and that is undeniably a good thing. Yet in the last 30 years, only one team (the 2009 Yankees) has led the majors in homers and also won the World Series.CONTACT INFORMATION The Royals struck out 973 times this season, by far the fewest in baseball. No other team was within 130 strikeouts of the Royals. Eric Hosmer had the most strikeouts on the roster, with 108. Eighty-three major leaguers had more.TOAST OF THE TOWN How much does Kansas City love its Royals? Not only did the team break a 26-year-old attendance record (2,708,549), it also averaged a 12.3 rating on Fox Sports Kansas City. That was the highest rating for a major league team on a regional sports network since 2002, and an 84 percent increase in viewership from last season.CENTER OF ATTENTION According to FanGraphs’ Ultimate Zone Rating, Kevin Kiermaier of the Tampa Bay Rays was by far the best center fielder in the majors this season. But the second- and third-best A.L. center fielders are on display in this series: the Royals’ Lorenzo Cain and the Blue Jays’ Kevin Pillar. Both cover lots of ground and overcame long odds: Cain did not play baseball until he was a sophomore in high school, and Pillar was not drafted until the 32nd round in 2011.TALL ORDER The Royals’ Chris Young, the 6-foot-10 former Princeton basketball center, averages only 86.6 miles an hour with his fastball. But his size and deception make him notoriously tough to hit. Of all major leaguers with at least 120 innings this season, only Clayton Kershaw, Zack Greinke and Jake Arrieta allowed fewer hits per nine innings than Young’s 6.64. Historically, Young has handled two Blue Jays sluggers well: Jose Bautista is 1 for 16 off him, and Josh Donaldson is 3 for 16, neither with a home run.MEET THE (FORMER) METS Both managers began their baseball careers as catchers drafted by the Mets. The Royals’ Ned Yost was taken in the first round (secondary phase) in 1974, and the Blue Jays’ John Gibbons was taken in an eventful 1980 first round in which the Mets also picked the future slugger Darryl Strawberry and the future Oakland general manager Billy Beane. Yost never played for the Mets, and Gibbons played only 18 games.BO KNOWS A.L.C.S. How long has it been since the Blue Jays made it this far? In the last A.L.C.S. game in Toronto, in 1993, Bo Jackson was in the starting lineup as designated hitter for the Chicago White Sox. Jackson, who rose to baseball stardom with the Royals, was playing with an artificial hip and went 0 for 10 in his only postseason series.A SEA OF BLUE When the Royals and the Blue Jays met in the 1985 A.L.C.S., it was the last time that every game of a postseason series featured that staple of the 1970s and ’80s, the powder blue uniform. The Royals still have a powder blue alternate jersey, but they tend to stick with white at home and gray on the road.COMMON ALUMNI Jorge Orta, the pinch-hitter wrongly called safe in the Royals’ Game 6 rally in the 1985 World Series, came to Kansas City in a trade from Toronto for Willie Mays Aikens. Buck Martinez played in the Royals’ first A.L.C.S., in 1976, and later caught for and managed the Blue Jays. John Mayberry, a Royals mainstay in the 1970s, was the first Blue Jay to hit 30 homers in a season, in 1980. David Cone won a World Series with Toronto in 1992 and a Cy Young Award with the Royals two years later. The Royals’ Alex Rios played six years for Toronto, and the Blue Jays’ Jose Bautista made a Kansas City cameo in June 2004. He was 5 for 25 with no homers and mostly played third base.POSTSEASON HISTORY They have met once, in that 1985 A.L.C.S., and it was epic. Seeking their first pennant, the Blue Jays won the first two games at home. Back in Kansas City for Game 3, George Brett had the game of his life, going 4 for 4 with two home runs in a 6-5 victory. Toronto won Game 4, but two young Royals starters, Danny Jackson and Mark Gubicza, won the next two games to even the series. In Game 7 (played precisely 30 years before Game 1 of this series), the Royals lost their ace, Bret Saberhagen, to a bruised thumb after three innings. But Charlie Leibrandt excelled in relief, and Jim Sundberg chased Dave Stieb in the sixth with a three-run triple off the top of the right-field wall at Exhibition Stadium. The Royals won, 6-2, and went on to win their only title.Advertisement