AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Scott CacciolaMEMPHIS — What is most remarkable about the Golden State Warriors’ season has nothing to do with their N.B.A.-best record or their league-leading shooting percentages or the ease with which they regularly dismantle opposing teams of highly paid professionals.Instead, it is the simple fact that Coach Steve Kerr is glad that two weeks remain in the regular season.“I still think we can get better,” he said. “I really do.”Consider this a warning to the rest of the league, which has spent the past five months rummaging for vulnerabilities deep within this team of 3-point-shooting cyborgs. Perhaps the Warriors can be exposed inside. Perhaps they are too reliant on scoring from the perimeter. Perhaps Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson will be abducted by aliens, which, in fairness, might be the best chance opponents have of slowing the Warriors’ march to the top seed in the Western Conference playoffs.On Friday night, after another dazzling victory in a season full of them, Kerr stood outside the visitors’ locker room at FedEx Forum and nitpicked his team’s flaws. The Warriors, he said, had committed too many turnovers (six) in the second quarter. Plus, their offense had stalled early in the fourth. So there was work to be done, never mind that the Warriors had sailed to a 23-point victory over the Grizzlies, who have the Western Conference’s second-best record.“So I’m actually happy to have a couple more weeks to keep honing our game and just let this thing continue to grow,” said Kerr, whose team was 59-13 ahead of its game Saturday night against the Milwaukee Bucks. “These guys really have a great feel for one another and what we’re trying to accomplish.”The standard for excellence with this team has transcended its winning percentage, which is inevitable when winning becomes so routine. The Warriors have established their own metrics for progress, and Kerr mentioned several of them: improving their ball movement, continuing to play aggressive defense, limiting turnovers.“When we reach that standard,” he said, “we’re really tough to beat.”No kidding. It often sounds as if the Warriors are trying to assemble the perfect basketball game, free of missed shots and turnovers and defensive miscues — basketball as performance art.Their game against the Grizzlies was billed around town as a possible conference finals preview and as something of a pre-playoff litmus test. The Grizzlies are stout inside — potential kryptonite for the Warriors, who had lost to Grizzlies in their only previous meeting this season. But the Warriors neutralized Zach Randolph and Marc Gasol with a rotating cast of post defenders — Andrew Bogut and Festus Ezeli, among them.“I think we’ve figured some things out as a staff,” Kerr said, “kind of who we want to play, with whom, and what rotations are the best rotations.”So while the Grizzlies shot 52.9 percent from the field in the first quarter and sent the Warriors’ Draymond Green to the bench with two early fouls, they somehow entered the second trailing by 7. In other words, the conventional basketball math does not apply to the Warriors, who are too explosive, too dynamic.The Grizzlies also got the full Curry treatment: 38 points, 10 assists and 8 3-pointers. But it was a layup that captured his genius. Midway through the third quarter, Curry leaked out in the open court after a turnover. Curry said he could sense the Grizzlies’ Jeff Green closing on him.“I was thinking about it for about 10 steps from halfcourt,” Curry said. “There was a lot going through my mind.”What he dreamed up was an up-and-under layup that he flicked high off the glass with his right hand. He did a little dance on his way back up the court.“I think we executed offensively, for the majority of the game, the best we have in a while,” he said. “The ball was moving all around. Guys were making plays. It was just fun to play.”Afterward, Kerr dismissed the stale notion that the Warriors might struggle in the playoffs as a perimeter-oriented team. He noted that the San Antonio Spurs attempted their share of 3-pointers in winning the title last season. So did previous champions like the Miami Heat and the Dallas Mavericks.“The game has changed,” Kerr said. “People are winning championships with defense and long-range shooting. I’m very comfortable with our style. I don’t know why Steph and Klay wouldn’t take any 3s once the playoffs start. We’re going to do what we do.”Kerr said he might — just might — consider finding opportunities to rest his top players in the final days of the regular season, but it did not sound like much of a priority. The Warriors look fresh for a reason. Entering Saturday, nobody on the team was averaging more than 32.9 minutes a game, a nod to their depth and their many blowouts.As an aside, Draymond Green said that Curry’s limited playing time ought to enhance his candidacy for the league’s Most Valuable Player Award. Curry often spends fourth quarters on the bench.“Because we’ve beaten a lot of teams by a lot of points,” Green said.Last week, the Warriors clinched the franchise’s first division title since 1976. But if they already look primed for the playoffs, they are still chasing the impossible: even better basketball.Advertisement