By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 28, 2015
The Anaheim Ducks had no idea their latest win put them into the Stanley Cup playoffs. They were just happy they had turned things around on their long Eastern trip.Frederik Andersen made 29 saves, and the N.H.L.-leading Ducks scored two goals in the second period to beat the struggling Islanders, 3-2, at Nassau Coliseum on Saturday.“Oh, we clinched? I’m serious,” Ducks Coach Bruce Boudreau said. “I haven’t mentioned anything to the players. We just want to keep going and progressing. If we do that, all the other stuff just falls into place.”Rickard Rakell gave the Ducks a 1-0 lead in the first, and Kyle Palmieri and Andrew Cogliano stretched the advantage in the second.AdvertisementThe Ducks, who lead the league with 103 points, started their trip — which concludes Sunday against the Devils — with losses against the Rangers and Columbus before winning in overtime in Boston on Thursday.AdvertisementLubomir Visnovsky scored a first-period goal for the Islanders, Casey Cizikas cut the deficit to 3-2 with 5 minutes 36 seconds left, and Michal Neuvirth stopped 21 shots but fell to 1-5 since being acquired from Buffalo.The frustrated crowd at Nassau Coliseum booed when John Tavares turned over the puck in the neutral zone. Tavares also flubbed a chance at a tap-in earlier in the frame.“We’re not playing as complete as we did before,” Tavares said. “We have to simplify. It is hard to say why we aren’t getting results. It’s frustrating.”HURRICANES 3, DEVILS 1 Eric Staal and Justin Faulk each scored in the third period as Carolina beat the visiting Devils.Patrik Elias gave the Devils a 1-0 lead midway through the first period, but the Hurricanes tied it late in the second. Chris Terry scored on a rising shot from inside the right circle that caught the upper far corner. It came with 1:27 left in the period, and it was Terry’s ninth goal of the season.Cam Ward finished with 21 saves for Carolina, while the Devils backup Keith Kincaid made 29 saves.CANADIENS 3, PANTHERS 2  Max Pacioretty scored in overtime as host Montreal clinched a playoff berth.Lars Eller and Alex Galchenyuk scored in regulation for the Canadiens, and Carey Price stopped 21 shots for his 41st win of the season.AdvertisementAleksander Barkov had two goals for the Panthers, while Roberto Luongo made 21 saves in defeat.PENGUINS 3, COYOTES 2  Daniel Winnik, Steve Downie and Sidney Crosby scored in a 4:08 stretch of the third period to rally host Pittsburgh.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Crosby’s 25th goal stood as the winner, and he also had two assists, increasing his league-leading scoring total to 78 points.The Penguins moved into a tie with the Islanders for second place in the crowded Metropolitan Division.PREDATORS 4, CAPITALS 3 Filip Forsberg scored during a three-goal first period and had two assists as visiting Nashville became the first Western Conference team to clinch a playoff berth.Mattias Ekholm, Mike Fisher and Forsberg, scored during a five-minute span midway through the first period for a 3-0 lead. Mike Ribeiro added a goal with an assist by Forsberg after Washington’s Troy Brouwer scored twice earlier in the second period.SHARKS 3, FLYERS 2 Matt Irwin and Joe Pavelski scored in regulation, and Brent Burns got the winning goal in the shootout to lead San Jose to a victory in Philadelphia.Michael Raffl and Claude Giroux scored, and Jakub Voracek had two assists for the Flyers, who fell to 3-10 in shootouts this seasonRED WINGS 4, LIGHTNING 0  Petr Mrazek made 23 saves for his fourth career shutout, and host Detroit beat Tampa Bay. The Lightning were blanked for the first time all season.MAPLE LEAFS 4, SENATORS 3  Eric Brewer scored 3:17 into overtime to lift host Toronto.Tyler Bozak had a hat trick in the third period and added an assist on Brewer’s winning goal as the Maple Leafs rallied from two down twice in the third to end a seven-game skid.AdvertisementBLUE JACKETS 4, BLUES 2 Boone Jenner scored the tiebreaking goal late in the second period, and Cam Atkinson had an empty-netter late in the third to lead Columbus past St. Louis for the Blue Jackets’ eighth straight road win.Sergei Bobrovsky had 29 saves for Columbus.WILD 4, KINGS 1 Nino Niederreiter and Mikko Koivu each scored two goals, and Devan Dubnyk had 31 saves in his 35th straight start with Minnesota to lead the host Wild past Los Angeles.AVALANCHE 5, SABRES 3 Matt Duchene had a goal and two assists, Jarome Iginla had three assists and host Colorado kept its slim playoff hopes alive with a win over Buffalo.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Ducks Edge Islanders to Clinch Playoff Spot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.