AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter MayBOSTON — The image is a lasting one for David Quinn. He recalls a somewhat disheveled and unusually conversant Phil Kessel making a surprising confession during the 2007 world hockey championships.“I wish that I had spent another year in college,” Kessel told Quinn, then an assistant for the United States team and now the coach at Boston University. Kessel, the Toronto Maple Leafs star, turned pro after his freshman year at Minnesota after being chosen fifth in the 2006 N.H.L. draft. The No. 3 pick in that draft, the Chicago Blackhawks star Jonathan Toews, returned for a second season at North Dakota. James van Riemsdyk, Kessel’s Toronto teammate, played two years at New Hampshire after being the No. 2 pick in the 2007 draft. Quinn hopes that Kessel, Toews and van Riemsdyk serve as lessons for one of the most heralded American prospects ever — the B.U. freshman forward Jack Eichel, who leads Division I in points and is widely expected to be no worse than the No. 2 over all pick in the 2015 N.H.L. draft. Quinn hopes Eichel reaches out to them when the inevitable decision arrives — whether to turn pro or return to college for another season.The topic is unavoidable. Eichel was named Hockey East’s rookie and player of the year. He was the most valuable player at last weekend’s Hockey East Championships, won by the Terriers. He is a nominee for the Hobey Baker Award, college hockey’s Heisman Trophy, the first freshman nominee in 12 years. Maine’s Paul Kariya (1993) was the only freshman to win it.Eichel assisted on the winning goal in overtime Friday as the Terriers opened the N.C.A.A. tournament with a 3-2 victory over Yale. Boston University then beat Minnesota-Duluth, 3-2, on Saturday for a berth in the Frozen Four.“I have a horse in this race,” Quinn said, referring to his oft-stated desire that Eichel spend at least one more year at B.U. “And it’s not just a horse. It’s a thoroughbred. It’s Secretariat.”Colin Wilson, who was selected No. 7 overall by Nashville in the 2008 N.H.L. draft, returned for another year at B.U. and led the Terriers to the N.C.A.A. title in 2009. He then signed with the Predators.“Best decision I ever made,” said Wilson, who has spoken to Eichel about the value of another year in college. “That second year at B.U. for me really changed my life. I found my game, I grew as a person and we won a championship.”Wilson added: “Looking back, my only regret is that I didn’t stay another year. Then again, I wasn’t Jack Eichel.”Eichel’s stock response to the impending decision is that he is focusing on the B.U. hockey season. He acknowledged that all the attention was “exciting, but it’s a little bit down the road.” Thanks to a decorated amateur career, Eichel arrived at B.U. amid great fanfare. As a 16-year-old, he led the United States Under-18 team in scoring. As a 17-year-old, he led the United States to the gold medal in the Under-18 world championships.“There is nobody in the history of college hockey who has been under the spotlight like him,” Quinn said of Eichel. “And no one has dealt with this kind of media attention in college hockey, ever.”If Eichel had any doubts as to his growing celebrity, they were quashed in late February.If Eichel had any doubts about his growing celebrity, they were quashed in late February. Celebrating the Terriers’ victory in the Beanpot tournament, he was caught on video saying, “Buffalo, I’m coming for ya” while he appeared to chug a beer.The Buffalo Sabres, who have the worst record in the N.H.L., could be in position to draft Eichel or the other top prospect, Connor McDavid.Quinn played down the incident, calling it “18-year-old high jinks” and adding: “He didn’t insult anybody. He didn’t hurt anybody. But he was rattled.”Eichel said it was one more life lesson in a year that has been full of them.“Obviously, a lot of people saw it,” he said, referring to the seven-second clip, which is on YouTube. “It’s probably smart to stay away from cameras and video things. That was a small lesson. I’ve learned a lot this year about the people you can trust.”Those same people will weigh in on the decision-making process after the N.H.L. draft in June. Quinn, tongue firmly planted in cheek, said, “I really think he could benefit from four years at B.U.” Advertisement