AdvertisementSupported byBy Jerry GarrettThe IndyCar season finally arrives this weekend with a street race in St. Petersburg, Fla., featuring a familiar-looking cast of drivers but an array of perhaps less familiar Chevrolet- and Honda-powered machines.The race, the Grand Prix of St. Petersburg, set for Sunday, was originally the second event of a 16-race calendar, which was to begin March 8 in Brazil. But that race’s organizers backed out in January despite reports of solid advance ticket sales and sponsor participation.The cancellation curtailed the 2015 campaign to barely five months in duration, the same length as last year’s 18-race slate. But it also afforded the teams and drivers, who have not raced since August, a few extra weeks to tweak new add-on aerodynamic kits designed to better visually differentiate the Chevys from the Hondas.In addition to possibly helping fans tell the cars apart, the kits will allow Chevrolet and Honda to adjust their entries for better performance. The hope is that wheel-to-wheel battles, particularly at IndyCar’s street-course and road-race venues, will be restored to levels not seen since the series tried a cost-saving move to a shared chassis several years ago.The shared chassis restricted individual tuning and development by teams and came to be seen as limiting technical cache for the high-speed series.The differences between this year’s versions of the cars and last year’s are startling.“The cars are insanely fast and stick like glue to the track,” said Will Power, the defending series champion, who drives a Chevy for Team Penske and who on Saturday took the pole position for Sunday’s race. Penske cars swept the top four spots in qualifying. “The G-forces are going to be huge as well,” Power added. “It’s going to make fast corners significantly faster while the aero kits will reduce drag.”The addition of the new aero kits, developed independently by Chevrolet and Honda, is expected to significantly improve both performance and safety. At oval tracks like Indianapolis and Texas, the increase in speed could be dramatic.“By Indianapolis in May, we should be able to even do more with the kits,” Power said. “I expect we’ll be well over 233 in practice.”In preseason testing, the Chevrolets claimed a slight edge over the Hondas in speed. Michael Andretti, owner of a four-car Honda-powered team, said, “I still think we are still far away from understanding the whole package because there is so much adjustability.” He added, “I don’t think anybody is going to have the right combination in the first race.”That could lead to an unpredictable race Sunday.“That’s what is cool about IndyCar,” Power said. “You can be 22nd one week, then you can be winning a race the next week. I think that keeps the fans interested. That’s how a series should be. It will be a tough year. You got to earn your meal ticket.”While there is more variability in the cars, there is stability among the drivers. Power said he believed the series was gaining strength from developing and retaining a regular cast of characters. “What has been very cool has been IndyCar’s continuity of drivers from year to year,” he said. “Now the same people are turning back up, and all these young guys are seriously quick.”In seasons past, up-and-coming stars like Tony Stewart, Danica Patrick and Sam Hornish Jr. would burst upon the scene, make a name for themselves and then move on to Nascar, Formula One or some other destination. Now, fewer drivers leave; others who did leave, like Simona de Silvestro and the four-time IndyCar champion Sebastien Bourdais, are returning. “The whole series is so competitive,” Power said. “You just see that in the last two years — how many different race winners there were, how many different pole-sitters there were. There’s nothing worse in a series where the same people win over and over and over.”Last season, 11 drivers won races, and the addition of aero kits should help further shuffle the deck and muddy the picture for prognosticators. “It sort of goes back to the old days, back when you had a new car every year,” said Andretti, who retired as a driver in 2007. “The way you go about it is to almost forget what you did last year.”Advertisement