AdvertisementSupported byOn College BasketballBy Marc TracyAs Harvard and Yale played for the Ivy League men’s basketball title earlier this month at the Palestra in Philadelphia, the writer John McPhee, 84, was a block away at Franklin Field. As a faculty fellow of Princeton’s men’s lacrosse team — “which means,” he said, “I stand around looking interested” — he watched the Tigers beat the Penn Quakers, 17-11.Fifty years earlier, McPhee had good reason to be at the Palestra for a basketball game, and for looking more than simply interested. He was covering an N.C.A.A. tournament game between Princeton and Penn State. Princeton won and then, at College Park, Md., defeated North Carolina State (whose zone press had just handled Duke) and Providence to advance to the Final Four in Portland, Ore. There, it lost to Michigan and, in the consolation game, devastated Wichita State, 118-82.That Princeton squad was perhaps the best basketball team ever to emerge from the Ivy League, a conference that, McPhee wrote, “is frequently accused of several kinds of snobbery, but never in athletics.” The only other Ivy team to make the Final Four was Penn, in 1979.Specifically, McPhee was at the Palestra that day in March 1965 to chronicle the exploits of Princeton’s best player. Two months earlier, a profile McPhee wrote of that senior forward appeared in The New Yorker, his first long article in a magazine for which he has since become a regular contributor. He was doing additional reporting for his first book, published later that year and given the same title as the magazine profile: “A Sense of Where You Are.”McPhee had wanted to write about the player since 1962, when McPhee’s father, a doctor for Princeton’s sports teams, told his son, at the time living in New York, to come see the standout on Princeton’s freshman squad. “If you want to try out with some piece, don’t give us that basketball player that you mentioned,” McPhee recalled a New Yorker editor telling him.McPhee wrote it anyway, and submitted the article on spec. The magazine’s longtime editor, William Shawn, personally handled the piece, even giving it its indelible title. It ran in the Jan. 23 issue. On its first page appeared a lightly drawn sketch of the player and his name: William Warren Bradley.Not everyone at The New Yorker initially realized what they had on their hands. Neither did the book’s subject.“I didn’t have the understanding of what an outstanding piece of work it was,” Bradley, 71, said recently in a phone interview.In a separate interview, McPhee said: “When editors were reading this piece, they were no more aware of him as the future Bill Bradley than he was.”That is what provides much of the book’s magic. As written, in McPhee’s simple and elegant style, Bradley is almost impossible to believe. At 21, he is wise, stentorian without being aloof, well-liked — voted Most Popular and Most Likely to Succeed by his classmates.He is also a great basketball player. He sets records (most points and field goals in an N.C.A.A. tournament and an N.C.A.A. tournament game), is “a deadly shot with either hand,” passes “as generously and as deftly as any player in the game” and plays defense, too. (His only implied on-court flaw is a propensity to foul out of games.) As portrayed by McPhee, Bradley is Abraham Lincoln with a jump shot.Bradley was the only child of a banker and his wife in Crystal City, Mo. (In the book’s “Rosebud” moment, he says of dribbling: “You don’t need any brothers and sisters. Just you.”) He taught Sunday school at the First Presbyterian Church. Before games, he listened to “Climb Every Mountain” from “The Sound of Music.” After the season, he retreated to an off-campus house and composed his 33,000-word thesis in a month. He graduated with honors. “He is everything his parents think he is,” McPhee wrote.Hindsight serves the book well. The reader today knows that Bradley is real: a star at Princeton, a 1964 Olympic gold medalist (to motivate himself to beat the Soviet Union, McPhee reported, Bradley had to imagine he was playing Yale), a Rhodes scholar, a solid player for Knicks teams that won two N.B.A. titles, a United States senator from New Jersey and a serious candidate in the 2000 Democratic presidential primaries.“A Sense of Where You Are:” the mysterious second-person tense, the seesawing iambs — it draws you in. The title itself is from Bradley. Speaking to McPhee at the gym, Bradley looked him in the eye and tossed the ball up. It went through the hoop. McPhee was astonished. “When you have played basketball for a while, you don’t need to look at the basket when you are in close like this,” Bradley said. “You develop a sense of where you are.”Many books feature bookish protagonists who come to learn more about themselves. But two things make “A Sense of Where You Are” different. First, sports make the metaphor wonderfully literal: the hero’s quest is not only to know where he is in a figurative sense, but where it is best to be in physical space — specifically, on a basketball court.Second, Bradley already knew where he was. He was remarkably self-assured. He was an inspiration to his teammates, who, playing at their best, against Providence, “were all passing like Bradley,” McPhee wrote. “They were all shooting like Bradley, dribbling like Bradley, thinking like Bradley.”That is the Bradley that Gary Walters remembers.“There was an aura about Bill, as a player and a leader,” said Walters, a sophomore point guard when Bradley was a senior and later a long-serving athletic director at Princeton. “It was great to have his leadership, simply because, who wouldn’t follow?”As perhaps the most closely observed chronicle of a year in the life of a college athlete, “A Sense of Where You Are” raises some of the same tricky questions that administrators, coaches, players and fans grapple with today. Should the players be paid? Should the games be made less demanding on their time?Bradley’s views on college athletes today is that they are, as the N.C.A.A.’s favorite phrase has it, “students first.”“My general take is that college should be for education, and an athlete who plays for a college should be a student as well as an athlete,” Bradley said, adding that if a player is more interested in athletics than education, then so be it: “That should be their life choice.”The same note is sounded by several conference commissioners who are seeking to restore freshman ineligibility, at least in basketball.But while Bradley’s beliefs may be valid, they have nothing to do with his own trajectory. (Nor does he view himself as a model.) Bradley was affluent. Having initially accepted a scholarship to play basketball at Duke, he chose Princeton, he said, because the summer before his freshman year he had visited Oxford University and was determined to return. A Rhodes scholarship seemed like a great way to do so, and he had read that Princeton produced the most Rhodes scholars. “I came home from a date, woke my parents up, and said I’d like to change my mind,” Bradley recalled.And yet in its way the book does argue the merit of incorporating athletics into education. Watching Bradley’s dual sense of where he is — on the basketball court and in life — serves as a reminder that most young people lack a sense of where they are, and that sports are one way to try to find it.Bradley explained what the book’s title means to him.“You have a sense of where you are in life,” he said. “You don’t get carried away. You know who you are. You understand the environment, the context in which you’re living, and you make decisions based upon the centeredness.”He added, “You’re also always working on who you are.”Advertisement