By PETER MAYMARCH 28, 2015
BOSTON —  Rangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist had waited almost two months for this day. Sidelined by a serious neck injury, he had gone through a couple of practices this week and was cleared to start Saturday against the Bruins.He returned in TD Garden, a building where he has enjoyed success: three shutouts and a measly 1.52 goals-against average. But this time it proved to be a charnel house for Lundqvist, who surrendered four goals in the first 26 minutes.He lost any hope of a shutout less than two minutes into the game on a disputed goal, and things deteriorated from there. The Rangers fell, 4-2, in front of a sellout crowd that included a sizable contingent of Rangers fans. The team had gone 6-0-1 in its last seven road games.“Obviously, not the start I was looking for — or the team,” Lundqvist said. “The first period was tough, timing-wise. I felt better as the game went along.”AdvertisementHe added, “Take away that first period, I felt pretty solid.”In that period, it was the playoff-chasing Bruins — and not the Eastern Conference-leading Rangers — who looked like the team that had amassed 101 points and clinched a playoff position. The Bruins scored three unanswered goals and went on to add a fourth less than six minutes into the second period. The Rangers scored late in the second period and in the final minute of the third.Advertisement“They came out at us strong, forced us into a few mistakes that led to Grade A opportunities,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “Our execution needed to be better. It wasn’t very good early on.”Vigneault had cleared Lundqvist for the much-anticipated return. Lundqvist was injured in a 4-1 victory on Jan. 31 against Carolina, when he was hit in the neck by a puck. He played two nights later, in a 6-3 victory over Florida. At the time of the injury, Lundqvist was playing superbly, having gone 16-4 in a 20-game stretch while allowing 1.82 goals per game.The Rangers went 18-7 in the 25 games Lundqvist missed, collecting 39 out of a possible 50 points. The backup goalie Cam Talbot appeared in all but two of those games and will start Sunday against Washington, Vigneault said.In deciding to start Lundqvist, Vigneault said he had been certain the Rangers would respond and “do what they can to help him out.” By the time they did, the Bruins led by 4-0. It could have been worse. Lundqvist stopped two breakaways and robbed Max Talbot after a giveaway by Keith Yandle. He finished with save 26 saves in his first appearance since Feb. 2.“We’ve got to know when our top guy comes back after two months, we’ve got to help him out and play our style and not have as many turnovers as we did,” the Rangers’ Rick Nash said.Lundqvist got no help in a first period that went from bad to worse in a hurry. Milan Lucic opened the scoring 101 seconds into the game when a rebound bounced off his skate and into the goal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the officials reviewed the play, it was ruled that there had been “no distinct kicking motion” by Lucic, and the goal was allowed to stand.“I was 100 percent sure it wasn’t a goal,” Lundqvist said. “I stayed confident and calm. But when they called it a goal, that kind of set the tone for the first period.”AdvertisementLucic struck again with 10 minutes 34 seconds left in the period, taking a feed from Torey Krug and drilling a 20-footer between Lundqvist’s pads. Lundqvist chalked up the misplay to rustiness and a lack of timing.“You make a different move or a different decision when you’re in the zone and feel comfortable,” he said.Boston went ahead, 3-0, with 5:33 left in the period. Carl Soderberg stole the puck from Matt Hunwick and beat Lundqvist to the stick side on a breakaway. The Rangers, meanwhile, could muster little offense against Tuukka Rask, who stopped all 14 shots he faced in the period, few of them difficult. He left the game 10 seconds into the second period with what Bruins Coach Claude Julien said might have been a case of dehydration. Rask traveled with the team to Carolina for Sunday’s game.The Rangers did not have a power-play opportunity for a second consecutive game and the fourth time this season.The Bruins’ final goal, 5:53 into the second period, came from Reilly Smith, his first since Feb. 22.The Rangers finally got on the board when Nash scored his 40th goal of the season late in the second period. It was the third time Nash has scored 40 in a season, and he did so for the first time since 2008-9.Hunwick scored the Rangers’ other goal with 23 seconds left in the game.By then the Bruins had gone into a defensive mode, taking just three shots in the third period after having peppered Lundqvist with 27 in the first two.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Bruins Spoil the Return of Lundqvist by Scoring Four Goals in the First 26 Minutes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.