AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — A few weeks before spring training, Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, was summoned to jury duty at a Manhattan courthouse. At one point in the selection process, he was asked, “What do you do in your spare time?”“Well,” he said, “now I’m looking for a shortstop.”The courtroom filled with laughter. Alderson was surprised by how many people got the joke. For Mets fans, though, it was gallows humor. The team has been unsettled at shortstop for two years, and all off-season fans had called for Alderson to acquire a proven one.Wilmer Flores, 23, is expected to start opening day. The Mets say he is the shortstop of the future. He can hit well enough, but his fielding is suspect. Many fans argue that if the Mets’ strength is pitching, defense at shortstop should be a priority. Every ground ball Flores takes is a test. Every at-bat is a chance to prove he belongs. He is undergoing the intense scrutiny that other Mets prospects faced in recent years — players like Zack Wheeler and Travis d’Arnaud, each of whom was acquired in a trade in which the team surrendered talented performers. “I hear things,” Flores said. “But I try not to.”The stakes are perhaps higher now than when Wheeler and d’Arnaud made their debuts when the Mets had lower ambitions. The Mets are talking about making the playoffs in 2015, after six consecutive losing years, and Flores is the only starter who has not played 100 games in a season.He is also a trailblazer, and a guinea pig, the first of the next wave of prospects making their way toward the majors. During the next few years, as the Mets try to contend, they could phase in several talented prospects — Michael Conforto, Brandon Nimmo, Matt Reynolds — the same way they are trying to do with Flores. His success will be a reflection on the team’s continuing ability to nurture young talent.For years, Flores has been considered among the Mets’ top prospects. He was signed as a teenager out of Venezuela in 2007 for a six-figure signing bonus. He immediately showed offensive potential, particularly for a middle infielder. The Mets started him in the minors at shortstop, but during his first three years in the organization, as he continued to mature, he made 57 errors there. For the next three years, the Mets shuttled him around the infield, seemingly unsure where he fit in. Tall and gangly, Flores does not have the build of the prototypical low-to-the-ground shortstop. He is not quick and does not move gracefully. But the Mets have few other options.Ruben Tejada, once seen as a shortstop of the future, was too inconsistent and had a reputation as a lazy underachiever. Reynolds, the shortstop prospect whom Alderson picked in the second round of the 2012 draft, is not ready.The Mets moved Flores back to shortstop, and they played him regularly during the final two months of the 2014 season. On offense, he was predictably solid, batting .260 with 16 extra-base hits and 22 R.B.I. over 49 games. On defense, he showed he could make the routine play and turn the double play. Still, Alderson said he surveyed the shortstop market over the off-season and “explored most of those options.” The Mets were publicly linked to several of them — Didi Gregorious, Stephen Drew, even Troy Tulowitzki. Alderson weighed each option against Flores — for their track record, upside, injury risk and cost. “We felt comfortable in each case that Wilmer was our best alternative, short term as well as long term,” Alderson said. He added: “I’m not even accepting the idea that Wilmer is going to be a below-average shortstop. He may turn out to be. But I’m not convinced based on what we know now and the sample we had last year that that’s going to be the case.”The Mets know Flores better than anyone. Reynolds, the prospect vying for the same job, has raved about Flores’s hands and footwork. His arm is considered above average, too. His glaring weakness is his lack of range.“People always harass him: ‘He’s not a shortstop, he’s not a shortstop.’ I think he is,” Reynolds said. “I take ground balls with him almost every day. I get to watch him. And I rarely see him miss a ball. He’s going to have a great career as a shortstop.”Given Flores’s offensive potential, Alderson decided he could live with his defense. He makes that same calculation with every player. Flores is not the only questionable defender on the Mets’ roster. Daniel Murphy is hardly a Gold Glove second baseman. D’Arnaud is still learning the finer points of catching. Michael Cuddyer is playing left field, a position he has never played regularly, at 36. “You evaluate every player on the basis of his overall ability,” Alderson said. “You take into account his strengths, you take into account his weaknesses, total up the pluses and minuses, and if on a net basis this guy is better than somebody on a net basis, then you live with the weaknesses and you rely on the strengths.”The Mets are doing their best to minimize Flores’s weakness. Tim Teufel, who coaches the infielders, works extensively with Flores on positioning. Before each game, Flores is given charts that tell him where to stand based on who is pitching, who is batting, what pitch is coming and the count. If he is positioned correctly, his lack of range, in theory, will not be a major liability. Flores is also trying to improve his quickness. The past two winters, he trained with Mike Barwis, the team’s fitness consultant. After that first off-season, Flores said, he lost 15 pounds. He feels lighter on his feet now, and he notices more pop in his bat. “I worked — I worked for this,” Flores said, as if he needed to justify the Mets’ confidence in him. It is unclear, though, how long his opportunity will last. If he starts the season slowly, pressure will mount to replace him. Reynolds is playing well this spring, defensively and offensively, hitting close to .400. “We will always try to put ourselves in a position where we have options,” Alderson said. “But that’s different than saying this guy has X amount of time. We have confidence in Wilmer and his ability and will give him plenty of opportunity to demonstrate it.”But again, Alderson could not help making light of the situation.“I don’t see Wilmer on a leash at all,” he said. “I don’t believe in leashes. I walk my dog without a leash.”Advertisement