

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
MARCH 28, 2015
In the movie “The Program,” Alvin Mack, a college linebacker played by the actor Duane Davis, appears destined for the N.F.L. That is, until a knee injury instantly rewrites his future. In a span of minutes, Mack goes from a potential first-round pick to a former player considering a future in coaching.A similar situation seemed to play out in real life last week when Brady Aiken, the No. 1 pick in the 2014 baseball draft, announced that he had undergone Tommy John surgery to repair the ulnar collateral ligament in his pitching elbow. Having declined a lowball offer from the Houston Astros, Aiken was pitching at the IMG Baseball Academy in preparation for this year’s draft. The bet on himself, which reportedly involved turning down a last-minute offer for $5 million, appeared to have gone bust.But in 2015, nothing is that simple. As observers scramble to declare the winners and the losers, the theme of the day should be this: patience for everyone.Less than 10 months ago, Aiken sat on a conference call after being selected by the Astros and compared himself to Clayton Kershaw and David Price. It may have seemed boastful, but as a 17-year-old left-hander with a mid-90s fastball and command of three major league-quality pitches, he was probably not that far off the mark. The team seemed just as enthusiastic about the latest piece in its rebuilding project.Advertisement“I couldn’t be more excited for the Houston Astros and their future by adding this player to what already is a very strong system,” Jeff Luhnow, the team’s general manager, said in an introductory news release.AdvertisementThe team and the player agreed on a deal in which Aiken would receive a $6.5 million signing bonus, well short of the $7.9 million slotted for his draft position. Before the contract could be signed, the team requested a magnetic resonance imaging of Aiken’s elbow, and that was when things unraveled.While the team has never directly addressed what it was told about Aiken’s pitching elbow, reports surfaced that his U.C.L. was unusually narrow and could make him susceptible to future injury. The Astros’ offer shrank to $3.1 million — the minimum required for the team to get draft-pick compensation should Aiken not sign — and a public relations battle started, with Aiken’s camp professing that the player was healthy and accusing the Astros of shenanigans, and with the Astros contending that they were just exercising their rights to protect their interests.The negotiation became even more complicated when it became apparent that Aiken’s fate would directly affect the team’s ability to honor its deals with two other draft picks, Jacob Nix and Mac Marshall, whom the Astros intended to pay above-slot rates based on the money they would save by not paying Aiken the maximum salary allowed under the collective bargaining agreement. If Aiken failed to sign, the team would forfeit the entire amount allotted to him, so at the last minute Houston reportedly increased its offer to $5 million, but Aiken chose to walk away.Even after the operation, Aiken was still proclaiming his belief that he had made the right decision in not signing with Houston, while clearly implying that he had been wronged by the team.“I can honestly say I don’t regret not signing,” Aiken said in an essay on The Players’ Tribune, the website founded by Derek Jeter. “It was a very difficult decision, but it also was an informed decision based on circumstances only a few people know the truth about.”Finding a middle ground between the team and the player on this issue can be difficult, but Jim Callis, a draft expert for MLB.com who previously ran Baseball America, said people were making a mistake by trying to find a winner.“I don’t think this was a case of one side was right and one side was wrong,” Callis said. “The Astros had the No. 1 pick in the draft and they took the best player at the time and they couldn’t sign him. This isn’t a win for anyone.”AdvertisementMaking things especially hard to evaluate at this point is the fact that both sides could end up happy. The Astros, having made what M.L.B. would consider a good-faith attempt to sign Aiken, will receive the No. 2 pick in this year’s draft as compensation for failing to get a deal done. And Aiken, despite being in the early stages of recovery from an operation that instills fear in the casual fan, is still very likely a first-round pick.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Callis cited numerous examples in recent years of players who had undergone U.C.L. repair and were still drafted at or near the position they would have gone before the surgery, including Jeff Hoffman, who went to the Toronto Blue Jays with the No. 9 pick in last year’s draft. Although Hoffman was still recovering from the operation, Toronto signed him to his full slotted salary of $3.1 million.“If Hoffman went No. 9 in what was a better draft, why couldn’t Aiken go higher in a lesser draft?” Callis said.In recent years, U.C.L. repair has become a common occurrence. In a number of recent studies, the rate of return for pitchers undergoing U.C.L. repair was over 80 percent.One of the few studies to raise a red flag was performed by a group of doctors at Columbia who produced a paper entitled “Performance, Return to Competition, and Reinjury After Tommy John Surgery in Major League Baseball Pitchers.”Of 147 pitchers in the study, 80 percent returned to pitch, but only 67 percent reached the same level of performance, and 57 percent again landed on the disabled list. Their study found performance declined along several major metrics after the operation, but noted that the declines were largely present in age-matched control groups of players who had not had the operation.Aiken, at 18, has youth on his side in his recovery and will go into this year’s draft as an intriguing case of a player with the upside of a No. 1 overall pick, but a huge question mark hanging over him in terms of his chances of a full recovery.“The Cubs and Red Sox might be two teams prepared to take a gamble like that,” Callis said. “He could go pretty high. It’s a mediocre draft shaping up so far, where most of the college pitchers have either been hurt or inconsistent.”The picture Aiken posted to Twitter of himself in a hospital bed was nothing like the fictional Mack, who was crying at his lost future. Aiken was smiling broadly and his essay was entirely upbeat. The potential for a soft landing with a marquee team, and the bonus slot of a top-10 pick, takes much of the sting out of the situation. At the same time, the Astros can move on by drafting a player with a less cloudy future.Without throwing a pitch, though, Aiken may have had a large impact on the game. His predicament has reportedly spurred M.L.B. and the players union to consider the possibility of a draft combine to avoid situations like this. Whatever team ends up drafting him will have to hope that is not his only legacy.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: No Winner or Loser When a No. 1 Pick Goes Under the Knife.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »