By HARVEY ARATONMARCH 28, 2015
ALBANY —  It is the little things that have kept Chris Dailey by Geno Auriemma’s side for 29 years, and counting.It is the routines she has personally embraced, the rules she has collectively enforced. Once considered a candidate to strike out on her own, Dailey gradually settled into something that was more than a familiarly repetitive way of life.It became, in fact, a life lived her way, and that is something she would like to broadcast to those wondering why she is still where she is.“I’ve said this many times — we’re in a society where we’re taught to believe that it’s better somewhere else,” she said. “But what happens as you get older is that you realize there’s nothing wrong with enjoying what you’re doing and being happy where you are.”AdvertisementDailey is the tall, slender woman — C. D. to those in the Connecticut women’s basketball program — often seen during games at Auriemma’s ear, the power program’s associate head coach whom Auriemma persuaded to join him in ancient times (1985) in the figurative cow pasture known as Storrs.Advertisement“Geno and I thought we’d be here for a couple of years and then go someplace where we could be really good,” Dailey said.At Connecticut, bad turned to decent and pretty good turned to consistently great. Auriemma never went anywhere and neither did Dailey. Here on Saturday, they again were in hot pursuit of a national title — a 10th that would build on a record nine — while blowing out Texas, 105-54, in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 16.Accustomed to the question of why the second-ranked person in the sport’s most dominant program had not left long ago to cash in on her own, Dailey offered the disclaimer, “I’m not one of these people that would have to be a head coach just to be a head coach.”Originally a Jersey girl, she was a pretty fair player at Rutgers, where she was serving as an assistant coach to Theresa Grentz when she met Auriemma while on a recruiting trip. She was not initially crazy about him, thinking he was a tad too sure of himself. He nonetheless talked her into the challenge of Connecticut on an annual salary of about $22,000.If the pay was not great, the location was good, as relocations go. If Dailey was going to leave New Jersey, she wanted to be close enough for an accessible drive home to visit her family. Another preference was proximity to the shore.Connecticut filled those requirements and then the winning began, her financial reward grew (now around $300,000 annually) and, at 55, she can say that no job opening ever attracted her enough to surrender what she already had.It is also true, Dailey said, that she is a fastidious creature of habit, a woman whose surname best describes a penchant for observing the 24-hour cycle.AdvertisementWithout fail, she buys a tall cup of iced tea every morning from the Panera Bread Company. She orders the same treat — a Blizzard — whenever she hits a Dairy Queen. Her workouts at the gym follow a precise pattern, the same machines and same order, day after day.It is such attention to detail, according to Shea Ralph, a former Huskies star and an assistant coach, that makes Dailey the perfect Auriemma partner.“It’s the yin and yang of the way they operate,” Ralph said. “She takes care of all the things we want to make sure Coach Auriemma doesn’t have to worry about. I don’t want to call her the team mother, but she makes sure that our young ladies learn how to be young women.“The thing is that Coach Auriemma is tough on the players on the court and he doesn’t want to do that off the court, so he lets C. D. be the bad guy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dailey, Ralph said, is the enforcer of the comportment rules she developed with Auriemma’s blessing to establish a team tradition, an image, a way of UConn life.Off the court, dresses or skirts must be worn to all team events. On the team bus, headphones and cellphones must be packed away to keep players communicating with one another.On court, the team motto is, “Separate yourself by how you play, not by how you look.” Headbands and sleeves are not allowed. Socks and T-shirts under jerseys must be worn the same way.“C. D. will notice everything, even if someone has folded over their socks,” Ralph said.Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis, a senior shooting guard, said: “Definitely C. D. is the be-all, end-all for us. Whenever you’re not sure about what you’re supposed to say, or do, you know to ask C. D. first.“Everything runs through her. We have our well-known C. D. phrases: ‘No dilly, no dally.’ ‘Quick like a bunny.’ ‘This isn’t a timeout.’ ”AdvertisementTime flies when you are almost always winning. The years pass. Youthful ambition gives way to middle-age contentment.“I feel like I’m second in charge, or however you want to say it, at a place where we’re considered the best at what we do,” Dailey said.“There’s no need for me to go prove anything else. And if I retired tomorrow, I think I would feel good about my career, the experiences that I’ve had, the lives I’ve been able to impact and the relationships I’ve been able to have.”One relationship that has endured is with Ralph, who finished playing at Connecticut in 2001 and spent five years as an assistant at Pittsburgh before returning to work with Auriemma and Dailey.“When I left here, I knew how to comport myself, I knew how to speak with the media, I knew how to eat with the different forks when I went to a banquet,” Ralph said. “I mean, we — all the players — make fun of C. D., but when they go out into the world, they are so grateful for all those little things.”Those little things do add up. In Dailey’s case, the total is 29 years, nine championships, and counting.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: To a Longtime Auriemma Assistant, There’s No Better Place Than UConn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.