AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirDavid Ortiz’s blustery rant about being unfairly branded a cheater for testing positive for a banned substance in 2003 made news Thursday, not only for its strident tone, but for where it appeared.Instead of being reported by a newspaper or a website known for breaking news, Ortiz’s remarks appeared as a first-person essay on The Players’ Tribune, Derek Jeter’s digital venture.The scoop was a small triumph for a website that has a mission to give an athlete a platform to say what is on his or her mind, serious or not, without a reporter playing the journalistic middleman. But it also showcased how the site’s streamlined structure — a small staff of producers and editors offering a (largely) unfiltered megaphone — can be appealing to prominent athletes who are eager to have their say on a topic, or a grievance.Before Ortiz used the site to angrily and profanely talk about his testing history, Tiger Woods had published a piece criticizing a writer who had parodied him and Blake Griffin had used another to take a few shots at Donald Sterling, the former Los Angeles Clippers owner.But the way the Ortiz article quickly went viral also showed the growing reach of The Players’ Tribune, especially when an athlete has something provocative to say, and how its direct pipeline to athletes positions it well to break news ahead of traditional news organizations. Within a half-hour of Ortiz’s post being published on The Players’ Tribune on Thursday night, The Boston Globe rushed onto its website a similar article, the product of an interview Ortiz gave March 11 to one of its reporters, Bob Hohler. That piece had been held since last week so it could be the centerpiece of The Globe’s Major League Baseball preview April 5.“When he filed it, we were wary,” said Joseph Sullivan, the Globe’s sports editor. “I worried about ESPN or Yahoo or The Boston Herald somehow doing a similar story. But I didn’t think about The Players’ Tribune.”Sullivan added: “Last night was not a good night for me.”Gary Hoenig, the editorial director of The Players’ Tribune, called the Ortiz story “a victory for our small staff, not a victory that we got the story and The Globe didn’t.”Ortiz had promised to contribute to the site since its launch last October, but it was not until earlier this month, when one of the site’s producers saw him at training camp, that he talked about what he felt was the unfairness of being bunched with baseball’s steroid users. In 2009, The New York Times reported that Ortiz had tested positive in baseball’s anonymous 2003 drug tests, for which there were no penalties. Ortiz has brooded about that disclosure ever since, and in the Tribune piece he said that if he tested positive, it was because he took an over-the-counter supplement and that he was not intending to cheat. He also used the first-person piece to declare that he had tested negative more than 80 times since 2004.“We were down there to talk to him, but we didn’t know where he’d be going with this,” Hoenig said. Eventually, Ortiz gave the website his interview 10 days to two weeks ago.“This was not a screed,” Hoenig added. “He’d been thinking about this.”Like nearly every post on the site, the Ortiz essay was not written directly by its bylined athlete but instead crafted from a recorded interview with a Tribune staff producer. Hoenig said these interviews are less traditional question-and-answer sessions than monologues with questions to nudge the conversation along. Editing is minimal, he added, and the athletes get the final approval. The staff producers who talk to them do not get bylines.Providing athletes with unfettered access to fans carries with it the risk that they will lie or shade the truth. Is everything in Ortiz’s essay absolutely accurate? Are the athletes’ first-person accounts being vetted and edited as if they were being published by a more traditional journalistic enterprise?Hoenig, a longtime newspaper editor who was a founding editor of ESPN the Magazine, said: “We do standard fact-checking. We knew the entire history of steroid testing in baseball. We knew how he’d been exposed in anonymous testing. We couldn’t verify the number of tests that he said he’s taken, but it was verified by his agent that he’d been tested frequently. Baseball would never tell us.”But Hoenig said the athletes whose bylines appear over controversial subjects run a potential risk, as well.“It’s their reputation out there,” he said. “It’s our job to say, ‘Do you really want to go out there and say that?’ ”Hoenig said that Jeter, who assiduously preserved his clean public image during his playing career by saying and doing nothing that could get him in trouble, reads accounts like Ortiz’s before they are published and asks questions.“He reads everything,” Hoenig added of Jeter. “He’s got mobile. We talk to him every day. He has comments every day.”The roster of athletes (and former players) featured on the site is lengthy and has included Jason Collins, Danica Patrick, Billie Jean King, Paul Pierce, Larry Sanders, Tyson Chandler, Eric LeGrand, Elena Delle Donne, Chris Long, Andrew McCutchen and Sue Bird. The accumulated message is that athletes, with help from a website overseen by an image-conscious superstar, can freely tell their stories and share their views as if they were credentialed writers. If they ultimately cannot bypass the ravenous news media in locker rooms or the digital hordes of social media, at least they can better set their own agenda.The website’s small staff identifies prospective contributors with direct outreach. In recent weeks, the site’s producers have been visiting baseball spring training camps. Last Sunday,  two of the staff members were in the Yankees’ dugout talking to Didi Gregorius, Jeter’s successor at shortstop, about controlling his story and letting fans get to know him better.“You send them to spring training because access is better,” Hoenig said.Matt Harvey, the Mets’ pitching ace, said he had been approached by The Players’ Tribune and wrote last month about his time away from baseball while recovering from Tommy John surgery.“A lot of times, especially in New York, you can read stuff or hear things that aren’t necessarily true,” Harvey said Friday after losing to the St. Louis Cardinals in a spring training game. “So for me to have an outlet where it’s first person and it’s true — everything is from me — it’s something I was really excited about.”But if there are open arms to athletes who want to tell a personal story directly to the Players’ Tribune audience, there is also a closed door to evident self-promotion.“We won’t pimp a product, a charity, or help you with your endorsement,” Hoenig said, with one exception being a piece by Seattle quarterback Russell Wilson about domestic violence that cited his  charitable effort to raise money for the National Domestic Violence Hotline. “We’ve rejected those ideas.”But as the site’s renown has grown — it had a modest 225,000 unique users last month, according to comScore, which tracks online traffic — more athletes have begun initiating contact. The agent for Brady Aiken, the No. 1 pick in last June’s baseball draft who did not sign with the Houston Astros after contentious contract negotiations, contacted The Players’ Tribune recently to arrange breaking the story Thursday that the pitcher had undergone Tommy John surgery. Doing so allowed Aiken, and his agent, to control the narrative about the injury, and his decision last year not to accept the Astros’ multimillion-dollar offer, before reporters and teams even knew he had had the operation.Tim Rohan and Billy Witz contributed reporting.Advertisement