

 Karen Crouse
 

ON COLLEGE BASKETBALL
MARCH 28, 2015
LOS ANGELES — The victories against Coastal Carolina and Oregon cleared Wisconsin’s path to the West Regional semifinal, but long after the details of the N.C.A.A. tournament games in Nebraska are lost to memory’s slow leak, the Badger players will recall their go-karting excursion in Omaha.Who could forget a helmeted Nigel Hayes bumping them into the wall or their player of the year candidate Frank Kaminsky being lapped by the usually mild-mannered Zak Showalter?“We weren’t afraid to hit people and take them to the wall,” Showalter said, laughing. He added, “We had some free time and we wanted to hang out together.”To the fans filling out brackets, the N.C.A.A. tournament is a zero-sum game. One winner emerges from a pool of 68 contenders, and if you’re not the champion, you are, in the strictest sense of the word, a loser.AdvertisementThe fans from the participating universities and anyone in possession of a completed bracket may live and die with every game, but they are perimeter players. From inside the madness, the perspective is more penetrating. Traevon Jackson, the Wisconsin guard who missed half the season with a broken foot, talked last week about the journey he has taken with teammates who have become friends he’ll have for life.“I’ve thought about that a lot,” Jackson said. “I’ve asked myself the question: ‘Who won the national championship five years ago? Who won it 10 years ago?’ You can’t remember. You literally have to go back and look it up. But those teams that build something that’s bigger than the trophy, that’s what I think about.”From the grave, the legendary North Carolina coach Dean Smith gave everybody something to think about last week when his trust, in accordance with his will, sent a $200 check to every varsity letterman who played for him during his 36 seasons as the Tar Heels’ head coach. In death, as in his life, Smith wanted to make sure every player, more than 180 in all, knew that they had enriched his life. Not just the players on his two national championship teams or his 13 Atlantic Coast Conference title squads.Sean Miller, the Arizona coach, on Friday described Smith’s gesture as “one of the greatest things I’ve ever seen in sports.”Miller, the son of a high school coach, asked, “What better way of kind of giving back to these guys who have gone to battle for you, have listened to you, have lost blood, sweat and tears for you?”AdvertisementThe day before his players would try to send Miller to the Final Four for the first time as a head coach, they talked about the life lessons he has taught them that would serve them better in adulthood than any X or O on a white board.If Miller never wins a national championship, if he is one day chased from Arizona for the offense of not winning enough, it won’t change how Rondae Hollis-Jefferson feels about him. Hollis-Jefferson, a sophomore, said of his transition from high school to college: “I wasn’t the best kid to work with, but he understood that, and he sacrificed a lot for me, and I appreciate that. He has done a great job.”Hollis-Jefferson paused, then leaned into the microphone on the dais he shared with Miller and four teammates. “Thank you.”Later, outside earshot of Miller, Hollis-Jefferson revealed the stern Miller’s kryptonite. It’s Elliott Pitts, the sophomore reserve guard whose name provides much comic relief. Hollis-Jefferson said he could count on getting a chuckle from Miller if he calls out to “Smellypits.” Miller has developed his own nickname for Pitts. He calls him “Elbow.”Pitts doesn’t mind. “When you have jokes like that, it kind of brings you closer together, really,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The victories matter, Hollis-Jefferson said. Don’t get him wrong. But a winning college experience cannot be measured by titles alone.“At the end of the day, basketball comes and goes, but these friendships, these bonds that you create throughout your college experience, there’s nothing like it,” he said. “For me, that’s a big thing. Twenty years from now, we can still hang out, we can still bring our kids around each other. Those are the things that you want in life, that you value.”Relationships don’t develop overnight. Teams develop chemistry over weeks and months and — less and less in one-and-done college basketball — years. At the Midwest Regional in Cleveland, Notre Dame forward Pat Connaughton talked about a trip the team made last summer to Italy that provided a mental mix tape of memories.
                For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.            “There’s a lot of stuff from when we were in Italy that we joke about,” he said, adding, “Then you go through the fall, go through football games together, doing the things that Notre Dame student-athletes do, but you do it as one.”AdvertisementConnaughton, a senior, spoke about what it meant to the Irish to advance to the round of 16 on the same weekend that Coach Mike Brey’s 84-year-old mother died. Never mind that the players distinguished themselves as the first team from Notre Dame in a dozen years to advance that deep into the tournament. The Irish kept going, too, advancing to the regional final for the first time since 1979.“The most powerful part was the fact that we were able to at least give Coach something back, no matter the fact that it couldn’t make up for what he lost,” Connaughton said.Last week in Omaha, a few Wisconsin athletes, including Hayes, were mesmerized by the stenographer seated off to the side, pecking away at a machine while they spoke in fast-break sentences. After the interview session, a few Badgers, led by Hayes and Wisconsin Coach Bo Ryan, huddled around the woman, Toni Christy, and asked if she would explain how her Diamante machine works.Christy was delighted. In her decade of working 25 to 30 sports events a year, Christy said in an email exchange, “no student-athlete, or pro, for that matter, has ever shown curiosity toward what we do.”Ryan wasn’t surprised. On the recruiting trail, he said, he looks for players who have more questions than answers.Why?“It doesn’t take a genius to see the interactions of people and be able to tell some things,” he said.At the end of their news conference after a victory over Oregon, Hayes stopped by Christy’s seat before returning to the Badgers’ locker room to say goodbye and pose for a selfie.“He is far more than just a very talented basketball player, which is what we all want our student-athletes to be, right?” Christy said. “He, like a lot of his teammates and other college student-athletes, is not just a jersey with a name on it.”And March is not just when nets are cut down. It is also when lifelong relationships are sewn up.Marc Tracy contributed reporting from Cleveland.A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Games Are Big, but Life Is Bigger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »