
MARCH 30, 2015

This week's schedule includes a few friendlies, one not-so-friendly and a rare low-stakes version of Der Klassiker in Germany. Soccer Editor — and shameless Ajax supporter — Andrew Das tells you what to watch.

This week's schedule includes a few friendlies, one not-so-friendly and a rare low-stakes version of Der Klassiker in Germany. Soccer Editor — and shameless Ajax supporter — Andrew Das tells you what to watch.
Fresh off a 
disheartening loss at Denmark last week, Jurgen Klinsmann will run out 
his United States national team against Switzerland on Tuesday in Zurich (Fox Sports 1, noon EST).
 The key thing to watch may not be the result but the pregame setup: 
will Klinsmann stick with the 4-4-2 and try to fix what went wrong last 
week, when the Americans surrendered two late goals and made the 
journeyman Nicklas Bendtner look like a Danish Ronaldo? Or will injuries
 (Clint Dempsey and now Aron Johannsson are out) and last week's 
performance lead him to try something altogether different?The game of the week, hopefully, will follow: the Netherlands hosts Spain (beIN, 2:30 p.m.) in Amsterdam in the countries' first meeting since last summer's 5-1 horror show/masterpiece (depending on your point of view) at the World Cup. (It's possible you have seen a highlight or two from that game.) Technically, this is a friendly. But don't expect it to be. The Dutch sure don't. Missed those matches but still need a soccer fix? Mexico plays Paraguay in a late-night friendly (ESPN2, 9 p.m.)Fresh off a 
disheartening loss at Denmark last week, Jurgen Klinsmann will run out 
his United States national team against Switzerland on Tuesday in Zurich (Fox Sports 1, noon EST).
 The key thing to watch may not be the result but the pregame setup: 
will Klinsmann stick with the 4-4-2 and try to fix what went wrong last 
week, when the Americans surrendered two late goals and made the 
journeyman Nicklas Bendtner look like a Danish Ronaldo? Or will injuries
 (Clint Dempsey and now Aron Johannsson are out) and last week's 
performance lead him to try something altogether different?The game of the week, hopefully, will follow: the Netherlands hosts Spain (beIN, 2:30 p.m.) in Amsterdam in the countries' first meeting since last summer's 5-1 horror show/masterpiece (depending on your point of view) at the World Cup. (It's possible you have seen a highlight or two from that game.) Technically, this is a friendly. But don't expect it to be. The Dutch sure don't. Missed those matches but still need a soccer fix? Mexico plays Paraguay in a late-night friendly (ESPN2, 9 p.m.)League play returns from the international break at the end of the week with a run of games that will eat up your Saturday
 nicely. The first is in Italy, where Juventus is running away with the 
Scudetto but there are still Champions League places at stake. One 
critical match in that fight is fifth-place Napoli's visit to 
second-place Roma (beIN, 6:30 a.m. EST). In England, Arsenal hosts Liverpool in London (NBCSN, 7:45 a.m.)
 in another breakfast-in-America special. The Gunners will try to keep 
the pressure on Chelsea and Manchester City in the title chase, while 
the Reds may be even more desperate for a win so as not to lose touch 
with the top four — and thus a possible place in the Champions League 
next season.There's a brief break after those two before Bayern Munich visits Dortmund (Gol, 12:30 p.m.)
 in the Bundesliga. In recent years, this would have been the game of 
the year in Germany; now, with Dortmund having scrapped its way up to 
10th place from last, it's mostly about pride. Which should make for 
just as good a show. Bayern enters with a 10-point lead in the league, 
so expect them to use the day, as usual, as a scouting combine for the 
next Dortmund player they'll poach.In the Netherlands, Ajax, the greatest club in the world and one you should consider supporting, travels to Utrecht on Sunday. Sadly, The Man does not want us to see the game, which will not be televised in the United States.The second-tier North American Soccer League season opens Saturday with five games, including a spicy 1970s-era matchup: the New York Cosmos at the Fort Lauderdale Strikers (7:30 p.m. EST). Most N.A.S.L. games are only available on streaming services, either through the league's new deal with ESPN
 or team-specific arrangements. But if you're going to moan and groan 
about the quality of play in M.L.S., it might not hurt to experience the
 alternative at least once or twice. And then maybe you should just stop
 moaning and groaning anyway.Advertisement