AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Los Angeles Clippers at Portland, Wednesday, 10 p.m. Eastern, NBATVFour teams in the N.B.A.’s Western Conference have clinched playoff spots, two from the Southwest Division and two from the Pacific.The Los Angeles Clippers, who have clinched, are in fifth place in the standings, behind the Portland Trail Blazers, who have not. That is because the Blazers, as the Northwest Division leaders, are guaranteed one of the top four spots if they clinch the division, which they are very likely to do.The Clippers, of the Pacific Division, could leap into the top four if they are able to pass the Memphis Grizzlies, a Southwest team, in the standings. But if the order stays as it is, the Clippers will face the Blazers in the first round, making Wednesday night’s matchup between the two squads a potential first-round preview.Last year, Portland faced Houston in the first round and won in six games in one of the most exciting series of the postseason. The series appeared to have exhausted the Blazers, and the Spurs quickly ousted them in the second round.The key contributors on the Blazers’ roster have not changed much from then. Given that instructive experience and the maturing of key players like Damian Lillard, Portland should have been able to look forward to furthering its success this year. Unfortunately, the team’s starting shooting guard, Wesley Matthews, ruptured his Achilles’ tendon early this month, and his departure has dashed the hopes of Blazers fans.Without Matthews, the team will be hard-pressed to equal last year’s results. It has gone 6-6 in his absence, winning some good games (including a tough one against Houston) but also losing to inferior teams such as Minnesota, Miami and Orlando.Lillard and LaMarcus Aldridge are under far more pressure to score now that a finely balanced offensive ecosystem has been thrown off-kilter. Aldridge has responded well, but Lillard, who relied heavily on Matthews on offense, has seen his output suffer. He had already been underperforming since the All-Star break, and his numbers have dropped still further.Matthews was also one of the team’s better defenders; with him in the lineup, the Blazers had the third-most efficient defense in the league. The decline of their defense since he has been out has been astonishing to behold: The Blazers now field the league’s fourth-most inefficient defense.Portland’s most significant acquisition of the season was Arron Afflalo, who was and would have continued to be an excellent backup to Matthews. Afflalo is a competent two-way player, but being thrust into a starting role has given him less time to adjust to the Blazers’ playbook.Portland played in two sets of back-to-back games last week, and while it might seem that such a crushing schedule would exhaust an already depleted team, the Blazers played well, winning three of the four contests. Aldridge and Afflalo were particularly impressive in Saturday’s game against the Nuggets, looking determined to wrap up the division. After the team’s struggles through March, though, it is difficult to imagine it sneaking past the Clippers in the first round.Los Angeles is on a seven-game winning streak and has won nine of its last 11 games. Since Feb. 9, the Clippers have the second-best record in the league, after the Warriors. But their more recent wins may be deceptive; most of them have been against lesser teams, and the Clippers have lost four of their last five games against the top eight teams in the West.Still, the Clippers have a formidable offense and a strong defense that has improved significantly since the All-Star break. Their core of Chris Paul, Blake Griffin and DeAndre Jordan remains solid. In fact, almost all of what the team does well can be traced to the specific skill sets of those three players. That is partly because the Clippers’ bench remains shaky at best and woefully ineffective at worst and has been depleted further by the loss of Jamal Crawford, who has been out for the past three weeks (although he expects to return soon).Because the Clippers have a weak second unit, the Blazers, a reasonably deep team, may be able to compensate for a lackluster defense if the two benches are matched up against each other in the playoffs. But given their newly abysmal defense, the Blazers would have to consistently outscore the Clippers to have a chance in a first-round series, and that just does not seem likely.Advertisement