

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE BASKETBALL
MARCH 29, 2015
CLEVELAND — In Notre Dame’s locker room after Saturday night’s loss to Kentucky, the whiteboard still bore the coaches’ talking points in black Sharpie. On offense: “Great Movement=Great Shots.” On defense, the only instruction underlined in blue was “Level 5 Team Rebounding.”How many levels of rebounding are there? “Five is the highest one,” the sophomore forward Austin Torres said.The whiteboard’s advice might seem obsolete after Saturday’s down-to-the-wire finish, when the Irish lost, 68-66, leaving Kentucky 38-0 heading to the Final Four.Yet Wisconsin, which will play Kentucky in the national semifinals for the second straight year, could do worse than to pick the brains of the Notre Dame staff and to watch the Irish’s performance.AdvertisementOver the next week, one debate will dominate college basketball: Did Notre Dame demonstrate to the world how to beat Kentucky? Or did the Irish demonstrate that barring something unforeseeable, Kentucky is all but unbeatable?Advertisement“We’re undefeated, but we’re not perfect,” Kentucky Coach John Calipari said after the game, reprising a note he had sounded many times.It is possible that a great team executing the optimal game plan against Kentucky will translate to what Notre Dame got: a 2-point loss. Few have been as good this past month as the Irish, who barreled through the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament and displayed grit in their first three games of the N.C.A.A. tournament.It is also possible that Kentucky had an off night. Tyler Ulis, a freshman guard, called the Wildcats “flat.”“We played arguably our worst game defensively,” said Willie Cauley-Stein, the only upperclassman who plays substantial minutes for Kentucky.He added: “I got dudes texting me from way back home, saying, ‘Dude, you should not have won that game.’ ‘Glad you won it, but you should not have won that game.’ I’m just like, ‘Yo, you’re right.’ The way they played and the way we played defensively, we shouldn’t have won the game.”The notion that the Wildcats won the game while at their worst should be nauseating for any team that still has to face them.Yet there is also the tantalizing possibility that Wisconsin could come through where Notre Dame did not.AdvertisementTake rebounding. Kentucky, the tallest college basketball team in the country, grabbed 29 rebounds in the game; it entered the game averaging 38.7. Kentucky had 10 offensive rebounds; it entered the game averaging 12.8. Before the game, it had limited its opponents to 19.3 rebounds per game; Notre Dame had 28.Maybe that was poor rebounding by Kentucky, or maybe it was Level 5 rebounding by Notre Dame.Or consider the concept “Great Movement=Great Shots.” At times, Notre Dame looked like the San Antonio Spurs, driving and kicking, spacing the floor, making the extra pass to get the better look. Guards Jerian Grant and Demetrius Jackson drove, creating space for a dump-off to Pat Connaughton or an inside-out pass to the marksman Steve Vasturia. The guards ran pick-and-rolls with Zach Auguste, who finished with a team-high 20 points.
                For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.            Maybe Kentucky’s pick-and-roll defense was unusually poor. Or maybe Kentucky can be beaten by a good pick-and-roll.Defensively, Notre Dame set out to deny Kentucky 3-pointers. The Wildcats went 4 for 8 from beyond the arc; on average, they try 15 3-point shots per game.“We were going to live with the 2s,” the Notre Dame assistant Martin Ingelsby said after the game. Wisconsin might make the same choice.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So, on (to) Wisconsin. According to the analytics site KenPom.com, Notre Dame scores the second-most points per 100 possessions, adjusted for opponent, in Division I. Wisconsin scores the most, by a wide margin. The Badgers have scored the most since at least 2002.In an interview Sunday, Seth Greenberg, the ESPN analyst and former Virginia Tech coach, said Wisconsin shared Notre Dame’s ability to put four men on the floor who could shoot 3-pointers; lacked guards, as Notre Dame had, who could penetrate off the dribble; and had top-notch, versatile big men, which Notre Dame did not.“You have the ability to invert your offense and pull the bigs away from the basket,” Greenberg said. “You have the ability to attack matchups in your frontcourt because of the versatility of Nigel Hayes and Sam Dekker.”He added, referring to Wisconsin’s center, “You have a unique matchup with Frank Kaminsky because you can move him so many places.”AdvertisementGreenberg said that Wisconsin must limit fouls, something at which the Badgers typically excel. But after averaging just more than 12 personal fouls per game during the regular season — easily the best in Division I — Wisconsin has averaged 15.75 in its four tournament games, including 21 on Saturday against Arizona.Beyond the matchup minutiae, two things will be drastically different next Saturday compared with this one.First, both teams will have enjoyed a week of rest and preparation, as opposed to the fewer than two days Notre Dame had before facing Kentucky.This might benefit Wisconsin more than Kentucky. Wisconsin lacks Kentucky’s depth. Having lost point guard Traevon Jackson for more than two months, the Badgers have five players who average more than 28 minutes. Kentucky has none.Still, Kentucky’s players said fatigue was an issue, and Cauley-Stein was adamant that more time would have helped against Notre Dame.“One day to prepare for a team like Notre Dame — that’s why we couldn’t stop them,” he said.Second, several Kentucky players suggested that Saturday’s brush with mortality would serve as a psychological boon. Cauley-Stein said that with 6 minutes 14 seconds left, after a Grant steal led to a Vasturia 3-pointer, he felt defeat was imminent. Then Cauley-Stein realized there was enough time for Kentucky to make up the difference.“To have that feeling, and you remember that feeling — that’s the closest we’ve been to losing in that high stakes a game,” he said.Cauley-Stein, who was on the bench with an injury when Kentucky lost last season’s championship game to Connecticut, added, “To lose at this time is heartbreaking.”A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Notre Dame’s Heartbreaking Defeat Should Hearten Wisconsin.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »