AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressFrans Nielsen scored 16 seconds into the second period to break a 3-3 tie, and the Islanders held on to beat the Detroit Red Wings, 5-4, on Sunday for their first home win this month.The Islanders entered the game winless in their seven previous home games, with their last win at Nassau Coliseum coming on Feb. 27 against the Calgary Flames and with one victory in their last eight games over all.The Islanders quickly fell behind, 2-0. The teams combined to score six goals in the opening 10 minutes.In addition to Nielsen, Ryan Strome, Kyle Okposo, Brock Nelson and Cal Clutterbuck scored for the Islanders.Tomas Tatar, Drew Miller, Niklas Kronwall and Pavel Datsyuk had the Red Wings’ goals.DUCKS 2, DEVILS 1 John Gibson made 26 saves, and Anaheim took another step toward securing the best regular-season record in the N.H.L. with a road win over the Devils. Ryan Kesler and Francois Beauchemin scored for the Ducks, who won their third straight and opened a 3-point lead over Nashville and Montreal in the race for the Presidents’ Trophy. Anaheim has four games left in the regular season, one fewer than the Predators and two fewer than the Canadiens.The loss was the Devils’ fifth straight, tying a season high. They were eliminated from playoff contention for the third straight year earlier in the day when the Boston Bruins beat the Carolina Hurricanes in overtime.BLACKHAWKS 4, JETS 3 Jonathan Toews scored with 30 seconds remaining in the third period to lift Chicago at Winnipeg. Andrew Shaw gave the Blackhawks a 1-0 lead late in the first period, but the Jets rallied with a power-play goal from Dustin Byfuglien and a short-handed goal from Blake Wheeler. Brad Richards scored for Chicago to tie the score at 2-2, but Byfuglien scored again on a power play to give Winnipeg the lead at the end of the second period. The Blackhawks tied the score in the third with an unassisted goal from Patrick Sharp, and Toews scored late to give them the victory. PENGUINS 3, SHARKS 2 David Perron and Sidney Crosby scored in a shootout as Pittsburgh topped San Jose for its second home win in two days.The Penguins killed off the final 3:52 of overtime while short-handed after a high-sticking double minor by Patric Hornqvist. In the shootout, Perron and Crosby beat the Sharks’ backup goaltender, Alex Stalock, to his stick side on the Penguins’ first two attempts.Pittsburgh’s Marc-Andre Fleury stopped a shot from Melker Karlsson, and when a shot by San Jose’s Logan Couture struck the crossbar, the game was over. The Penguins pulled back into a tie with the Islanders for second place in the Eastern Conference’s Metropolitan Division, at 95 points. FLAMES 5, PREDATORS 2 Lance Bouma scored twice to lead Calgary past host Nashville. Michael Ferland, Kris Russell and Jiri Hudler also scored for the Flames, who ended a two-game losing streak.Roman Josi and Seth Jones scored for the playoff-bound Predators, who played their third game in four days and had a four-game winning streak end.PANTHERS 4, SENATORS 2 Jaromir Jagr scored two goals, and Dan Ellis made 25 saves as Florida defeated host Ottawa. The win pulled the Panthers to a point behind the Senators, who are in ninth place in the Eastern Conference.Jussi Jokinen and Dave Bolland also scored for Florida, and Erik Karlsson and Jean-Gabriel Pageau had goals for Ottawa. Craig Anderson made 33 saves for the Senators.BRUINS 2, HURRICANES 1 David Pastrnak scored on a centering pass from Carl Soderberg 4:23 into overtime to give Boston a road victory over Carolina. The win put the Bruins 3 points ahead of Ottawa and 4 ahead of Florida in their race for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. Ottawa has played one game fewer than the other teams.Advertisement