
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
MARCH 29, 2015
In an interview with The Indianapolis Star on Sunday, Mike Pence, the Republican governor of Indiana, tried to extricate himself from a cage of intolerance and divisiveness into which he had put himself and his state. After coming under ferocious criticism from around the country, he said that he would now support legislation to “clarify” that the state’s new Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which he signed into law last week, would not discriminate against gays and lesbians.Supporters of the law, which prevents the state from “substantially burdening a person’s exercise of religion,” say it protects the rights of people and business owners from compromising their religious beliefs; opponents say it opens the door to discrimination.Under the law, for example, a business owner who objects to birth control on religious grounds apparently can’t be compelled to sell contraceptives. One who objects to homosexuality on similar grounds would not be compelled to provide services to a gay person or a same-sex couple.More than 10,000 people have signed petitions against the bill — and that was just last week.Arn Tellem, the sports agent, urged in an email last week to The New York Times that the Indiana Pacers, the N.C.A.A. and the professional sports leagues “not only condemn this blatantly unconstitutional legislation, but also to take forceful action against it by re-evaluating their short- and long-term plans in the state.” One of Tellem’s clients is Jason Collins, the former N.B.A. player who became the first professional athlete in the four major American team sports to publicly come out as gay while active.AdvertisementAsked if he had expected such an intense backlash to the bill, Pence told The Star: “I just can’t account for the hostility that’s been directed at our state. I’ve been taken aback by the mischaracterizations from outside the state of Indiana about what is in this bill.”AdvertisementMischaracterizations from outside the state?Pence sounds like just another in the string of segregationists from an earlier era: George Wallace, the governor of Alabama; Lester Maddox, the governor of Georgia; and Orval Faubus, the governor of Arkansas. They said marches against their segregationist policies were a result of outside agitators, often implying that the blacks in their states were content with the status quo.The problem, to them, wasn’t racism; the problem was outsiders.Here we are in 2015, with a governor erecting more barriers and claiming to be misunderstood by the world.Trust me, we understand; many of us have watched this movie before. Back in the day, it was black and white. Now it’s in multilayered, multifaceted Technicolor.The governor’s timing is impeccable. Indeed, many of the outsiders will become insiders later this week as thousands of fans head to Indianapolis for the annual spring ritual known as the men’s basketball Final Four.The governor might as well put signs at airports, train stations and highways saying, Gays allowed but not welcome.To its credit, the N.C.A.A., based in Indianapolis, responded immediately — if not definitively — to the law’s passage. The organization’s president, Mark Emmert, said in a statement that the N.C.A.A. was “deeply committed to providing an inclusive environment for all our events.”“We are especially concerned about how this legislation could affect our student-athletes and employees,” Emmert said. “We will work diligently to assure student-athletes competing in, and visitors attending, next week’s men’s Final Four in Indianapolis are not impacted negatively by this bill.Advertisement“Moving forward, we intend to closely examine the implications of this bill and how it might affect future events as well as our work force.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sports have not always been the epicenter of enlightenment.Daniel Murphy of the Mets embarrassed Major League Baseball and himself last month when, after being asked about Billy Bean, a former major league player who said he was gay after retiring, he told NJ.com: “I do disagree with his lifestyle. I do disagree with the fact the Billy is a homosexual.” He felt that way, he said, because he is “trying to surrender to Christ in my own life.”Last year, when Michael Sam became the first publicly gay player to be drafted by an N.F.L. team, some players expressed discomfort with the idea of having a gay teammate. So be it.Everyone has an opinion.Problems develop when opinions drive policy or when bigotry becomes law.It’s too late for the N.C.A.A. to pull this year’s Final Four out of Indianapolis, but the organization can make sure none of its championships are held in the state until the law is scrapped, or at least modified to ensure that no business is given the legal right to discriminate.In signing, and then promoting, a bill that opens the door for discrimination, Pence has encouraged a divisiveness that is antithetical to the achievements represented by the four teams who have reached Indianapolis.Though much is wrong with sports today — including recruiting violations, poor graduation rates and rampant commercialism — sports remain, for fans, an escape from rigors of daily life.This is especially true at tournament and playoff time.The best teams put aside egos, vanities and prejudices to achieve a shared goal. They put aside differences, and in some cases that could mean their sexuality, to a become a melting pot of everyone’s higher self.That’s not sports, that’s life.Governor Pence promised to clarify the intent of the law this week.He’d best hurry. The posse is headed to Indianapolis.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Off the Dribble and Into a Firestorm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »