AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartThe Atlanta Falcons are 5-0, and with a win on Thursday in New Orleans, they can match their win total from the 2014 season. Much of Atlanta’s success has been (rightly) attributed to quarterback Matt Ryan, the superstar wide receiver Julio Jones and their new head coach, Dan Quinn. But there is another Falcons player who has been powering the team’s success: the second-year running back Devonta Freeman.In 2013, Freeman helped Florida State win the B.C.S. national championship. He declared for the N.F.L. draft after that game, forgoing his senior year, and was selected early in the fourth round by the Falcons. As a rookie, he was stuck behind the veteran Steven Jackson and failed to rush for even 40 yards in a single game. In the first two games of 2015, the rookie Tevin Coleman started at running back for Atlanta and Freeman was limited to 22 carries for 43 yards.In Week 3, when Freeman received the first start in his professional career, it was not exactly newsworthy. But everything he has done since then has been. In his first three N.F.L. starts, he rushed 71 times for 362 yards (5.1 yards per carry) with seven touchdowns. He also caught 17 passes on 19 targets for 177 yards. Freeman’s 539 yards from scrimmage over the last three weeks is 190 more than any other running back’s.In his first 18 N.F.L. games, Freeman had never gained more than 84 yards from scrimmage. In his first three starts, he has gained at least 149 yards in each one, making him the first Falcons player since Jamal Anderson (1998) with such a streak. He is currently the N.F.L. leader in yards from scrimmage (645) and total touchdowns (eight). And he is one of the best bargains in the N.F.L., too, costing the Falcons only $631,106 in salary cap dollars.From 2012 to 2014, the Falcons had only three games with a 100-yard rusher; only the Colts, with one, had fewer. And over that three-year period, only the Cardinals rushed for fewer yards, while Atlanta threw the third most passes in the N.F.L. (behind only New Orleans and Detroit). But after years of struggling to find a running game, the Falcons have found the most productive running back in football through five weeks.Advertisement