AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter KerasotisPORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — It’s been a long road from the Bronx to Queens, measured not in miles, but in lifetimes.Johnny Monell Jr. thought about that, about the journey his father began 34 years ago, when he left the Bronx to become a catching prospect in the Mets organization — a baseball lifer who spent 17 years chasing a dream. Johnny Monell Sr. never made it to Queens, his career peaking instead in Virginia with the Class AAA Tidewater Tides. But now his son, with a week left in spring training, is clinging to the hope that he will be one of the 25 players who head north with the Mets.“It gives me chills thinking about it,” Monell Jr. said.A 29-year-old journeyman minor leaguer, known more for his left-handed power bat than for his glove, Monell has impressed the Mets this spring after signing with the club as an off-season free agent and arriving as a nonroster invitee. In Grapefruit League play, Monell had converted 42 at-bats into a .357 batting average and four home runs through Sunday. Only Michael Cuddyer, with five homers, has more this spring with the Mets.“We’ve been very, very happy with what we’ve seen,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said of Monell. “Johnny has handled himself very well, and he’s going to get some more playing time this week.”Monell is competing with Anthony Recker for the backup spot behind starting catcher Travis d’Arnaud. Recker, a.197 hitter in 375 major league at-bats, was batting .250 without a homer in 40 spring at-bats through Sunday. He is, however, a better defender and considered something of an incumbent, having played 108 games with the Mets in the last two seasons.If Monell is anything, though, he is persistent. It is part of his DNA, after all. His father’s 17-year quest to make the major leagues did not just take him to Tidewater; it took him to Puerto Rico, Mexico, Italy and Taiwan. Often, young Johnny would tag along. His parents divorced when he was 7, and his mother, Vivian Rosado, often sent him to wherever his father was playing to spend his summer and winter vacations. For the boy, it was heaven.“I grew up in clubhouses,” he said.Like his father, Monell grew up in Bronx streets playing baseball. Pelham Park was across from the apartment complex where he lived, and one particular game he and his friends played there shaped his hitting style.Stationed between two buildings, the boys would bat with a pitcher approximately 40 feet away, firing a tennis ball. If they hit the ball between the second and fourth floors of the apartments across the street, it was a single; between the fourth and sixth floors, a double; the sixth and eight floors, a triple; above the eighth floor, a home run; and on the roof, a grand slam.The real trick, though, given how narrow the opening was between the buildings, was to keep from pulling the ball.“You had to hit it up the middle,” said Monell, who graduated from Christopher Columbus High. “If you hit the buildings, it was an out. To this day, I’m an up-the-middle, gap hitter. I really think it comes from playing that game at Pelham Park.”Baseball was a constant not only with his father, but with his mother’s family, too. All were Yankee fans. “I used to ride my bicycle to Yankee Stadium just to see Bucky Dent walk in,” Vivian Rosado said. “He was so handsome. I had a crush on him.”Monell said his grandmother and great-grandmother were Yankees fans. “When I was little,” he said, “my Uncle José Rosado took me to my first game at Yankee Stadium and told me about one of the greatest left-handed hitting first basemen — Don Mattingly.”Monell Sr. grew up a fan of the 1970s Yankees of Thurman Munson, Ron Guidry, Graig Nettles and Reggie Jackson, while his son latched on to Derek Jeter, Jorge Posada, Mariano Rivera and Andy Pettitte.At the Pelham Park Little League, where a picture of him now hangs, Monell Jr. played shortstop, first base and the outfield. But that changed one day when he was 12 and with his father during winter ball in Puerto Rico. Hector Villanueva, a Chicago Cubs catcher at the time, gave the boy his gear when he saw him shagging balls near the bullpen.“All of a sudden,” Monell Sr. said, “I’m hearing that my son is catching in the bullpen. I went and peeked in. Johnny couldn’t see me — his back was to me — but I could see he was holding his own. He was pretty good.”A short while later, the boy, still wearing Villanueva’s outsize gear, the shin guards reaching halfway up his thighs, found his father in the clubhouse, and he was excited.“Dad, I want to catch,” he said.From that day forward, he did.Even as a boy, Monell always furnished his own locker, filling it with equipment he would find lying around.One day in Puerto Rico during winter ball, when Johnny was 7 or 8, Bernard Gilkey, the former Mets player, told Monell Sr. that Johnny was inside the clubhouse and needed help. “I go in, and the lights are off, and I hear, ‘Dad, Dad’ ” Monell Sr. said. “They had put Johnny in a laundry bag and hung it on a hook. It was their way of telling him not to take everybody’s gear and stash it in his locker. I let him stay there for a while, and then I sent a clubbie in to rescue him. It was all in fun.”These days, Monell Sr. runs the 220 Second to None baseball academy in Margate, N.J. He and his son talk every day. But it was the phone call that came on Sept. 4, 2013, that was most special. His boy, a former 30th-round pick in 2007, had gotten the call up from Class AAA Fresno to the San Francisco Giants. Monell Sr. could not get to the first game in San Diego fast enough, but he was there the next night in San Francisco, where he met his son when Johnny emerged from the Giants’ dugout pregame.They hugged.“I can’t describe the feeling,” Monell Sr. said. “I had some tears. It was emotional.”Monell later had pinch-hit at-bats at Citi Field and Yankee Stadium, the latter fulfilling a wish from his great-grandmother Francisca Sanchez, who had always said she did not want to die until she had seen Johnny play in Yankee Stadium. After that game, Monell Jr., his mother and grandmother, visited his great-grandmother at her nursing home.“It was very emotional,” said Rosado, noting that the great-grandmother died a short time later.It could get emotional again.“It’s hard to imagine playing in Citi Field, and playing for the Mets, knowing my dad spent his entire career trying to get to the same place,” Monell said. “Growing up, it wasn’t that far away, just across the Whitestone Bridge.”Just a few miles and a couple of lifetimes away.Advertisement