AdvertisementSupported byNets 107, Lakers 99By Andrew KehThe Nets met the Los Angeles Lakers, one of the worst teams in the N.B.A., at Barclays Center on Sunday and had somewhat more trouble than they would have liked on their way to a 107-99 victory. But as they approach their final 10 games, tussling for one of the last playoff spots in the Eastern Conference, they will take every victory they can get, pretty or not.“We got another win, and that’s all that matters right now,” said Deron Williams, who had 13 points and 9 assists.The victory moved the Nets (32-40) into the conference’s eighth and final postseason berth, a half-game ahead of the Boston Celtics, who lost later Sunday, and the Indiana Pacers, who won. The Nets, who have won three in a row, were coming off Friday night’s big victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers. After a game Tuesday against the Pacers and one Wednesday against the Knicks, they will play seven consecutive games against teams that appear bound for the playoffs.So Sunday afternoon’s game was, in theory, supposed to be one of the easy ones. The Lakers (19-53) are next to last in the Western Conference and have been one of the teams unabashedly angling for draft lottery position. Nick Young has not played since Feb. 22 because of an injury to his left knee. Jeremy Lin was ill and not available; he walked through the Lakers’ locker room before the game, his voice raspy, sipping tea.The Lakers never had a lead over the Nets, but they stayed close, getting strong play from Jordan Hill, who had 22 points and 16 rebounds off the bench. The Nets relied again on Brook Lopez, who used his size advantage to score 30 points, grab 11 rebounds and block four shots.“We knew they were going to keep fighting,” said Lopez, who has averaged 28.8 points over his last four games. “They’re all N.B.A. players here.”Alan Anderson hit a corner 3-pointer to start the fourth quarter and push the Nets’ lead to 14, but Hill sank a 10-foot jump shot with 3 minutes 47 seconds remaining to cut the advantage to 3 points, spurring a “Let’s go, Lakers!” chant.The Nets looked at ease only after Ryan Kelly missed a jumper with 40.7 seconds left that would have cut the difference to 5. Joe Johnson grabbed the rebound and passed to the rookie guard Markel Brown, who was fouled while dribbling down the sideline. Anderson yelled to him that he should have dunked it anyway, and the two laughed before Brown, who had a career-high 17 points, made his two free throws.Anderson had the ball later near midcourt as the final seconds ticked off the clock. He kept pump-faking, threatening to attempt a halfcourt shot. Lopez, standing near him, pretended to swat at the ball, until the final buzzer sounded.The levity was a long time coming, but the Nets were celebrating a win, and that was enough.Advertisement