AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Filip BondyLong before I became a sportswriter, I was a misplaced, heartfelt Chicago Cubs fan somehow surviving in the New York area. I began rooting for all teams with baby animal nicknames at age 5, which turned out to be a terribly unkind fate in 1969, when the Baltimore Colts lost to the Jets in the Super Bowl and the Mets made September mincemeat of the Cubbies. I lost my lunch money many times over in ill-fated bets.My romance with the Cubs eventually cooled a bit, but one feeling never died. Any baby boomer fan of this bewitched Cubs team still bristles at the mere sight of Mr. Met, and is now experiencing a cold chill down his spine at the thought of the coming National League Championship Series.The Mets’ 3-2 victory over the Dodgers in Game 5 on Thursday night means the Mets and the Cubs will meet each other for the very first time in the postseason, a statistical oddity of sorts. Considering their long, synchronous relationship, the collision is long overdue.The performance timelines of the Mets and the Cubs, their win-loss patterns, are eerily similar over the past 53 years, from the moment the Mets were invented. In 1962, the expansion Mets famously finished 10th in the National League with a futile 40-120 record. The Cubs were more anonymous in ninth place, at 59-103. Already, they were close dancing.Both teams stunk out the joint for most of the 1960s until suddenly they didn’t in 1969, when the National League was divided into East and West divisions. By the time a black cat crossed Ron Santo’s path at Shea Stadium, the Cubs were well on their way to blowing a nine-and-a-half-game lead over the Mets in the East.On Sept. 2, the Cubs were still 84-52 and five games ahead of the Mets. Twenty-two days later, they were mathematically eliminated. During one span, the Cubs lost eight straight games while the Mets were winning seven in a row.“If I’d known we were going to lose eight straight,” Cubs Manager Leo Durocher stated, “I would have just played nine pitchers every day and let everyone else go home and rest.”It was a collapse of epic proportion, yet that botched race also had a lot to do with an extraordinary Mets rotation that included Tom Seaver, Jerry Koosman, Gary Gentry and a bit of young Nolan Ryan.The good times soon ended. The Cubs and the Mets faded together in the late 1970s, then were revived in the mid-’80s. When the Cubs won the East in 1984 behind Ryne Sandberg and Rick Sutcliffe, the Mets finished right behind them and were building toward their greatest season of all, 1986. In 1989, the Cubs won the East, and the Mets finished second. More tailgating.Next came a rather lengthy, simultaneous hibernation, marked by many losing seasons for both franchises. Then, a painful separation: The Cubs were moved to the Central Division in 1994, leaving behind their true rivals in the East. People can talk all they want now about the Cubs-Cardinals rivalry. That’s just geography. Mets-Cubs is what cuts to the heart at Wrigley Field, at least among fans with long memories.Forced onto separate turfs, into their own divisions, the two clubs kept shadowing each other. They briefly contended in the late 1990s and the early part of the new millennium. Steve Bartman undid the Cubs in 2003. The Mets made the playoffs in 2006; the Cubs, in 2007 and 2008.More futility followed, together again, as always. The Cubs entered 2015 having amassed five successive losing seasons, while the Mets had managed six. Since 1962, both teams have collected far more losing years than winning records.So you see, these two teams are tethered at the hip, and forever by the standings. Regardless of how the N.L.C.S. goes over the next week, the two franchises will have already ascended this season like a two-headed phoenix from the sub-.500 depths.It must be noted that the Mets are not at all fashioned or constructed like their Chicago counterparts. Their success is an astronomical anomaly, for it revolves around their rotation. It is always this way, when the Mets are at their best. If it is not Seaver and Koosman at the front end, it is Doc Gooden and Ron Darling, or Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom and Noah Syndergaard.Meanwhile, just as in 1969, the Cubs have only one truly outstanding starter: Jake Arrieta, standing in for Ferguson Jenkins. And once more, the Cubs have a more impressive offensive lineup than the Mets. Both teams appear built to last for several more years, before they nose-dive together into the depths of despair, where they mostly reside and generally appear far too comfortable.For now, most grizzled Cubs fans greet this coming test with a sense of dread, even though the Cubs swept the season series against the Mets. It is all too easy to imagine the sluggers Kris Bryant and Anthony Rizzo swinging and missing against some of the best arms in the league. The Cubs have been there, done that.It’s been only 46 years since Durocher’s nice guys finished second. My stomach still growls from the lost lunches.Advertisement