By VIV BERNSTEINMARCH 29, 2015
GREENSBORO, N.C. —  There are only a handful of elite programs in women’s college basketball, and every year, it seems, those same teams run through the N.C.A.A. tournament on the way to the round of 8 and the Final Four.This year’s tournament, though, is going to be a little different. The blue bloods will have some new blood, and don’t be surprised if South Carolina makes itself perfectly at home at Amalie Arena in Tampa, Fla., next weekend.Tiffany Mitchell scored 21 points and carried the top-seeded Gamecocks down the stretch of an 80-74 win over second-seeded Florida State in the Greensboro Regional final Sunday for their first berth in a Final Four. The Gamecocks will play Notre Dame in the tournament semifinals.South Carolina (34-2) rallied from a 10-point first-half deficit in the game, which Florida State (32-5) had led throughout. When it came down to the end, Gamecocks Coach Dawn Staley wanted Mitchell to have the ball and the game in her hands.AdvertisementMitchell, a two-time Southeastern Conference player of the year, scored 7 points in a late stretch of 1 minute 32 seconds, during which the Gamecocks broke a 67-67 tie and inched away.AdvertisementIt was a Mitchell layup that broke the tie, with 1:59 remaining. A 3-point basket from the baseline followed at 1:20 for a 72-67 lead. And after grabbing a rebound of her own missed shot, forcing Florida State to foul her, Mitchell added a pair of free throws with 27 seconds left for a 74-69 edge. Free throws by Asia Dozier in the final seconds sealed the victory.“I just think me and Coach Staley have a nonverbal communication,” Mitchell said. “I just look at her, and she looks at me, and I’m just like, ‘All right, it’s time.’ That’s kind of what happened. Just made plays for my team when I needed to.”Alaina Coates, who added 14 points for South Carolina, was named the most outstanding player in the regional, with Mitchell and Florida State’s Leticia Romero and Adut Bulgak joining her on the regional first team, along with North Carolina’s Latifah Coleman.Florida State, which was not ranked in the top 25 at the start of the season and was picked to finish fifth in the Atlantic Coast Conference, led by 10 points at one point in the first half.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s hard to lead for 28 minutes and trail for three and lose it,” Florida State Coach Sue Semrau said. “For our kids to battle the way they did with a crowd like this — wish we had been in Jacksonville or Tampa — but certainly you have to credit South Carolina and their play all year long, and their crowd here today, I thought, was fantastic.”Foul trouble had kept Florida State from maintaining momentum, and when the Gamecocks rallied, the crowd, with several thousand raucous South Carolina fans, energized them. Many fans stayed to watch South Carolina cut down the nets.The Gamecocks senior forward Aleighsa Welch said she believed they would travel to Tampa, too.“Amazing,” Welch said in the locker room, a net from one of the baskets hanging around her neck. “Amazing. Surreal. Wonderful. And happy.”NOTRE DAME 77, BAYLOR 68 Lindsay Allen scored 23 points to help top-seeded Notre Dame defeat Baylor in the Oklahoma City Regional final and reach its fifth consecutive Final Four.AdvertisementAllen, who scored a career-high 28 points in a semifinal win over Stanford on Friday, followed that by making 10 of 16 shots. She was named the most outstanding player of the regional.Michaela Mabrey scored 14 points and Jewell Loyd added 13 for the Fighting Irish (35-2), who won their 21st straight game.Nina Davis had 26 points and 13 rebounds, Sune Agbuke had 12 points and 10 rebounds and Niya Johnson added 10 assists for second-seeded Baylor (33-4), which had hoped to avenge an 88-69 loss to Notre Dame in last year’s regional final. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: With Late Surge, South Carolina Makes First Final Four.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.