By PAT PICKENSMARCH 29, 2015
After a game to forget Saturday in Boston and a lackluster third period Sunday, the Rangers find themselves suddenly mired in a rare losing streak.Alex Ovechkin and Jason Chimera each scored twice in the Washington Capitals’ 5-2 victory over the Rangers at Madison Square Garden.The Rangers lost in regulation for the fourth time in seven games, dropping consecutive games in regulation for the first time since Jan. 27 and 29. Kevin Hayes and Derick Brassard scored the Rangers’ goals, and Cam Talbot stopped 26 shots.“We really haven’t had this feeling for a while,” said defenseman Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain. “Collectively, our preparation and our focus and our execution has to be better here.”AdvertisementThe consecutive losses have come since the Rangers clinched a playoff berth Thursday in Ottawa. The schedule will not become easier as they hit the road for games against Winnipeg and Minnesota, two teams in playoff spots in the Western Conference.AdvertisementAfter the Rangers took a 2-1 lead late in the first period, the Capitals scored the next four goals, including two third-period goals from Chimera, who had not scored since Feb. 6, a span of 20 games. He had his first multigoal game since Dec. 23, 2011.His goal at 4 minutes 41 seconds of the third period broke a 2-2 tie, and he added an insurance score 2:59 later. Both goals came off turnovers by Rangers defensemen, with Keith Yandle and Chris Summers, who was called up from the American Hockey League before the game, coughing up the puck.“There’s no doubt in the third period, it didn’t seem like we had a lot of gas in the tank,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “That certainly seemed to affect our execution on the ice. A lot of the mistakes, we made in the third from the back end. There were some obvious better decisions with time.”Ovechkin entered the game seven goals ahead of Rick Nash for first place in the N.H.L., with 47. Nash scored his 40th during the Rangers’ 4-2 loss to the Bruins on Saturday, his first goal in eight games, and rejoined Brassard and Mats Zuccarello on the Rangers’ top line Sunday.But it was Washington’s reshuffled first line — with Ovechkin skating alongside Evgeny Kuznetsov and Joel Ward — that wreaked the most havoc. Ovechkin netted his 48th goal 4:32 into the game, snapping a shot between Dan Girardi’s legs and past Talbot’s stick.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Capitals goalie Braden Holtby was on his game early, making 10 first-period saves, including a couple of highlight-reel stops. He used his stick on Hayes and his glove on Tanner Glass to keep the Rangers scoreless.“I thought Holts was very good early,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said. “We gave up way too many chances and unforced errors, sloppiness.”Washington’s sloppiness led to two late first-period goals as Hayes and Brassard scored 1:01 apart. Hayes netted his 15th of the season, sliding a one-handed shot around Holtby on a breakaway after taking John Carlson’s turnover.AdvertisementHayes has 39 points, tied with Islanders forward Anders Lee for fifth place among rookies.Brassard broke the tie with 49 seconds left in the period when he took a drop pass from Zuccarello and whipped a shot past Holtby’s glove, giving the Rangers a 2-1 advantage after one period.But after the Rangers outshot Washington, 12-8, in the first period, the Capitals clamped down, limiting the Rangers to just 13 shots over the final 40 minutes.“I don’t think we had enough shots,” Nash said. “Everything opens up after a shot. That didn’t happen tonight.”Washington also killed five Rangers power plays, two of them shortened by four-on-four action.“It’s not nearly good enough,” Vigneault said of the man advantage. “Without a doubt, we’re going to look at some tape here and make some adjustments.”While the Rangers’ power play scuffled, Washington’s league-best man advantage capitalized when Ovechkin netted his second goal on the power play. Ovechkin’s slap shot deflected off Dan Boyle’s skate and trickled past Talbot, tying the game.“That’s a character win,” said Holtby, who made his N.H.L.-best 66th start and earned his 37th win. “We developed our chances, developed goals. It’s a blueprint.”A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Fall Flat at the End of a Lost Weekend.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.