AdvertisementSupported byDuke 66, Gonzaga 52By Ben ShpigelHOUSTON — Every day for the last two years, Quinn Cook has thought about one game, and it is not a game that he enjoys reliving. He remembers the confetti falling and Louisville celebrating and his Duke teammates consoling one another. Their faces, the sadness, he will never forget.When he went to the bench in the final seconds of the Blue Devils’ 66-52 victory over Gonzaga on Sunday, he was greeted with a warm embrace by Coach Mike Krzyzewski, who shared a few words that Cook did not recall.“I don’t know,” Cook said. “I was crying.”He fell sobbing into the arms of the assistant Nate James before joining the celebration. Cook was the first player to hold aloft the South Regional trophy, and he conducted interviews at his locker afterward with one of the nets around his neck. When Duke arrives in Indianapolis this week in advance of its national semifinal against Michigan State, Cook may still be wearing it. Until Sunday, when the top-seeded Blue Devils (33-4) advanced to their first Final Four since 2010 and their 12th over all under Krzyzewski, Cook was the rare Duke senior whose memories of playing in the N.C.A.A. tournament unspooled like D’s on a report card, unsatisfactory marks for one of college basketball’s premier programs: first-round upset losses to Mercer last year and Lehigh in 2012 bookending the loss that tormented him most, that regional final loss to Louisville in 2013.Cook is one of the few holdovers from that team because Duke is now loaded with freshmen. Not just any freshmen, but four McDonald’s all-Americans, three of whom start for what Krzyzewski said was the youngest team he had coached in his 35 seasons at Duke. “The way he’s treated the freshmen has changed our season,” the assistant Jon Scheyer said of Cook.The glue: That was what one of those freshmen, Justise Winslow, called Cook. Winslow scored 7 straight points late in the second half to turn a close game into a rout, denying second-seeded Gonzaga (35-3), which had set a program record for victories, its first berth in the Final Four. With its rotation thinned to eight scholarship players after Rasheed Sulaimon was kicked off the team in January, Duke won 16 of its next 17 games, a stretch that has continued into the tournament. Along with Krzyzewski, Cook instructed teammates not to worry, they would be fine. His nurturing guidance, coaches said, could be felt most with Tyus Jones, the dynamic freshman point guard who was selected as the region’s most outstanding player. Cook met Jones at a camp two summers ago and implored him to choose Duke.Instead of stealing Cook’s job, Jones has complemented him. As Cook has settled into more of a scoring role, Jones has thrived as a creator, a facilitator. He had 15 points and 6 assists on Sunday and supplied the highlight of the game, stealing a pass under the basket and, while hurtling out of bounds, banking it off Przemek Karnowski to retain possession. That moment was symbolic of Gonzaga’s fortunes. It led by 4 points early in the second half but could not withstand Duke’s 3-point shooting — 8 for 19 — or its own poor luck. With the Bulldogs trailing by 53-51 with less than five minutes remaining, Kyle Wiltjer, alone under the basket, missed what would have been a game-tying layup. “I mean, it was a shot he makes,” Gonzaga Coach Mark Few said. “He would make that thing 499 times out of 500. Just a fluke, and there’s nobody on the team we’d rather have taking it other than him.”On Duke’s next possession, Winslow barged into Karnowski, forcing his fourth foul, and made both free throws. Winslow made two more after being fouled while grabbing an offensive rebound, and then he swished a 3-pointer that put the Blue Devils ahead by 60-51 with 2 minutes 48 seconds remaining.“You talk about knowing who he is,” Scheyer said of Winslow. “You look at the shots he’s taking, and I think in the beginning of the year, he was letting guys off the hook a little bit. Now he’s the last guy I’d want to guard.” When Few took over at Gonzaga after the 1999 season, he abided by a singular philosophy to continue building the program: “What did Duke do here?” Gonzaga allocated resources, he said, to improve the overall experience for players.The Bulldogs have appeared in every N.C.A.A. tournament since, all 16 of them, evolving from beloved underdog to feared behemoth. To complete the ascension and reach the Final Four, to do what the Gonzaga greats Adam Morrison and Richie Frahm and Dan Dickau could not, the Bulldogs would have had to topple their paragon.They trailed by 31-26 at halftime and grabbed a 38-34 lead at the 16:20 mark before Duke reeled off 9 straight points, a run capped by a Jahlil Okafor jumper. Even though Gonzaga stayed close until the barrage that followed Wiltjer’s miss, the outcome never seemed in doubt. After a steal and a fast-break layup by Matt Jones, who along with Winslow led Duke with 16 points, extended the lead to 66-52, Krzyzewski pumped his first, whirled and pointed at the cheering fans — a contingent that included the Dallas Cowboys’ coach, Jason Garrett, and quarterback Tony Romo — standing behind the Blue Devils’ bench. For those outstanding freshmen, for Tyus Jones and Okafor and Winslow, all they have known is N.C.A.A. tournament success. With the N.B.A. beckoning, that group is unlikely to last as long at Duke as has Cook, who is trying to make this moment, now that it has finally arrived, last as long as it can. Advertisement