By ZACH SCHONBRUNMARCH 29, 2015
SYRACUSE —  The moment was worth savoring, so Michigan State stayed on the court long after the final buzzer sounded, the nets came down and Travis Trice’s back began tightening up enough to almost double him over. Matt Costello skipped around, and Lourawls Nairn Jr. wept. They stayed until there was no one left to hug. Then they went into the locker room and hugged some more.It seemed completely improbable and yet entirely reasonable at the same time. Michigan State, a No. 7 seed, had no business being in the East Regional final and yet handled business as usual. The Spartans trailed Louisville at halftime and in the final minute of regulation. Still, here they were, dancing, after outlasting the No. 4 seed Cardinals, 76-70, in overtime at the Carrier Dome.“I can’t even put it into words,” Trice said.It had been months since the Spartans even mentioned Indianapolis, the site of this year’s Final Four, even though, early in the season, they were yelling “Indy!” to break every huddle. In January, after they started the season 13-7, Coach Tom Izzo put an end to that. “We’re not worthy of it,” he told his team, and that was it. The Spartans chanted the name of their next opponent for the remainder of the season.Now that next opponent, Duke, will be meeting them in Indianapolis.“It was pretty cool the way the guys felt about it,” said Izzo, who is headed to his seventh Final Four since 1999. “Pretty cool.”AdvertisementThe game was a clash of titans, the kind of matchup we have seen before and will see again in March, April or otherwise.AdvertisementRick Pitino, screeching out directives, his voice hoarse by the 10-minute mark. Izzo, crouching along the sideline, or wandering out on the court, seemingly unable to curb his own enthusiasm. The faces, suits, voices, mannerisms, all of it seemed perfectly familiar, as if dad and uncle were meeting again at the driveway hoop for the one-on-one game to claim the annual family crown.The game was destined for overtime. This was Michigan State’s eighth overtime game this season, the most in program history, and its record was 2-5 in extra time entering Sunday. But nothing about the Spartans has fallen in line with expectations.On Sunday, two of the game’s key moments came from a freshman, Marvin Clark Jr., who put the Spartans ahead, 65-64, with 39 seconds remaining in regulation. Clark then followed that up with a tremendous defensive rebound, ripping the ball from Louisville’s Mangok Mathiang, who had four inches on him.“If I don’t get this, all this hard work we put in is going to be for nothing,” Clark said, recalling his thoughts as he went for the rebound.He wound up missing both free throws at the other end, giving Louisville another opportunity with 21.4 seconds left. After a drive and a missed shot by Terry Rozier, Mathiang got the rebound and Clark fouled him, sending him to the line with 4.9 seconds left. Mathiang, a 48 percent free-throw shooter, made the first attempt, tying the game. After an Izzo timeout, Mathiang bounced out of the Louisville huddle telling teammates, “I got this.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But his second free throw missed. Then, in overtime, Louisville shot 1 of 7 from the field.“It’s a bitter pill to swallow,” Pitino said. “We all had some big dreams.”Michigan State was unranked entering the postseason, and Izzo had just about resigned himself to thinking the loss of stars Adreian Payne, Gary Harris and Keith Appling was going to require more than one season to rebuild. Likewise, Louisville sustained an uninspired stretch of three losses in four games in February. That was before the Cardinals dismissed their third-leading scorer, Chris Jones, who was charged with sexual assault.Yet comparing the postseason résumés of Izzo and Pitino was like the prelude to a prizefight. Pitino was striving to reach his eighth Final Four, moving him alone into second among active coaches behind Duke’s Mike Krzyzewski, who reached his 12th later Sunday.AdvertisementIzzo was 6-2 in round-of-8 appearances. His record on the second day of an N.C.A.A. tournament weekend, now 21-4, is unparalleled, and the Spartans were raring to go for this game. Kevin Pauga, Michigan State’s director of basketball operations, thought he had shown up early for the team breakfast Sunday morning, at 10:15, but the entire team was already waiting for him.Michigan State could not contain Montrezl Harrell, though, in the first half, letting him score 12 points.“We didn’t respect the fact that he could make that little 12-foot jump shot,” the Spartans assistant Mike Garland said. “He was sticking it in our face.”They adjusted by filtering Harrell to the left, his off-hand side, and trapping him along the baseline. After trailing by 8, Michigan State went on a 25-11 run in the first 12 minutes of the second half. Louisville, trailing by 6 with under four minutes remaining, still fought back, led by Wayne Blackshear. He was vomiting at halftime, sustained a fierce blow to the nose and still finished the game with 28 points.But in overtime, the Cardinals came out sluggish, perhaps knowing they were a free throw away from winning. The Spartans lapped up their second wind.“I still think we earned the win in regulation, but they earned the comeback, too,” Izzo said. “We weren’t lucky. I’m not sure they were unlucky. It was just a hell of a basketball game.”A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: For Two Stalwarts, the Joy Never Gets Old.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.