By BILLY WITZMARCH 29, 2015
KISSIMMEE, Fla. —  When Baltimore Orioles Manager Buck Showalter was asked his assessment of Alex Rodriguez, who had homered against his team Saturday, he paused to think. He asked some questions of his own. He offered a quip.Showalter moved on to other topics but then circled back a few minutes later to Rodriguez, whom he managed for a season in Texas, 2003, when Rodriguez won the first of his three American League Most Valuable Player awards.“You know what’s slowed down?” Showalter asked. “The way he runs around the bases.”With opening day a week away, it was an example of how Rodriguez, as he returns from a one-year suspension for using performance-enhancing drugs, figures to maintain his ability to get under the skin of others, this time with a home run trot that Showalter thought had carried even more preening than usual.Fan reaction to Rodriguez has been mixed this spring, with a good helping of boos greeting his at-bats — even at Steinbrenner Field, where he has mostly been well received. Up close, the reception has been even more welcoming, as it was Sunday when Rodriguez paused to sign autographs for about five minutes during a break in batting practice before the Yankees’ 7-0 victory against the Houston Astros.AdvertisementChants of “A-Rod! A-Rod!” emanated from the dozens of fans who crushed up against a railing near the dugout, craning over one another with baseballs, photos and pens. The chaotic scene contrasted with Rodriguez’s demeanor as he calmly plucked items out of the maw and signed them as he spit sunflower seeds.AdvertisementA little earlier, as he sat in the dugout, Rodriguez deflected broader questions of acceptance, as he has all spring.“I’m here to play baseball,” he said after a long pause. “I am extremely grateful to play baseball again.”With few exceptions, Rodriguez has been on his best behavior this spring. The rancor and distrust between him and Yankees management, which was so public when he last played in 2013, has been absent. Though the Yankees would have benefited had Rodriguez taken an injury retirement, meaning that they would not be on the hook for a series of $6 million bonuses tied to home runs and that insurance would cover the remaining $61 million he is owed, they have been publicly welcoming.General Manager Brian Cashman said early in training camp that Rodriguez’s spot on the roster was assured, defusing one early story line. He also added that he had no expectations for Rodriguez, removing a standard by which he would be judged throughout spring training.“Obviously, for me, this is a different spring,” Rodriguez said. “Under a normal spring, the last thing you worry about is the game. You measure your day by what happens pregame and postgame. If you’re doing your job, you should be fully exhausted by the first pitch of the game.”Rodriguez added that this spring “is different because I’m doing things for the first time.““I haven’t been on the field for a year and a half,” he said. “There’s many, many questions.”Rodriguez, whom the Yankees would like to use as their primary designated hitter and as a backup third baseman and third-choice first baseman, has batted .324 this spring with three home runs, a team-leading seven walks and seven strikeouts. Scouts have generally given mildly positive reviews to the way Rodriguez is swinging the bat, given his age, 39, and his long absence. But they also note that he is far from where he once was.Advertisement“I know he can hit a left-handed 89-mile-per-hour fastball pretty good,” Showalter said of the pitch Rodriguez hit for a home run against Orioles pitcher Brian Matusz.He added: “Spring is a great fooler, both good and bad. How’s a guy going to do? Well, that other team will answer for me. If I was a betting man, I’d bet on him. He’s always performed well on the type of stage he’s going to be on.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Sunday, Rodriguez found himself on a new stage — playing first base. He has not played the position before, and if the Yankees had their druthers, he would not have to this season, with Mark Teixeira healthy and Garrett Jones an experienced backup. But the Yankees had so many injuries last season that nine players were used at first base.When Rodriguez did not use his new first baseman’s glove and carried a degree of nonchalance when he worked out there at the beginning of training camp, it raised questions of how willing he was to play the new position. But he has begun to do extra work at first base, as he did for about 30 minutes Saturday with the infield coach Joe Espada, getting more familiar with it and his first baseman’s glove, which is smaller than most.“There was probably more intrigue around him from all of us and probably from himself,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “I’m sure he had confidence in what he could do, but when you sit out a year and you don’t play a lot for two years, you’re probably curious about what it’s going to feel like.”Rodriguez looked mostly at ease Sunday, even while fielding a difficult slow bouncer to his right, which he charged, bobbled on the short hop but recovered and made an across-the-body, on-target throw to pitcher Nathan Eovaldi covering first.“That one was challenging,” said Rodriguez, who had no other hiccups on his three chances. “I felt like a quarterback hitting my tight end on the run.”Girardi said Rodriguez, who was removed after three innings, would very likely get another crack at playing first base, perhaps Thursday when the Yankees have split-squad games. As if to underscore the Yankees’ need for options, Teixeira left a minor league game in Tampa after getting hit with a pitch on his right knee. Girardi said Teixeira would probably be on the field Wednesday, the next time the team plays at home.Afterward, Rodriguez stuck to his usual talking points: He is thankful to be playing a game he loves again, and he would be a team player.Advertisement“Anytime Joe calls my number, I’m just going to be ready,” Rodriguez said. “Whatever the team wants me to do, I’ll do.”In a week, the real games begin and the results will matter. The more weighty assessments will begin then. As it always seems to be for Rodriguez, he will not be measured as much by his words as by his actions.Inside PitchThe Yankees reduced their roster to 35. Pitcher BRYAN MITCHELL and outfielder RAMON FLORES were optioned to Class-AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. Pitchers KYLE DAVIES, JACOB LINDGREN and NICK RUMBELOW; catchers FRANCISCO ARCIA and KYLE HIGASHIOKA; infielders COLE FIGUERA and JONATHAN GALVEZ; and outfielder SLADE HEATHCOTT have been assigned to minor league camp. Pitcher SCOTT BAKER was released.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Rodriguez? So Far, So Good.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.