By HUW RICHARDSMARCH 29, 2015
Australia completed its climb from the depths to the heights of world cricket on Sunday when it won its fifth World Cup, defeating New Zealand by seven wickets in the final at the Melbourne Cricket Ground.Less than two years ago, many of the same players departed the Champions Trophy, the last global tournament in the One-Day International format, winless and in disarray.“We’ve had an amazing journey the last couple of years,” all-rounder James Faulkner said after receiving the Man of the Match trophy on Sunday.The team, coached by Darren Lehmann, who was appointed shortly after the Champions Trophy debacle, and led by captain Michael Clarke, displays the traditional Australian virtues of toughness, confidence and aggression.AdvertisementIts triumph was spearheaded by hugely effective bowling. The final lasted 499 deliveries, but the likely winner was clear after only four. That was when New Zealand’s captain and batting catalyst Brendon McCullum had his off stump surgically removed by a delivery from Australian’s left-arm paceman Mitchell Starc.Advertisement“It was a little lucky”, said Starc, later named Man of the Tournament. Luck had only so much to do with it: Starc also explained that he and the Australia bowling coach, Craig McDermott, had planned the sequence of deliveries that led to McCullum’s demise.McCullum had made a habit of starting New Zealand’s innings with audacious strokeplay. It worked brilliantly most of the time, but as the former England captain Michael Vaughan said on BBC radio, the difference was that Starc is too good to be handled that way.New Zealand lost its first three wickets for 39. Ross Taylor and Grant Elliott took the score to 150, but just as New Zealand was threatening a good score, Faulkner removed Taylor and Corey Anderson in the space of three deliveries, precipitating a late-order collapse to 183 all out.Australia galloped to the target, reaching it with 101 balls to spare. The bulk of the runs came from Clarke, playing his last one-day international, with 74 and Steve Smith, whose 56 not out included the winning runs.Smith, more than anybody, symbolizes the renaissance of this side. Two years ago he looked a “bits and pieces” player who neither batted nor bowled well enough to make a real impact, a goofy Tim Robbins-lookalike appreciated as much for his contribution to team chemistry as for anything he did on the field. Now he is heir apparent to the captaincy and one of the finest batsmen in the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Clarke wore a black arm band in memory of teammate Phillip Hughes, who was killed in a match last November. “It’s got PH on it. I’ll wear it every time I play for Australia,” he said after receiving the trophy. “It has been a really tough few months and everyone would say we played this World Cup with 16 players. Tonight is dedicated to our little brother.”Australia’s five victories have come in the last eight tournaments. Next on the all-time list are India and West Indies, with two each.New Zealand lost its first final, but is a winner as a vibrant co-host and major on-field force.“They’ve been the form side of world cricket the last six months: Brendon McCullum has done an incredible job. They have match-winners through their team,” said the Australia all-rounder Shane Watson. “We’re incredibly glad to have won.”AdvertisementNew Zealand confirmed itself once again, like Australia in Rugby Union and the Netherlands in soccer, as the sport’s pound-for-pound champion, maximizing limited resources by intelligence and innovation.This was the World Cup when the aggressive batsmanship of the Twenty20 format moved up to the longer form of the game, making scores of 300 or more the norm rather than an exception. But New Zealand, an innovator at earlier World Cups, supplemented that evolution with McCullum’s imaginatively aggressive captaincy in the field.“We didn’t lift the trophy but have no regrets with the brand of cricket we played, and we walk away with our heads held high,” said McCullum after the final. “It’s the greatest time of our lives and that’s how we tried to play the game, with a free spirit and heart. I still think we can be very proud of our achievements in this tournament.”Other countries also have happy memories. South Africa at last won a knockout match and was eliminated only after the best match of the tournament, its semifinal against New Zealand. Bangladesh got to play a knock-out match after deservedly eliminating England.Ireland and Afghanistan showed that there is not only life but real cricketing quality beyond the 10 test-playing nations, showing the nonsense of the decision to reduce the 2019 tournament to 10 teams. The long pool stage has nothing to do with the number of qualifiers, but is designed to benefit broadcasters and protect big revenue-generators, notably India, from early elimination.Ireland and Afghanistan contributed considerably more to this year’s tournament than several of their supposed betters. Cricket’s rulers have backtracked before — this tournament was originally intended to have only 10 teams — and should do so again.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Australia Concludes World Cup Revival With Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.