AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Wales has grown accustomed to its gifted athletes’ throwing around rugby’s oval ball, rather than kicking soccer’s round one. There have been three notable exceptions over the past 60 years — John Charles, Ryan Giggs and now Gareth Bale.By and large in Wales, sons are pushed into playing rugby, and that has allowed the country, like New Zealand, to be among the best in the world, despite a small population.Charles broke the mold when he led Wales with equal skills as both a defender and, most notably in the 1958 World Cup, as a goal scorer in the attack.Much slimmer and more sinewy than big John Charles, Giggs played a thousand times on the wing for Manchester United, but he never reached a World Cup or a European Championship with his national team.Bale, for whom Real Madrid paid 100 million euros (then about $130 million) to buy him from Tottenham in the summer of 2013, is kind of a cross between the two. He plays predominantly on the wing, and he can combine the height and strength of Charles with the speed and trickery of Giggs.Right now, Bale is having a hard time in Madrid. The Spanish media, along with some fans, have targeted him with particularly spiteful abuse and are blaming the Welshman, in effect, for Real’s fall from its lofty perch since the beginning of the year.Reasonable people can see that Bale — as well as Cristiano Ronaldo and Karim Benzema — have suffered a drop in form because of injuries to the midfield players who create the openings, including Luka Modric and James Rodríguez.Still, it is Bale who has received the most criticism. One newspaper, Marca, accused Real of paying €100 million for a player who barely merits €20 million. A rival sports newspaper, AS, described his performance last week at Barcelona as worthless.Three fans waited for him that night and shouted insults at him and attempted to kick and punch his distinctive white car as he drove away.Bale responded in the only way that an athlete should, playing the next game like the leader he can be. Unfortunately for Real Madrid fans, it was in the red jersey of Wales. The national team was playing at Israel, which entered Saturday’s game unbeaten in qualifying for the Euro 2016 tournament in France.Just before halftime, Bale leaped high in the air to create the opening goal for Aaron Ramsey. Then Bale scored with a free kick that was the equal of the many that Ronaldo scores. And finally, Bale struck again in the 77th minute to finish off the 3-0 win in Haifa, Israel.That victory, in a hot, humid and supposedly hostile atmosphere on the Mediterranean, knocked Israel off the top of its group. Wales now leads Group B, ahead of both Israel and the favorite, Belgium.If you wonder how hard it can be to win against Israel, this is the first time the national team has lost a competitive home match to anyone since 2012. Saturday’s game was sold out two months ago, and the Israelis will fill another stadium when they meet Belgium in Tel Aviv on Tuesday.By the time Bale hit top form in Haifa, the Israeli defender Eitan Tibi had been sent off for twice fouling him. First, Tibi tripped the winger on the right edge of the penalty box after Bale bamboozled him with one of those high-speed stepovers. The foul was deliberate and desperate. The referee issued a yellow card, and Bale curled the free kick over the defensive wall and beyond the reach of goalkeeper Ofir Marciano at the near post.Moments later, Bale exposed Tibi again, this time with sheer speed. The Israeli body-checked him, and a second yellow card meant his instant dismissal.The remaining 10 Israelis would play more defiantly than they did when the team was complete, but it still was not enough to prevent Bale and his teammate, the Arsenal midfielder Aaron Ramsey, from combining for that third goal, swept in by Bale’s left foot. So it ended, as the Israeli coach Eli Guttman had feared it might, with the Real Madrid winger too much for the home team to contain. Guttman had suggested, tongue in cheek, that great players do not lose it and that Bale was probably saving himself for the game in Haifa.Wales Manager Chris Coleman is building the team around the strengths of Bale and Ramsey as it tries to reach the finals of a major competition for only the second time in its history, something Coleman never accomplished as a player. When Wales played the Belgians in Brussels last November, the manager selected a defensive lineup to contain the better team in a game that ended in a 0-0 stalemate. In Haifa, Coleman chose a different formation, lining up with three central defenders, pushing the fullbacks wide in advanced roles and releasing Bale and Ramsey (or Baley and Rambo, as he calls them) in free roles behind a central striker.Bale — the man of little worth in some Spanish eyes — increased his tally to 16 goals in 49 appearances for Wales, pushing him past Charles. Bale had already exceeded Giggs, who scored 12 goals in 64 appearances for Wales. Charles finished with 15 goals in 38 games for Wales, but, remember, he was a dual-purpose player, either a defender or attacker, depending on what the team needed.Charles had moved to Leeds United before heading to Juventus, where he was treated like a king and is still revered. Gianni Agnelli, the team owner at that time, adored the Welshman, whom he dubbed “Il gigante buono,” or the gentle giant.Bale is neither gentle nor gigantic. He is cast in the shadow of Ronaldo in Madrid, but he has full freedom of expression with Wales, and the difference is evident on the field.Advertisement