AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunHis floppy hair, puckered mouth and timeless shooting stroke captivated New York City and the Big East Conference in the early 1980s. Now, 30 years later, Chris Mullin will return to St. John’s as the coach of the men’s basketball team, according to a person with knowledge of the agreement.Mullin took St. John’s to the Final Four in 1985 and was drafted seventh over all that year by the Golden State Warriors, with whom he played until 1997. He is still the university’s career scoring leader. But Mullin, 51, has no coaching experience at any level. After retiring from the N.B.A. in 2001, he was the Warriors’ executive vice president for basketball operations from 2004 to 2009. More recently, he was an adviser for the Sacramento Kings.Now he is set to inherit the Red Storm from Steve Lavin, who agreed to part ways with St. John’s on Friday, a week after his second N.C.A.A. tournament appearance in five years. The roster will lose four of its top six scorers because of graduation, and the statuses of two other players — Rysheed Jordan, who could enter the N.B.A. draft, and Chris Obekpa, who was suspended from the team — remain in doubt.The terms of the agreement were not immediately clear, but Mullin is expected to earn at least $2 million a year with St. John’s, according to another person with knowledge of the deal.Mullin, who was traveling to New York from the West Coast to complete the deal Monday night, is expected to be introduced in a news conference Wednesday. Reports of the offer from St. John’s had circulated throughout the weekend, but the agreement by Mullin was first reported by The Daily News.It is unusual for a college team to hire someone without coaching experience, although it has worked out well for Iowa State, which named Fred Hoiberg, a hometown favorite, its coach in 2010 after he had spent more than a decade as an N.B.A. player and executive. Hoiberg has led the Cyclones to four N.C.A.A. tournament appearances.Larry Brown is a Hall of Fame coach with plenty of experience, but when he was hired at Southern Methodist in 2012 at age 71, he had not coached at the college level since 1988. Brown assembled a top-notch staff, including the former Illinois State coach Tim Jankovich and the ace recruiters Jerrance Howard and Ulric Maligi. Mullin will most likely try to make similar arrangements with the formation of his staff. In any case, his return seems certain to reinvigorate a fan base that wound up frustrated through Lavin’s tenure with St. John’s, and it is a coup for the university’s new president, Conrado Gempesaw.Advertisement