By PETER KERASOTISMARCH 30, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. —  Word filtered through the Mets’ organization at the start of spring training that the owner Fred Wilpon would be around more and would be more engaged. With spring training winding down, Wilpon made good on that promise in an unusual way — at least by his standards.Early Monday morning, Wilpon addressed the team in a closed-door meeting that players described as motivational and inspirational, with the focus on winning. Afterward, Wilpon offered a wan smile but no comment as he breezed past reporters, having wilted from public view in the roughly six years since he became embroiled in the Bernard L. Madoff financial scandal.The meeting was the first time Wilpon had addressed the Mets during spring training, said the team’s longtime media-relations director, Jay Horwitz.“He’s been around a lot,” outfielder Curtis Granderson said of Wilpon, “and he’s communicated a lot. The important thing about him addressing the entire team is that what he said is not just talk. What he said lines up. He was telling us that we have talent, and I can see that. He was telling us that we have young guys ready to contribute, and I can see that, too.”AdvertisementAt Monday’s meeting, which lasted 20 or 30 minutes, some players and coaches also spoke, said Granderson, who was not among them.Advertisement“It was good,” he said. “Everybody is on the same page.”Third baseman David Wright declined to go into specifics but said: “Anytime you have those types of meetings, you can take a lot out of it. I think everybody in here took a lot out of it.”As if on cue, and perhaps underscoring their commitment to the coming season, the Mets traded away two promising young players during the course of a 7-1 Grapefruit League victory over Miami, acquiring veteran left-handed relievers to address what had looked to be a glaring hole since the team lost Josh Edgin to an elbow injury.In one trade, the Mets dealt the minor league right-hander Cory Mazzoni and a player to be named to the San Diego Padres for the left-hander Alex Torres, who was 2-1 with a 3.33 E.R.A. last season but may be better known for wearing an oversize protective cap designed to prevent head injuries.Also on Monday, the Mets exchanged outfielder Matt den Dekker for the Washington Nationals left-hander Jerry Blevins, who posted a 4.87 E.R.A. last season but limited left-handed hitters to a .160 batting average.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The moves, along with Wilpon’s meeting, only increased the buzz around the Mets, who have shown signs that they could emerge from a prolonged funk with a blend of young talent, veteran leadership and formidable starting pitching.The Mets last had a winning record in 2008. That December, Madoff was arrested in a huge fraud scheme. Hundreds of millions of dollars that Wilpon and Saul Katz, the Mets’ president and Wilpon’s brother-in-law, had invested with Madoff evaporated.Since then, the Mets have methodically trimmed millions of dollars from their payroll — a major-market franchise functioning as if it were in a small city. Mets fans, though, were already upset by the franchise’s steady regression even as Wilpon occasionally made blustery public statements.In 2011, Wilpon told The New Yorker that Jose Reyes “thinks he’s going to get Carl Crawford money,” referring to a seven-year, $142 million contract. “He won’t get it,” Wilpon added.AdvertisementIn the same article, Wilpon said of Wright: “A really good kid. A very good player. Not a superstar.” He also made disparaging remarks about Carlos Beltran, then a Mets outfielder.In 2012, Wilpon insisted that he would be vindicated in the Madoff scandal and that the Mets were not, and would not be, for sale. And in 2013, Wilpon asserted that the Mets were on the cusp of a turnaround and indicated that the team was ready to substantially increase its payroll. (That, like the turnaround, did not happen.)That was among the last times Wilpon spoke publicly.Since then, he has appeared increasingly attached to his current team. After a blowout loss to the Marlins on March 9, Wilpon had a 25-minute discussion with Manager Terry Collins in Collins’s office.Collins insisted the meeting was benign. But at the very least, it signaled Wilpon would indeed be taking a more active role with the team.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Wilpon Is Making Good on His Promise to Be More Engaged With the Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.