AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensOn the surprising march to last spring’s Stanley Cup finals, the Rangers’ best line did not feature Derek Stepan, Martin St. Louis or Chris Kreider. And on the Rangers’ run this season to the top of the N.H.L., their best forward unit has not had any of those players either.A number of players have contributed to the Rangers’ offense, including Stepan, Kreider and St. Louis. But for roughly the last two seasons the team’s most consistent line has had Derick Brassard at center and Mats Zuccarello on the right wing — no matter if it is Rick Nash, J. T. Miller, Benoit Pouliot or someone else playing left wing.“All those guys are good players,” Brassard said, referencing Nash, Miller and Pouliot. “They’re all big guys that skate well and win pucks for us. Me and Zukes, we’re playmakers, and we try to play with the puck as much as we can.”Brassard and Zuccarello started playing together, with Nash, after Brassard arrived in a trade from Columbus during the 2013 season. Brassard and Zuccarello then occupied the Rangers’ third line last season with Pouliot.Despite the fact he was considered a checker by N.H.L. standards, Zuccarello led the team in points (59), and Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault called that line the club’s best throughout its run to the Stanley Cup finals.“He works hard every game,” defenseman Dan Girardi said of Zuccarello, a 5-foot-7 Norwegian. “He’s always in the right place at the right time, he makes defensive players offensive players — scoring goals, blocking shots, hitting guys. He’s kind of the full package, and he’s been playing really well for us for a long time.”Zuccarello, 27, endured a tough start this season. He scuffled through a contract dispute and posted only 23 points in 44 games before the All-Star break. His struggles led to trade rumors and speculation that he was not worth the money he sought.But Zuccarello has been one of the Rangers’ best players since the break, with 24 points in 29 games, and he received a four-year contract extension on March 1. Since signing his deal, he has 12 points in 14 games. “Zuke’s playing real solid right now,” Brassard said. “He’s playing a 200-foot game, and it helps a lot to win a lot of pucks even though he’s a little shorter than everyone else.”Zuccarello picked up his 20th primary assist on Brassard’s goal in Sunday’s 5-2 loss to the Washington Capitals. Brassard (39) and Zuccarello (33) are first and third on the Rangers in assists heading into Tuesday night’s game in Winnipeg.Brassard, 27, is enjoying a career season in his third year with the team. He has a career-high 55 points, shedding a reputation for inconsistency and establishing himself as a top-line center.What’s more, Brassard and Zuccarello have lifted Nash’s game. They played together at times in 2013, and in early November, Vigneault put Nash back on left wing with the duo. Nash netted 30 of his 40 goals with them.“It’s fun playing with those guys,” Nash said. “It seems like we’ve had chemistry all year.”When St. Louis was injured March 15, Vigneault moved Nash back with Stepan and Kreider, putting Miller with Brassard and Zuccarello. Miller, 22, posted five points in six games on that line before Nash, who has scored one goal in his past 10 games, rejoined Brassard and Zuccarello on Sunday.“I know those two are going to make great plays,” Miller said after the Rangers’ victory at Carolina on March 21, when he scored off a pass from Zuccarello. “I just have to try to make room for them.”The rookie Kevin Hayes has played on left wing with Brassard and Zuccarello for two games and netted a winning goal off a feed from Brassard in the Rangers’ 1-0 victory over the Calgary Flames on Feb. 24. Hayes said he felt comfortable with Zuccarello and Brassard on the ice and off.“You play with those guys, and you’re called upon to be offensive,” Hayes said after the Calgary game.Zuccarello said he and Brassard simply had chemistry.“We get along really well outside the ice, and it just carries over to the ice,” Zuccarello said. “There’s not a lot of talk. We just go out and play and have fun. I think that’s the most important thing.”Advertisement