By MARC TRACYMARCH 30, 2015
While Indiana’s legislature and governor said Monday that they would clarify a new law that critics say could condone discrimination against gay people, the Indianapolis-based N.C.A.A., days before the Final Four was set to begin in Indianapolis, left the door open to moving future events and its own headquarters.“We have to be able to conduct our affairs and our tournaments in an environment that reflects the values of inclusiveness and diversity,” N.C.A.A. President Mark Emmert told The New York Times on Monday afternoon. “Inclusion and diversity are real touchstone values in higher education.”A spokesman for Duke, one of the teams playing in the Final Four, also voiced concerns about the law on Monday.Earlier in the day, Emmert expressed similar sentiments in an interview on ESPNU.Emmert said the N.C.A.A., college sports’ governing body, had used lobbyists to oppose the law, called the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The law, which does not explicitly mention sexual orientation, prevents the state from forcing private individuals or corporations to do business in ways that violate religious beliefs. Critics say it could lead to discrimination; supporters say it protects religious freedom.Advertisement“We communicated our deep concern for our ability to maintain a diverse work force and also to support our own membership values,” Emmert said, noting that the N.C.A.A. had done the same last year in opposition to a state constitutional amendment that would not have recognized same-sex unions as marriages but which ultimately failed to make the ballot.In addition to this year’s Final Four, which will be at Lucas Oil Stadium, Indianapolis is scheduled to hold next year’s Division I women’s Final Four. The city also hosts other college championships and is home to about 500 N.C.A.A. employees.Asked whether the N.C.A.A. would consider moving its headquarters or next year’s women’s Final Four, Emmert said, “I don’t want to overstate that fact, but we certainly want to make sure that we have a place where we can create the work environment and the tournament experiences that are a reflection of the values of higher education.”Emmert said that he had heard from several members who opposed the law and that he had been in touch with the boards of all three divisions. They will discuss the law next month at quarterly meetings, he said.“Most of the commentary will likely be coordinated through the association and the governing bodies,” he said, adding, “Individual schools can express their views as they see fit — and often do, universities being universities.”AdvertisementThe Republican-dominated General Assembly and Gov. Mike Pence, a Republican, spent Monday in damage-control mode.Pence said in a statement last week that the law was “not about discrimination, and if I thought it legalized discrimination in any way in Indiana, I would have vetoed it.” He told The Indianapolis Star on Saturday that he hoped the legislature would produce legislation that would “clarify the intent of the law.” The governor’s office did not reply to a request for comment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We hope to have a fix very soon,” David C. Long, president pro tempore of the State Senate, said at a news conference Monday, with the speaker of the State House of Representatives by his side.Indianapolis Mayor Greg Ballard, a Republican, told reporters that he hoped the state legislature would make sexual orientation a protected class and touted a city human rights ordinance that already does that.Asked whether the new law would override the ordinance, Ballard told The Times on Monday, “We’re getting fuzzy answers to that question.”Several universities in the state with prominent sports teams have weighed in.The president of Indiana University, Michael A. McRobbie, said in a statement that his institution “hopes that the controversy of the past few days will move the state government to reconsider this unnecessary legislation.”James Danko, the president of Butler, a private university in Indianapolis whose men’s basketball team has reached the Final Four in recent years, said in a statement that the law “strikes me as ill-conceived legislation at best.”Purdue University, which is public, declined to comment on the law, citing “longstanding Board of Trustees policy” in a statement from the office of its president, Mitch Daniels, the previous governor and also a Republican. It did “stand by our university-wide policy of nondiscrimination.”Several sports leagues, including the N.F.L. — which has a franchise, the Colts, that plays home games at Lucas Oil Stadium — have declined to comment.AdvertisementEmmert acknowledged that a significant number of N.C.A.A. members are religiously affiliated and might have different views of the law.“The challenge of the association, as a collective membership, is to find the collective will on these things,” he said.Asked whether any of those members have urged the N.C.A.A. to support the law, Emmert replied, “I have not heard that.”A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: N.C.A.A. Steps Up Pressure Over New Indiana Law.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.