By MIKE TIERNEYMARCH 30, 2015
ATLANTA —  For its N.C.A.A. tournament coda, “One Shining Moment,” CBS could justify devoting an entire segment to the Hunters of Georgia State. During the first weekend alone, Ron, the coach-father, and R. J., the player-son, provided the types of images that endear the tournament to its rapt followers.There was Ron wheeling along the sideline during the Panthers’ opener in a makeshift chair to accommodate an Achilles’ tendon he tore in the postgame jubilation over the team’s Sun Belt championship. And there he was cracking the cast when he fell off the chair reacting to R. J.’s nearly 30-foot basket that beat Baylor, 57-56, with 2.6 seconds remaining.There was Ron in a scooter high-fiving fans with his free hand and R. J. tapping his heart in appreciation as they left the court together after losing to Xavier in the next round.There was Ron’s uplifting “nothing to be sad about” speech to his crestfallen team in the locker room. And the news conference, when he wept unashamedly on the podium while grasping R. J. and saying: “I love this kid, man. Love him.”AdvertisementThe epilogue played out Monday, far from the glare of the Final Four, and it was R. J.’s turn to cry. A spindly 6-foot-5 junior, Hunter tearfully told teammates that he would forgo his final season to enter the N.B.A. draft.Advertisement“That was the hardest part,” he said later in the Georgia State University Sports Arena, looking every bit the college student in jeans with holes at the knees. “I love these guys.”Though Ron sobbed in the building three weeks ago after what he correctly suspected was R. J.’s final home game, on Monday the coach showed only the wisecracking persona that had been in evidence last week when he was a studio guest on the tournament telecasts.He joked about soon having to relearn the life of a bachelor now that his wife, Amy, would be absent while spending extensive time with R. J. at her son’s new location.The family, which also includes a daughter who is due to marry in May, spoke this month about the inherent pressures on a father-son tandem with the same team.Each had hinted that declaring for the draft might be the wiser option, though R. J. had maintained then and throughout the tournament that he was torn.Whatever uncertainty he felt was ultimately dissolved by encouraging feedback from N.B.A. general managers and the dread of having to confront constant double-teaming for another year.Ron speculated that R. J. might have returned had the Panthers failed to qualify for the tournament. But R. J. said: “The tournament made it hard. I felt so connected to the school.”AdvertisementRon, who partook in three N.C.A.A. tournaments three decades ago while at Miami of Ohio, said pro talent evaluators had been nearly unanimous in assessing his son as ready for the N.B.A. The family believes he will be selected between the 15th and 35th picks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I wouldn’t have wanted him to go if I felt he was in the 40s,” said Ron, who was not surprised when R. J. revealed his decision at a restaurant Sunday night. Four days earlier, after a father-son talk in which R. J. was noncommittal, Ron went home and told his wife, “He’s going.”She approved, saying Monday that the tournament experience had convinced R. J. that turning pro was his destiny.“We’re into signs,” she said.Attention now turns to whether another Hunter will vacate the premises.With an ebullient personality, a knack for recruiting and a four-year record of 87-47, Ron might draw interest from programs that offer more resources and better pay.Pledging affection for the university and for Atlanta, he said he had instructed his agent to pass along only opportunities that would far exceed the current one. He has yet to be linked to an opening and is negotiating with Georgia State for a raise as well as upgrades for the team, such as fewer bus rides to road games.“I like it here,” Ron said, before joking that he might give up coaching and switch to broadcasting.As R. J. and Ron, still tethered to a scooter, went through media interviews, Amy stood to the side, pondering a question on whether Ron would remain at Georgia State.“I hope so,” she said.An article on Tuesday about Georgia State guard R. J. Hunter’s decision to enter the N.B.A. draft misstated, in some copies, the injury sustained by his father, Georgia State Coach Ron Hunter, in the postgame celebration of the team’s Sun Belt Conference championship. He tore an Achilles’ tendon, not an anterior cruciate ligament.A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Father Stays on Sideline as a Georgia State Player Enters the N.B.A. Draft.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.