By HARVEY ARATONMARCH 30, 2015
ALBANY —  Connecticut’s steamroller of a women’s basketball team met a head-on challenge for one half on Monday night but ultimately went merrily on its way to another Final Four, undented and undaunted.The final score, 91-70, of the team’s victory over Dayton in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 8 did not reflect the quality of the resistance it faced for 20 minutes: Coach Geno Auriemma’s Huskies, the defending national champions, knew they were in a game.Trailing by 44-43 at the intermission, the bigger, stronger Huskies took control in the second half against the high-scoring Flyers, tightening their defense and going on a 15-3 run to cement their eighth consecutive berth in the national semifinals. At 36-1, Connecticut goes on to Tampa, Fla., to play Maryland, with South Carolina and last season’s runner-up, Notre Dame, in the other semifinal.Connecticut’s only senior starter, Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis, set a Division I record for career 3-pointers, eclipsing the old mark of 392 with 12 minutes 32 seconds left. She finished with seven 3-pointers and 27 points in the game. Breanna Stewart and Morgan Tuck, controlling the paint, each had 23 points, with Stewart grabbing a career-high 16 rebounds.AdvertisementFor Auriemma, seeking to add to his record nine N.C.A.A. titles, the tight first half was a blessing, a reminder for the Huskies that while they are dominant, no one is unbeatable.Advertisement“We needed a game where we were challenged, and we needed a game where we would have to respond,” Auriemma said, anticipating stiff competition in Tampa but perhaps none more formidable than what Connecticut faced in the first half.He added of Dayton (28-7), “That’s probably one of the best teams we’ve played in the last five years.”Flyers Coach Jim Jabir, a New Yorker who went to high school with Chris Mullin (at Xaverian, in Brooklyn) and to college with Jeff Van Gundy (at Nazareth, in Rochester), has long been accustomed to losing to Auriemma, like most coaches in the Division I women’s game. From 1996 to 2002, when he coached a struggling Big East team in Providence, Jabir was 0-8 against the Huskies, losing by an average of 45.9 points, with drubbings of 78 and 65. He had fared no better at Dayton, with a 40-point defeat in Storrs in 2011-12.But this Dayton team, Auriemma said, had gotten his attention with tournament victories over the Albany Region’s No. 2 seed, Kentucky, and its No. 3 seed, Louisville. Dayton was the only team not seeded first or second to reach the round of 8.“They play a style that’s really fun to watch — they’re fearless,” Auriemma said before the game of the Flyers, whose up-tempo offense was modeled after Paul Westhead’s Loyola Marymount men’s teams of the 1980s and his W.N.B.A. squads later. “They just play; they’re not intimidated by anyone or anything.”Jabir said of his tactics in trying to make Dayton the first Atlantic 10 Conference team in the Final Four, “The smart money would be to play like Villanova and run the shot clock down, but we don’t play that way.”From the start on Monday, it was clear that Auriemma’s assessment was right: The Flyers, lighting up the scoreboard as usual, were not intimidated by anyone or anything, not the Huskies or the stage.Led by the 6-foot-4 senior Ally Malott and the 6-foot junior Kelley Austria, the Flyers dictated the pace, which enabled them to counter Connecticut’s more physical frontcourt players. They were deadly from the perimeter, converting 7 of 10 early 3-point attempts, with Malott making all four she took.AdvertisementFor a change, it was Auriemma’s team that was forced to keep up. It did, behind Stewart’s 14 first-half points on an assortment of drives and jumpers and the long-range shooting of Mosqueda-Lewis, who made three 3-pointers in the process of scoring 13 points in the half.Not many Connecticut opponents get the quality open shots that Dayton did, with the Flyers spreading the floor in halfcourt sets, penetrating and consistently finding the open shooter. Even a smiling Auriemma seemed to admire, if not enjoy, the quality of Dayton’s attack.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The biggest lead Connecticut could muster in the first half was 41-37. When Austria scored on a fast-break layup to put Dayton back ahead, Connecticut had its first halftime deficit this season. (The Huskies led Stanford by 2 in the one game they lost.)And that was with Dayton shooting just two free throws, making one, as it relied mainly on its perimeter game.Jabir said he knew his team could not continue to shoot that way, given the law of averages and the adjustments Auriemma was sure to make.“We knew they were probably getting yelled at a little bit and they would come out and make a run,” Malott said.The shift in momentum occurred on the Huskies’ defensive side, with constant switches on ball screens leaving few open looks for the Flyers. Malott failed to score after the break.“It was a little harder to get open,” she said.The 15-3 Huskies run turned their 1-point deficit into an 11-point lead, and it soon ballooned to 20. Jabir knew there was no clawing back.Advertisement“He’s got great players; I know that,” he said of Auriemma. “But he gets them to play at such a high level.”To share that level even for 20 minutes was an achievement, Jabir knew.“That was fun,” he concluded. “This is a proud day.”MARYLAND 58, TENNESSEE 48 Lexie Brown scored 13 of her 15 points in the second half, Brionna Jones added 14 points and 9 rebounds, and top-seeded Maryland advanced to its second straight Final Four with a win over No. 2-seeded Tennessee in Spokane, Wash.Brown made three 3-pointers in the second half as the Terrapins (34-2) overcame their lowest-scoring first half of the season — they led, 22-21, after 20 minutes — to eliminate the Lady Vols (30-6) from the N.C.A.A. tournament for the second straight year. The Terrapins will be making their fifth Final Four appearance, and their third under Coach Brenda Frese.Ariel Massengale had 16 points for Tennessee (30-6), which was trying to reach the Final Four for the first time since 2008. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: UConn Women Stumble, for a Half Anyway.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.