AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonSYRACUSE — Ten seconds remained in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s tense East Regional final Sunday when the basketball unexpectedly ricocheted into the hands of the Michigan State senior guard Travis Trice.Trice knew just what to do: nothing.On the Michigan State bench, Coach Tom Izzo was thinking that the ball was precisely where he wanted it. The Spartans had a 4-point lead over Louisville in a frenzied overtime.Trice stood absolutely still, a picture of poise and a statue of self-control. The Cardinals had to foul Trice, who made two free throws that sealed the Spartans’ 76-70 victory.Michigan State is heading to the Final Four on the back of Trice, a small, skinny guard who was barely recruited out of high school, who was not a starter until this season and whose career was nearly derailed by a mysterious brain infection. He also had a litany of injuries in recent seasons, including a debilitating concussion.For most of his college years, hardship dogged him off the court. So it is little wonder that Trice, finally getting his chance, appears so composed and peaceful on the court.“Travis has always had that cool demeanor in games,” his mother, Julie, said after Sunday’s victory. “He’s the one who is trying to calm down everyone around him. I don’t know how he does that. I couldn’t do that.”Trice, 22, shrugged on Sunday when asked how he had come to his tranquil deportment.“I’ve always felt like that was part of my job as the point guard,” he said. “And truthfully, in my head, I am trying to stay calm and be sure I’m thinking straight.”Trice’s measured approach to the game was evident at least three times in the regional final. Near the end of regulation, after his teammate Marvin Clark Jr. missed two free throws, shots that might have clinched the victory for Michigan State, Trice went to Clark at the next whistle — with the game still very much in doubt.“I told him that those misses weren’t going to lose us the game,” Trice said. “I told him he was going to get another big rebound or another chance to help us win. We needed him now so we could win.”Midway through overtime, the Spartans were running a little ragged, hurrying to inbound the ball and jumpy in their offensive sets. They seemed to be feeling the stress of a game played on national television in front of an announced crowd of 24,404 that was mostly standing and yelling.Trice gathered his teammates at the free-throw circle.“Slow down,” he said. “Easy. Relax.”Earlier, in the huddle before the overtime period, Izzo prepared to give his team a pep talk.“But Travis was telling the guys that we’re going to be O.K.,” Izzo said. “So I didn’t say anything.”The Spartans’ Branden Dawson said Trice had told them: “Hey, this is our eighth overtime game this season. We’ve got this. We’re going to win.” Dawson added, “We believed Travis.”The 6-foot-6 Dawson may be most responsible for Trice’s ending up at Michigan State. Big-time basketball coaches flocked to recruit Dawson at his summer Amateur Athletic Union games. A few also noticed Trice, a 150-pound point guard who was not yet 6 feet tall.Izzo decided he wanted Dawson and Trice. For months afterward, Trice’s family often heard that he had been given a scholarship to help lure Dawson to Michigan State. When Trice averaged less than five minutes a game in his first two seasons as a Spartan, it might have seemed like more than just a theory.Izzo said he was waiting for Trice to get a little bigger and stronger; there were also a few talented guards playing ahead of him. But Trice was having trouble adding bulk because of frequent physical setbacks.Trice had turf toe, infected blisters on his feet, pulled muscles, strained ligaments and a concussion. Then, in 2012, he began to lose weight. He developed dark circles under his eyes.“They ran every kind of test trying to figure out what was wrong with him,” Julie Trice said. “It was scary, especially when they said they were doing a spinal tap.”A brain infection caused by a parasite was eventually suspected. Slowly, he recovered.“That changed him; it made him live in the moment,” Julie Trice said. “It made him realize that tomorrow is not promised, and neither is the next game.”Healthy again, Travis Trice had time to work out and get stronger.“He got up to maybe 175 pounds,” Izzo said, laughing. “But this past summer, he really advanced a lot physically. And I think he got more confident, too. Travis has always had a high basketball I.Q., but this season, I saw Travis develop in new ways. The last six weeks, he’s just been electric.”In the N.C.A.A. tournament, Trice has averaged 19.8 points a game, an increase from a season average of 14.8 entering the tournament. The seventh-seeded Spartans will play Duke, the top seed from the South Region, in the national semifinals Saturday in Indianapolis.Asked to explain Trice’s jump in production, Izzo grinned and said, “The bigger the game, the more often you want the ball in Travis’s hands.”When his two free throws dropped with 10 seconds left Sunday for his 16th and 17th points, Trice allowed himself a small smile. But when the game ended, he collapsed to the floor.“That’s the first time I’ve ever seen Travis cry,” said Dawson, who has been his teammate for many seasons.Julie Trice said: “That wasn’t like him. But I was kind of happy to see it. I was saying, ‘Let it go, baby.’ ”As he lay on the court, Trice was absolutely still again.“I was trying to hold it in,” he said later. “But at that moment, you think of everything you’ve been through. I’m glad that I did cry now.“It isn’t my style. But it felt good.”Advertisement