AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonThe N.F.L. penalized the Atlanta Falcons and the Cleveland Browns on Monday, suspending two team executives for off-the-field infractions last season.The league suspended the Browns’ general manager, Ray Farmer, for the first four regular-season games of the 2015 season without pay for sending text messages to his coaches during games last year. The Browns were also fined $250,000. Farmer will not be allowed in the Browns’ offices or practice complex and cannot attend the team’s games during his suspension.“I respect the league’s decision and understand that there are consequences for my actions,” Farmer said in a statement. “Accountability is integral to what we are trying to build, and as a leader I need to set the right example.”The Falcons will forfeit a fifth-round draft pick in the 2016 N.F.L. draft because they piped in recorded crowd noise at home games during the 2013 and 2014 seasons. The team was also fined $350,000. Roddy White, the team’s former director of event marketing (not the Pro Bowl receiver of the same name), would have been suspended for eight games for breaking league rules prohibiting artificial crowd noise. White was fired by the Falcons. If he works for an N.F.L. team this season, he may have to serve some, or all, of the suspension.Rich McKay, the Falcons’ president, did not know about the infraction, but he was White’s boss. McKay will be suspended from the league’s competition committee beginning Wednesday and can apply to return to the committee on June 30.“What took place was wrong and nowhere near the standards by which we run our business,” Arthur Blank, the owner of the Falcons, said in a statement. “Anytime there are actions that compromise the integrity of the N.F.L. or threaten the culture of our franchise, as this issue did, they will be dealt with swiftly and strongly.”The penalties are mild compared with those for some other off-the-field infractions. Farmer will still be with the Browns to help pick players in the coming N.F.L. draft, and he will also be with the team during training camp and the preseason. The team will not forfeit any draft picks. The Falcons will give up the late-round pick next season, but no member of their player personnel was penalized.By comparison, in 2007, the Patriots were stripped of their 2008 first-round draft pick after the league determined that a team staff member videotaped signals that were used by Jets coaches during the season opener that year. New England was also fined $250,000 for that infraction, and Coach Bill Belichick was fined $500,000.A special investigator hired by the league has yet to determine whether the Patriots were at fault when some of their game balls were found to be inflated below league minimums during the A.F.C. championship game in January.The league is also looking into allegations that Woody Johnson, the owner of the Jets, broke league rules on tampering when he said last year that he would be interested in Darrelle Revis’s returning to the team. Revis became a free agent when the season ended and has since signed with the Jets.The Jets have also accused Robert K. Kraft, the owner of the Patriots, of tampering for comments he recently made about Revis.Advertisement