AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherCall it the Familiar Four.We started with 68 teams, from North Florida to Eastern Washington. But the four that remain have the comfortable feeling of old gym shoes. It’s a bit like a baseball playoff with the Braves, the Cardinals, the Red Sox and the Yankees. Well, maybe not the Yankees.All four of this year’s surviving teams have already made Final Four appearances in this short decade, and two have won a championship in that time. Three of the four were No. 1 seeds and favored to make it this far.As it is in so many ways, Kentucky is the standout, heading to its fourth Final Four in five years. Wisconsin returns as well, after a national semifinal appearance last year (and it beat the same opponent, Arizona, to get there).Duke is back for the first time since its 2010 title. But with 12 round-of-16 appearances in the last 15 years and 12 Final Four berths in the Mike Krzyzewski era, it is hardly an exotic face.Michigan State, the only non-No. 1 seed to make it this year, cannot be considered an interloper, either, not with its history of tournament overachievement. Its last visit to the Final Four was in 2010, as a fifth seed. Last year it made the round of 8 as a fourth seed.Though the teams and coaches were predictable, the cast of characters on the court is largely new, as has come to be common in 21st century college basketball.Of the seven Kentucky Wildcats who played at least 10 minutes Saturday, only two, the Harrison twins, played in last year’s national championship game. They are joined by four freshmen and the junior Willie Cauley-Stein, who missed that final with an injury.But that inexperienced group is still the big favorite in Indianapolis despite a scare against Notre Dame in the round of 8 Saturday. Kentucky was outplayed for much of that game, and had Notre Dame not made a hash of its final possessions, the Irish might have been in the Final Four for the first time since 1978.Kentucky will face Wisconsin, which is that rare bird, a veteran-led Final Four team. Frank Kaminsky, a senior, was predictably strong in the victory over Arizona, but so was the junior Sam Dekker, who shot 8 for 11 and scored 27 points. Wisconsin did not play a freshman for even a minute.Though many expect that semifinal to produce the eventual national champion, Duke looks dangerous in the other half of the bracket after crushing Gonzaga on Sunday. Behind the possible N.B.A. No. 1 draft pick Jahlil Okafor, his fellow standout freshman Justise Winslow and, for good measure, the senior leadership of point guard Quinn Cook, the Blue Devils have won 19 of their last 21, losing only to Notre Dame twice.Though it is surrounded by three No. 1 seeds, Michigan State should not be underestimated. It lost 11 times this season, but most computer rankings had the team around 20th nationally before the tournament. And after its wins over Georgia, Virginia, Oklahoma and Louisville, it has moved up to about 10th, hardly a long shot.Still, it is hard to look past Kentucky, at 38-0 the first power conference team to go undefeated in the regular season since Indiana’s 1976 team, which won the national title.And next year? Well, three of Kentucky’s four key freshmen are expected to leave and be selected in the first round of the N.B.A. draft, as is Cauley-Stein.But John Calipari has signed one of the nation’s top five high schoolers, the 6-foot-10 Skal Labissiere from Memphis, and is in the hunt for two more, Jaylen Brown and Malik Newman.Do not be surprised if next year in Houston, more familiar faces return.Advertisement