By SEWELL CHANOCT. 15, 2015
LONDON —  Is competitive bridge — the four-player card game favored by the likes of Warren E. Buffett and Bill Gates — a sport?No, a British court ruled on Thursday, dealing a blow to bridge players who had brought a lawsuit in an attempt to obtain official recognition and government financing to teach the game in schools and encourage students to take it up.The English Bridge Union, which has 55,000 members, brought the suit after Sport England, formerly known as the English Sports Council, said last year that it would not recognize so-called mind sports like bridge and chess.Justice Ian Dove, ruling for the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, insisted that the issue was “not the broad, somewhat philosophical, question as to whether or not bridge is a sport,” but rather this narrower question: “whether or not the defendant lawfully adopted a definition of sport which effectively excludes ‘mind sports.’ ”AdvertisementOther countries — among them Belgium, France, Ireland, the Netherlands and Poland — recognize competitive bridge as a sport. The International Olympic Committee recognized bridge and chess as sports in the 1990s, although neither has been played at the Olympics. (The World Bridge Federation and its United States affiliate are trying to change that.)AdvertisementThe issue was not merely symbolic: The sports council and its parent and sibling organizations in Britain distribute funds from the National Lottery for all kinds of projects, from Olympic-level facilities to youth leagues, and sporting competitions are eligible for certain tax exemptions.“The importance of supporting physical training and physical recreation remains a significant element of public policy,” Justice Dove wrote in his ruling, though he added: “That is not to say that there may not be good reason for public policy to promote mental activity and agility.”Phil Smith, the director of sport at the council, praised the ruling.“Sport England’s job is to help the nation to be more physically active, a role given to us by our royal charter,” he said in a statement. “We recognize that many people enjoy playing bridge, but that’s not going to play a part in the fight against inactivity.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ian Payn, vice chairman of the English Bridge Union, said he was “very disappointed” by the ruling. He said the case was never about money.“There’s a lot of calumny going around claiming it’s an attempt to get funding from Sport England,” he said. “Nothing could be further from our minds.”The bridge union believes that recognition not only would provide intangible benefits but also would make it easier for schools to add bridge to their curriculums and for local bridge clubs to reserve space for tournaments. (Justice Dove said the “nonpecuniary” benefits of recognition “cannot be dismissed out of hand.”)Mr. Payn said the organization might appeal. Justice Dove did not specifically grant permission to appeal, which would ease the process to contest the ruling but does not rule out the possibility.He noted that the bridge union had already spent 100,000 pounds, or about $153,000, in litigation expenses and had also been ordered to pay at least £50,000 to cover Sport England’s litigation costs.“Whether we think that something so chimeric as recognition is worth the expense of possibly losing the appeal, as well, is the decision we have to face,” Mr. Payn said.AdvertisementRegardless, the bridge union will carry on. Mr. Payn noted that the English team “narrowly missed” the bronze level — losing out to Poland — at this year’s World Bridge Teams Championships, which were held in Chennai, India, and ended on Saturday.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: British Court Decides Competitive Bridge Isn’t a Sport.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.