By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE and JERÉ LONGMANMARCH 30, 2015
BOSTON —  In the glassy offices of Boston’s headquarters for bidding on the 2024 Olympics, signs remind officials: “Keep Calm and Bid On.”“It’s taking the long view,” said Richard A. Davey, the chief executive of Boston 2024, the private group that is overseeing the city’s bid. “You can’t get too high on the good days or too low on the bad days.”The bad days have seemingly far outnumbered the good since Boston was chosen in January over Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington as the American candidate to host the Summer Games in 2024; it would be the first Summer Olympics in the United States since the Atlanta Games in 1996.Recent polling showed that only a third of Boston residents wanted the Olympics in their backyard. A majority of residents are worried they will be stuck with the tab for cost overruns, and they have been annoyed by Boston 2024’s lack of transparency. With public support cratering, Boston 2024 officials reversed themselves last week and said that they would support a statewide voter referendum on the Games on the November 2016 ballot.AdvertisementThe officials went so far as to say that if the measure passed in Massachusetts but failed in the city of Boston, they would drop the bid and withdraw from contention. That possibility makes a referendum a high-stakes gamble; if it fails, it not only humiliates its backers here but it also adds another chapter to the United States Olympic Committee’s quixotic effort to bring the Games back to the United States.AdvertisementOlympic bids are famously roller-coaster affairs, down one day, up the next. London made several gaffes and underwent a messy leadership change; it was not considered the favorite to host the 2012 Summer Games until Paris stumbled at the last moment and the International Olympic Committee settled on London.Much time remains to shore up public opinion in Boston. The I.O.C. will not choose the 2024 host city until September 2017 from a roster that is likely to include Paris, Rome, and Hamburg, Germany.“There is plenty of time to get this bid where it needs to be,” Scott Blackmun, chief executive of the United States Olympic Committee, said in a recent conference call with reporters.And Boston has a lot going for it — a great passion for sports, corporate and political backing, and support from renowned universities like Harvard and M.I.T. It has devised a walkable Olympic plan that would rely heavily on public transportation and the use of temporary structures to avoid littering the region with white elephants after the Games end. As such, the Boston bid meshes well with the goals of the I.O.C.’s Agenda 2020 for sustainable, less expensive Games.“If the U.S. would come forward with the right bid, it could be very good timing,” said Michael Payne, a former marketing director for the I.O.C.Boston, he added, “could create a very interesting narrative.”More Than a Simple NoBut if voters rejected Boston’s bid in a referendum and the city pulled out of contention, it would be a disaster, not only for the bid leaders but also for the entire Olympic movement. The Olympics labor under an image of bloated extravagance and corruption. And losing an entry from the United States — long the economic engine of the Games, with its television rights fees and corporate sponsorships — would deal it another severe blow.It would also undermine considerable efforts by Mr. Blackmun and Larry Probst, chairman of the U.S.O.C., to overhaul a dysfunctional American Olympic committee and repair a once-tattered relationship with the International Olympic Committee.AdvertisementA toxic relationship between American and international officials helped scuttle bids by New York (2012) and Chicago (2016) to host the Summer Games. A collapse of the Boston bid could harm future American attempts to secure the Games and would again raise questions about the leadership and direction of the U.S.O.C.“If Boston withdraws its bid, it would make it seem like the U.S.O.C. didn’t do a good job choosing its city, didn’t research enough possibilities, didn’t take into account that people in Boston didn’t want the Olympics,” said David Wallechinsky, the president of the International Society of Olympic Historians.Some critics, and even some supporters, of the U.S.O.C.’s choice of Boston over Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington said the Olympic committee should have given more concrete reasons it picked Boston in the first place. They also said the committee should have conducted more thorough polling beforehand and provided more details and fostered more public debate before announcing its selection of Boston in January.“The U.S.O.C. did some polling, so they obviously had a perspective, but if I understand correctly, a lot of the local community, business leadership and others were somewhat blindsided by this,” said Mr. Payne, the former I.O.C. marketing director, who said he had exchanged ideas about the bidding process with Mr. Blackmun. “Would it have been better to have a more open discussion? Looking back now, probably a lot of people would say yes.”The U.S.O.C. said that its polling beforehand showed a majority in favor of the bids in all four of the American candidate cities for 2024. The committee also imposed certain parameters on the bidding process that it thought would be good for the cities, but in retrospect they might have backfired.For example, it did not want Boston, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington to spend $10 million each on their bids just in hopes of winning, as Chicago did in its futile campaign for 2016.And it did not want the American cities to divulge all of the details of their plans nearly three years before the I.O.C. chose the 2024 host. Doing so, the committee argued, could give a competitive advantage to international challengers and risk the kind of bid fatigue that befell Chicago.“We felt there were pros and cons of doing it the way we did it,” said Patrick Sandusky, a spokesman for the U.S.O.C.Mr. Sandusky added: “We didn’t want it to become a cash arms race. We felt if we did it early enough, they could build a plan that was more detailed and right for the city. The flip side of that is people didn’t know as much in Boston, perhaps, as they did in Chicago at the time of the announcement.”AdvertisementAdmitting MistakesIn retrospect, said Mr. Davey, who was brought in as chief executive of the bid after Boston was selected, more engagement with the general public would have helped.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think we definitely got distracted by process; there’s no doubt about that,” Mr. Davey said. “The bid details were not released until after we were designated. I can’t speak for other American cities, but I think Bostonians expect to be involved early and often when it comes to such a large event like the Olympics.”Asked what mistakes had been made, Mr. Davey said: “The transparency piece. Having it upfront. That would have helped. We should have had a tighter message and a plan to brief people, to answer questions. We spent a lot more time getting into details with elected officials and with constituency groups and interest groups.”Secrecy, a failure to verify possible venues in advance with landlords, a contract that barred city employees from criticizing the bid and revelations of exorbitant pay (including $7,500 a day to former Gov. Deval Patrick) also contributed to civic dyspepsia about Boston’s hosting the Olympics. On top of that, more snow fell on Boston this winter than ever before, causing the collapse of the public transportation system, a key component of the Olympic bid. By mid-March, only 36 percent here wanted to host the Games, one of the most anemic levels of support ever registered in a potential Olympic city.Technically, the U.S.O.C. could nominate another American candidate by a September 2015 deadline. But that is before the referendum is likely to be held. And officials say they are standing behind Boston.“We made a decision; we’re supporting Boston and moving forward with our applicant city for the 2024 Olympic Games, period,” said Anita DeFrantz, an American delegate of the I.O.C. and a member of the board of directors of the U.S.O.C.The challenge for Boston officials is to overcome an existential debate about whether the Olympics have outlived their usefulness and become an unmanageable spectacle of cost overruns and taxpayer-sapping finances that could be more urgently directed elsewhere.The 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia, cost $50 billion. Rome withdrew its candidacy for the 2020 Summer Games, awarded to Tokyo, citing economic concerns. Oslo, Munich, Krakow, and Davos-St. Moritz, Switzerland, led a veritable parade of withdrawal from interest in hosting the 2022 Winter Games.AdvertisementGames as a ‘Catalyst’For Boston to bolster public support in this climate of skepticism, experts said, it must convince residents that the Games will truly be privately funded and within budget — and that they can help achieve broader and more permanent civic goals, such as upgrading transportation systems, as was done with Barcelona in 1992, Athens in 2004 and London in 2012.“Instead of thinking of the Olympics in the context of a big snowstorm where infrastructure didn’t work, you turn it around and say the beauty of the Olympics is that they’re a catalyst to getting things done that you otherwise wouldn’t be able to generate the political will for or money to do,” said Dan Doctoroff, who was named this month as a member of the U.S.O.C. board of directors and who led New York’s unsuccessful attempt to host the 2012 Summer Games.One of the biggest complaints in Boston has been that a small cabal of business leaders and construction magnates who would benefit from the Olympics has hijacked the process and excluded the citizenry. Mr. Davey said one of his goals was to show that the bid organizers were listening to these concerns and that someday residents would feel they owned the Olympics the way they own the Boston Marathon.“No one has suggested that we should cancel the Boston Marathon in two weeks, which has three times as many athletes and as many spectators on the highest day of the Olympics,” Mr. Davey said.“That’s because the city owns the marathon,” he said. “Where we need to get to, and this is where the public process comes into play, is that the city of Boston needs to own this, not a small group of individuals, and we’re beginning that now.”A version of this article appears in print on March 31, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: In Vote on Boston Bid, U.S.O.C.’s Future Is at Stake, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.