AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanVIERA, Fla. — Jerry Blevins was waiting in the Washington Nationals’ bullpen Monday afternoon when he first noticed something unusual. He was scheduled to pitch against the St. Louis Cardinals, but as the game went on, he was not summoned. Then he saw his manager walking toward the bullpen. He had been traded to the Mets.Intradivision trades are rare, and this one seemed particularly hard to understand. The Nationals have built themselves into perennial contenders in the National League East, dominating the Mets in particular. But this year, finally, the Mets seemed confident enough and talented enough to make a run in the division. Blevins, suddenly a Nationals rival, asked another reliever for a ride home from the park after he learned of the trade. “I was like, ‘Can I please avoid this awkward bus ride?’ ” Blevins said.The Mets welcomed Blevins on Tuesday, and they hope that he will become one of the final pieces of a contender. After making two trades Monday, the Mets have three promising left-handed relievers: Alex Torres, Sean Gilmartin and Blevins. Of the three, Blevins may be the most important, because he will be expected to match up against the best left-handed hitters in the division.On Tuesday, Blevins made his unofficial Mets debut here, against the Nationals, facing Bryce Harper, whom he considers a friend.The Mets won, 2-0. “There’s all sorts of awkwardness,” Blevins said. “But that comes with the territory. This is the life we chose. I’m just happy to be a New York Met. I’m ready to wear those pinstripes. They’re supposed to be slimming, so that’s unfortunate for me.”Blevins stands about 6 feet 6 and weighs 185 pounds. An active Twitter user, Blevins made a strong statement about his new team on Tuesday. “We have a chance to shock some people in the East,” he said. “We’ve got such high talent. I’d put this rotation against anybody’s. I feel like we can do some damage.”The Mets have about a week to incorporate Blevins into the roster and determine how they will use their three left-handed relievers. The team gave him No. 13, his number with the Nationals. For the Mets, that carries some significance. Billy Wagner was another left-handed reliever who wore No. 13, and his Mets career ended glumly, with Tommy John surgery. During the past few years, the Mets have overworked their left-handed relievers, from Pedro Feliciano, to Tim Byrdak, to Scott Rice, to Josh Edgin. All of them sustained arm injuries. But perhaps Blevins’s fate will be different. “I don’t throw quite as hard as Billy Wagner,” he said, grinning.Blevins’s fastball sits near 91 miles per hour. He has carved out an eight-year career largely on his ability to get left-handed batters out. He has held them to a .212 average over his career, and last season, he limited them to a .160 average while recording 66 strikeouts in 571/3 innings.In the N.L. East — where teams employ hitters like Harper, Freddie Freeman, Christian Yelich, Ryan Howard and Chase Utley — Blevins could become a valuable acquisition. “I evaluate the hitter, what they’re trying to do,” Blevins said. “Then you either try to exploit what they’re doing or play a little chess match and mix and match. Some guys guess, some guys don’t. It’ll be fun. It’ll be fun. I enjoy that.”With Blevins’s arrival, the Mets’ bullpen seems more balanced. They could keep two left-handed relievers all season to play the matchups and manage their workloads. Jenrry Mejia and Jeurys Familia seem comfortable at the end of games, and Bobby Parnell and Vic Black are expected to return in a month or so. Of course, there was a reason the Nationals were willing to deal Blevins within the division for the outfield prospect Matt den Dekker. With the Nationals this spring, Blevins allowed eight earned runs and four home runs in eight innings. But on Tuesday, he faced the one batter — Harper — and struck him out on three pitches.INSIDE PITCHDaniel Murphy (hamstring) went 1 for 3 with a walk in a minor league game and also ran the bases. The Mets are unsure whether he will return by opening day. Advertisement