By BILLY WITZMARCH 31, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. — Only Masahiro Tanaka knows whether the small tear in his elbow ligament that caused him to miss two months last season is providing any discomfort or is in some way responsible for a slight dip in his pitching velocity during spring training.But each time Tanaka shows some sort of vulnerability or does not quite match the standards he set last season, when he was among the best pitchers in the American League, doubts creep in about his health.So it has been this spring, which Tanaka concluded Tuesday with a not-good, not-bad performance against the Minnesota Twins, allowing three runs on seven hits over four and a third innings. He struck out one and did not walk a batter, tossing 76 pitches — the most he has thrown this spring.“I feel good that I was able to come through camp healthy right now,” Tanaka told reporters in Fort Myers, Fla., where the Yankees lost, 3-1. “I think I’m a bit relieved.”AdvertisementTanaka had a lighter workload this spring, pitching about seven fewer innings than he did a year ago. He is not the only pitcher with whom the Yankees were treading carefully. C. C. Sabathia made only eight starts last year, his season ending for knee surgery. Like Tanaka, Michael Pineda was effective when he was healthy but missed nearly three months with a shoulder injury.Advertisement“You never know about pitchers today,” Manager Joe Girardi said in Fort Myers, mindful of last season, when Ivan Nova tore elbow ligaments in late April. He is expected to return by June.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jacoby Ellsbury, who until Tuesday had been out since March 15 with an oblique strain, said he expected to be ready for Monday’s season opener against Toronto at Yankee Stadium. Ellsbury singled twice in five at-bats while playing center field for five innings in a minor league game.“It’s not really a controlled environment,” said Ellsbury, who is likely to be in the lineup Wednesday when the Yankees play the Tampa Bay Rays. “You have swings and misses, check swings, all that stuff. So that’s the best test for it, game action.”SALARIES SET RECORD  The average salary when opening-day rosters are finalized Sunday will top $4 million for the first time, according to a study of all major league contracts by The Associated Press. Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Clayton Kershaw leads all players at $31 million, and his team projects to open the season with a record payroll of about $270 million. (AP)WILL OF CUBS GREAT IS VALID A judge in Illinois determined that the will signed by the Chicago Cubs great Ernie Banks that gives all his assets to Regina Rice, his longtime caregiver, was valid. Banks’s family maintained that Rice coerced him into handing over his assets. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Tanaka Is ‘a Bit Relieved’ After His Elbow Meets the Demands of Spring.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.