By ANDREW KEHMARCH 31, 2015
Less than a minute remained in the Nets’ game Tuesday night, and they were hounding the Indiana Pacers around the Barclays Center floor, their sneakers squeaking in a frantic rhythm as they tried to guard a 5-point lead. The desperation was palpable, and the doggedness paid off.With 38.9 seconds left and nowhere to go, Pacers center Roy Hibbert launched a desperate 3-pointer that missed the rim altogether. Seconds later, on the other end, Joe Johnson splashed a 3-pointer through the net, and relief surged through the arena. The Nets had watched a gigantic early lead evaporate, but they recovered down the stretch to secure a hugely important victory, 111-106.Deron Williams said after the game that the Nets, who have been wildly inconsistent this season, might not have showed such resolve a few weeks ago. But it seems as if the feeling around the team has changed.“It’s a mentality, a sense of urgency, realizing we have a chance to make these playoffs, and we’re just trying to make a push,” said Williams, who had 11 points and 8 assists.AdvertisementWilliams pointed out that every game, every little detail, was important now as the playoff picture crystallized in the far-from-overwhelming Eastern Conference.AdvertisementAt the start of the day, only three games separated seventh through 11th places in the standings. At the end of the night, the Nets were alone in the eighth and final postseason spot, a half-game ahead of the Boston Celtics and one and a half games ahead of the Pacers. On top of that, the win gave the Nets a 2-1 regular-season series win over the Pacers, giving them a vital tiebreaker, should it come to that.The Nets, then, seem to be peaking at the perfect time. The victory gave the team its first four-game winning streak of the season. And the Nets have a game on Wednesday against the Knicks — the closest thing to a surefire win in the N.B.A.“Let’s put it as it is: We’re more together; we care more about each other,” Nets Coach Lionel Hollins said of his team’s metamorphosis.Central to the change has been Brook Lopez, who notched 24 points, 11 rebounds and 2 blocks. A day earlier, Lopez had been named the Eastern Conference’s player of the week. In his six previous games, he averaged 28.8 points, 9.3 rebounds and 3 blocks while shooting 61.5 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lopez was unstoppable early on, helping the Nets overcome a halting start to the game. The Pacers scored 7 straight points after the tipoff, and Hollins called a 20-second timeout to regroup. Whatever advice he doled out seemed to stick. The Nets went back out onto the court and closed the first quarter on a 33-8 run, playing simple, attractive basketball.They pinged the ball around, creating easy baskets. Supplying the finishing touch much of the time was Lopez, who had 14 points through the first period, slipping into the lane for two-handed dunks and easy layups. In the final minute of the quarter, he spotted up for a 19-foot jumper and made that, too.The Nets built their lead to 19 points 1 minute 18 seconds into the second quarter, but once their second unit took over, things went awry. They were indecisive passing the ball, and their movement lacked conviction. They relied on isolation play and took ill-advised shots. Solomon Hill’s 3-pointer with just over two minutes to go before halftime gave Indiana a 52-50 lead.The Nets ended the first half on an auspicious note, though, as Williams drove into the lane and flipped the ball behind his back to Lopez as the defense shifted toward him; Lopez tossed in a hook shot to give the Nets a 57-54 lead at the half.Advertisement“I think the ball’s just been moving really freely the last number of games,” Lopez said. “You can see everyone’s really comfortable on the court. Everyone’s been jelling and playing well together.”The cohesion was easy to grasp when it mattered most. The Pacers crept within 3 points with just over two minutes remaining before Johnson hit an 18-foot step-back jumper. The Nets then played suffocating defense on the next two Pacers possessions, contesting George Hill’s 3-point attempt and coaxing Hibbert’s doomed, late attempt.On the other end, the ball found its way to Lopez, who swung it over to Johnson, whose shot secured one of the Nets’ most crucial wins of the season.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets, Hitting Their Stride When It Counts, Hold Off the Pacers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.