By SETH BERKMANMARCH 31, 2015
Over the last two weeks, the National Invitation Tournament has used a 30-second shot clock instead of the current 35-second one, an experiment that even President Obamaadvocated for in early March.The idea is that it would create a faster, more fluid pace that could become the standard in men’s college basketball.Miami, Temple, Old Dominion and Stanford, which played in the N.I.T. semifinals on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden, became acclimated to the shorter clock after early hiccups. A majority of players and coaches supported a 30-second shot clock.“I’d like to see it implemented,” said Stanford Coach Johnny Dawkins, whose team is averaging 74 points per game in the tournament after its 67-60 victory over Old Dominion on Tuesday, nearly 2 more points than it averaged in the regular season. “There are some other things we want to continue to make it better that we’d probably have to do, but it’s a good first step toward speeding play up slightly,” he said.AdvertisementIn addition to a shorter shot clock, the 3-foot restricted area was extended to 4 to decrease collisions under the basket.After examining data from the N.I.T. games, the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball rules committee will consider the changes during its May meeting. If the changes are approved, a recommendation will go to the playing rules oversight panel in late June, with the changes possibly going into effect for the 2015-16 season. Since 1993-94, men’s college basketball has used a 35-second shot clock.AdvertisementEarly-round N.I.T. games were sprinkled with player misjudgments. Miami center Tonye Jekiri said there were some possessions in which he took too many dribbles in the post and when he passed the ball out to guards because time was running out on the shot clock.“That five seconds makes a difference,” Miami guard Davon Reed said. “We found ourselves a few times just throwing up a shot with three to one seconds to go. We’ve made adjustments. Coach has emphasized getting into our sets faster, but not rushing.”Another challenge for Miami has been the use of 2-2-1 pressure zones by its opponents, reducing the time that the Hurricanes had to set up their offense.“That makes it difficult to score,” Miami guard Sheldon McClellan said of the press. “Once you get the ball past half court and set our offense, there’s like 12 seconds left.”Miami Coach Jim Larranaga said the transition was more challenging than he anticipated. The Hurricanes had only one practice to adjust to the rule change before playing North Carolina Central in the first round.The Hurricanes have been able to win with the shorter shot clock, but with their 60-57 win over Temple on Tuesday, their average dipped to 67.8 points, down from 68.4 in the regular season.Advertisement“I think the 30-second shot clock would add a few more possessions to the college game and probably be good for the sport,” Larranaga said.Old Dominion Coach Jeff Jones does not disagree with a permanent change to a 30-second shot clock, but he argued that there are other changes that would be needed to supplement the overhaul, such as widening the lane.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If we did that in a vacuum, I think that would be naïve and the results would be unpopular,” said Jones, whose Monarchs are scoring 61.7 points per game in the N.I.T., compared with 65.4 in the regular season. “If you don’t make any other changes and you change the shot clock, you’re going to get more possessions, but more empty possessions.”Larranaga also advocated extending the 3-point line from 20 feet 9 inches.“I’d like to see them widen the lane, extend the 3-point circle,” he said. “We have too many players out there who are not great shooters who want to shoot 3s.”A popular argument for the 30-second shot clock is that it would help the college game more closely resemble the up-tempo N.B.A., which uses a 24-second shot clock. However, Jones did not believe that college basketball should try to fully emulate the pro game.“My other hesitancy on this whole move to shorten the shot clock, I would hate for it to be an interim step to go towards 24,” Jones said. “I think that would be detrimental to the college game. It would only benefit the high majors that have the players that can get their own shot. We’re not the N.B.A. We don’t have that level of talent.“That would force college basketball to be played a certain way, instead of having different ways of playing offense,” he added. “This N.I.T. has different styles for different people. I don’t want to be the N.B.A.”The Collegeinsider.com and College Basketball Invitational tournaments are also using 30-second shot clocks.Few teams have adjusted to the modifications as well as Temple.Through much of the regular season, the Owls were characterized by strong defense, but had long stretches of inefficient offense. During the N.I.T., the Owls became an offensive revelation, averaging 74.3 points per game — about 9 points more than the regular season — despite scoring only 57 points in their loss to Miami.AdvertisementTemple Coach Fran Dunphy, who built Pennsylvania into an Ivy League power during the 1990s — often with a slower, more meticulous offense — said college basketball was headed toward a faster pace of play.“I’m glad the N.I.T. implemented it,” Dunphy said. “I think we’re going to see a 30-second shot clock very soon, if not next year. I think everyone wants to see more scoring.”REBOUNDSStefan Nastic had 17 points and 6 rebounds to lead Stanford over Old Dominion, 67-60. The Cardinal (23-13) will play Miami in the title game Thursday. ... Sheldon McClellan scored 12 of his 16 points in the second half for the Hurricanes, who rallied past Temple, 60-57. Both teams struggled from behind the arc. The Hurricanes (25-12), who trailed by 11 points in the first half, shot 6 of 21 from 3-point range, and the Owls (26-11) were 3 of 19. Quenton DeCosey’s 3-point shot at the buzzer bounced off the rim.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: 30-Second Clock Wins Support of Players and Coaches.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.