AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: America's Cup World SeriesBy Christopher ClareyHAMILTON, Bermuda — It has been more than two years since Iain Percy’s closest friend and teammate, Andrew Simpson, died in San Francisco Bay.They grew up together, won an Olympic gold medal together and raised many a glass together. But Percy and the America’s Cup syndicate Artemis Racing have had to sail on without Simpson, who was struck in the head and then drowned after the team’s 72-foot catamaran capsized and broke apart in a training accident in May 2013.Percy, the Artemis skipper, was on board that day. He held Simpson in his arms after his friend, nicknamed Bart, was pulled from the water. Percy was also the one who informed Simpson’s wife, Leah, of his death.Artemis, a Swedish team with a multinational lineup, later competed in the 2013 America’s Cup challenger series, and it will be back to challenge for the 2017 edition in Bermuda with Percy, now 39, still on board and in the role of team manager.A Briton, he has a thick beard and strikingly thick forearms from years of grinding sails into place. Before this week’s Louis Vuitton America’s Cup World Series in Bermuda, he spoke with Christopher Clarey of the International New York Times in Hamilton about the challenges facing Artemis and about Simpson’s legacy, including the now annual charity sailing event Bart’s Bash, which was held last month.The interview has been edited and condensed.  Q. How did Bart’s accident change you?   A. I think for a couple years there it did quite a lot. I did go into my shell quite a bit. I think I probably became quite a workaholic for quite a long time. I was probably a bit of an emotional void: I don’t want to think about life. I just want to think about something else. Work will do. And I channeled my energies. I’m coming through it, I must admit, a little bit now. I’m starting to enjoy things more and not take life quite so seriously, which I kind of did on purpose for quite a long time. Longer term, I hope it doesn’t change me too much negatively, but Bart as a person was changing me when he was alive. He still changes me now in a positive way. Q. After the disaster of 2013, was there ever any question in your mind whether Artemis’s owner and backer, Torbjorn Tornqvist, would want to challenge again?   A. No, he’s very passionate about the America’s Cup, winning it and supporting the sport as well. It’s something that’s important to him. You notice over the years, he’s always been supportive of the holder of the Cup. He doesn’t get involved in these petty games. He wants to win but he wants to win fair and support it to become a bigger event as well. Q. In what way does this challenge feel different after having to fight through the loss of Bart last time just to get to the starting line?   A. I think the switch came when we did start a new campaign. The two things became separate at that point, so we’ve been focusing on 2017. It really is good fun working with the teammates we have at Artemis. Everyone is incredibly passionate, very technically minded developing the equipment, and that has been going very well in training here. Losing Bart was a personal thing as losing a friend would be to anyone else and work now is trying to win the America’s Cup, which is enjoyable. I still hear his voice on a personal level guiding me in my work decisions, but yes obviously still sad not to have him himself.From a purely professional standpoint, this is a fresh campaign, no excuses. And we’ve put together a winning campaign. It’s great fun, really motivating and after the accident, it was just a very different thing. It was a scramble. It wasn’t a competitive race. And I like being back to the purity of what we are now. We are concentrating on winning 100 percent. We have no distractions, and I’m back to what I know, if you like, which is just focusing in on winning. Q. How do you see Bermuda as a Brit?   A. I find it so completely halfway between the U.S. and the U.K. that it’s hilarious. There are some real quirky British things, like where we are sitting right now in the Royal Bermuda Yacht Club. And I’m sure they even wore Bermuda shorts and long socks at some point in the U.K. a hundred years ago. But at the same time obviously there is a big U.S. influence, through tourism really and I think through the business community. Sometimes you feel you’re in a country town in the U.K. and the next time you feel like you’re in the U.S. in one of the cities. So it sits in the middle and it’s culturally in the middle. Q. Russell Coutts, head of the America’s Cup event authority, told me that no team spent less than $100 million on the Cup last time and that this amount was ridiculous.   A. Agree and agree. Q. Coutts also said that with the change to a smaller boat and smaller crews this time, a team could mount a competitive campaign for as little as $30 million.  A. It will cost our team more than that. That’s for sure. But I think it is safely south of $100 million, and that is important. I do agree that our sport cannot sustain that. The event’s got a huge value, and I think there’s a growing interest and a spectacular product. But it’s not at a rate where a team can compete almost at the same cost as a Formula One team that has at this stage obviously a lot more viewers and maybe will for quite a few years. Q. Ben Ainslie has launched a British challenge for this Cup. You are in charge of Artemis. Chris Draper is with Team Japan. There’s a lot of British flavor to this edition. What might this do for sailing in your country?  A. I think it does increase the interest back home. Most of all, of course, it’s Ben having the team which has been fantastic. It’s really not easy to start an America’s Cup team. He has a collection of backers to help him underwrite it, and Ben has gone out and found commercial money and is frankly doing a really good job on the sporting side, too. So as ever, Ben, a friend of mine, continues to impress me how he manages to pull things off. He’s a very capable guy. So that’s going to be the main difference for the U.K. It has a team to get behind and that’s really exciting. Q. I understand you’ve stayed very involved with Bart’s family, supporting his wife and two young sons.   A. They are amazing boys. His wife is really fantastic. It’s a testimony to her really and him living through the boys that they still have this positive outlook. They really want to be involved in sailing with the charity, with Artemis, things that could have been something you almost could want to run away from. But on the contrary they really have involved themselves with the sport. Q. What did you do for the second edition of Bart’s Bash last month?  A. We started a sailing center for Bart in Weymouth, the Olympic venue, called the Andrew Simpson Sailing Center. So I went back there and sailed with his son Freddie again. Amazing the difference between age 4 and age 5. Last year, all he did was moan about the splashes, and I kept telling him, ‘Your dad never moaned.’ But that didn’t help. This year, he didn’t seem to mind. He was all over the waves, so it was really nice to see him starting to love sailing. I think we finished about 12,000th again, but he thought we won. So that’s all that matters.Advertisement