AdvertisementSupported byOn College BasketballBy Harvey AratonThis was 15 years ago, in the twilight of Chris Mullin’s wonderful basketball-playing life. Springtime in Indianapolis had matched him and the Pacers against his hometown Knicks, but Mullin wasn’t part of the playoff action, not in the way he had so often been, shooting picturesque southpaw jumpers from all over.Mullin had surrendered his minutes that season to a younger man, Jalen Rose, and stood, or sat, No. 11 in the 10-man rotation of Coach Larry Bird. No surprise, he was still the last of the Pacers out of the practice gym that day, repetition being his guiding career principle.He finally stepped out to admit to warring emotions about the encroaching end of his playing days, which would come the next season, in 2001. On the one hand, he was weary of the road, missing too much at home. On the other hand, 8-year-old Sean had complained that week about Dad’s planned absence from a school presentation because of a game.“But you don’t even play,” Sean said, hitting where it hurt, at the heart of the matter. The boy would never see his father in his Dream Team prime.By now, the Mullin children, four in all, surely understand what he meant to basketball, and especially college basketball, as it was defined in New York in the mid-1980s by St. John’s. The question of the moment, with Mullin returning this week as the university’s new coach, is how much might his name and pedigree mean to the young people he will have to recruit to lift the Red Storm higher than his predecessor, Steve Lavin, was able to over the past five years?To those teenagers not yet born when Mullin ran with Michael, Magic and Larry at the 1992 Summer Olympics, will he be as familiar as family?Two voices who could speak with a high degree of authority on the subject weighed in with similar sentiments.“The parents and the A.A.U. coaches absolutely know how great Chris Mullin was, and the kids do, too, to an extent,” said Fran Fraschilla, an ESPN analyst who coached St. John’s from 1996 to 1998. “They’re in touch with the whole retro, Slam Magazine thing. Chris is still going to have a lot of street cred.”Isiah Thomas said, “Absolutely, Chris will get players. ” Thomas coached for three losing seasons, ending in 2012, at Florida International University and said that his N.B.A. celebrity had been paying recruiting dividends when he was let go.As evidence of his claim, Thomas sent a text with a list of players and recruits who went elsewhere after his departure. The landing sites included Maryland, Connecticut, Washington, New Mexico and even St. John’s (Joey De La Rosa).“Parents knew me, and the kids knew me, too,” Thomas said. “I wasn’t even at a basketball school, which St. John’s is. I’ll tell you why Chris will get players. They are all looking for N.B.A. pathways. That’s what Kentucky is selling with John Calipari, and Chris will be able to sell that at St. John’s.”Above the seamy underside of college basketball — the institutional, incessant selling — this is a great New York story, the homecoming of a boy from a bedroom in Brooklyn once filled with bunk beds and brothers. But it’s also not unfair to ask whether bringing in Mullin, who has never been a coach on any level, is also a great hire, or at least the best one St. John’s might have made.No definitive answer to that question is forthcoming, but there is a temptation to wonder whether Mullin’s former St. John’s teammate Mark Jackson might have been the more logical fit to pitch for St. John’s in a sport that, first and foremost, demands a spontaneous and often self-serving spiel.Anyone who has ever heard Jackson, an ordained minister, preach to a congregation or, as an N.B.A. analyst, to a television audience would suspect that he — like the more famous Division I coaches — could sell snowballs to 18-year-olds in the Sahara.Jackson didn’t last very long as a head coach with a rising Golden State team in the N.B.A., making front-office enemies. But college coaches are true power brokers, control freaks not only by nature but by job definition. And while Jackson’s religious invocations were considered over the top in a for-profit setting, they might not have raised so many eyebrows at a Catholic university.Thomas said that while Jackson was a highly respected pro and had developed a charismatic television persona, Mullin came with the aura of stardom, the best player in St. John’s history.“There isn’t a player in New York City who won’t know who Chris Mullin is when he walks into the room,” Thomas said.Is that enough? People used to say that the essential requirement for a St. John’s coach was to keep the local players local. When Mullin meets the news media on Wednesday, he will surely be asked about that.But as Fraschilla noted, the recruiting dynamic has changed for a program like St. John’s. Many New York players now go to New Jersey for high school ball, or to a prep school far away, creating what Fraschilla called “a big talent drain” in the Northeast.In other words, St. John’s may never be a major national player unless it can compete for players nationwide. The Mullin story will have to play well outside Noo Yawk.All things considered, Fraschilla rated the hiring “a calculated risk, but a risk worth taking because of who it is. And having coached at St. John’s, having lived it, I can say they are best suited to having a guy from inside.”Referring to Lou Carnesecca, the coaching legend and 90-year-old St. John’s patriarch, he added, “It’s Looie’s family, and who better to come back and run it than Chris?”Bottom line: “Right person, right time,” Fraschilla said.Now comes the daunting part: turning back time.Advertisement