AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian SciarettaAnother game, another late goal for the United States national team, which tied Switzerland, 1-1, on Tuesday in Zurich.It has become an alarming trend for Jurgen Klinsmann’s American team: goals inside the final 15 minutes have now cost the team results in seven of its nine exhibition games since the World Cup.Tuesday marked the second time in a week that the United States surrendered a second-half lead. Last week, it produced a 3-2 loss to Denmark. On Tuesday, the result was a tie, a result that wasted a spectacular free kick by Brek Shea just before halftime.Valentin Stocker’s goal in the 80th minute — 11 minutes after a red card to Jozy Altidore left the Americans with 10 men — rewarded a Switzerland team that had been pressing hard for the equalizer.The Americans next chance to put a stop to the worrisome trend comes April 15, when they play Mexico in another friendly in San Antonio.Ratings from Tuesday’s game, from 1 (diabolical) to 10 (world class):StartersNick Rimando: He did not concede a goal, but his distribution did not help the team maintain or win possession either. Rating: 5.0Timothy Chandler: Effective getting forward in the first half, he part of several dangerous chances. But he made multiple defensive lapses after halftime, and was fortunate that the Swiss did not capitalize. Rating: 4.5Michael Orozco: Another solid and sturdy half by Orozco, the Puebla-based central defender, who played well during both friendlies in this international window. The most consistent defender on this trip. Rating: 6.0John Brooks: Making his second straight start, Brooks was beaten one-on-one too easily at times, and his positioning let him down on more than one occasion. Rating: 5.0Brek Shea: Tuesday a major test for Shea at his new position — left back — against a quality European opponent. In the 45th minute, he hit a spectacular free kick that produced the only American goal. Defensively, he was shaky toward the end, but over all Shea held his own. Rating: 6.5Danny Williams: Making his first appearance for the United States in more than a year, the oft-injured Williams did a solid job shielding the backline. Rating: 5.5Alejandro Bedoya: The New Jersey-born Bedoya put on the best American performance of the game. He should have had an assist in the first half on a play when Bradley could not hit the target from inside 10 yards. Over all, the offense seemed to flow through Bedoya, but after a red card left the United States with 10 players, he worked hard defensively to prevent the Swiss from grabbing a victory. Rating: 7.0 and man of the matchAlfredo Morales: A fairly solid performance on both sides of the ball. He seemed to combine well with Williams and Bedoya in the middle of the field before fading in the second half. Defensively, he was willing to do the dirty work that kept the Americans in the game. Rating: 5.0Michael Bradley: Being asked to generate the attack in the playmaking role, Bradley looked uncomfortable for stretches. He squandered a golden opportunity in the first half on a delivery from Bedoya and made a few turnovers in key attacking moments. Still, his hustle and work rate helped the United States when it was trying to hang on. Rating: 5.5Gyasi Zardes: His finishing left a lot to be desired and his first touch let him down, but his solid athleticism and positional sense allowed him to get into dangerous positions several times. His execution needs to get better to succeed in the international game. Rating: 4.5Jozy Altidore: After a terrific outing last Wednesday against Denmark, Altidore initially picked up where he left off. In the first half he was dangerous and combining well with his teammates in the attacking third. But his red card in the 69th minute was inexcusable, and it let his teammates down. As someone who has worn the captain’s armband in the past, Altidore should be expected to keep his composure. Rating: 3.5SubstitutesWilliam Yarbrough: Making his international debut for the United States, Yarbrough was an improvement from the veteran Rimando. He commanded his box well and helped mightily in distribution, but his defense let him down on the goal. Rating: 6.0Ventura Alvarado: Thrust into a difficult position, Alvarado replaced the steady Orozco and then had to help a defense that was under siege in the final 20 minutes. His communication with the rest of the back line seemed off. Rating: 4.5DeAndre Yedlin: Replaced Bedoya for the final 15 minutes but struggled to get into the game and was not linking up with his teammates as well as Bedoya had. Rating: 4.5Tim Ream: Came on in 89th minute to help preserve the draw. No ratingJordan Morris: Like Ream, a late-game cameo. No ratingAdvertisement