AdvertisementSupported byNets 100, Knicks 98By Scott CacciolaOn the Nets’ second possession Wednesday night, Markel Brown went up high after a lob pass and came down hard, after the Knicks’ Langston Galloway nudged him midflight. Brown writhed on the court for several minutes, through a timeout. It looked bad. The Madison Square Garden crowd was even quieter than usual.Eventually, though, Brown returned to his feet and strode to the foul line, where he sank two free throws.The Nets are a resilient bunch these days, and in their continuing pursuit of a postseason berth, they found that the Knicks were ready to scrap. The Nets needed each and every one of their possessions to escape with a 100-98 victory. After the Nets squandered a 16-point lead, Brook Lopez followed up his own miss for the winning basket, a layup with two seconds remaining that left the Garden comatose once more. The Nets (34-40) moved into a tie for seventh place in the Eastern Conference with the Miami Heat.“It wasn’t a pretty win,” said Deron Williams, who led the Nets with 26 points, 7 rebounds and 7 assists. “We would’ve liked to have put it away a little earlier. But it didn’t happen that way. We had to fight for it.”The Knicks (14-61) played hard and played tough — and still left the building assured of a record for franchise futility. Welcome to their world.The game was the final of four between the teams this season. The Nets swept the Knicks for the first time since the 2006-7 season, when the Nets were still residents of New Jersey. But amid a stretch of new lows for the Knicks, what was one more?The Knicks’ season is an ashen carcass, a point that Phil Jackson, the team president, tacitly drove home Monday in an email to season-ticket holders. In the email, Jackson thanked the fans for their “unwavering support” and pledged that the Knicks were “steadfast in our resolve” to bring a championship back to New York.A parade seems unlikely anytime soon. And despite a solid effort, the Knicks’ loss Wednesday ensured they would finish with their worst winning percentage in franchise history. That record had been held by the 1962-63 Knicks, who went 21-59 to finish with a .263 mark. The best the Knicks can do now is .256.The Nets, on the other hand, were less than 24 hours removed from a crucial victory over the Indiana Pacers, who are also vying for a playoff spot. After that game, the Nets’ Alan Anderson talked about having a “tough one tomorrow on the road.” Just to be clear, he was talking about playing the Knicks. Across the bridge.In any case, the Nets ran out to a 17-9 lead and kept exerting pressure. When the Knicks made a push late in the second quarter, Williams went around a defender for a layup, sank a 3-pointer and then got two more baskets inside to help the Nets to a 58-53 halftime lead.The Knicks surged again in the fourth. After Galloway buried a 3-pointer, Shane Larkin lobbed the ball to Cleanthony Early for a dunk that cut the Nets’ lead to 94-93.Later, Early drilled a 3-pointer to tie the game at 98-98. With 14.2 seconds left, the Nets drew up one final play. Williams drove hard, but when his shot was errant, Lopez was there to tip the ball off the backboard. He grabbed his own miss and scored. A heave at the buzzer by Early came up short. It was the Nets’ ninth victory in their last 11 games.“We had to stick with it, and we did,” said Lopez, who collected 18 points and 7 rebounds. “It’s something we wouldn’t have done at the beginning of the season.”Carmelo Anthony made a courtside appearance about three hours before the game. Anthony had season-ending surgery on his left knee in February and convalesced for a few weeks at his home. More recently, he has been able to spend more time at the team’s training complex and at the Garden.“I think he’s enjoying being back around the group, and guys have been happy to see him,” Coach Derek Fisher said before the game.When Fisher was asked whether Anthony would join his teammates on the bench, he said, “I’m not sure.” When he was pressed on the issue, Fisher sounded annoyed.“That has nothing to do with Brooklyn tonight,” Fisher said. “I guess you can ask him that if you guys ever get a chance to talk to him.”Anthony has not spoken publicly since he played in the All-Star Game on Feb. 15. He had surgery four days later.With that awkward preamble out of the way, the stage was set for the latest iteration of an intracity matchup — is it really a rivalry? — that was billed, not so long ago, as the Battle of the Boroughs. For one night, at least, the game had some luster.Advertisement