By BILLY WITZAPRIL 1, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  As shortstop Brendan Ryan slid toward second base to field a grounder during the Yankees’ exhibition game Wednesday against the Rays, second baseman Stephen Drew heard Ryan shout. So by the time the ball bounced off Ryan’s bare hand, Drew knew something was wrong.A few moments later, so did everyone else: Ryan had to be carried off the field with a right calf strain.Ryan, who was taken to a nearby hospital to have a magnetic resonance imaging test, does not seem likely to be with the Yankees when they open their season at home Monday against Toronto.“I’d be surprised,” Manager Joe Girardi said after the game, a 3-0 loss.If Ryan, an outstanding fielder who has struggled to hit, is out for an extended period, it will test the Yankees’ depth, which did not hold up as the team missed the playoffs the last two seasons. The starting shortstop, Didi Gregorius, who injured his wrist Saturday, is expected to return Thursday and should be able to start Monday, Girardi said. His backup will now be Drew, a career shortstop who is shifting to second.AdvertisementGirardi said the Yankees would be looking for somebody to back up Drew at second. The leading candidate for most of spring training was Jose Pirela, who batted .370 and made a favorable impression with his hustle. But Pirela has been sidelined with a concussion since March 22, when he crashed into the outfield wall. Pirela has been cleared to ride an exercise bicycle and has reported no symptoms, but he has not yet been cleared to return to baseball exercises.Advertisement“He’s still not where he needs to be,” Girardi said. “I think that would be a long shot, too.”That could open the door for Rob Refsnyder, who has hit well in spring training (.333 with six extra-base hits) but has been unsteady in the field.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Beyond him there are options with some versatility: Cole Figueroa and Nick Noonan, who have played several infield positions. Figueroa has been steadier this spring, hitting .280 without committing an error, and he has major league experience.“I can’t really tell you exactly where we’re going to go,” Girardi said. “I’m sure there will be different thoughts as we sit down and meet. We’ve got to iron it out.”Later Wednesday, the Yankees said they had acquired Gregorio Petit, a minor league outfielder, from the Houston Astros in exchange for cash considerations.There are few other decisions to be made over the final few days before the season begins. Girardi announced that Adam Warren would be the fifth starter, leaving the team to decide on a backup catcher (John Ryan Murphy or Austin Romine) and the final two spots in the bullpen.Chase Whitley, a right-hander, made a strong case for one of them on Wednesday. In four innings, he allowed four hits and one run, with six strikeouts and no walks.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Injuries Spur Unplanned Infield Shift for Yankees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.