AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — From coach to captain, the Islanders are a relieved group, after a comeback victory over the Detroit Red Wings on Sunday ended a monthlong home losing streak.With five games left in the regular season, which concludes April 11, the Islanders are fortunate that their early-season success has provided a points cushion that allows them to essentially control their playoff destiny, beginning with a visit to the Columbus Blue Jackets on Thursday.At 45-27-5, the Islanders have their most victories since the 1983-84 season, when they won 50 games. But they led the Metropolitan Division on March 1 and had tumbled to third by April 1.Before rallying from a 2-0 deficit for a 5-4 victory over the Red Wings on Sunday, the Islanders had been 0-5-1 in March at Nassau Coliseum, which they will leave after this season for Barclays Center in Brooklyn. On Sunday they scored three power-play goals for the first time all season, and they added a short-handed goal to give their nervous fans a chance to relax.“There are teams that crumble, they dissolve when adversity strikes, but we worked hard,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “Our guys have been resilient all year. We talk about adversity. For me, it’s a springboard for success.”Capuano has guided the Islanders through plenty of struggles since taking over in November 2010. They missed the playoffs his first two seasons and finished last in the Metropolitan Division a year ago after injuries decimated their roster.In 2013, after a lockout-shortened 48-game season, the Islanders sampled the postseason for the first time since 2007, battling the top-seeded Pittsburgh Penguins in the first round and losing in six games.An Islanders-Penguins rematch could be ahead. Entering Wednesday, the teams were in second and third place in the division, with the Washington Capitals close behind.John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain, said that he did not want to look too far ahead, and that he was continuing a one-day-at-a-time approach. He cautioned that the team must secure a playoff spot before visions of postseason mania could start to take shape.But with Islanders fans vowing to be as loud as possible during the team’s final spring at the Coliseum, Tavares knows how vital home-ice advantage will be for the franchise, which has not won a postseason series since 1993.“We want to play hard to end the season the right way,” said Tavares, who leads the team with 34 goals and 43 assists for 77 points, four points from tying his career best. “It would be huge to have that extra game in our building. We know it would be a special atmosphere because of how great our fans have been.”The Islanders had lost two home games in a row just once this season before their March malaise, and they still have a 24-14-1 home record with two games left at the Coliseum.“We had to get our mojo back, and I think we have,” said forward Ryan Strome, who is second on the team with 48 points in his first full season with the Islanders.They were 20-6 at home before a crushing defeat Feb. 16 against the Rangers, who rallied from a 5-3 third-period deficit for a wild 6-5 win.The subsequent home swoon, including another loss to the Rangers on March 10, alarmed many fans. With the team leaving for Brooklyn, there is a palpable sense of urgency to make the end of this season special.Islanders forward Josh Bailey said there was never discernible anxiety among the players during a string of close home defeats to top opponents.“We kept working, so it was a big win for all of us, especially because of how we had been playing well but not getting the results we wanted,” Bailey said, referring to the game against the Red Wings. With the Islanders struggling to score during the past month, Capuano is still tinkering to find the best line combinations before the playoffs. The team will host the Buffalo Sabres on Saturday and visit Philadelphia and Pittsburgh next week ahead of a home finale against Columbus on April 11.“For me, it’s how we perform under pressure,” Capuano said. “We talk about adversity and I think we’ve come together as a group and become stronger. We have to battle. That’s what it takes to be successful.”Advertisement