AdvertisementSupported byBy Brendan PruntyIsaiah Briscoe did not have to be there. His Roselle Catholic High School team had just won the New Jersey high school boys’ championship less than 48 hours earlier. The season was officially over. He had a busy travel schedule of all-star tournaments and events coming up over the next week, so it was a natural time to finally relax — to not touch a basketball for a week or so.At 5:45 a.m., Briscoe was knocking on the door of his private school, rousing the janitors to be let in.He wanted to work out.“He’s probably the hardest worker that I’ve ever seen,” Roselle Catholic Coach Dave Boff said. “We win the Tournament of Champions on Monday, and on Wednesday he’s working out on his own. That says it all.”So does this: Briscoe, a 6-foot-3 guard, is the next cog for Kentucky’s big blue machine. As the Wildcats march toward an undefeated season and a potential national championship this weekend at the Final Four in Indianapolis, they do so with a roster loaded with elite players. That is the upside. The downside? Many on the roster will probably be playing in the N.B.A. next season — which means Coach John Calipari must bring in another crop of highly regarded players.That is where Briscoe comes in. A Union, N.J., native, he is one of the centerpieces for Calipari’s next Kentucky team.“He had John Wall and Tyreke Evans and Derrick Rose and Eric Bledsoe,” Briscoe said. “So as the next person coming up, I just want my name mentioned in the same sentence.”He certainly has the talent to accomplish that goal. With a powerful first step and a body that can take the punishment when attacking the basket, Briscoe is viewed as a natural fit for Calipari’s style of play. He is a consensus top-25 player, and the four major recruiting websites — Rivals, Scout, 24/7 and ESPN — rate him among the top 20 players in the country, and among the top two or three point guards. On Tuesday night, he displayed his talents at the McDonald’s high school all-American game in Chicago.Briscoe is already living the Kentucky life, without having officially arrived in Lexington.“He owns it,” his father, George, said. “He doesn’t shy away from it. He’s been waiting for this moment.”He even had to wait for Kentucky to realize it.Before transferring to Roselle Catholic from St. Benedict’s Prep in Newark after his sophomore year, Briscoe was viewed as a very good prospect who was not in great shape. College coaches would see him during summer camps and in games, catching glimpses of supreme ball-handling and shooting skills through rolls of baby fat.“The first time I saw him, he was M.V.P. of a Hoop Group camp, but I didn’t like his body,” said Jay Gomes, who runs the website NJHoops.com and is a longtime evaluator of high school talent in the state. “He was strong, but he was heavy-legged. He didn’t look like the typical superstar basketball player, but his skills were still there.”When Briscoe arrived at Roselle Catholic, Boff sat him down and outlined what he needed from Briscoe. Briscoe told him how he hoped to grow as a player by the time he graduated.Briscoe saw a player who was “fat, chubby and had two left feet.” Boff saw a player with tremendous talent, who did not understand how to play point guard. The elite programs Ohio State and Syracuse were interested, but everyone — including Briscoe — felt there was more potential to be mined.Briscoe took up boxing and yoga to shape his body. Boff and his coaching staff conducted film study to sharpen his skills. By the time he finished his junior year, Briscoe’s name was on everyone’s lips.Sure enough, Kentucky became interested.“Isaiah, to be honest, he was skeptical of it,” said Briscoe’s Amateur Athletic Union coach, Jamal Slappy. “He wasn’t sure because they came in pretty late. And I told him, ‘At the end of the day, it’s Kentucky.’ ”And Kentucky’s recruiting pitch was a strong one. In each of his six seasons with the Wildcats, Calipari has had a top-ranked recruiting class. Three years ago, he won a national championship. Last year, the Wildcats made another Final Four, where they lost to UConn in the championship game. While in Lexington, Calipari has put 18 players in the N.B.A. Pretty soon, Briscoe was on the phone with Wall for two hours talking about point guard play.“They’re from where I’m from,” George Briscoe said of the recruiting process. “It was so easy to connect. Cal is me. He’s a Northeast guy. That was an easy sell.”Then there were the friends who had already been won over by Kentucky. During Isaiah Briscoe’s official visit on campus, the current Wildcats Devin Booker and Tyler Ulis jokingly tackled him upon first sight. He had played A.A.U. youth basketball with a fellow New Jerseyan, center Karl-Anthony Towns. Even after Briscoe committed, the Kentucky love flowed freely. At last week’s state championship game in Trenton, Towns’s father, Karl, sat courtside to represent his son and the current Wildcats players.In full Kentucky garb, of course.“It’s easy to see how it works,” Towns said of the Kentucky lure. “New Jersey is a small state. Everyone knows how much we enjoyed the process.”At that moment, Briscoe spotted the elder Towns in the crowd and left the layup line to give him an embrace. “Loving the outfit!” Briscoe told him.“Got to represent,” Towns replied. “Had to let you know that Kentucky nation is here for you, my man.”Forty minutes later, Briscoe was at the center of a celebration, trophy in his hands. He had scored 27 points, grabbed six rebounds, made five steals and added two assists in a 12-point win over Pope John. His season was over, the next journey about to begin.Kentucky has pinned its hopes that after this season ends with a championship, Briscoe can be there to repeat that scene in Trenton, for the Wildcats, next April.“I’m ready,” Briscoe said. “All the hype is real. Everything they say about Kentucky is real. I’m just ready to be a part of it.”Advertisement