AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanThe Mets’ off-season was essentially devoid of splashy moves, as the front office chose to make judicious upgrades in the outfield while looking to an existing core of players — some veterans, some fairly new to the majors — to improve on a 79-83 record.As it heads into its seventh season, Citi Field is evolving along a similar path. Changes were made over the winter, but nothing as dramatic as the new bleachers being installed at Wrigley Field.Still, on Wednesday, 12 days before the team’s home opener against the Philadelphia Phillies, the Mets felt compelled to show off their new toys, led by their prized structural addition for 2015, a new video screen for the center-field scoreboard. The screen is one of the 10 largest in Major League Baseball, which is more than the Mets can say for their payroll.The Mets inherited their first scoreboard — it came with the rest of the Polo Grounds, where the Mets made their home in 1962-63. Though they have not always broadcast results favorable to the home team — the Mets’ record at home over 53 seasons is 2,146-2,074 — the scoreboards at the Polo Grounds, Shea Stadium and Citi Field have provided a steady commentary for a club that has struggled more than it has succeeded.During their first two seasons at the Polo Grounds, the Mets accumulated 105 losses on a scoreboard located above the iconic Rheingold Beer sign in the outfield, including a 5-1 defeat by the Philadelphia Phillies on Sept. 18, 1963, the last regular-season game played at that stadium.At Shea Stadium, late in Game 6 of the 1986 World Series, the scoreboard operator pre-emptively congratulated the Boston Red Sox on winning baseball’s championship. A little bit later, the message disappeared, and then a 2 was replaced by a 3 under the E column for the Red Sox, as Ray Knight scored the winning run on the ball that went through Bill Buckner’s legs.Daktronics, a South Dakota-based company that produces scoreboards and L.E.D. displays, installed the new high-definition screen that, at 5,670 square feet, is 62 percent larger than its predecessor at Citi Field.The Mets also replaced static advertisement signs along the stadium bowl with L.E.D. displays, including a K board in left field that evokes the days of the K corners at Shea Stadium, when the Mets had Dwight Gooden on the mound.Also new at Citi Field this season is an exterior marquee board that will hover over the Whitestone Expressway, greeting fans who are willing to sit through traffic and drive to the game.(Other new signs outside Citi Field are not as harmonious. Two billboards have gone up near Citi Field urging the Mets’ ownership to sell the team. A similar billboard was erected this spring near the team’s spring training headquarters in Port St. Lucie, Fla.)The new video screen for Citi Field was assembled in South Dakota and shipped to Queens in 4-foot-by-8-foot sections, a process that Jay Parker, a Daktronics vice president, equated to “building like Legos.” It took about two months to install the screen and make it become fully operational.The Mets are hoping the new screens will have plenty of Mets highlights to brag about. There could, perhaps, be more home runs this season, as the Mets have shortened a portion of the outfield fences for the third time since the stadium opened. The newest alteration is in right-center field, where the dimensions were decreased by 3 to 11 feet in certain areas, particularly in front of the visiting bullpen.While the fences were changed for competitive baseball reasons, the scoreboard upgrade was done in part to keep up with technology and to enhance Citi Field events that have nothing to do with baseball. This summer, Citi Field is scheduled to host two Foo Fighters concerts and a professional wrestling event.Advertisement