By TIM ROHANAPRIL 1, 2015
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — The Mets were trailing by three runs in the bottom of the ninth inning in a meaningless exhibition game Wednesday when the reserve players began a rally and the starters began shouting in excitement at the clubhouse televisions, urging them on.The comeback ultimately fell short; the Mets lost to the St. Louis Cardinals, 5-4. But the moment seemed to capture the way things have been going for the Mets this spring.The Mets have won 18 times in 30 exhibition games, the most victories of any National League team. Their starting pitchers have looked good, and their hitters are bashing an unusual number of home runs for a team not generally known for its power.Then again, these are only spring training numbers. It says something that players do not generally remember statistics from spring trainings past, only whether they stayed healthy.AdvertisementIt says something, too, that although the Mets have finished with a losing record for six straight seasons, in three of them, they finished at least .500 in spring training.AdvertisementStill, as they prepared to play their last game in Florida on Thursday before heading to Texas for two games against the Rangers and then to Washington to begin the season, the Mets contended that their spring record was a sign that they were creating a culture that could carry over to the games that count.“Us being a young team, being where we’re at, a spring training like this can give us confidence,” said David Wright, the team’s captain.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets’ new batting coach, Kevin Long, credited Michael Cuddyer, the team’s key acquisition in the off-season, for helping reinforce his message. Cuddyer, 36, has flourished in Florida under Long’s watch, hitting six home runs, the most by a Met in a spring training since 1997, when Butch Huskey also hit six, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.Huskey never developed into much of a player, which demonstrates how unreliable spring training numbers can be. Still, the Mets can only feel encouraged that Cuddyer, a career .279 hitter who has battled injuries in recent seasons, looks as strong as he does.Cuddyer is penciled in to play left field this season, alongside Juan Lagares, the young, increasingly dynamic center fielder whom the Mets are now close to signing to an extension that will cover the 2016-19 seasons, with an option for 2020, which would be Lagares’s first year of free-agent eligibility.Published reports indicated the deal, including the option year, would total more than $30 million. For the Mets, the deal is a sign of confidence in Lagares, 26, who is hitting .345, with three home runs. Yes, it is just another set of spring training numbers, but that will not keep the Mets from feeling a bit more confident that Lagares is the real deal.And for Lagares, the feeling is mutual.“I love the Mets,” he told reporters on Wednesday. “That’s the team that gave me an opportunity when I was 16 years old, you know?”A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Have Strange Feeling: Confidence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.