AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunAfter talking for nearly two hours — at a formal news conference in front of 1,000 fans, during interviews carried on a dozen television stations and while being photographed with trustees, boosters and the St. John’s mascot — Chris Mullin walked alone through a corridor of Carnesecca Arena and found one of the few faces he did not know.It was a lacrosse player, Chris Hughes, but naturally there was a connection there, too. “You probably know my son,” Mullin said, receiving a wide smile in return. Indeed, Sean Mullin played lacrosse for the Red Storm last year.It seemed there was no one near the St. John’s campus on Wednesday who did not share some link or have a quick to story to tell about Mullin, the man hired to revive the glory days he ignited for the Red Storm three decades ago. His introductory news conference, which was open to the public, felt more like a large family reunion.Fans reassured him whenever there was a pause.“Go Chrissy Mull!” one yelled, and “You’re gonna do great, Mull!” another said.“It’s great to be home,” Mullin said.With his old coach, Lou Carnesecca, by his side, and former teammates, such as Walter Berry, in attendance, the echoes of 1985 — the year Mullin led St. John’s to the Final Four — reverberated throughout the afternoon. Mullin was handed a red jersey bearing his old No. 20. He is the 20th coach in St. John’s history.“It’s a surreal moment, it really is,” Mullin said. “St. John’s University has meant so much to me and my family. When that opportunity was presented to me, I couldn’t turn it down.”There were, of course, more sobering topics, such as how Mullin — with no coaching, recruiting or staff-building experience — might expect to rebuild a winning roster. He said he considered it a challenge he was not going to shy away from.He said he would rely on his years as an N.B.A. executive with the Golden State Warriors and an adviser with the Sacramento Kings to guide his understanding of the players he wants. He has already outlined the personality he expects his teams to adopt.“I’d like to teach my players how to play, and not just run plays,” Mullin said. “I’d much rather have guys play with each other, have the ball moving, less dribbling, more passing, aggressive and decisive. I don’t want guys looking over at me to call plays; I want them out there playing.”As a Hall of Fame player, and a member of the 1992 United States Olympic Dream Team, Mullin can speak authoritatively on that aspect of the game. Those who know him said there was little doubt he could adapt to the sideline.“I always thought, when he was younger, he’d be a great coach,” Berry said. “He’s a basketball genius.”St. John’s president, Conrado Gempesaw, said he first met Mullin several months ago and was struck by his enthusiasm for the university. Gempesaw thanked Steve Lavin, who agreed to leave the program less than a week ago. From there, it was a matter of persuading Mullin to take the job.“I strongly believe this was a change for the future of our basketball team,” Gempesaw said. “Once I made that decision, we decided who would be the best coach for St. John’s. I can assure you I found him.”Evan Daniels, director of basketball recruiting for Scout.com, said Mullin would need to quickly familiarize himself with the current New York recruiting landscape and hope that his N.B.A. résumé would resonate with prospects.“He has a good personal pitch,” Daniels said in a telephone interview. “His background, his success, and the fact that he’s done it to a level that these kids want to do it.”Mullin has already hired one member of his staff, Matt Abdelmassih, a former St. John’s student manager who has been a dynamic recruiter for Iowa State. He arrived from Ames, Iowa, on Tuesday night, checked into an airport hotel, and was ready to hit the road recruiting for his favorite team, St. John’s, and his favorite player, Mullin.Asked if he was worried that a name like Mullin might not resonate with 17-year-old players, Abdelmassih shook his head. “If it doesn’t, all you have to do is bring up that Dream Team picture,” Abdelmassih said. “I’m pretty sure it’ll resonate fast.”Advertisement