By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 1, 2015
MEMPHIS —  Vince Carter began to lose his hair when he was about 23, but he still goes to the barber with specific instructions. Last week, he wanted his beard trimmed.“I said, ‘Look, I need you to cut it low so you don’t see any gray here, please,’ ” Carter recalled, pointing at a spot on his chin that is particularly susceptible. “He did a great job. I said, ‘Thank you.’ ”If Carter is self-conscious about going gray at 38, it is one of the rare instances in which he has fought the slow toll of time. As a basketball player, he has embraced his old age, adapting his game and tailoring his approach as his career marches on.Gone are the fierce drives and skyscraping dunks (for the most part), replaced by jumpers along the 3-point arc. In another era, Carter was a highflying icon who posterized opponents, but his greatest feat has taken shape in more recent seasons: his willingness to change.Advertisement“You think you’re going to be the star, the go-to guy, forever,” Carter said last week. “But when reality sets in, that’s when it’s a challenge: How do you deal with that?”AdvertisementAfter 17 N.B.A. seasons and eight selections to the All-Star Game, after all the acrobatics and the endorsement deals and the comparisons to fellow highfliers, which he never sought, Carter has found joy coming off the bench for the playoff-bound Memphis Grizzlies. He is a spot-up shooter, much as he was in three previous seasons with the Dallas Mavericks, and an example to his teammates.“I watched Vince growing up, just like everybody else did,” the Grizzlies’ Jeff Green said. “To see the athleticism that he once had, and for him to accept the fact that he’s not what he used to be, it shows his professionalism and maturity. Because it’s hard to change. A lot of guys haven’t been able to do what he’s done.”Carter is the fourth-oldest player in the N.B.A. — only Andre Miller, Tim Duncan and Kevin Garnett are older, according to Basketball-Reference.com — and he has had his struggles this season, averaging 6 points a game while shooting 34.2 percent from the field. But in 15 games since returning from a foot injury, he has shot 40 percent from 3-point range, giving the Grizzlies hope that he can be a factor in the playoffs.He does not lack confidence — not now, not ever. He does not need reminders to shoot.“We need that threat on the floor,” Coach Dave Joerger said.Carter is also extraordinarily competitive, same as always. That much was apparent against the Cleveland Cavaliers last week, when he was ejected for saying unkind things to an official. Carter wants to win a championship, he said — the one career goal to elude him. His contract with the Grizzlies is guaranteed through next season.“I can’t imagine not playing,” Carter said. “I can’t accept that yet. I’m not at that point where I wake up and it’s like, I’m tired of this. Being around these young guys makes you feel young, I promise you. Well, until you go home and you’re like, O.K., I’m really not that young.”When the Grizzlies visited Toronto in November, the Raptors honored Carter with a montage of highlights from his days with the team. Carter spent the first six and a half seasons of his career with the Raptors and played an outsize role in expanding the game in Canada. Eric Hasseltine, the Grizzlies’ radio voice, recalled staring at the video screen in wonder.Advertisement“You forget how high above the rim he played,” Hasseltine said. “They showed those highlights, and it was, like, none of this should be humanly possible.”
            Over the last four seasons, 46 percent of Vince Carter’s total field-goal attempts have come from the 3-point line — including a career-high 57.7 percent this season.        57.7%60%Percentage of field-goal attempts that are 3-pointers50403020100’98-99’04-5’09-10’14-15APRIL 1, 2015
Superstardom was never the goal, Carter said. It was simply a product of being passionate about the game and wanting to compete with the best players in the world. In some ways, that approach helped ease his transition in recent seasons. Because he never necessarily yearned for the spotlight — he described himself as a “homebody” and as someone who did not “get out much” — he was more willing to accept supporting roles.He also recognized that the market for aging swingmen was shrinking. If he wanted to remain employed, he had to become something else.“It wasn’t easy,” said Carter, a perennial starter who recalled being relegated to coming off the bench during his final weeks with the Phoenix Suns in 2011. “It was my own personal battle. I’d sit there and go home frustrated. But what was I going to do about it? I guess I could have torn up the locker room. But that’s never been me. I wasn’t going to make a public fuss. I had to make myself of value.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That process began in earnest when he signed with the Mavericks ahead of the 2011-12 season. Carter studied game film of high-octane reserves like Manu Ginobili of the San Antonio Spurs. Carter also scoured the Internet for old video of Vinnie Johnson, a former guard with the Detroit Pistons.“Just zeroing in on guys like that who were sixth men but still played big minutes and were effective,” Carter said. “You had to game plan for them just like you’d game plan for the team’s best players.”At the same time, Carter continued to hone his outside shooting. He knew that was where he would make his living. He could still drive. He could still dunk, even if the landings hurt more than they once did. But he was realistic about his fading physical abilities. His familiar pop, the explosiveness that had made him a household name in his early 20s, was not going to be there in his late 30s.“Everybody struggles with change,” Carter said. “We’re afraid of it. We’re not sure about it. And I wasn’t sure about it, either, but I was going to try to conquer it.”Stu Jackson, a former coach and league executive who now works as an analyst for NBA TV, noted that so many of the league’s best players — Magic Johnson, Michael Jordan and Jason Kidd, to name three — had the foresight to develop their perimeter games as their careers wore on.Advertisement“Those players, because of their greatness, figured out how to evolve,” Jackson said. “And to me, Vince Carter falls into that category. He reinvented himself.”Carter’s quest for self-preservation is evident in his fondness for the 3-point line. In his first 13 seasons in the league, only 22.6 percent of his field-goal attempts were 3-point shots. Over the last four seasons, 46 percent of his attempts have come from the 3-point line — including 57.7 percent of them this season.“I think he’s an example about how if you take care of yourself and you’re realistic about where you are, you can lengthen your career,” said Chris Wallace, the general manager of the Grizzlies, who cited an ancillary benefit: the money. Carter, it should be noted, has earned more than $165 million in salary in his career.When he was injured this season, Carter made several appearances on the Grizzlies’ television broadcasts as a guest analyst. As usual, he was anticipating the next phase of his life, once his playing career concludes. He would like to work in television, he said, even though he has not ruled out coaching. If only he could find a way to do both.“Maybe I could come into practice and the coach would let me help out,” he said.He knows that day is coming. He has had 192 teammates in his N.B.A. career, and some are now analysts (Grant Hill) and referees (Haywoode Workman) and coaches (Derek Fisher).“It’s crazy,” said Carter, who has outlasted them all.For now, another trip to the barber awaits.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Carter, at 38, Extends His Range and His Career.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.