AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherTiger Woods played 18 practice holes at Augusta National Golf Club on Tuesday, sparking speculation that he will return to competition at the Masters after back and other injuries.If he does come back, what are his chances of success?Woods has come back from extended layoffs several times in his career, so his past does provide some clues.From his debut as a pro at age 20 in 1996 to 2008, he missed no significant playing time. The first big gap in his career came after his victory at the 2008 United States Open for his 14th title in a major tournament.At that tournament, at Torrey Pines in California, he beat Rocco Mediate on the first hole of a sudden-death playoff despite struggling with a knee problem. He described it as “probably the greatest tournament I’ve ever had.” Two days later, he announced that he would have surgery to repair damage to the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee. He has not won a major since.He made his return early in the next season at the 2009 Match Play Championship, beating the unheralded Brendan Jones in the first round. But in the second round, he lost, 4 and 2, to the journeyman Tim Clark.Though that return was indifferent, it did not take him long to find his form. Two weeks later, he was ninth at Doral, and the next week he won at the Arnold Palmer. He won five more tournaments on the PGA Tour that year.At the end of the 2009 season, though, came his most notorious break from golf. After he crashed his S.U.V. into a neighbor’s tree and his marital infidelities were exposed, he announced an “indefinite break from professional golf.”His chosen site for his return in April 2010? Augusta National for the Masters, the tournament he had made his own with four career victories.Phil Mickelson won the event, but Woods contended almost the whole way and finished fourth.Woods had a poor 2010 and early 2011, the lone bright spot another fourth at the Masters. Just a month later, Woods pulled out of the Players Championship because of more problems with his left knee. He missed the United States Open and the British Open.His next return came in August 2011 at the World Golf Championship-Bridgestone, where he was 37th. The rest of that year was forgettable too.Woods seemed back in business in 2012, winning four times on the tour, and he took five titles the next year. In 2014, though, he had back surgery. Returning at Congressional in June, he missed the cut by a comfortable margin.After the 2014 P.G.A., Woods, still bothered by back problems, again took a break. His return in January at the Phoenix Open was a disaster, including his worst round as a pro, an 82.Once again he stepped away, and his latest comeback may well begin at this year’s Masters starting April 9.Woods’s performances in the first tournament after a layoff have been poor, especially by his standards.The one exception came in spring 2010. Woods’s backers can point to the fact that this strong effort was the one time he returned at the Masters, as he may do next week.But detractors will note that it was also the only time his absence was the result of personal problems, and not an injury.Woods is the greatest golfer of his age. He is 39 and has not won a major tournament for almost seven years, but it would be foolish to assert he will never be great again.Still, based on his record, it is unlikely his return to glory will come next week at Augusta.Advertisement