AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenFor the teams headed to Indianapolis this week, the three-week journey to the Final Four is the culmination of an odyssey that began last fall.In addition to missed shots and buzzer-beaters, the tournament is also distinguished by late starting times, quick turnarounds and time away from campus. There are mandatory news media obligations, unfamiliar hotel beds and long airline flights.Whenever the journey ends, the players who return to campus will almost certainly face piles of class work that, without advance planning and diligent effort, might have turned into insurmountable mountains. That makes this the most challenging time of year for the student part of the student-athletes — to use the N.C.A.A.’s preferred term — who pull this lucrative freight train.For players whose teams are eliminated, the high of a tournament run gives way to a looming academic reality. This is not always an easy transition.The Wichita State junior guard Fred VanVleet had to face that reality after the Shockers lost to Notre Dame last Thursday in a round of 16 game. Class was back in session Monday and VanVleet and his teammates were suddenly students trying to make up for lost time, not athletes leading a Final Four charge.“It’s tough to wind down when we’ve been on a basketball run since Christmas break,” VanVleet said after his team was bounced. “It’s been strictly mostly basketball. The last couple of weeks, there hasn’t been much class; a lot of traveling, putting all your heart and soul into what you love to do.”So, how do players keep up? The simple answer is: Some do and some don’t. Every sport in every intercollegiate program has a cadre of advisers who act as conduits between the academic and the running-and-jumping side of campus. Their job is to make sure 18- to 22-year-olds manage being an athlete — which is why many are on campus in the first place — and a student.“I hate school, so it’s going to be even harder for me,” VanVleet said after his team was eliminated.“You don’t really hate school,” I said.“I do hate school,” VanVleet repeated. But he said that he understood that being a responsible student was part of the covenant he had made. Part of his job is to come down off the high of the Final Four and get back into the academic swing of things.“It’s nothing special,” he said. “You just go back, start going back to class, communicating with your professors, catch up on things you may have missed.”VanVleet said the key for him was to get ahead of the work. “We’ve been doing our work early all semester, trying to get ahead, preparing for this time so it’s not going to be that difficult,” he said. “It’s more of a mental choice to take care of it.”One problem is that the built-in time demands on athletes are exacerbated by the demands of television, the fountain from which blessings flow in college sports. After one first-round game in his region ended after 1 a.m. local time, West Virginia Coach Bob Huggins was asked what he thought about playing games into the early morning. Huggins smirked.“Now you’ve got to remember this,” he said. “It’s all for the betterment of the student-athletes.”Huggins’s sarcasm illuminated what is simultaneously hypocrisy and a seemingly unsolvable dilemma: The lucrative tournament puts an immense strain on the student-athletes who make it go, but only more and more immensely talented student-athletes can feed the beast. What’s amazing is that athletic officials will insist, amid all the glitter and gold, that the N.C.A.A. oversees a nonprofit enterprise.A couple of Sundays ago, West Virginia tipped off after 8 p.m. in Columbus, Ohio. The Mountaineers returned to Morgantown early Monday morning, only to depart Tuesday for Cleveland in time to meet the news media Wednesday, and talk about their game against top-ranked Kentucky Thursday.(The unbeaten Wildcats played in Louisville on Saturday, made the trip back to Lexington and departed for Cleveland the next Tuesday.)Huggins focused some of his ire on the competitive imbalance in the tournament’s scheduling and on the television executives who set the start times, but he wasn’t the only one griping. The demands on college athletes’ time grow more burdensome every year, with games virtually every day of the week, and at almost any hour, to accommodate the television networks’ insatiable appetite for content.Players, by and large, respond with a shrug.“We’re young guys,” West Virginia’s Gary Browne said. “We only need a little bit of a nap, a 30-minute nap, and we’ll be good to go.”That is exactly what the adults running this lucrative circus want to hear. But now some powerful administrators are looking for ways to dial things back. They have proposed reduced time demands on athletes but also perks like increased medical support, larger stipends and assurances that athletes who leave college without a degree can return to earn one.“With all the attention and all the money coming into collegiate athletics,” the Pacific-12 commissioner, Larry Scott, said recently, “I think we have to work that much harder to make sure that going to school is the priority.”But with the football playoffs off to a phenomenal start and the men’s and women’s basketball tournaments continuing to be a financial bonanza, the demands on student-athletes’ time will only increase.This is the real madness of March.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement