

      By JOSH KATZ, 
    
MATTHEW BLOCH, 
    
LARRY BUCHANAN and 
    
JOE WARD

APRIL 3, 2015

What makes a record unbreakable? Sometimes, the game changes and records move out of reach. Sometimes, the game remains the same, but a truly exceptional player has a single-season performance so dominant that it is unlikely to ever be surpassed.
And the records that seem unlikeliest to fall are a combination of an extraordinary player and fundamental shifts in the game. By using something called extreme value theory — often used for modeling extreme weather events and floods — we can approximate how many seasons of baseball similar to the most recent era it would take for there to be a 50 percent chance that the single-season records below will have been broken.
Of course, unforeseeable changes in baseball’s rules make these numbers tentative at best. But they serve to highlight some of the best performances in baseball’s modern era (since 1901), and the ones that are likely to remain on baseball’s record books for decades, and centuries, to come.And the records that seem unlikeliest to fall are a combination of an extraordinary player and fundamental shifts in the game. By using something called extreme value theory — often used for modeling extreme weather events and floods — we can approximate how many seasons of baseball similar to the most recent era it would take for there to be a 50 percent chance that the single-season records below will have been broken.
Of course, unforeseeable changes in baseball’s rules make these numbers tentative at best. But they serve to highlight some of the best performances in baseball’s modern era (since 1901), and the ones that are likely to remain on baseball’s record books for decades, and centuries, to come.Of course, unforeseeable changes in baseball’s rules make these numbers tentative at best. But they serve to highlight some of the best performances in baseball’s modern era (since 1901), and the ones that are likely to remain on baseball’s record books for decades, and centuries, to come.Nap Lajoie was one of the most feared hitters of his era, but it was when he jumped, in 1901, to the newly formed American League — and its diluted pitching staffs — that he set the batting average mark that still stands. Rogers Hornsby, a second baseman like Lajoie, nearly matched the mark 23 years later when he hit .424. But there doesn’t appear to be any Lajoies or Hornsbys about to burst on the scene.The last to hit even .400 was Ted Williams in 1941. And with offense on a steady decline, the best average in the majors last season belonged to second baseman (of course) Jose Altuve (.341). What did he need to catch Lajoie? Another hit about every third day. Doesn’t seem like much, but you’re not likely to see this record broken.
The last to hit even .400 was Ted Williams in 1941. And with offense on a steady decline, the best average in the majors last season belonged to second baseman (of course) Jose Altuve (.341). What did he need to catch Lajoie? Another hit about every third day. Doesn’t seem like much, but you’re not likely to see this record broken.This is a classic case of a record once set by a transcendent performer that transformed into a record fueled by the changing nature of the game. When Babe Ruth hit 54 home runs in 1920, it was more than four times the average of the next 15 on the list that season. (And it was more than any team hit in the American League that year.) But Ruth’s home run prowess triggered a change in the game, and by the time he hit 60 in 1927, it was “only” about three times the average of the next 15.
When Barry Bonds hit 73, it was down to one and a half times the average of the next 15. When Bonds set the record, at the height of the steroid era, 41 players had 30 or more homers; last season, only 11 hit that many.
When Barry Bonds hit 73, it was down to one and a half times the average of the next 15. When Bonds set the record, at the height of the steroid era, 41 players had 30 or more homers; last season, only 11 hit that many.The era of the R.B.I. was the 1920s and ’30s; of the top 15 R.B.I. seasons, 14 of them occurred in those two decades. So it is not surprising that Hack Wilson’s monstrous total of 191 came in 1930, a prime example of a record reflecting the changing nature of the game. But offense largely gave way to pitching after World War II and didn’t see a resurgence until the recent steroid-fueled era. Two players from that recent era are the only ones to have had seasons with more than 160 runs batted in: Manny Ramirez (165) in 1999 and Sammy Sosa (160) in 2001. Last season’s A.L. leader, Mike Trout, had 111, which ranks 789th on the single-season R.B.I. list.
But offense largely gave way to pitching after World War II and didn’t see a resurgence until the recent steroid-fueled era. Two players from that recent era are the only ones to have had seasons with more than 160 runs batted in: Manny Ramirez (165) in 1999 and Sammy Sosa (160) in 2001. Last season’s A.L. leader, Mike Trout, had 111, which ranks 789th on the single-season R.B.I. list.As the emphasis on power hitting has risen, so have strikeouts. A single-season record for strikeouts by a batter has been set in four of the past 11 seasons, and 43 of the top 50 highest strikeout seasons have happened since 2000, with more than half by hitters still active. When Mark Reynolds set the mark in 2009, he hit a home run every 13 at-bats and struck out every two and a half at-bats. At least he was not hitting into double plays.
When Mark Reynolds set the mark in 2009, he hit a home run every 13 at-bats and struck out every two and a half at-bats. At least he was not hitting into double plays.There is little ambiguity about what type of record this is. Rickey Henderson was far better at stealing bases than nearly every other player before him or since. Although he was clearly not a one-dimensional player, he did seem to have a single-minded goal: steal and steal often, regardless of the circumstances.He attempted 172 steals during his record-breaking season, successfully stealing second base 95 times, third base 33 times and home twice. Henderson stole more bases in 1982 than 28 entire teams stole in 2014. More than half of the teams last season didn’t even attempt 130 steals.
He attempted 172 steals during his record-breaking season, successfully stealing second base 95 times, third base 33 times and home twice. Henderson stole more bases in 1982 than 28 entire teams stole in 2014. More than half of the teams last season didn’t even attempt 130 steals.This relatively new statistic attempts to measure a player’s value across a number of criteria and, among other things, can measure his worth against his peers that season. With few exceptions, the value for the top performers in this statistic has remained relatively constant since Ruth’s 14.1 in 1923.
As the pool of players has become larger, the skill of a hypothetical replacement player has gone up, making it more difficult to set a record in this category. Using the WAR formula used by Baseball-Reference.com, only two players other than Ruth have recorded a WAR above 12: Rogers Hornsby’s 12.1 in 1924 and Carl Yastrzemski’s 12.4 in 1967.
As the pool of players has become larger, the skill of a hypothetical replacement player has gone up, making it more difficult to set a record in this category. Using the WAR formula used by Baseball-Reference.com, only two players other than Ruth have recorded a WAR above 12: Rogers Hornsby’s 12.1 in 1924 and Carl Yastrzemski’s 12.4 in 1967.With the increased emphasis on on-base percentage in recent years, it seems hard to believe that the list of the top 200 best on-base-percentage seasons includes only five active players (Albert Pujols, 76th; Miguel Cabrera, 167th; Jose Bautista, 174th; David Ortiz, 188th; Joe Mauer, 196th). Bonds’s eye-popping .582 in 2002 and his astronomical .609 in 2004 were fueled in part by league-leading seasons in walks and intentional walks.There are usually two main ingredients involved when a player receives a lot of intentional walks: Opponents are too afraid of his power (and would rather put him on first than risk more damage), and the hitters who follow him in the lineup don’t pose nearly the same threat.
This was true of Barry Bonds for most of his career. From 1992 through 2007, Bonds led the league in intentional walks in all but four seasons. The phenomenon peaked in 2004 when he was followed most often in the lineup by either Edgardo Alfonzo or Pedro Feliz. Bonds was intentionally walked four times in a game four times that season. No one other than Bonds has ever had more than 45 intentional walks in a season.
This was true of Barry Bonds for most of his career. From 1992 through 2007, Bonds led the league in intentional walks in all but four seasons. The phenomenon peaked in 2004 when he was followed most often in the lineup by either Edgardo Alfonzo or Pedro Feliz. Bonds was intentionally walked four times in a game four times that season. No one other than Bonds has ever had more than 45 intentional walks in a season.As much as fans want the manager to bunt the runner over to second base, small ball is just that, a small part of the game, and has been for almost a century.
The record holder, Ray Chapman, was one of the best bunters of his generation, one of just five players to ever compile 50 sacrifice bunts in a season (and the only player to do it twice). He was on a pace to surpass 50 again in 1920, when, on one afternoon in August, he was struck in the head by a pitch as he leaned in to bunt. The pitch knocked him unconscious, and he died the next morning. 
Chapman’s death shocked the baseball world, and partially led to rule changes that greatly benefited hitters, including hastening the demise of the spitball and making sure that scuffed, hard-to-see balls were taken out of play. This helped usher in the new wave of power hitting in the 1920s.
As much as fans want the manager to bunt the runner over to second base, small ball is just that, a small part of the game, and has been for almost a century.
The record holder, Ray Chapman, was one of the best bunters of his generation, one of just five players to ever compile 50 sacrifice bunts in a season (and the only player to do it twice). He was on a pace to surpass 50 again in 1920, when, on one afternoon in August, he was struck in the head by a pitch as he leaned in to bunt. The pitch knocked him unconscious, and he died the next morning. 
Chapman’s death shocked the baseball world, and partially led to rule changes that greatly benefited hitters, including hastening the demise of the spitball and making sure that scuffed, hard-to-see balls were taken out of play. This helped usher in the new wave of power hitting in the 1920s.
The record holder, Ray Chapman, was one of the best bunters of his generation, one of just five players to ever compile 50 sacrifice bunts in a season (and the only player to do it twice). He was on a pace to surpass 50 again in 1920, when, on one afternoon in August, he was struck in the head by a pitch as he leaned in to bunt. The pitch knocked him unconscious, and he died the next morning. 
Chapman’s death shocked the baseball world, and partially led to rule changes that greatly benefited hitters, including hastening the demise of the spitball and making sure that scuffed, hard-to-see balls were taken out of play. This helped usher in the new wave of power hitting in the 1920s.
Chapman’s death shocked the baseball world, and partially led to rule changes that greatly benefited hitters, including hastening the demise of the spitball and making sure that scuffed, hard-to-see balls were taken out of play. This helped usher in the new wave of power hitting in the 1920s.The nature of pitching has changed drastically over the 114 years of baseball’s modern era in ways that make this record almost impossible to break. The New York Highlanders (now the Yankees) played 155 games in 1904, and Chesbro started nearly one third of them, 51 in all. Remarkably, he finished all but three. Of his 48 complete games, 41 were wins (out of the 92 the Highlanders had that season). As the chart shows, completing more than even 10 games these days is a rarity.Not surprisingly, as the number of complete games continues to fall, the statistics for relievers continue to rise. Closers are brought into save situations even when the starter or other relievers are still pitching well.The season Rodriguez set the record, he had 69 save opportunities. That is quite a few, but not enough to put the record out of reach. Since 2000, there have been 90 instances in which a reliever with at least 25 saves has appeared in at least 70 games.
The season Rodriguez set the record, he had 69 save opportunities. That is quite a few, but not enough to put the record out of reach. Since 2000, there have been 90 instances in which a reliever with at least 25 saves has appeared in at least 70 games.Protecting the arms of expensive pitchers, along with the proliferation of relievers, puts this stat firmly in the category of a record that is staying put. The last pitcher to throw even 300 innings was Steve Carlton in 1980. Walsh pitched in 66 games in 1908, starting 49 of them and completing 42.Much like complete games and innings pitched, the single-season wins record is well out of reach for current players. It is difficult to imagine Chesbro’s record of 41 — earned in the same season as his record-setting 48 complete games — ever falling in an era when 30 starts is considered a productive season. The last pitcher to even start 41 games was Phil Niekro 36 years ago.Shortened seasons in 1981, 1994 and 1995 are omitted. The number of top performers shown in each season is the same as the number of teams.Source: Baseball-reference.com, baseball-almanac.comAdvertisement