AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenHere is a story about the time Sydney Leroux wanted to jump off a cliff.It was in Hawaii a few years ago. Leroux and many other players on the United States women’s national soccer team were attending the wedding of their teammate Abby Wambach. One afternoon, Leroux heard about a nearby ledge on a bluff from which interested divers could leap. The drop was sheer, more than 50 feet to the water below. Leroux grabbed her best friend on the team, Alex Morgan, and dragged her toward the precipice.“Let’s jump!” Leroux said as Morgan eyed the edge warily.“Wait, wait, wait,” Morgan replied. “This is crazy.” Leroux looked disappointed. Morgan peered around.“Look,” Morgan said finally. “There are some boys over there. Let’s make them jump first just to be sure, O.K.?”Leroux and Morgan like this story because it is, in many ways, emblematic of their relationship. On a team that is still largely defined by its veterans — Wambach, Hope Solo, Christie Rampone, Megan Rapinoe — Morgan, 25, and Leroux, 24, are the leading edge of a younger generation of stars, two goal-scorers who have developed a deep friendship that encompasses a shared spirit of adventure, a common interest in social media and even the occasional awkward reality that one’s success on the field might take away playing time from the other.“Alex and I are a rare breed of friends,” Leroux said during an interview last month when the United States was training for a match in France. “We’re very competitive with each other, but we’re very close. Like anything, we get into it sometimes. We’ve had fights. But we’re very close, and I think our relationship has grown a lot stronger being in this environment where we are pushing each other all the time.”It is not unusual, of course, for teammates to become close. The women’s national team, which faces New Zealand on Saturday in St. Louis, is a particularly close-knit group. Its players, because of frequent camps and the lack of a consistent professional league in the United States, spend more time together than a men’s national team.The relationship between Leroux and Morgan, though, seems a bit different if only because of their common traits. Both had success at the youth national team level. Both have developed huge followings because of their propensity for scoring goals and chronicling their lives on social media. Both are in high-profile relationships with professional men’s players.“Even our mothers have gotten close,” Morgan said. “I think now they actually talk to each other more than we do.”“Yes,” Leroux said. “They’re besties, too.”Like most friendships, the connection between Leroux and Morgan is based on a combination of circumstance, shared experiences and chemistry. It dates to the 2008 under-20 Women’s World Cup, a tournament in which Morgan scored four goals, Leroux scored five and the United States took home the championship trophy.Since then, Morgan and Leroux have forged a relationship that includes frank conversations about soccer (Morgan: “We vowed to be brutally honest”); occasional discussions about clothes and makeup (Leroux: “We’re not girly-girls, but we do like to get dressed up”); and, more often than one might imagine, text messages featuring bizarre or unseemly images.“I don’t know where she finds some of these things,” Morgan said of Leroux. “She sends me memes, pictures of anything. Bald rats. I don’t even know.”Leroux nodded. “Sometimes I just send her pictures of whatever gross thing I’m doing at that moment.”Their roles in the relationship are clear, as they were on the Hawaiian cliff. Leroux is the wilder one, the freer spirit; Morgan is more pragmatic and sporadically serves as a reasoned, if beloved, filter. Often, Leroux will come up with an idea and then ask Morgan to “figure out how we should do it.”Social media and self-branding are also a significant part of both of their lives. The two have variously chronicled their Halloween activities, their thoughts on the movie “Fifty Shades of Grey” and the ordeal of having a car towed, in addition to occasionally posting racier photos. One such image, of them wearing bikinis, drew more than 15,000 likes on Instagram.They are, by far, the most Internet-visible players on the team.“They’re two peas in a pod,” Becky Sauerbrunn, a veteran defender, said.“I think they’re funny together,” Rapinoe said. “I think they have their own thing going on and they bring it together and it’s like this superpower with millions of followers, that sort of thing.”She added: “They’re younger than everyone, so they’ve formed this friendship in a different environment than we did. It’s pretty interesting to see.”Opening up on social media is a conscious choice for Leroux and Morgan, a vehicle for “giving people the chance to be in our lives,” Leroux said. Morgan is a bit more cautious, and both have re-evaluated their candor after hurtful experiences with the more vicious component of modern celebrity follower dynamics: sexism, misogyny and, for Leroux, racism.“It can be hard,” Leroux said of being subjected to Internet attacks. “But that’s something we lean on each other about, too. Sometimes it’s just as simple as Alex saying to me, ‘You don’t know these people and you don’t have to care what they think.’ ”Both conceded that dealing with the seedier element of Twitter was part of life for public figures, and their profiles figure to continue to rise as the United States approaches this summer’s Women’s World Cup in Canada. Morgan is the more established of the two, having been part of the 2011 World Cup team (as a reserve) and featuring in the 2012 Olympics. Leroux, though, has scored 33 goals in 67 appearances for the national team and has proved to be a tremendous option off the bench when she does not start.Predicting how the team will look in June is difficult. Jill Ellis, the team’s coach, has tinkered with lineups and formations, and while Morgan and Leroux said they hoped to play together, Ellis has not shown an inclination to give them their wish. “The natural position for both, their most comfortable position, is a No. 9,” Ellis said, referring to the traditional designation for a forward.Whatever happens in Canada, Leroux and Morgan insist that playing-time concerns will not affect their relationship. What might, at least a little, is marriage.Morgan wed Servando Carrasco on New Year’s Eve, and Leroux revealed in February that she had gotten married in January to Dom Dwyer — though even that has, for the moment, not been a big obstacle. Since Carrasco, a midfielder, and Dwyer, a striker, both play for Sporting Kansas City in Major League Soccer, Morgan and Leroux are often in the same city even when they’re not with the national team.“Obviously, your priorities change once you get married,” Morgan said. “Your free time that you have is different. We’ll get to Kansas City and Syd might be like, ‘Let’s meet up,’ and you’re thinking, ‘Well, I only have one day here, so. ...’ ”Leroux laughed.“It’s true,” she said. “Your life changes and your relationships change. But then, when we get back with the team, we can just fall right back into the way things were before.”Advertisement