By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 1, 2015
OAKLAND, Calif. —  Steve Kerr, the coach of the Golden State Warriors, the defending N.B.A. champions, will take a leave of absence while recovering from back surgery and will be replaced on an interim basis by Luke Walton.The Warriors said Thursday that Kerr would need time off for rehabilitation and recovery. Kerr had surgery to repair a ruptured disk in late July and had follow-up surgery in September.“After the first two days of training camp, I realized I need to take a step back and focus on my rehabilitation in order to be ready for the grind of another N.B.A. season,” Kerr said in a statement. “As I noted last week, my summer was difficult and no fun due to the multiple back surgeries. At this point, I simply want to get healthy and back to my normal daily routine on and off the court.”The Warriors said they did not know how much time Kerr would miss.“At this point, the most important thing is to make sure Steve is healthy, completely recovered and ready for not only the rigors of a long N.B.A. season, but day-to-day life in general,” General Manager Bob Myers said. “We don’t anticipate the recovery process will be long term, but as of today, we don’t know the exact time frame. We’ll evaluate his progress daily.”AdvertisementKerr hurt his back during the N.B.A. finals in June. In Kerr’s first season as the team’s coach, the Warriors won their first N.B.A. title in 40 years.Walton, a son of the Hall of Famer Bill Walton, was an assistant for Golden State last season after having spent 10 years as an N.B.A. player. He was part of two championship teams with the Los Angeles Lakers under Phil Jackson.Advertisement“Luke is fortunate enough to have played and coached under some great coaches,” Myers said last week. “He has an innate ability to think the game, to learn the game and also to communicate the game.”A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Kerr Takes Leave to Recover From Surgery.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.