By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 3, 2015
In the opening minutes of an event for Knicks’ season-ticket holders on Thursday night, Phil Jackson used the words acrimonious, sublimate and gestalt.It all sounded very impressive, and perhaps that was part of Jackson’s strategy — that despite being neck-deep in a ramshackle season, Jackson remains in control as team president, with a firm plan for the future.Not to mention a sensational vocabulary.“We knew we were going to have to take this team apart to get to where we want to go,” Jackson said at Madison Square Garden. “It may be a godsend in the end result.”Jackson and Steve Mills, the team’s general manager, fielded prepared questions from Al Trautwig and Alan Hahn of the MSG Network before an invitation-only crowd of roughly 300.AdvertisementOne of the season-ticket holders who was in attendance provided The New York Times with an audio recording of the Q. and A., which was billed as an “open conversation” but came across more like a 45-minute infomercial.AdvertisementThe Knicks (14-61) have already assured themselves of owning the worst winning percentage in franchise history. Jackson did acknowledge that the season had been a disaster.“I would have never thought that something like this could happen,” said Jackson, who blamed the news media for putting undue pressure on the team and for shining too bright of a spotlight on the triangle offense. “The season became convoluted because everybody wanted to discuss the triangle and how the triangle was going to perform.”At the same time, Jackson worked to put the focus on the future. The Knicks are bound for the draft lottery, with a 25 percent chance of winning the top pick should they finish with the league’s worst record. In their race to the bottom, the Knicks have a two-game lead on the Minnesota Timberwolves. Two freshman centers, Jahlil Okafor of Duke and Karl-Anthony Towns of Kentucky, are widely considered the top two prospects.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A first draft pick can move the whole organization,” Jackson said. “Patrick Ewing did in the early ‘80s. We want to see if that player is the one who can move the whole franchise ahead.”Jackson was asked if he knew whom he would take with the first pick.“You know, I do,” he said.When he declined to elaborate, the audience was left to rummage for clues. Clue No. 1: Jackson said he valued defense over offense when it came to post players. Clue No. 2: Jackson slipped and said “Okafor” when he was trying to refer to Michael Olowokandi, a former top overall pick (and notorious bust). The mistake elicited an excited reaction from those in attendance.There were other light moments. When Trautwig said that Mills had just returned from crisscrossing Europe “like Napoleon,” Jackson interjected: “He didn’t go to Russia!”Mills, who was pushed out of his role as team president when Jackson was hired in March 2014, sought to establish his bona fides by talking at length about his scouting trips overseas. His favorite word of the evening was “agent.” He also spoke fondly of Carmelo Anthony, who underwent season-ending knee surgery in February. Mills said that Anthony had been a regular presence in his office to talk about personnel.“He’s very much been part of the process to try to understand what we’re looking for,” Mills said.As for Jackson, he chose to recall a pleasant episode from the recent past.“I’m sitting in Europa cafe, having a coffee and reading the paper,” he said, “and a guy comes over and just says: ‘I wholly approve of what you’re doing. Stick with it.’ ”AdvertisementOn a friendly stage before a friendly audience, Jackson delighted in a rare opportunity to stick to the script.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Jackson Faces Fans and Talks of Future.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.