AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyKEY BISCAYNE, Fla. — The duel was supposed to happen last month in the California desert in Indian Wells. But Serena Williams’s winning streak finally did collide with Simona Halep’s winning streak, and it was worth the wait.It was punch against counterpunch late Thursday night. It was Williams’s dictation against Halep’s deft baseline typing.And although Williams fluctuated between ruthlessly efficient and surprisingly shaky, she managed — as she has so often against her most dangerous opponents — to find the lines and the solutions under greatest duress.Her 6-2, 4-6, 7-5 victory put her into her yet another final at the springtime tournament in South Florida now called the Miami Open. The event has changed names and sponsors through the years, but Williams has been a near-constant factor.She is now 10-0 in semifinals here and will be going for her eighth singles title on Saturday. She will face an unexpected opponent: Carla Suárez Navarro, the 12th-seeded Spanish veteran who is now assured of rising into the top 10 for the first time after defeating Andrea Petkovic, 6-3, 6-3, in Thursday’s first semifinal.It has been 14 years since a Spanish woman was in the top 10, and Suárez Navarro is only the third woman to make it into that select group, joining Arantxa Sánchez Vicario and Conchita Martínez.But Suárez Navarro will certainly be no favorite on Saturday. She is 0-4 against Williams and has lost the eight sets they have played by the following scores: 6-0, 6-3, 6-2, 6-0, 6-0, 6-0, 6-2, 6-3.No wonder Suárez Navarro admitted that she was hoping to play Halep next.It could have happened, despite a remarkable first set from Williams in which she did a fine impression of a player in the zone. But Halep — the last woman to beat Williams — managed to avoid the knockout punch in the second set and finally broke her serve at 4-4.Halep, the third seed, from Romania, was so focused on the challenge at hand that when she held serve in the next game, she was unaware at first that she had won the set. She finally realized that it was time to sit down, and she did so laughing to herself.“I didn’t play for the score,” she said. “I played just to try to play my best tennis, to try to be close to her, and just to hit and to fight for every ball.”That was what was required, but the No. 1-seeded Williams was definitely keeping score despite her ups and downs, her satisfactions and frustrations.They were supposed to play in the semifinals in Indian Wells, but Williams was forced to withdraw with a knee injury. Halep went on to win the title, but her winning streak is now over.Williams rolls on and has won the last 20 matches she has played.Advertisement