AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — Windows of opportunity, creaking open and clattering shut, create their own unique rhythms each spring, and on Thursday they created a symphony in the Yankees’ clubhouse before and after their 6-2 split-squad victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates.Brendan Ryan sat at his locker, a crutch by his side, shaking his head over the misfortune of tearing his calf muscle the day before. Gregorio Petit stood nearby, beaming about the chance to play for the Yankees, the team his father passionately roots for — an opportunity afforded by Ryan’s injury.An hour later, at the opposite end of the clubhouse, Chase Whitley had cleaned out his locker after being informed that his sterling spring performance — a 1.17 E.R.A. over 15 1/3 innings — was not enough to earn a spot on the opening day roster.An inordinately large number of teammates approached Austin Romine to chat or shake hands, perhaps a sign that his eight-year career as a catcher in the Yankees’ system was near its end.Though Manager Joe Girardi might take great pleasure in telling a player he has unexpectedly made the team — as he did last year with Dellin Betances and Yangervis Solarte — delivering bad news is gut-wrenching.“I still say it’s the worst part of my job,” Girardi said. “It’s very difficult for me, and I feel for them because it’s a dream of theirs.”Ryan was distraught Wednesday, having worked himself into shape after missing the first two weeks of training camp with a back injury. He is not expected to return before May.“It didn’t feel like a bee sting or like a hammer to the back of the calf, like I’ve heard,” Ryan said. “But then I couldn’t move. I couldn’t believe it.”Within six hours of Ryan’s being carried from the field, General Manager Brian Cashman had acquired Petit from the Houston Astros for cash considerations.It took the Yankees that long to eschew several in-house options in favor of an infielder whose main purpose was to give shortstop Didi Gregorius some relief, especially against left-handed hitters. Cashman said Petit fit that bill better than second baseman Rob Refsnyder, who is not as steady defensively, and Nick Noonan, who hits left-handed in a lineup that is already tilted in that direction.Petit was getting his hair cut Wednesday evening in Kissimmee, Fla., when he was informed of the trade. Knowing the Yankees’ policy prohibiting facial hair, Petit made sure to get his beard shaved, too.He then called his wife in Houston. He had planned on seeing her Friday when the Astros were to return to Houston for two games, but he told her not to wait for him. Then he called his father, who had always wanted him to play for the Yankees, in Venezuela.“I asked him, ‘Are you sitting, are you O.K.?’ ” Petit said. “ ‘Well, I got some good news for you. I just got traded to the Yankees.’ He said: ‘No way. I’m sitting now for sure.’ ” There was ebullience in Petit’s voice and a sparkle in his eye as he spoke. He had not yet met with Girardi, and his Astros duffle bag sat on the floor near his locker. His belongings, which had been prepared to ship to Houston, would now be sent to New York.But others will have different destinations.Romine and John Ryan Murphy have been all but indistinguishable as solid-defense, light-hitting backups for catcher Brian McCann, but Romine is out of options, meaning he will most likely be traded, or scooped up on waivers if he is released. Murphy is younger and played well at the end of last season.Girardi said the decision, which is not expected to be made until after Saturday’s final exhibition game, in Washington, was that much more difficult because as a former catcher, he had a closer relationship with them.“It makes it much harder for me,” he said. “And the unfortunate thing is you know you’re going to disappoint someone.”It is usually Girardi, Cashman and the assistant general manager Billy Eppler who deliver the news. Cashman emphasized that opening day was only a starting point, that the roster would fluctuate during the season.“The most important aspect,” Cashman said, “is making sure there’s honest dialogue from manager, coaches, front office to each individual player about where they are, how we see them, how they see themselves, and trying to map out a strategy for them, because all of them want to be in the big leagues.”INSIDE PITCHALEX RODRIGUEZ shone at first base Thursday, the second time he had played the position this spring. He scooped two balls from shortstop Stephen Drew out of the dirt, one off a tricky hop. He had seven putouts and an assist. ... JACOBY ELLSBURY played in his first major league game since straining his oblique on March 15. MICHAEL PINEDA finished an excellent spring with a 1.42 E.R.A., 23 strikeouts and one walk in 19 innings. He allowed one run in five and a third innings against the Pirates.Advertisement