AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanJUPITER, Fla. — The Mets cleaned out their lockers Thursday, packed their bags one last time and dressed for a long trip. Their belongings were loaded onto trucks. Their cars had been shipped north. Spring training was ending, and Matt Harvey blended into the crowd, wearing what looked like a finely made black suit.As he sat out last year after having Tommy John surgery, Harvey missed the subtle parts of being a professional baseball player, like being around his teammates for trips like these. Spring training can be grueling, but Harvey embraced the minutiae this year with a smile, perhaps because his comeback has gone so well.He pitched well, again, in his sixth and final spring start Thursday, throwing four scoreless innings against the St. Louis Cardinals to lower his exhibition-season E.R.A. to 1.19.Afterward, having proved he was healthy, Harvey was asked what his goals were for the season. He did not say he wanted to win the Cy Young Award or rack up 20 victories. For all the hype surrounding his initial rise and now his comeback, it was easy to forget that Harvey had never pitched a full season in the major leagues.“I want to make every start,” Harvey said. “For me, now, pitching a full season and just being out there is the main goal.”That could be the Mets’ biggest task this season. All spring, opposing players praised the way he pitched. While it may have seemed like the polite thing to say, he routinely made hitters look foolish.He threw one slider that nearly caused Dustin Pedroia to topple over because he swung through it so hard. On Thursday, Harvey froze Matt Holliday on a 98-mile-per-hour fastball for a strikeout. Harvey totaled 21 strikeouts in 222/3 innings, and his command seemed even better than it was before the operation, which took place in October 2013. He walked one batter the entire spring and finished having recorded 59 consecutive outs without issuing a walk.Adam Wainwright, the Cardinals’ ace, has watched Harvey with some curiosity, and he was among those who were impressed. Wainwright is often used as an example of a star pitcher who had Tommy John surgery and came back good as new.But his case was slightly different from Harvey’s. While Harvey had about 17 months to recover, Wainwright had about 13 months. Wainwright, who missed the 2011 season, said that in his first three months back in 2012, he struggled mentally and with arm fatigue. He eventually regained his confidence, but he finished with a 3.94 E.R.A. In his other eight seasons, he has a 2.87 E.R.A.The Mets could have brought Harvey back near the end of last season. But they held him back, hoping the extra rest would ease his transition.“He’ll probably have moments of ups and downs, even though he’s had some more time,” Wainwright said. “But he’s such a great talent, and he has such a great arm, he’ll probably be fine.”The Mets have a plan in place for how Harvey will be handled. Sandy Alderson, the general manager, indicated it would involve pitch counts and inning limits, but he declined to go into detail. Manager Terry Collins declined to give a specific pitch count for Harvey’s first start, April 9 against the Nationals.“We’ll take care of him,” Collins said, adding, “We’re going to be delicate.”INSIDE PITCHThe Mets announced that they had agreed to terms with Juan Lagares on a contract that will run through the 2019 season, with a club option for 2020, the year when Lagares will turn 31. The deal is reportedly worth $23 million. ... Curtis Granderson left Thursday’s game after being hit by a pitch on his right knee. The Mets are optimistic that both Granderson and Daniel Murphy (hamstring) will be ready for the season opener. ... The Mets will play two more exhibition games, against the Texas Rangers, on Friday and Saturday in Arlington, Tex.Advertisement