By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 2, 2015
J. T. Miller scored the winner in the third period, less than a minute after Minnesota had tied the game, and the visiting Rangers earned a 3-2 victory over the Wild on Thursday night to clinch the N.H.L.’s Metropolitan Division title.Fifty-five seconds after Thomas Vanek scored for the Wild, Miller tipped the puck into the net at 6 minutes 48 seconds of the third. The Rangers improved to 26-11-2 away from home, setting a franchise record for road wins, and stayed in first place in the Eastern Conference, with 105 points, with five games to go.Dominic Moore scored against one of his eight former teams, Rick Nash later scored in the first period for his 41st goal, and Ryan McDonagh had two assists for the Rangers.Henrik Lundqvist made 26 saves for the Rangers. They have played one fewer game than Montreal (103 points) and Tampa Bay (102) in the race for the top seed in the playoffs.AdvertisementBLUE JACKETS 4, ISLANDERS 3 Ryan Johansen scored late in regulation to tie the score and added the clinching goal in a shootout, leading Columbus over the visiting Islanders and extending the Blue Jackets’ streak to eight straight wins.AdvertisementAfter Mark Letestu scored to open the shootout, Johansen slowed as he approached goalie Jaroslav Halak and slid the puck between his leg pads. Sergei Bobrovsky, who had stopped Frans Nielsen in the first round, then stopped Kyle Okposo to seal the victory.BLACKHAWKS 3, CANUCKS 1 Jonathan Toews and Marcus Kruger scored in the third period, and host Chicago clinched a playoff spot with a win over Vancouver.The Blackhawks (47-24-6) remained a point behind St. Louis for second in the Central Division.BRUINS 3, RED WINGS 2 Zach Trotman scored his first N.H.L. goal with 2:08 remaining to lift Boston to a victory at Detroit.Trotman’s wrist shot got between Petr Mrazek’s glove and jersey and trickled past the goal line to give Boston its fourth straight win.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PANTHERS 6, HURRICANES 1 Roberto Luongo earned his 400th career victory, and Jaromir Jagr had a goal and an assist, tying Ron Francis for fourth place on the N.H.L.’s career points list, as host Florida routed Carolina.Luongo became the 11th N.H.L. goalie to record 400 wins. SENATORS 2, LIGHTNING 1 Patrick Wiercioch scored 4:43 into overtime, leading host Ottawa past Tampa Bay.Mark Stone also scored for the Senators, and Andrew Hammond made 28 saves. Jonathan Drouin scored the lone goal for Tampa Bay, which has lost four of its last six. Ben Bishop made 32 saves.BLUES 4, FLAMES 1 Jaden Schwartz had a goal and an assist, and Jake Allen had light work in net for St. Louis, which ended a three-game home losing streak and clinched a playoff spot with a victory over Calgary.AdvertisementPaul Stastny, Jori Lehtera and Patrik Berglund also scored for the Blues, who reached 100 points for the third time in four seasons. St. Louis is in second place in the Central Division with 101 points, 2 behind Nashville, with five games to go.CAPITALS 5, CANADIENS 4 Troy Brouwer scored the winner in the fourth round of a shootout, leading Washington to a win at Montreal.Alex Ovechkin and Joel Ward each scored two goals for the Capitals in regulation.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Miller’s Goal Lifts Rangers to Win and Division Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.