By MARC TRACYAPRIL 2, 2015
CLEVELAND —  Those who think this Kentucky basketball team is unbeatable, take one step forward.Not so fast, Kentucky supporters.It is true that Kentucky is undefeated in all the games that count this season, and after defeating Notre Dame, 68-66, on Saturday, it will carry a 38-0 record into the Final Four in Indianapolis this weekend. Like last year, it will play Wisconsin in the national semifinals.But it is also true that on Aug. 17, this same Kentucky team lost, 63-62, to the Dominican Republic national team in the Bahamas, where the Wildcats had decamped for a week of preseason practice and exhibition games.While Wisconsin might consult the game plan deployed Saturday by Notre Dame, which led Kentucky well into the second half and lost by only 2 points, there is also a blueprint for being ahead of Kentucky not just late in the game but at the end of the game, when it counts.AdvertisementAsked about the game in August, several Kentucky players could not recall much except that Kentucky had been up late and faltered because of a last-second shot by power forward Jack M. Martinez, who is the team captain.The Wildcats freshman guard Tyler Ulis remembered a little more.“At the end, I missed the free throw,” he said. “And I missed two 3s late. And that’s about it.”Ulis was actually 2 for 5 from beyond the arc and led the team with 12 points. Other leading scorers were the freshman Karl-Anthony Towns and the sophomore Derek Willis, who has rarely played during the season.At the time, Kentucky was experimenting with a platoon system — two five-man lineups that more or less played together and split overall time. That platoon was slowly abandoned during the course of the season as several members saw their minutes decline and, in December, the junior guard Alex Poythress sustained a season-ending anterior cruciate ligament injury.Willie Cauley-Stein — the anchor of Kentucky’s stellar defense — did not play during the loss in the Bahamas because he was still recovering from the ankle injury he had sustained during last season’s N.C.A.A. tournament. The reserves Willis, Dominique Hawkins and E. J. Floreal combined to play 43 minutes.Advertisement“Well, it was another learning experience, and that’s what we’re trying to do here,” Coach John Calipari told The Lexington Herald-Leader after the defeat.Orlando Antigua, the Dominican team’s coach and a former assistant under Calipari, recently referred to the game as “many moons ago.”“Cal and the staff were experimenting,” added Antigua, who is now the coach at South Florida.Moreover, it was the sixth game the Wildcats had played in eight days. In fact, one of the previous games was an 83-71 victory against the Dominican team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, the team does know what it is like to defeat the Wildcats.James Feldeine, who contributed 7 points and a steal in 20 minutes of play during the game, offered some thoughts recently from Italy, where he plays for Pallacanestro Cantu, near Milan.“Was an up-and-down game,” he said in a text message. “Both teams were playing great defense. And of course we knew all their plays. Because of Coach O.”Having a former Calipari assistant on staff is an advantage that Wisconsin does not enjoy, nor does Duke or Michigan State, one of which would play Kentucky should the Wildcats advance.One motivating factor for the Dominican team, Feldeine said, was “knowing Coach Cal and knowing he would hate to lose to us.” Before Antigua, the Dominican team’s coach was Calipari.Another was seeking to avenge the earlier loss, something the Badgers, who lost to Kentucky on a buzzer-beater in last year’s Final Four, know something about.“We were mad we lost to kids,” Feldeine, 26, said. The Dominican team is composed primarily of older professionals.AdvertisementWhich brings up another hot topic related to Kentucky’s stretch of perfection this season. Could a professional team beat Kentucky?Larry Brown, the longtime N.B.A. coach who is now the coach at Southern Methodist, said recently that Kentucky would make the N.B.A. playoffs out of the Eastern Conference, which the former most valuable player Charles Barkley playfully dismissed as “stupid.”“I’m going to take it to an all-time low: the New York Knicks can beat Kentucky,” Barkley, now an analyst, said on CBS of the 14-61 Knicks.No matter what the answer is, one team has beat Kentucky this year. It just did not count.“I don’t worry about that game anymore; we’re well past that,” Ulis said of his team’s lone defeat. “I was upset then a little bit, but I was at peace with it then, because it really didn’t matter to our record.”A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: 38-0, With One Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.