By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 2, 2015
After Elliott Bullock made the Stanford men’s basketball team as a freshman walk-on in 2008, he played well enough to earn a scholarship for his sophomore year.Off the court during the 2009-10 season, Bullock often isolated himself and battled depression and anxiety, which nearly derailed his college basketball career.Now, five years later, Bullock is Stanford’s most vocal and animated player, despite logging only 34 minutes this season. From the bench, Bullock, a 6-foot-10, 235-pound center, commonly assumes the role of a coach, yelling and directing the defense to their proper spots on the floor and alerting them to the plays being run by their opponents.While Coach Johnny Dawkins keeps a relatively cool demeanor through the game, Bullock, a 25-year-old senior, snaps towels in frustration and flexes his muscles after his teammate Reid Travis fights for points in the paint. He sits at the last spot on the bench, but is the first to run to midcourt after a timeout to bump chests with teammates in appreciation of their efforts.Advertisement“He had some growing to do his first few years here,” Dawkins said. “The beautiful thing was watching him go through it and become the leader he’s become. He wasn’t open initially, wasn’t outgoing. He stuck to the things he knew very well and didn’t really stray outside of that or expand his role.“He’s gotten more mature as he’s grown in our program,” Dawkins added. “He’s expanded who he is as a player and who he is as a person.”On Thursday night, when the final buzzer sounded and Stanford (24-13) had captured the 2015 N.I.T. title with a 66-64 overtime win over Miami (25-13), Bullock was the first player in line to shake hands with the Hurricanes. He then congratulated Chasson Randle, who led the Cardinal with 25 points and made the go-ahead free throws with 3.4 seconds remaining.Before the game Bullock reflected on his career. He said that he had shown signs of depression throughout his entire life, but that he was in denial about it until he went on a Mormon mission after his sophomore year in 2010.Bullock had a promising freshman season, playing in 15 games, at times with a herniated disk. The next season, depression and anxiety impeded his progress, and as he prepared for his mission, he was unsure if he would return to basketball.Advertisement“I was having the emotional struggles of it and the mental struggles of it,” Bullock said. “As a sophomore in college you want to fight through anything. I thought this is something I can control, something I can get over. I should have sought out more help. I should have relied more on my coaches, my teammates, my family. At the time I wasn’t mature enough to be able to do that.”During his first year working in impoverished areas in Houston, Bullock felt a reprieve from his symptoms. But as he was assigned more responsibilities, he relapsed. With the help of mission leaders, Bullock finally recognized his depression.“It changed my perspective and value system,” Bullock said of the experience. “I was able to step back and go, What is really important to me, and really evaluate my goals and aspirations.”As Bullock began to better acknowledge his symptoms, his passion for basketball grew stronger.On his mission, he was not allowed to watch television or read newspapers, so Bullock could not regularly follow Stanford’s path to winning the 2012 N.I.T. title. Occasionally, he would glance at a newspaper at a gas station or receive an update when he made a weekly trip to the local library.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Though my focus was elsewhere, in downtime or other moments, my thoughts were absolutely with the team,” Bullock said. “My heart would take a little leap, and I’d be happy for them and cross my fingers and wait for the next week when my dad would send an email and tell me if they won.”Bullock returned to Palo Alto, Calif., in June 2012, training to get back in basketball shape. Realizing how far behind he felt physically, he redshirted the 2012-13 season and eventually, as he said, “got into the best shape of my life.”However, Bullock probably overtrained and on the third day of practice last season, he learned he had a stress fracture in a kneecap.“That’s life,” Bullock said. “It doesn’t always come as you planned.”Despite not being able to play, Bullock immersed himself with the team unlike during his first two years at Stanford. His relationships with teammates became more open and developed outside of basketball.“He’s a very loving guy who has a huge heart,” the Stanford senior Chasson Randle said. “Someone you can depend on to be there if you’re going through anything.”AdvertisementBullock was also more willing to use his coaches as a resource. As a freshman and sophomore, he felt intimidated by coaches and did not know how to communicate with them.One of the assistants who taught Bullock how to better balance his interactions in life was the former Cardinal center Mark Madsen, who had also completed a mission.“His contributions have been invaluable,” Dawkins said of Bullock. “He’s been with me the longest. He knows what we want. He provides great energy and enthusiasm off the bench. We’ve been fortunate to have him.”Thursday was Bullock’s final game, almost seven years since he first wore a Cardinal jersey. Being 25 and playing college basketball has not always been easy; Bullock is also planning a wedding for June and searching for jobs in health policy, while many of his college friends have already established careers.But his current N.I.T. experience has washed away the disappointment of not going to the N.C.A.A. tournament and the time he lost on the court, such as not being with Stanford for the 2012 N.I.T. title run. It has also allowed Bullock to connect with his teammates and coaches in a way that was absent during his early career at Stanford.“It developed by going through the fire,” Bullock said. “These years I’ve been with the team, it creates a bond that’s one of those where I know I can rely on them and trust them.”A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Senior’s Presence Felt From Stanford Bench.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.