AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseRANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — All day, Lydia Ko had been hitting hooks by accident. On her 16th hole of the opening round of the ANA Inspiration on Thursday, Ko was forced to try to manufacture one to maintain any hope of salvaging par and equaling Annika Sorenstam’s record of consecutive rounds under par.From where Lexi Thompson, Ko’s partner for the round, stood on the fairway, Ko’s shot from behind two trees on the left side of the par-4 No. 7 looked impossible. But Ko, the No. 1-ranked female golfer, pulled it off. Choking down on her driver, she hit a low hook around the trees and onto the green, 25 feet from the pin. She two-putted for a par that felt like an albatross being lifted from around her neck, and she closed with a birdie and a par for a one-under 71 at Mission Hills Country Club.It was Ko’s 29th straight round under par, which matched Sorenstam’s L.P.G.A. record, set in 2004. Ko stood four strokes off the lead held by Morgan Pressel after the opening round. “Lucky I had more birdies than bogeys,” said the 17-year-old Ko, who insisted that Sorenstam’s record had never crossed her mind.“I was so busy trying to make up-and-downs, or trying to make a good two-putt or make some birdies,” she said, “because I really wasn’t hitting my driver well, and here the rough can get pretty thick. When you’re in that position, a record was the last thing I was thinking about.”Ko and Thompson, who carded a 72, were the sixth group off No. 10, and they played the first seven holes in winds that reached 20 miles an hour. “It was gale force for the first seven, eight holes,” Thompson said. “It was definitely tough.”It did not seem to bother Ko, who birdied two of her first three holes. She gave a stroke back on the fourth, the par-4 13th, when her approach got caught in one of the morning’s biggest gusts and her ball landed in a greenside bunker. Her next shot landed 25 feet from the pin, and she missed the putt.The par-3 14th was playing 133 yards, with water on the right. Thompson, hitting first into a right-to-left wind, used a 9-iron and put her shot in the water. Using a 7-iron, Ko landed her tee shot within 15 feet and made the putt to get back to two under.Ko has spent the past several months adding a draw to her arsenal. Her big miss has become a hook, which was evident as she bogeyed three of the next four holes to make the turn at one over. After her bogey at the par-5 18th, Ko tossed her ball into the water. For the even-keeled Ko, that qualified as an emotional outburst. As she said on the eve of the tournament: “Sometimes I get angry. But even when I get angry, maybe it’s only my caddie and I that know it.” She birdied No. 2 to get back to even, which is where she stood as she surveyed her options for her second shot on No. 7. “I said, This is going to be like a 90-degree hook,” Ko said. “I had two gaps, and the gap on the left, that means I could go directly at it.”She added, “But I knew that I’d be better off trying to create a shot rather than expect it to go straight out of there.”The result, Thompson said, “was impressive.” She added: “It was an incredible shot.”Ko described the shot, a slinging hook, as “probably one of the most difficult” that she had hit in competition. It ended up being “pretty good,” she said, but she has no desire to try it again soon.“Definitely don’t want to be there the next couple of days,” she said.Ko said that when she is playing poorly she will occasionally laugh out loud, because it beats getting upset. She and Thompson exchanged giggles throughout their round. On the eighth green, their peals of laughter rang out like church bells. Both hit their tee shots to inside four feet. “We both hit it good on eight, so we were like, ‘O.K., we’ve got this; we can make a good birdie from here,’ ” Ko said, adding, “It felt like a long time since I made a birdie.”After the putt at No. 8, Ko was under par for the first time since her sixth hole. She had a 15-foot birdie attempt at the par-5 ninth, but her putt came up short. Ko’s 71 was her best opening round in three starts at this event. She finished outside the top 25 in her two previous appearances.Ko learned plenty, she said, from watching Thompson win last year after opening with a 73. “She had an amazing score the second day, and then just kind of continued on,” Ko said, referring to Thompson’s second-round 64 in 2014.Sometimes one or two shots can change one’s fortunes completely, Ko said, adding, “You just can’t lose your concentration until that last putt drops.”Advertisement