AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie LambOn the first Saturday in May 1996, Donato Lanni, amid final exams to complete a business degree at Concordia University in Montreal, watched the unheralded California thoroughbred trainer Bob Baffert come within a nose of winning the Kentucky Derby with a gelding named Cavonnier.Weeks later, Lanni packed up his Volkswagen Golf and headed for Lexington, Ky., to fulfill a lifelong goal of working in the racehorse industry.“I literally didn’t know one person,” Lanni said of arriving in the world’s horse capital.Today, Lanni is one of the most sought-after thoroughbred scouts in North America, and one of his most loyal clients is Baffert, who subsequently won three Derbys and was inducted into the Hall of Fame.Together, the pair have found the 2014 Breeders’ Cup Classic winner, Bayern; the 2010 Preakness winner, Lookin at Lucky; and the two-time Breeders’ Cup champion Secret Circle, who last week won the $2 million Dubai Golden Shaheen.On Saturday, Baffert will saddle Dortmund, another Lanni find, in the $1 million Santa Anita Derby at Santa Anita Park. The undefeated colt is not only the 3-5 morning-line favorite, but he is also a leading contender to win the Kentucky Derby on May 2.Lanni also selected One Lucky Dane, a second Baffert runner in the Santa Anita Derby, at the September yearling sale at Keeneland. That colt is the second choice after Dortmund, at 5-1.Lanni grew up in Beaconsfield, Quebec, a sleepy suburb on Montreal’s west island, and his father owned Standardbreds. As a teenager, he spent his summers working as a groom at Blue Bonnets Raceway, which closed in 2009.At Blue Bonnets, Lanni worked under André Lachance, a trainer who comes from a long line of successful French Canadian horsemen.“He was kind of the Clint Eastwood of Standardbred trainers,” Lanni said. “He didn’t say anything, he didn’t like anybody, didn’t talk to anybody, but for some reason he liked me, and I got along with him, and he taught me things like horses’ feet and conformation and soundness.”But Blue Bonnets was not the bluegrass, and upon arriving in Kentucky, Lanni found that human pedigree holds as much sway as the equines’.For weeks, Lanni showed up at farms looking for someone to give him a shot, but he did not have any luck. Running out of money, he bought a tent and camped out in the Kentucky Horse Park for “at least a week,” as he put it, until he found work preparing yearlings for auction at a Standardbred farm.From there, he landed a job selling stallion breedings for the famed Walmac Farm. At Walmac, he met the prominent horse owner George Krikorian, who took a liking to him and told him that if Lanni ever saw a horse that caught his eye, Krikorian would buy it.At a yearling sale in Kentucky, Lanni saw a bay filly by Dynaformer who he believed had all the makings of a stellar racehorse. He bought her for Krikorian for the modest price of $35,000. Krikorian named her Starrer, and she went on to be a multiple graded stakes winner, earning more than $1 million in purses.“From that point on, I learned how to look at horses,” Lanni said. “To understand what has a good chance of staying together and staying sound, mentally and physically.”Joe Drape and Melissa Hoppert weigh in on some of the contenders for the 141st Kentucky Derby, which is set to be run May 2.With the help of mentors like the trainers Bruce Headley, Baffert and Richard Matlow, Lanni has honed his skill of picking winners. At thoroughbred auctions, Lanni says he makes a point of looking at every horse and asking himself: “Is it made right? Is it athletic? Does it move right?”He does not take notes, just gives each horse a quick glance. If a horse he likes is still on his mind at the end of the day, Lanni adds it to a shortlist.“I learned how to not gauge horses by their pedigree, just by their physical, by an athletic individual that’s made right and has class,” he said. “With all these great horses that I have been involved with, they all had a presence about them: They were just a cool, smart animal.”Lanni met Baffert through John Sikura, owner of Hill ’n’ Dale Farms in Lexington, where Lanni works as director of bloodstock services.Baffert said: “We’re a good team. He knows what I like, and he knows what I don’t like. Like brothers, I consider him like a brother.”At 17 hands, their latest star, Dortmund, is a beast of a horse. He was a bargain, too, costing $140,000 at a Maryland 2-year-old-in-training sale. He is a son of the Derby and Preakness winner Big Brown, who has yet to make a name for himself as a sire.On Saturday, Baffert and Lanni will find out if Dortmund can get one step closer to living up to his sire’s legacy.“Every year, I drive through the Horse Park just to remind myself how lucky I am to have got here and be surrounded by great people and great horses,” Lanni said.Advertisement