AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherWhen Stanford and Miami meet on Thursday night in the final of the N.I.T., they will be competing for a consolation prize. Most N.I.T. winners would have much preferred even a short run in the N.C.A.A. tournament.In addition to earning the unofficial title as the nation’s 69th best men’s basketball team, N.I.T. winners also hope that they have built momentum for a run in the big tournament the next year.“I’ve been telling everybody it’s great for next year, too,” Aaron Bright of Stanford told The Associated Press after his team won the 2012 N.I.T. “We won five in a row, and I think we are going to use this experience for next year and making a run at the March Madness.”Is it true that an N.I.T. title is a jumping-off point to N.C.A.A. success? Not really.Of the last 20 N.I.T. winners, 10 made the step to the N.C.A.A. tournament the next year. But most were only middle-ish seeds: Aside from Michigan, seeded third in 1998, no N.I.T. winner was seeded better than fifth; the median seed was seven.And the records of those teams in the tournament were a bit worse than even those seeds would have predicted. They were a combined 7-10, with two final 16 appearances and nothing further.Bright’s 2013 Stanford team failed to live up to his prediction and returned to the N.I.T., where it lost in the second round.You might expect the winners of the lesser Collegeinsider.com Tournament and College Basketball Invitational to have even weaker N.C.A.A. tournament performances.Just one of six C.I.T. winners, Old Dominion in 2010, made the N.C.A.A. the next year. And only two of seven C.B.I. winners did.But one of those C.B.I. teams actually wins the prize for best performance in the N.C.A.A. by a smaller tournament titlist in the last 20 years.In 2010, Virginia Commonwealth, led by forward Larry Sanders, won five straight games to lift the C.B.I. trophy. The next year, despite losing Sanders to the N.B.A., it sneaked into the N.C.A.A. as an 11th seed. The Rams then went on a famous underdog run, won a play-in game and then four more, the last over top-ranked Kansas, to make the Final Four.It probably is not an omen for this year’s C.B.I. winner, Loyola University Chicago, but you never know.Advertisement