AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherKris Bryant, the consensus top baseball prospect in the country, had a scintillating spring training for the Chicago Cubs. In 44 plate appearances, he hit .425 with nine home runs and three doubles, slugging an improbable 1.175.The Cubs then sent him to the minor leagues.The reasoning seems to have nothing to do with his ability. Under baseball’s complicated collective bargaining rules, if Bryant spends 12 more days in the minors, his eligibility for free agency will be delayed one year, until 2021.Essentially, a clock starts ticking when a player makes his major league debut, which Bryant has not yet done. Keeping him in the minors for two weeks this spring will delay the clock enough to earn the Cubs an extra year of Bryant, at a potential savings of millions.Cubs pitcher Jon Lester was critical of the move, and the players’ union threatened litigation. Bryant’s agent, Scott Boras, was also predictably annoyed.The Cubs’ move assumes that Bryant, a 23-year-old third baseman, will become a superstar worth keeping as long as possible. No one cares if a so-so player leaves as a free agent a year early.What are Bryant’s chances?Bryant played for the University of San Diego, where he led Division I in homers and won the Dick Howser Trophy as the college player of the year. Still, history shows that nothing is certain.Of the 12 position players who won that award from its inception in 1987 to 2005, a few developed into big stars, notably Todd Helton (Tennessee, 1995), Robin Ventura (Oklahoma State, 1988), Mark Teixeira (Georgia Tech, 2000) and J. D. Drew (Florida State, 1997). Alex Gordon (so far) and Jason Varitek also had solid careers, but the other six players were journeymen or busts. Three did not even make the major leagues.Bryant was drafted No. 2 over all by the Cubs and has spent two years in the minors; last season he was the Baseball America minor league player of the year. Between 1987 and 2005, 13 position players won that prize.In this company, Bryant’s chances begin to look significantly better. Every player on the list had at least a decent career, and several turned out to be superstars, including Frank Thomas, Derek Jeter, Manny Ramirez and Andruw Jones. Also on the list are Joe Mauer, still going strong at 31; Tim Salmon; Eric Chavez; and Paul Konerko.About the only major disappointment is 2005’s winner, Delmon Young, who has mostly been just serviceable for five teams over nine seasons.Using Baseball-Reference.com’s career wins above replacement as a measure, the median performer of the group is Chavez, a player just about any team would have loved to have.But will Bryant soar past the Chavez level, to the heights of Thomas, Jeter and Ramirez?One clue could be his minor league statistics. For years, such numbers were considered suspect, with many anecdotal tales of prospects who tore apart the minors but could not hit a major league curveball. But in the 1980s, Bill James demonstrated that minor league statistics were very predictive of major league performance.In two years of minor league play for six teams at every level from rookie league to Class AAA, Bryant amassed 740 plate appearances, maybe 10 percent more than he might have in a typical full major league season. He hit a combined .327, with a .428 on-base percentage and a .666 slugging average. He also had 48 doubles and 52 home runs. His Class AAA numbers alone over about half a season were .295/.418/.619 with 21 home runs.Even if one reduces his raw numbers by 15 percent or so, as many baseball statisticians recommend for the transition to the major league level, the totals are still big. And one would expect him to continue to improve through his late 20s.Although Bryant’s slugging credentials seem unimpeachable, there is some uncertainty about his fielding. He made 27 errors in 160 minor league games, which would be a large number for an equivalent major league season.There has been talk of shifting him to the outfield, perhaps left, where more offensive output is expected than at third base.The experts certainly see a budding All-Star. His college coach, Rich Hill, said, “The chapters are going to be written on him for years to come, but the character is off the charts, and the leadership and the courage.” When Baseball America named Bryant the minor league player of the year, Cubs General Manager Jed Hoyer said, “He’s exceeded our expectations at every level.”Early success is no guarantee of superstardom — ask the two-time college player of the year Brooks Kieschnick — but the signs are there that Bryant could achieve it. By sending him down to the minors, oddly enough, the Cubs showed that they thought he could.Advertisement