AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurAfter completing its long, complicated and anything but transparent process of choosing a city as its candidate to host the 2024 Summer Games, the United States Olympic Committee has found itself in an awkward position.Boston, the city the committee chose to represent the United States, does not appear to want to host the Games at all.Too expensive, some Bostonians say — the money used to host the Games should be dedicated to improving schools and social programs. Too many people, others say — Boston has terrible traffic, so why invite thousands more to further clog the streets?Too unnecessary, say those personally hurt by the notion that the Olympics could improve Boston’s image worldwide: Why does Boston need the Olympics to validate it as a world-class city when Bostonians are perfectly happy with Boston as it is?So, now what, U.S.O.C.? It’s as if you have chosen your prom queen, only for her to balk at the prospect of buying an expensive evening gown and pricey high heels. Thanks, U.S.O.C., but no thanks. Here’s your corsage back.The U.S.O.C. is probably blushing now, but it put itself into this position in the first place and should have known better, considering the recent spate of cities backing off Olympic bids because a majority of their citizens were against them. It should have looked for a city with overwhelming support from within, so it could possibly have avoided what it is facing right now in Boston: a statewide vote that would be held in November 2016, more than a year after the U.S.O.C. would have to submit its final bid to the International Olympic Committee.So, basically, the U.S.O.C. is stuck with Boston, whose Olympic bid appears to be doomed. If recent history is any guide, that public vote will deal the fatal blow to Boston’s chances. Voters in Munich; St. Moritz/Davos, Switzerland; and Krakow, Poland, all batted away their bids for the 2022 Winter Games. Vienna retreated from its 2028 Summer Games bid after a vote, too.All of those lessons, yet the U.S.O.C. chose a city still stinging from the highway project known as the Big Dig, which, like every Olympic bid, promised to be on budget but was riddled with huge overruns. And by winter’s end the city would also be cranky after being snowbound for months.Other bid cities were so much more upbeat. Maybe Tulsa should have won. The Games would have helped put it on the map, if the I.O.C. could have found Oklahoma in the first place.Or Dallas. Texas would have been a grateful host, and would have done whatever it took to make the Games spectacular (no matter how ridiculously expensive or ill-advised, if the city was following Jerry Jones’s rules).And then there was Los Angeles, sweet L.A., the city that could probably host the Summer Games tomorrow. To see the U.S.O.C. turn its back on Los Angeles was a surprise to many, including me.Los Angeles, a two-time Olympic host, has made a career out of bidding for the Games and has a proven track record. It’s a city whose Summer Games in 1984 captivated an entire American generation, turning some Olympians, like Mary Lou Retton and Greg Louganis, into iconic sports figures. Those Games actually made a profit, too, a main reason Los Angeles is one of the few Olympic cities that made a positive impression on the people who call it home.The bid prepared by Boston 2024, a group of business leaders, construction magnates and politicians that was presented to the United States Olympic Committee in December. The committee chose Boston over Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington on Jan. 8.Right now, unfortunately for the U.S.O.C., Boston and Los Angeles do not appear to have much in common.Patrick Sandusky, a U.S.O.C. spokesman, said he could not disclose the results of the polls the committee commissioned in advance of its vote in January that decided its host city. He said the board of directors chose to keep that information within the organization, and “for informational purposes only.” But he did say that a majority of the people polled in the four finalist cities — Boston, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington — wanted the Olympics to come to their town.By the looks of what’s happening in Boston, it seems that 50.001 percent of Bostonians wanted the Games. And that might have been at its peak.A recent poll by a Boston radio station showed that support for the bid has been on a downward spiral since the city was chosen by the U.S.O.C., with only a third of residents in support of the bid, and more than half opposing it. (Those poll numbers went from 51 percent to 44 percent to 36 percent just in the last few months.)Whatever the reason for the meager support for the Games, the U.S.O.C. said it was sticking with Boston and would not turn to Los Angeles, which, according to several people with knowledge of the results, showed support for the bid that approached 80 percent and was the strongest of the four bid cities.The bid organizers in Los Angeles were careful not to rub that in when I spoke to them this week. They did not say they knew their poll numbers, but were confident that the people of Los Angeles were more than comfortable with having the Olympics on their doorstep.Barry Sanders, the Southern California bid’s chairman, said that his organization was disappointed to lose to Boston, but that he wished Boston the best in winning the Games, which would be the first Summer Olympics in the United States in nearly 30 years.“No sour grapes,” he said. “We’re not spoilers, and so we wish them well.”Several other people connected with the bid said they did not want to comment because it might seem like schadenfreude to mention Boston’s struggles after the city’s prevote polling numbers came in so much lower than Los Angeles’s. It left those people wondering what the U.S.O.C. was thinking.Considering that the competition to host the Olympics has become a global game of hot potato recently — one city doesn’t want it, and other cities don’t, either — they are right to wonder.While polling should not be the sole indicator of which city should win the bid, it should be a primary factor if the technical elements of the bids are comparable. But it is too late to remind the U.S.O.C. of that now.Now the Boston organizing committee and the U.S.O.C. will have to spend time and money trying to convince Boston that it wants the Olympics, rather than focusing on what it would take to pull off a great Olympics in the end.Peter Vidmar, an Olympic gold medalist in gymnastics and a member of the Los Angeles bid team, said, in his eternal Southern Californian optimism, that Boston could be won over, in time.“When we had the Games in Los Angeles, there were traffic concerns and people were concerned about the potential burden on the taxpayers, but none of those problems materialized,” he said. “There were so many great legacies left in Los Angeles after the Games, and I don’t see why it would be any different in Boston. People just need to believe in it.”But, as he said, that will take time — and there might not be enough of it.Email: juliet@nytimes.com Advertisement