AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim CaseyLorenza Jefferson was listening to a Christian radio station in the late 1990s when the hosts began talking about home schooling. He had never heard of the concept, but it intrigued him.He and his wife, Robin, were raising toddlers at the time and were concerned about the elementary school near their house in Texas. After doing some research, they decided to home-school their four children. Robin taught them and Lorenza worked at Federal Express.The Jeffersons said the arrangement worked out well, particularly for their youngest daughter, Moriah, the starting point guard on Connecticut’s women’s basketball team.“I’m so glad I was home-schooled,” Moriah Jefferson said. “I loved it. It gave me a good competitive edge.”At 5-foot-7, the skinny and well-mannered Jefferson does not look like a typical star athlete. Still, she is one of the nation’s quickest players and one of the most valuable members on a team filled with former high school all-Americans.A junior, she averages 12.3 points a game, leads UConn with 4.9 assists and 2.5 steals a game and shoots 59.5 percent from the floor and 50.5 percent on 3-pointers. She was named a second-team Associated Press all-American this week.On Sunday, Jefferson will compete in her third Final Four when the top-ranked Huskies (36-1) face Maryland (34-2). The winner will play Notre Dame (35-2) or South Carolina (34-2) in Tuesday night’s final. With two more victories, UConn will have three consecutive N.C.A.A. tournament titles and 10 over all.The success is nothing new for Jefferson. In high school, she won four national home-school championships while playing on the Texas Home Educators’ Sports Association Riders, a team featuring girls who were home-schooled and lived near Dallas. Her mother was an assistant on Coach Alan Burt’s staff.The Riders played about 50 games a year, twice as many as high school teams, and they competed against many of the top public and private teams in the area. Thousands of fans watched them in the national home-school tournament in Missouri. Numerous home-school students have received Division I scholarships, including the former Tennessee guard Taber Spani and the North Carolina guard Justin Jackson.“We were approached all the time about putting Moriah in school,” Lorenza Jefferson said. “But we thought it was best that we continue doing what we were doing. I honestly think that it worked out best for her because it allowed her to do a lot of things that she would not have been able to do if she had been in school.”Robin Jefferson usually taught her daughter subjects two years ahead of her grade level. Moriah also took courses at Cedar Valley College, a community college in Lancaster, Tex., and she took educational trips with her mother and her three siblings, Danielle, Joshua and Jeremiah. Jeremiah is a freshman guard at Weber State in Ogden, Utah.The Jeffersons were active in sports leagues, and they hung around with their neighbors and a group of home-schooled children from the Oak Cliff Bible Fellowship, a nondenominational Christian church.“I was always around a lot of people,” Moriah Jefferson said. “I was never secluded in my house. I was going to different events with different kids.”The flexibility of a home-school schedule allowed Jefferson to work on her basketball skills. She trained for a few hours most days and even dribbled while watching television, making sure to keep her eyes on the screen instead of on the ball. Lorenza Jefferson recorded all of his daughter’s games, and he and Moriah watched the videos to understand how teams defended her and how she could get her teammates more involved.“It’s one thing to tell a kid you’re shooting the ball this way or you’re doing this,” Lorenza Jefferson said. “It’s another when they see it because you can’t deny it.”He added: “It’s not about what you can do. You’re trying to make the team better. A good point guard makes her whole team better because you learn their strengths and weaknesses and you play to their strengths.”Jefferson used the film sessions to become smart and unselfish on the court, attributes that helped her as she played with other stars. Her church team in elementary school included the current college players Jordan Jones (Texas A&M), Empress Davenport (Texas) and Diamond Lockhart (Wichita State). When they got older, they joined the D.F.W. Elite squad that won the prestigious Nike national tournament in 2011 and featured players who are now at Texas A&M, Baylor, Notre Dame and other major programs.“It was Mo’s team,” Daryl Horton, the D.F.W. Elite coach, said. “Even though I had a lot of great players on that team, she was definitely the leader.”Jefferson, who was the first player from Texas signed by Coach Geno Auriemma in his 30 years at UConn, has developed into a leader with the Huskies, as well. As a freshman she came off the bench and struggled adjusting to the college game. The past two years she has started every game, been more assertive and confident, and has emerged as a reliable outside shooter and defensive stopper.Jefferson traveled to Connecticut for the first time in September 2010 when she watched the United States women’s national basketball team play Australia in an exhibition game in Hartford. That weekend she toured the campus and met the former UConn stars Diana Taurasi and Maya Moore.Now, Jefferson and her teammates in the Huskies’ junior class could become the most successful group in the sport’s history. They have two national titles and will be favored to win this year’s and next year’s N.C.A.A. tournament. No women’s college basketball team has won four consecutive championships.For Jefferson, moving 1,700 miles from home could not have worked out better.“I never thought I was going to leave Texas,” she said. “It wasn’t one of my top schools for the longest time until I actually came up here and visited. After I took that first visit, I always knew this was the place.”Advertisement