By MARC TRACYAPRIL 3, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS —  Several Wisconsin players are used to the text message that arrives at 11 a.m. Every morning, they are supposed to log in to an app and enter certain data — what they ate for dinner the night before, how their bodies feel, how well they slept. They log in again after practices and answer questions about what they did and how they feel. The information is then crunched for the coaches with a program called Metrifit.But Wisconsin’s players can be like typical college students: They procrastinate. And so, at 11, they typically receive prodding from the Badgers’ strength and conditioning coach, Erik Helland.Helland “usually gets mad at me because I’m not too judicious with filling in my information,” the junior forward Sam Dekker said at a news conference Friday.For the record, Dekker added, “Last night, I got about seven and a half, eight hours, which is not too bad. My last meal, probably a burger. I think it was a burger and guac.” Sitting on the same dais, Coach Bo Ryan could not help but add of Dekker, “He’s big on guac.”AdvertisementIn Ryan’s 14 seasons as Wisconsin’s coach, his teams have made two Final Fours: this year and in 2014. This is probably not unrelated to the presence of the 7-foot forward Frank Kaminsky, who on Friday was named the Associated Press national player of the year.AdvertisementBut another important figure over the past two seasons has been Helland, who was hired in 2013 after spending the previous 25 years on the Chicago Bulls’ staff.Wisconsin players credit Helland with keeping them fit during a postseason that has included seven games in 16 days — grueling by college standards, but old hat for somebody who was a part of six N.B.A. title runs.“Coach Erik Helland does a great job of monitoring our body fatigue, and how we feel,” Nigel Hayes, a sophomore forward, said.On Friday, Ryan called him “the best strength coach in America.” Ryan added: “He fills me in on some things — maybe this guy needs to be encouraged to do this, that type of thing. I certainly know that in the last five minutes of games, I think our guys have looked pretty fresh.”Strength and conditioning could be the X-factor when Wisconsin faces Kentucky in the national semifinals Saturday for the second year in a row. In many ways, the teams cancel each other out: Kentucky has a stingy defense, allowing just 83.6 points per 100 possessions; Wisconsin flouts a high-power offense, scoring 121.5 points scored per 100 possessions.Where Kentucky has the edge is depth: Nine Wildcats play substantial minutes and no one averages more than 26. By contrast, not counting the senior Traevon Jackson, who recently returned from injury, only six Badgers have averaged more than 17 minutes per game this season. Last weekend, in games against North Carolina and Arizona, four Wisconsin starters played at least 32 minutes each game.In other words, Wisconsin’s fitness could be the difference-maker.Helland recently credited the Badgers’ success to their attention to detail, saying, “The real substance behind excellence is doing the routine things in a very extraordinary way.”AdvertisementHe added: “These things aren’t accidents. Certainly last year, you can always argue when a team makes one Final Four appearance. Two Final Four appearances? I said this to the players: Two Final Four appearances is not an accident.”John Dettman, the Wisconsin athletic department’s director of strength and conditioning, said in an email that Helland’s N.B.A. experience had been “beneficial but not a major factor” in his hiring. “More about the person and the fit for U.W.,” Dettman explained.Certainly Helland seems like someone conjured in Ryan’s imagination. Like many of Ryan’s players, he is a Wisconsin recruit — a native of Edgerton, about 30 miles southeast of Madison, who called his Badger fandom “a big part of my upbringing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He preaches the fundamentals. On Friday, he could be seen in the Badgers’ locker room propped up on a training table reading a book called “Talent Is Overrated.”“I understood the importance of this position, coming back,” he said. “I probably valued it more than somebody who hadn’t been from there did.”Helland was initially struck by the differences between the pro and college games. Those differences, he said, go well beyond simply dealing with professional grown men versus with young adults. He seemed to marvel while observing, “I’ve got kids whose sleep is disrupted by virtue of, ‘I was up till 2 or 3 in the morning writing a paper.’ ” Referring to frequent travel and weeks with four or five games, Helland said, “In the N.B.A., your job is to manage the chaos.”He added: “This time of year, I bring a lot more of those principles, things I did with N.B.A. players, to the table, particularly as it pertains to recovery. So we will increase the number of recovery modalities that we will use. I will really lock into their sleeping, their eating, their mood state.”According to Dan Peterson, Metrifit’s director of United States business development, the product is made by an Irish company and is used mainly in Europe and Britain by rugby and soccer teams, including the Crystal Palace soccer team of the English Premier League.Athletes use Metrifit in several sports at Wisconsin — the only university in the United States, so far, to make use of it, said Peterson, who lives in Hartland, Wis.AdvertisementThere are other products for tracking how much energy athletes expend. Catapult, an Australian company, has made inroads in football and is used by more than a dozen N.F.L. teams and plenty of college programs. But Metrifit appealed to Helland.“We showed it to Erik, and Erik loves it — he’s been tracking a lot of the same data for years on paper and pencil and Excel spreadsheets,” Peterson said.The players, too, understood its usefulness.“It’s good for us to track how we’re doing,” said Zak Showalter, a redshirt sophomore whose minutes at guard increased after Jackson’s injury.The senior guard Josh Gasser added, “He’s on top of us, and we do extra things to make sure we’re recovered.”According to Hayes, those things include massages and acupuncture, and adjusting practice loads — the result of Helland communicating his knowledge about the players to Ryan.“Can’t complain about a massage,” Hayes said playfully. Helland identified Hayes as the player most similar to the most famous Bull he used to work with: Michael Jordan.“Nigel has a single-mindedness — although he’s young — a focus, an intelligence,” Helland said. “Nigel has, I think, that kind of connection to the game.”And Wisconsin fans can take solace in the fact that, unlike the team’s core of upperclassmen, Hayes is only a sophomore.Because of an editing error, an article in some editions on Saturday about Erik Helland, the strength and conditioning coach for the Wisconsin men’s basketball team, misstated the number of points Kentucky, Wisconsin’s Final Four opponent, was allowing per 100 possessions this season. It was 83.6 — not 53.9, which was the average number of points Kentucky allowed per game.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Strength Coach Uses an App That Works More Than Thumb Muscles .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.