By TIM CASEYAPRIL 3, 2015
Five years ago, Roy Mabrey and several of his friends flew to Indiana to attend a Notre Dame football game. Mabrey grew so fond of the university that he began to hope his daughter Michaela, a talented high school basketball player, might choose it.But Michaela Mabrey was close to her parents, two sisters and two brothers, and she did not seem interested in moving too far from their home in New Jersey. Although Notre Dame Coach Muffet McGraw made a strong pitch, she was not confident that she could persuade Mabrey to sign.Mabrey’s reluctance to head to the Midwest disappeared when she visited the campus in the spring of 2011, during her junior year at Manasquan High School. She was as smitten by the university as her father had been.“Literally, right when I got there, I fell in love with it,” said Mabrey, who will be Notre Dame’s starting shooting guard Sunday when the Fighting Irish (35-2) face South Carolina (34-2) in the Final Four. “It’s such a beautiful campus and such a beautiful place. With the academics and the athletics, you just can’t get any better than Notre Dame.”AdvertisementThis fall, Mabrey will be joined by a familiar face on campus and on the court: Her sister Marina has signed with Notre Dame. On Wednesday night, Michaela Mabrey drove to Chicago and watched Marina share most valuable player honors in the McDonald’s All-American Game after recording 12 points, 6 rebounds and 3 steals in 17 minutes.AdvertisementMarina Mabrey is also a guard, but she is more aggressive and competitive than Michaela, who led Notre Dame with 71 3-pointers this season and is known for her outside shooting. The sisters honed their skills by playing one-on-one against each other at home in Belmar, N.J. They also competed with their older brother, Roy, who averaged 17 points a game this season as a senior for St. Anselm College in New Hampshire.“It was extremely competitive,” Michaela Mabrey said of the family matchups. “If somebody would lose, they would run into my mom and start crying because they’d be so upset. And then we would just keep battling every single day, which got us all better.”Michaela and Marina Mabrey have been teammates before, on the New Jersey Demons club team, and both led Manasquan to state titles and were McDonald’s all-Americans.Yet it was not inevitable that Marina would commit to Notre Dame, even though she had grown close to McGraw and the assistant coach Niele Ivey, who played point guard on the Irish’s 2001 national championship team.Most of the nation’s top programs offered Marina a scholarship, and she said she seriously considered creating her own legacy elsewhere.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I really just tried to stay out of her recruiting process,” Michaela Mabrey said. “Of course, I was so happy when she chose Notre Dame because I would love to play with her again.”Two other McDonald’s all-Americans (Ali Patberg from Indiana and Arike Ogunbowale from Wisconsin) are set to join the Fighting Irish next season, when they will be favored to return to the Final Four. This season, Notre Dame started two juniors (Mabrey and Jewell Lloyd), two sophomores (Lindsay Allen and Taya Reimer) and a freshman, Brianna Turner.The entire Mabrey family is planning to attend Sunday’s semifinal, including the youngest Mabrey sister, Dara, a high school freshman who Michaela said might be more talented than all of her siblings.Michaela Mabrey, who came off the bench in her first two seasons, has been playing as well as ever recently. Against Baylor in last Sunday’s Oklahoma City Regional final, she scored 14 points in 19 minutes and made 5 of 6 shots, including all four of her 3-point attempts.Advertisement“I feel like I’m in rhythm right now,” she said. “I think I’m playing really well in this tournament. I think we all are, actually. I think we’re playing a lot better in the tournament than we have throughout the year, which is perfect.”A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Notre Dame Doubles Down on a Family From New Jersey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.