AdvertisementSupported bySharks 2, Devils 1 (Shootout)By Pat PickensNEWARK — Pete DeBoer has a knack for turning around teams in his first season as coach.In his debut as an N.H.L. head coach in 2008, DeBoer guided the Florida Panthers to a 93-point regular season — their third best — but fell 2 points shy of a playoff spot.In his first season in New Jersey in 2011, the Devils registered a 102-point campaign and enjoyed an improbable run through the Eastern Conference playoffs that ended two wins short of winning the Stanley Cup. DeBoer led the Devils to 102 regular-season wins — the second most in franchise history (Jacques Lemaire had 276) — before being fired on Dec. 26, 2014. DeBoer appears to be at it again this season for the 4-0 San Jose Sharks, who failed to make the playoffs last season.“I loved every minute of it,” DeBoer said of his three-plus years in New Jersey before Friday’s return to Newark. “I loved working for Lou,” he added, referring to the former Devils president and general manager Lou Lamoriello. “My family loved living in the area — still does. No regrets. When I look back at the experience here, I have nothing but great memories and a lot of great friends.”Still, he made the playoffs once, in 2011-12, and was criticized for his inability to integrate young players with veterans on the ice.“We all really enjoyed him as a coach,” Devils goalie Cory Schneider said. “We had a good relationship. We just didn’t get the job done for him last year.”John Hynes was hired to replace DeBoer this season. The Devils have lost their first four games for the first time since 2001-2 and have yet to hold a lead. They have been outscored by 12-6, including Friday night’s 2-1 shootout loss, but Hynes called the Devils’ performance “a good statement for our group.”The Sharks claimed their first shootout win of the season.DeBoer’s Devils also started strong in shootouts, winning an N.H.L.-best 12 of 16 during the 2011-12 season. But after his first season, the Devils won only four of 25 shootouts during the remainder of DeBoer’s tenure.“The irony of us winning a shootout in this building isn’t lost on me,” DeBoer said after the game.DeBoer’s family still lives in New Jersey, and he said he still considered New Jersey his home. With four days between the Sharks’ last game in Washington and Friday’s in Newark, DeBoer was home with his wife and two children. His older son, Jack, is a hockey player at Salisbury School in Connecticut and has committed to Boston University for next fall.DeBoer replaced Todd McLellan after the Sharks missed the postseason for the first time since 2002-3 — and for just the fourth time in the past 21 seasons. McLellan recorded 311 wins in seven seasons but never reached the Stanley Cup finals. McLellan stripped Joe Thornton of his longtime captaincy after a disappointing end to the 2013-14 season, and the decision turned out to be the start McLellan’s downfall last year.“Todd’s a heck of a coach, and this is a well-coached group,” DeBoer said. “Seven years with one voice, sometimes, is a lot, too. Three, four years is a lot with some groups in the N.H.L.”The Sharks are 4-0 for the third time in their past four seasons, but they have been invigorated by their new bench boss. “We’ve got a new dressing room, new coaches, and with that, it’s like school,” Sharks defenseman Brent Burns said. “There’s a new energy there, and you want to do well.”DeBoer’s tenacious style, in which he stresses shot suppression and an aggressive forecheck, have been highly successful and were on display again Friday. Joel Ward won a puck battle deep in the Devils’ zone and found Patrick Marleau in front of the net for the game’s first goal just 2 minutes 1 second in.“We wanted to get the first goal,” DeBoer said. “We knew they’d had some trouble, hadn’t played with a lead, and we wanted to try to stick them in a hole early, and we did.”Also part of that new energy is the first-time starting goaltender Martin Jones. Jones, who was acquired in a draft-day deal with the Bruins after Boston had traded forward Milan Lucic to Los Angeles, allowed a goal on the first shot he faced this season, then stopped 104 straight shots before Adam Henrique’s third-period power-play goal. “He’s been so good for us,” Burns said. “We’ve been playing well in front of him, but when we do make mistakes, he’s bailed us out.”Jones also set the Sharks’ franchise record for consecutive scoreless minutes (234:39) before Henrique’s late goal, on a deflection of Damon Severson’s point shot, spoiled his bid for a third straight shutout. Jones said he had tracked the puck off Henrique’s deflection but had put his blocker up too late to stop it. DeBoer is leaning on Jones as he did last season with Schneider, who also was a first-year starter. DeBoer started Schneider in goal during the Devils’ first 20 games last season, and he put Jones in for his fourth straight start on Friday. But DeBoer added that he would most likely start the backup Alex Stalock either Saturday in Brooklyn against the Islanders or on Monday against the Rangers.Jones is happy with the early success but admitted it was too early to be overly confident.“It’s only four games,” Jones said. “A big part of being a starting goaltender is doing it over the course of 82 games.”Advertisement