AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzTAMPA, Fla. — In recent days, a trailer loaded with players’ luxury cars sat in the parking lot at Steinbrenner Field. Cardboard packing boxes, with each player’s number, were parked in front of their lockers. Before heading home, the Yankees gathered belongings from the clubhouse. These rites of spring were indicators that the Yankees were preparing to break camp and head north for their final tuneup Saturday in Washington before arriving in New York for Monday’s season opener against the Toronto Blue Jays.The players had their own signs that they were ready for the 2015 season to begin: the feel of a curveball snapped off just right and the comfort of the bat handle in their hands.So when the Yankees headed to the airport Friday after their 8-2 loss to the Washington Nationals, they also carried with them another staple of spring: the confidence they could not be better prepared for what awaits them over the next six months.Some questions are yet to be resolved, among them how Manager Joe Girardi will handle the reconstituted bullpen — he may not anoint a closer — and whether Didi Gregorius, who will replace Derek Jeter at shortstop, can be anywhere near the upgrade at the plate that he promises to be in the field. But the Yankees’ overriding concern is their health. Mark Teixeira, Masahiro Tanaka, Michael Pineda, C. C. Sabathia, Ivan Nova and Carlos Beltran were troubled by injuries last season, and Alex Rodriguez had two hip operations before being suspended for 2014 for his role in the Biogenesis drug scandal. “If we can stay healthy, I expect us to be at the top of the division,” said Sabathia, who had his best outing of the spring Friday after he settled down from a rocky first inning. “We’ve definitely got the talent in here. It’s just a matter of us staying on the field. It’s encouraging that everybody came out of spring training healthy and feeling good, so hopefully we can carry that into the season.” The player whose health will bear the most scrutiny is Tanaka, who will start Monday — an honor that had been bestowed upon Sabathia for the past six seasons. Tanaka was one of the American League’s premier pitchers last season before he was found to have a slight tear in an elbow ligament in July. After consulting with several doctors, he opted against surgery.Tanaka’s velocity in spring training has dipped slightly, to the low 90s, and his curveball was not sharp, prompting Pedro Martinez, newly elected to the Hall of Fame, to suggest in a radio interview that Tanaka was not healthy. Tanaka insists he is fine, but he has thrown fewer innings during spring training than he did last year, as did Sabathia. The objective was simply to make sure they survived spring training in good condition. Girardi said he had tweaked the daily routine for older players — Teixeira, Beltran, Rodriguez and Sabathia will all be 35 by the end of next week — giving them complete days off on occasion. Sometimes players might be given a day off from playing in a game, but still come to work out. Girardi preferred they did not.“You’re not into your first two or three rounds of B.P. because maybe you’re a little tired,” said Girardi, referring to batting practice. “And then you’re frustrated because you don’t like your B.P. Then you go and take 150 swings. It kind of defeats the whole purpose.”Girardi has hinted that he would make good use of his bench, so that players like first baseman Teixeira, right fielder Beltran and designated hitter Rodriguez remain reasonably fresh throughout the season. The only unresolved roster spot is the backup catcher, where Austin Romine is out of options. He is competing with John Ryan Murphy. Neither had a hit Friday. But also unresolved is how the bullpen will be configured. It has been 20 years since the Yankees did not have an anointed closer. Girardi said he is seriously considering letting the left-hander Andrew Miller and the right-hander Dellin Betances share the closer’s role. The pitchers have a combined two career saves.The determining factor in who finishes a game may be determined by the opponent’s lineup. If a left-handed stretch of the lineup is expected up in the ninth, Miller may be given the opportunity close. If it is laden with right-handers, it could be Betances, who has not had a smooth spring.“It has a chance to be advantageous,” Girardi said.Advertisement