AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanEarly Friday afternoon, the Citi Field grounds crew needed only a minimal effort to prepare for the Mets’ National League Championship Series with the Chicago Cubs that is set to begin Saturday night. On the first- and third-base lines, where it has read “2015 NLDS” for the last week, the crew simply painted a “C” in place of the “D” and was mostly finished.Strategically, the matchup with the Cubs is also not much different from the Mets’ last series versus Los Angeles. The Mets will match some of their best young pitchers against a dominant right-hander, Jake Arrieta, and a lefty ace, Jon Lester, and hope that they can prevail, just as they did against the Dodgers’ righty-lefty combination of Zack Greinke and Clayton Kershaw. But in other ways, of course, the Cubs-Mets showdown is far different. The Cubs and Mets are linked by history — most notably, the 1969 pennant race — but until now have never met each other in the postseason, whereas the Mets and Dodgers had. And while the Dodgers have not won a World Series in 27 years and the Mets in 29, it has been a logic-defying 107 years since the Cubs were champions, which adds an extra layer of intrigue and urgency to this series.There’s more, too. Cubs Manager Joe Maddon received his big break in baseball thanks to Mets Manager Terry Collins. And while it’s Cubs versus Mets there is a backdrop of Red Sox versus Yankees, with Cubs General Manager Theo Epstein now following a similar blueprint to his curse-busting work in Boston, and with Manny Ramirez, of all people, now working with the Cubs’ young hitters less than a decade after smashing balls over the Green Monster.Even Matt Harvey’s presence in the N.L.C.S. is likely to be more front and center than it was in the last round. Against the Dodgers, he pitched a workmanlike five innings and notched a victory in Game 3. Against the Cubs, he is set to start Game 1 and, amid the never-ending debate about his innings limit, is penciled in for another start, assuming neither team sweeps. In a late-afternoon news conference at Citi Field on Friday, Harvey again addressed his innings issue, saying, “I think everybody has kind of had enough talk and discussion about that whole ordeal.” That ordeal began in early September after his agent, Scott Boras, publicly challenged the Mets’ use of Harvey in his first season back from Tommy John surgery, contending that 180 innings should be Harvey’s limit for the year but that the team seemed ready to go a good deal beyond that number.When Harvey initially indicated that he did not disagree with Boras, he was berated by fans and commentators for seemingly putting himself before the team. Since then, there have been skipped starts for Harvey, mini-starts, longer outings and now, deep in October, an apparent consensus that — limits or no limits — he will keep pitching a while longer this postseason. Or as Harvey said on Friday in reference to his initial concerns in September about how many innings he had already pitched: “I’ll be the last person to ever bring that one up again.”After the Mets won Game 5 against the Dodgers Thursday night, Collins announced Harvey as his N.L.C.S. Game 1 starter. For decades, baseball strategy has dictated that Game 1 pitchers in a seven-game series are also in line to start Game 5 — and in rare cases, Game 4, although it is all but assured the Mets would not start Harvey three times in a series this year.“Going into a seven-game series and having the opportunity to line up for two games, I couldn’t be happier and more ready for it,” Harvey said.Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson was a little more cautious, saying Friday that how much Harvey pitches would depend on how he feels after Saturday. Collins, however, was unambiguous. When asked if he planned on pitching Harvey beyond Game 1, Collins replied, “Absolutely.”And Boras? In a telephone interview, he said he expected Harvey to take his normal turns through the rotation as long as the Mets are alive in the postseason, a significant reversal from his stance last month, perhaps in deference to Harvey’s wishes.“I expect Matt to pitch as the Mets determine if and when he should pitch,” Boras said.Meanwhile, as Cubs hitters took their swings on Friday, Ramirez, his facial hair now peppered with gray specks, kept an eye on the proceedings from left field while dressed in a hoodie sweatshirt.Last February, the Cubs hired Ramirez as a hitting consultant. At the time, Epstein said Ramirez would consult the Cubs at least once a month, but his presence has been far more frequent lately. Young hitters like Kyle Schwarber and Jorge Soler have praised Ramirez for his guidance.Ramirez did not appear to be talking on Friday, but both managers, who are effusive by baseball standards, certainly were.The two men go back some. Their first in-depth conversation came at a hotel in Phoenix, when Collins decided to bring on Maddon as his bench coach when he managed the Anaheim Angels in the late 1990s. When Collins resigned in 1999, Maddon replaced him as interim manager.“We had a really good relationship on the bench, really good,” Maddon said.Collins also credited Maddon for introducing him to using computers for strategizing. Maddon, however, said he would use the “eyeball test” for scouting Harvey in Game 1, perhaps to put to use in a return matchup.As for how Harvey might do in Game 1, Collins vouched that “he’s ready for it.”He added, “I think he’ll pitch well.” Advertisement