
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
APRIL 3, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS — It sounds ridiculous to say that a coach with Tom Izzo’s résumé will try to break through on Saturday when Michigan State plays Duke in the Final Four.But it’s true.Izzo has a résumé that any coach in America would covet. Michigan State is making its seventh trip to the Final Four under Izzo in the last 17 seasons, the most in the nation in that period. He won the national championship here in 2000.The only thing he has not done consistently is beat Duke’s Mike Krzyzewski. Michigan State’s last victory against Duke was in 2005, in the round of 16. Since then, Duke has won four straight over all. The Blue Devils are 3-1 against Michigan State in the N.C.A.A. tournament, with the 2005 game the Spartans’ only victory.Last November, Duke defeated Michigan State, 81-71.“I think they’ve had some good teams,” Izzo said when asked why he thought Krzyzewski had such an advantage. “I think you just have to give them credit. They’ve just been a little better. I don’t think it’s something where I fixated.”AdvertisementKrzyzewski has beaten hundreds of coaches. You don’t record the most wins among Division I men’s college basketball coaches without beating a lot of very good colleagues.AdvertisementWhat makes the relationship between Izzo and Krzyzewski compelling is their similarities. They have working-class backgrounds — Izzo was raised in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, in Iron Mountain, and Krzyzewski grew up in a Polish-American community in Chicago. They both prefer tough, gritty, defense-first players.The difference is that Krzyzewski has managed to recruit those type of players who also have McDonald’s all-American pedigrees. Izzo typically lands highly talented, gritty players whom he can mold in the image of the Spartans’ program.Izzo has the hunger of a midmajor coach while prospering in a big-time environment. The us-against-them mind-set is pronounced, even when he says his program has outgrown it. Truth is, Izzo relishes the underdog role, and statistically, that role has suited him.This is the third time Izzo has led a Michigan State team seeded No. 5 or lower to the Final Four. Michigan State, seeded seventh this year, is 13-9 in the N.C.A.A. tournament under Izzo when it is the lower-seeded team.
                For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.            “Izzo’s kids are going to be blue collar, work hard, they’re going to play defense, they’re going to be tough,” said Harvard Coach Tommy Amaker, whose team was knocked out of the N.C.A.A. tournament by Michigan State last season. When he was Michigan’s coach from 2001 to 2007, Amaker coached against Izzo frequently. Amaker also played for Krzyzewski and was an assistant at Duke.“He’s not interested in the frills and the things that kind of look cute,” Amaker said of Izzo.Izzo and Krzyzewski are close friends, their wives are close friends, and the coaches have great respect and admiration for each other.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But when it comes to the business of college basketball, Krzyzewski has the clear edge.On Friday, Izzo’s players admitted that while they wanted to beat Duke to reach the championship game, they also wanted to help their coach catch up to Krzyzewski. “That’s big motivation,” guard Denzel Valentine said.AdvertisementIzzo was asked how he built tough-minded teams whose members played for one another.“I still think you have to play your role,” he said. “You can’t be somebody you’re not.”Izzo recalled mistakes he had made, even in preparing for the N.C.A.A. tournament: “My first Final Four, we played down in Tampa. I just felt like I was still doing hotel tickets on Friday night and game tickets Saturday morning. So you grow as a coach. I think the same as players, you grow, but I don’t think you want to try to be somebody you’re not.”This Michigan State team (27-11) is quintessential Tom Izzo — a team that was written off in February; got hot during the Big Ten tournament, falling in overtime to Wisconsin in the title game; and is here, staring down star-studded, No. 1-seeded Duke (33-4).“Nobody counted them in,” Izzo said of his players. “We weren’t even ranked in the beginning of the year. And they didn’t complain about that. We understood where we were; we understood we had some things to prove.”Izzo also took a shot at the prognosticators who had underestimated his team. “We weren’t doing it to prove you wrong; we were doing it to prove us right, that we believed in ourselves,” he said.Duke is a 5-point favorite, which is deserved. But perhaps this is the night that grit and muscle win, and Izzo’s Spartans break through.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Izzo Looks to Erase Blot on Résumé by Knocking Out a Friend.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »