AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrouseWhen Tiger Woods declared his intention Friday to play in the 79th Masters, people who were present for his stirring playoff victory 10 years ago against Chris DiMarco immediately tensed, as if preparing for the unavoidable one-car crash that was about to happen.What if the worst-case scenario happens and Woods withdraws, as he did from his last start, at the Farmers Insurance Open on Feb. 5, because of a lingering back injury? What if the next-worst scenario happens and his back is fine but his short game is balky? Then what?The Masters is part competition, part commemoration. After an eight-month respite, the best players in the world will resume chasing immortality next week at Augusta National Golf Club. As players like Rory McIlroy, the world No. 1, compete for the green jacket, former champions many years past their primes will engage in what amounts to a 36-hole (or more) nostalgia tour.The fans who followed Ben Crenshaw in 2014 did not bemoan his lack of mastery. They came not to track each shot Crenshaw took in his rounds of 83 and 85, but to behold one of the game’s major contributors. The same could be said for the supporters of Tom Watson, who seemed more miffed last year by his noncontending scores of 78 and 81 than anyone in his appreciative gallery did.Woods, 39, has as many Masters titles as Crenshaw and Watson combined. But when he tees it up next week at Augusta National, he will find himself in legends’ limbo. Eighteen months removed from his last official PGA Tour victory, nine months removed from his last official 72-hole finish, and two months removed from a signed-for 82, Woods will not be favored to win his fifth green jacket. But neither is he a lock to be feted like the Crenshaws and Watsons for simply showing up.Pity Woods if he opens with a 76, as he did in 2003, or surpasses his career-high round at Augusta, a 77 on his first visit there, as an amateur in 1995. After Woods reportedly failed to break par in a practice round this week, Twitter was alive with the pings of people expressing concern that Woods would be setting himself up for embarrassment if he chose to compete in his 20th Masters. For Woods, the scrutiny that comes with being a 14-time major champion is his cross to bear. No wonder he has back problems. The mantle of indomitableness is an impossibly heavy load to carry. On Friday, Woods’s announcement eclipsed the potentially history-making round of Lydia Ko, who shot a one-over-par 73 in the second round of the ANA Inspiration, the women’s first major of the year, to fall short in her attempt to post her record 30th consecutive subpar score. “I’ve worked a lot on my game and I’m looking forward to competing,” Woods wrote on his website. “I’m excited to get to Augusta and I appreciate everyone’s support.”In 2005, Woods opened with a 74, his third-highest score at Augusta National as a professional. He left as the champion. In 19 starts at Augusta, Woods has 13 top-10 finishes, including 11 finishes of fifth or better, and he has never missed the cut.For many years Woods made a difficult game look effortless, especially at Augusta National, one of the game’s most unforgiving tests. That was his gift.In recent months he has made a hard game look more difficult. Woods’s last official round was his worst in 19 years as a touring pro, an 82 at the Phoenix Open that made many of the fans in his gallery want to reach out not to high-five him, as usual, but to hug him.Woods hasn’t competed in the Masters since placing fourth in 2013. He missed last year’s tournament after surgery for a pinched nerve in his back. In 2010, he arrived at Augusta National after a nearly four-month break and finished fourth. But that break was a consequence of the unraveling of his personal life, not his game.“This is a tough first place to start,” said Paul Azinger, an ESPN golf analyst, in a teleconference held the day before Woods committed to the tournament.Augusta National’s slick, severe greens can make the most confident players look confused. “And he’s got to go out and probably exorcise some of those demons,” Azinger said. “The first little pitch shot he’s got to hit will be microanalyzed, and he knows that.”Woods is not the first to be humbled by the game, and he won’t be the last. In the mad world of social media, his struggles have been critiqued like nobody else’s. The biggest difference between Woods and everybody else, Azinger said, is that Woods cannot work out the kinks in his game in relative peace and quiet (as was borne out this week when he set foot on the grounds of Augusta National). “Every single shot he takes is documented, and that’s a whole ’nother animal,” Azinger said. “He really does deal with a lot.”Woods entered the Masters knowing that playing wouldn’t be its own reward. And that’s the real pity.Advertisement