AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherFans have been known to complain loudly about what they perceive as subtle biases from national television announcers. So what will they make of a broadcaster openly cheering for one side or even singing an alma mater?Last year, TBS introduced what it calls Team Stream, locally flavored broadcasts of the semifinals of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament.Duke-Michigan State and Kentucky-Wisconsin will be shown on TBS on Saturday night, as usual, with the familiar voices of Jim Nantz, Grant Hill and Bill Raftery. Their job is to report the action objectively from all angles.Viewers who land on TNT or TruTV will get the same game, but a different experience, with announcers focusing their commentary on one team, and even rooting for it.“We wanted a dynamic where it’s about ‘our team,’ ” said Craig Barry, senior vice president for production at Turner Sports. “Using words like ‘we’ and ‘our’ to create a higher level of energy, higher highs and lower lows.”The three versions of each game will be independent operations, with separate production trucks. The director of each Team Stream will have access to all the national camera shots and will also be able to choose shots from cameras devoted to the local team. There will also be locally tailored halftime shows.The play-by-play men are mostly local broadcasters from each team’s region, while the color men are all former players for their teams: Alaa Abdelnaby of Duke and Rex Chapman of Kentucky on TNT, and Mateen Cleaves of Michigan State and Mike Kelley of Wisconsin on TruTV.Kelley is an unabashed Badgers fan. “If they win,” he said, “I’ll be cheering so loud in the championship game, it will make Ashley Judd blush.”He said it could be hard for an announcer to call games involving a favorite team — “Fans of the opposing team will always think you’re biased against them” — so he is looking forward to having an audience made up primarily of Wisconsin partisans.“It’s what fans want to hear,” he said, adding, “They want to feel like the announcers are on the same page” as they are.And on Team Stream, commentary favorable to one side is allowed, even encouraged.That could mean, as Richard Sandomir noted in a favorable review in The New York Times last year, Chapman saying after a Kentucky basket: “There you go, big boy; that’s what I like to see. Get off the schneid!”“Rex is the quintessential homer-slash-fan,” Barry said. “He brought a really, really unique energy to the broadcast.”For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Barry said that in choosing announcers, it was important to “toe that line between great talent and local appeal.” He added: “A lot of these guys would never have an opportunity to call a Final Four. They’re on their A game.”Dave Baker, who regularly covers Kentucky basketball on local television, will work with Chapman, as he did last year. He said that any homerism would be similar to what is heard on local broadcasts of any sport around the country. “When Mel Allen did the Yankees, he could be critical, but you knew he wanted them to succeed,” Baker said.There were those in the audience last year who might not have understood the concept and who sounded off on social networks against the biased coverage, perhaps not knowing that a neutral broadcast was a few channels away.Barry acknowledged that confusion and said that this year, after every commercial break, graphics would point out what viewers were watching and tell them where to go to find the other broadcasts if one of those would be more to their liking.“We nailed the execution,” Barry said, but “we needed to ensure everybody understood what they were watching.”At one point last year, the enthusiastic Chapman, a star shooting guard at Kentucky who had a 12-year N.B.A. career, even sang a brief excerpt from “My Old Kentucky Home” after a Wildcats basket.Baker said of his partner, “Whatever he is feeling in his heart at the time, it’s coming out for everyone to listen to.” But as a singer? “He’s a better jumper.”Advertisement