By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 3, 2015
Tiger Woods, who has been on a two-month leave from competition to work on his game, will play in the 79th Masters next week, he announced on his website on Friday. He will be in search of his fifth Masters title, 10 years after he last won the event.Woods, 39, missed the Masters last year after having a back operation. In 19 starts at Augusta National Golf Club, Woods has 13 top-10 finishes, including 11 finishes of fifth or better, and he has never missed the cut. He was fourth in his last appearance, in 2013.“I’m playing in the Masters,” Woods said in a statement on his website. “It’s obviously very important to me, and I want to be there.“I’ve worked a lot on my game and I’m looking forward to competing. I’m excited to get to Augusta and I appreciate everyone’s support.”AdvertisementThis is not the first time Woods comes into the Masters after a lengthy layoff. In 2010, he returned after a nearly four-month break and finished fourth. The difference is that break was a consequence of the unraveling of his personal life, not his game.AdvertisementThe last official event in which Woods, a 14-time major champion, posted four rounds was the British Open in July; he was 69th of the 72 players who made the cut. Over time, his back improved, but he has not shown the same form he did during his five-win season in 2013.Woods missed the cut at the P.G.A. Championship after posting consecutive 74s. He took the next four months off to allow his back to heal. In his return, at the December tournament he hosts, Woods struggled with his short game and finished tied for 17th in the 18-man field.His short game showed no improvement in his next start, at the Phoenix Open in January. After an opening 73, Woods carded his worst score as a professional, an 82, and finished tied for last among the 36-hole finishers, missing the cut by 11 strokes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The next week, at the Farmers Insurance Open, Woods withdrew during his first round, with more short-game woes and a tight back. As he memorably described it, “I tried to activate my glutes as best I could, but they never stayed activated.”Six days later, in a statement posted on his website, Woods announced his leave. He said his play and his scores “are not acceptable for tournament golf” and added, “When I think I’m ready, I’ll be back.”After he announced he would not play the Arnold Palmer Invitational, a mid-March event he has won eight times, Woods wrote on his website, “I hope to be ready for the Masters, and I will continue to work hard preparing for Augusta.”This week Woods, who was ranked No. 1 as recently as March 2014, fell out of the top 100, to 104th, for the first time since 1996.Woods won the 2005 Masters in a playoff against Chris DiMarco, who said recently that if Woods decided to play this year, the tournament would be a “make-and-break week.” “I never thought I’d ever say it because I thought when I played with him he had the greatest mind ever, he was the strongest mind I’ve ever seen, but it’s getting mental, and if it doesn’t get fixed, I don’t know if he can overcome it,” DiMarco added.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.