AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy Andrew DasThe troubled Copa América Centenario soccer tournament, planned to be held in the United States in 2016 but imperiled by its ties to the FIFA corruption scandal, could be in position to go ahead after all.South America’s soccer confederation, Conmebol, announced Friday that it had cut ties with a controversial company, Datisa, that held the marketing rights to the Centenario, according to Reuters. The tournament would bring top stars like Lionel Messi of Argentina and Neymar of Brazil to the United States for a monthlong, 16-team tournament in June.U.S. Soccer officials refused to confirm the Reuters report Friday night, but the severing of ties would remove the biggest objection of American organizers.The tournament, a special edition of the biennial South American championship, was created in 2014 to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Copa América. But in an indictment released in May, the United States Justice Department painted a picture of the event as little more than a criminal enterprise set up to bribe top soccer officials.The indictment said the main investors in Datisa conspired to win and keep hold of lucrative media-rights contracts from regional soccer confederations through the payment of up to $110 million in bribes. Several of those investors were among the executives arrested in a sweep of top soccer officials in Zurich in May.Given Datisa’s direct ties to the FIFA corruption scandal, United States Soccer has refused to host the tournament with the company as a partner.U.S. Soccer officials have been pressing Conmebol, which runs the Copa América, to end the agreement. They even skipped a meeting in Mexico City in September that had been called to try to save the troubled tournament. If the biggest stumbling block were removed, an announcement of the tournament’s dates and host cities could come soon.GERMANY DENIES BRIBES The German football federation denied allegations that it used bribes to secure the 2006 World Cup.The newsmagazine Der Spiegel reported Friday that a slush fund of 10.3 million Swiss francs (about $6 million at the time) was used to secure four votes from FIFA’s 24-member executive committee. The German federation called the report “completely baseless.”The federation said it disputes “the authors’ conclusions, made without any facts, that votes were bought in this context for the awarding of the World Cup” and that neither the federation’s president “nor the other members of the organizing committee were involved or could have known about such operations.”The federation said it reserved the right to take legal action against Der Spiegel.FIFA called the magazine’s allegations “serious” and said they would be reviewed. (AP)CITY F.C. FALLS TO ORLANDO Cyle Larin scored twice in an eight-minute span in the second half, and Orlando City beat visiting New York City F.C., 2-1, to keep its playoff hopes alive.Orlando City (12-13-8) has won five straight games to move within a point of sixth-place Montreal for the final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.Kwame Watson-Siriboe gave New York City (10-16-7) a 1-0 lead in the second minute of first-half stoppage time. Mix Diskerud’s shot from distance deflected off a crowd in front of the goal, and Watson-Siriboe one-touched the loose ball into the back of the net.Larin tied it in the 62nd minute after heading in Corey Ashe’s cross. Eight minutes later, Larin made it 2-1 on a counterattack. (AP)Advertisement