By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 16, 2015
Cleveland Browns quarterback Johnny Manziel was involved in a dispute with his girlfriend this week that the police said involved alcohol.Manziel was pulled over by the police in Avon, Ohio, after a witness said a person was trying to jump from his speeding vehicle. Manziel admitted having consumed alcohol before the incident. According to the police, Manziel was not charged, and his girlfriend, Colleen Crowley, said she did not want to press charges.Manziel, who was drafted by the Browns in the first round in 2014, spent 70 days in a Pennsylvania rehabilitation clinic earlier this year for an unspecified condition. It is not known if he was prohibited from drinking after leaving the program.Browns General Manager Ray Farmer released a statement Friday night.“It is a matter that we take seriously and have expressed our concerns to Johnny directly,” Farmer said. “Those conversations will remain private and we will refrain from further comment at this time.”AdvertisementA team spokesman said that Manziel’s status for the Browns’ home game Sunday against Denver had not changed. Manziel could face discipline from the N.F.L. under its personal-conduct policy.AdvertisementManziel, whose rough rookie season was followed by his checking himself into the treatment center, has been Josh McCown’s backup for the last three games. He started for an injured McCown in Week 2 and led the Browns to a win over Tennessee.Shortly after the Browns issued their statement, Manziel posted an explanation on his Twitter account.“Colleen and I got into a dumb public argument on the way home Monday afternoon,” Manziel wrote. “It probably looked more interesting than it was and I know I would stop and check if I saw a couple arguing on the side of the road. It was embarrassing but not serious and when we talked to the police and they realized everything was alright and I was sober, we went home together and everything is fine.”SEAHAWKS’ LYNCH TO RETURN After missing the last two games with a hamstring strain, Marshawn Lynch is expected to return to the Seattle’s starting lineup for Sunday’s game against the Carolina Panthers.Linebacker Bobby Wagner’s status will be a game-time decision.Lynch did not start against the Chicago Bears in Week 3 because of a calf injury and then left the game for good in the second quarter after straining his hamstring. The two games Lynch missed were the first games in which he was inactive since being traded to Seattle in 2010.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lynch participated fully in practice on Thursday and Friday.“He looked really back to full health,” Coach Pete Carroll said. “He made it out, looked good, and we’re counting on him playing.”Wagner’s status is more uncertain. He suffered a strained pectoral last week against the Cincinnati Bengals.“He’s tough enough to play with it,” Carroll said. “It’s just whether it’s the right thing to do to get him back to health.”AdvertisementBILLS’ MCCOY LIKELY TO PLAY  Buffalo running back LeSean McCoy expects to return from a hamstring injury and play Sunday against the Cincinnati Bengals. The status of quarterback Tyrod Taylor and receiver Sammy Watkins is listed as questionable.McCoy has missed each of the last two weeks after a setback at practice. He originally hurt his left hamstring at training camp Aug. 18. He is listed as probable.“I look forward to playing,” McCoy said. “When my number’s called, I’m going to be out there looking to make plays.”Asked about McCoy’s status, Coach Rex Ryan said: “I feel pretty good. I guess sometimes the experts get it wrong.”McCoy has yet to make a major impact after arriving in Buffalo in a blockbuster trade with the Philadelphia Eagles for linebacker Kiko Alonso. In three games, he has 146 yards on 43 carries.If Taylor is unable to play, E. J. Manuel will start in his place.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Browns’ Manziel Avoids Charges After Dispute With Girlfriend .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.