AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerAn arbitrator ruled Friday that Josh Hamilton, the troubled Los Angeles Angels outfielder, could not face discipline under Major League Baseball’s drug program. Hamilton, who has fought drug and alcohol addiction for years, had reported a relapse to the commissioner’s office two months ago, and the league was upset by the arbitrator’s ruling.“The Office of the Commissioner disagrees with the decision,” M.L.B. said in a statement, “and will seek to address deficiencies in the manner in which drugs of abuse are addressed under the Program in the collective bargaining process.”Hamilton is on the disabled list after shoulder surgery in the off-season, and was not with the Angels in spring training. He remains away from the team, in Texas, recovering from the operation, and the ruling ensured that he would not lose any of his $23 million salary.The Angels, who could have saved some of that money if Hamilton had been suspended, issued a firm but telling statement after M.L.B. announced the ruling.“The Angels have serious concerns about Josh’s conduct, health and behavior and we are disappointed that he has broken an important commitment which he made to himself, his family, his teammates and our fans,” said the statement, from General Manager Jerry Dipoto. “We are going to do everything possible to assure he receives proper help for himself and for the well-being of his family.”The league said that its representatives and those from the players’ association were deadlocked on the issue of whether Hamilton had violated the terms of his drug program. The arbitrator sided with the union.According to multiple officials briefed on the matter, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly, Hamilton’s side characterized his case as a continuing health and addiction issue. He missed three years in the minor leagues because of drug violations, and has been in a treatment program since.Hamilton’s side was said to argue that, although he had slipped, he had not violated the terms of the program he is under, and was diligently working to adhere to it. It is unclear if Hamilton technically failed a drug test this time, but the arbitrator did not appear to believe that self-reporting a misstep was the same as failing a test.The most recent relapse, though, was not Hamilton’s first. At least two others, involving alcohol, are publicly known — in 2009 and in 2012, when he played for the Texas Rangers. Hamilton remained very productive on the field for Texas, winning a Most Valuable Player Award in 2010 and leading the team to two World Series.The Angels were aware of Hamilton’s history when they signed him to a five-year, $125 million contract after the 2012 season. But they were eager to return to the playoffs, and did so last season by winning the American League West.But Hamilton has made minimal impact. In 240 games for the Angels across two seasons, he has hit just .255, with 31 home runs. He is popular with teammates, though, and last month at spring training they expressed concern for his well-being.“When this came out, it was tough,” Mike Trout, the Angels’ star center fielder, said. “He’s got four girls. He’s a good person, he’s a good teammate, he’s a good friend of mine. I hope he comes out of it well.”Advertisement