By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYAPRIL 3, 2015
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla. —  John Isner came into the Miami Open with a losing record for 2015 after struggling in the early season. He also lost both singles matches in the United States first-round Davis Cup team’s 3-2 loss to Britain last month. But he has found his range and won four straight singles matches in Miami, beating three players seeded in the top 10: Grigor Dimitrov (No. 9), Milos Raonic (No. 5) and Kei Nishikori (No. 4). Isner, a 6-foot-10 American, has yet to drop his serve and is now into the semifinals, which, in this case, might better be termed the final four.An edited and condensed interview with Isner, a Georgia alumnus, in Miami on Thursday:Q. So you’re on a roll, not just on this court but on a different type of court. You’re the only one in The New York Times’s celebrity N.C.A.A. tournament pool to correctly pick the Final Four.A. That’s pretty impressive, but my picks prior to this were not. My first two rounds were abysmal. I tried to pick some upsets, and I fell flat on those, but I kept my Final Four teams alive.Q. Why did you pick Michigan State to advance to the Final Four?A. It pained me to pick Michigan State over Georgia, which you would think I probably wouldn’t do. I was certainly pulling for Georgia, but my whole reasoning there was that Tom Izzo, he’s pretty good in March. It wasn’t that hard, and they played Wisconsin in the Big Ten championship really tough. That’s all.AdvertisementQ. Confident in that choice or just trying to separate yourself?A. No, I wasn’t confident, really. It’s lucky, but as I said, I was pulling hard for Georgia, but in the pool I picked Michigan State. But I would have loved to have it the other way around. Trust me.AdvertisementQ. Are you sticking with your original picks for the Final Four itself: A Wisconsin-Duke final and a championship for Wisconsin?A. I have to. I can’t tell you I’m that confident about it, but I have to stick with it.Q. The only other person in the pool who got three of the four was Lisa Raymond, so can we conclude that tennis players have too much time on their hands to watch basketball and fill out brackets?A. I have a lot of time on my hands. People think I’m pretty busy. Yeah, but I’m not as busy as people think. The fantasy baseball draft was the other night, and I’ve got that coming up for a good six months, so I’m excited about that. A lot of time on my hands.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. What’s your level of basketball knowledge?A. Well, I watch all sports, and I played it, obviously. I almost went with basketball over tennis. This is pretty exciting times now, N.B.A. playoffs coming up and the N.C.A.A. tournament. So it’s a lot of fun.Q. I watched you lose the Davis Cup match on the first Friday to the British against James Ward and you then lost on Sunday to Andy Murray. That match against Ward could have been devastating. Why didn’t it turn out to be devastating? And are you playing this well now because of what happened there?A. It was devastating, and it still is. I would give anything to have that first Friday back. You know going into a tie like that playing against Andy Murray is going to be very tough, but I wasn’t playing great going into that match against Andy. But I played the right way against him and things sort of clicked for me after that. I can’t beat guys consistently playing like I’m 5-foot-10.Q. Was that phrase conveyed to you?A. Yeah, Jim Courier [the United States Davis Cup captain] told me that. Justin Gimelstob [Isner’s coach] told me that. That’s not rocket science, but it’s easier said than done. There are a lot of things that go on between the lines of a tennis court, mentally, physically and whatnot. But I’m playing the right way right now. That’s for sure.Q. Justin was very frustrated after you lost to Gilles Muller in the third round in the Australian Open, feeling like you’d laid down a good base in the off-season but just weren’t putting the pieces together in the match. Do you feel it’s coming together now?A. Yes, it is. Certainly, I’ve worked extremely hard with him. People seem to think when you lose a match it’s because you are not working hard. Things take time. I’m not going to play well every week, but I’ve never doubted anything with the work I’ve done with him or anything he’s told me. I’ve never doubted that at all. I’ve always told myself it will pay off somewhere, don’t know where, but it will pay off. And maybe it’s starting to pay off a little bit here. I still have a lot of work to do though.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.