By HUW RICHARDSAPRIL 3, 2015
LONDON — Should Chris Wyles help Saracens take the final steps and finally win a European title this year, thanks will be owed to USA Rugby.“Back in 2007, I was at Northampton. We got relegated, I was leaving and one possible option was even to give up rugby,” said Wyles, who is likely to start for Saracens in its European Champions Cup quarterfinal match at Racing Metro in Paris on Sunday. “Then I was asked about playing for the U.S.A. in the World Cup. It was a fantastic opportunity, and it put me on the biggest stage in world rugby.”Among those watching was the Australian coach Eddie Jones, who was working with South Africa’s national team. “He saw me play, and when he was coach at Saracens in 2008, he gave me a contract here,” said Wyles, 31, who has been at the North London club ever since. “I owe U.S.A. rugby a huge debt for making all of that possible.”His accent and heritage are middle-class English, but there is little doubt that Wyles cherishes the memories of his childhood in America — he was born in Stamford, Conn., and lived in Allentown, Penn., until his family moved to England when he was 12 — and still more the opportunities that came from it.Advertisement“I was always focused on sports, and living in America gave me the chance to play a lot,” he said. “I played some lacrosse and baseball, although my main game was always soccer.”AdvertisementRugby came later, at school in England, and his first senior games were with the Nottingham club while he was studying for a degree in political science at the city’s highly rated university.“I jumped at the opportunity to play in the World Cup, and it re-ignited my connection with America,” said Wyles, who will play in his third World Cup with the U.S. Eagles later this year. “I’ve played in some great games with the Eagles and enjoyed the experience of squads which mix amateurs and professionals.”He will go to the World Cup as one of the team’s veterans, a leader with years of experience at the top levels of professional rugby in Europe. “We’ve had quite a journey,” said Wyles, who has seen Saracens rise from an upstart to a perennial European contender. Last year, it lost the final as the French club Toulon won its second straight title when the competition was known as the Heineken Cup.His blossoming as a player has mirrored his club’s rise in the ranks.“Chris has been one of our most valuable players over the last four seasons — most years he is among the three who play in most matches,” said the Saracens coach, Mark McCall. “He plays a number of positions, which is great for us but may sometimes be to his detriment. He played at center against Harlequins last week and had a big game, but he’d probably tell you he’s really a left wing. His flexibility has been phenomenal for us.”All four English clubs that qualified for the quarterfinals must travel this weekend. History suggests that only one will progress: Exactly 25 percent of the quarterfinals have been won by the away team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Saracens has a good shot to win its game at Racing Metro. It won an away quarterfinal match last season against Ulster, and it counts as a European veteran compared to the French club, which is a first-time qualifier for the playoffs.It also won its last visit to Racing two seasons ago. “I remember it very well. We played in the snow,” said Wyles. “This will be a different set of circumstances, so you put that to one side, but you can’t deny that we do draw on those experiences.”Memories of last season’s disappointments are also driving the club. “Toulon showed us how you win a cup final,” Wyles said about last year’s 23-6 loss in Cardiff, Wales.AdvertisementSaracens has won an English championship, but memories of losing last season’s final to Northampton, 24-20, after dominating the regular season with only three losses in 22 matches remain sharp and painful for its players.After the club season will come the World Cup, where the No.16 Eagles will be the lowest-ranked team in Group B.With matches against South Africa, Scotland, Samoa and Japan, the club will consider any victory a true triumph.“Every draw is tough, but part of the enjoyment is playing the big teams with the big stars. It is a chance for us to show the rest of the rugby-playing world that we can play, and to help grow the game in the United States,” Wyles said.On that front, he has never felt more optimistic, especially after he saw a huge crowd take in a match against the world champion, New Zealand, last autumn.“Playing the All Blacks in Chicago was a massive step for us, and having sevens in the Olympics from next year is huge,” he said. “We know how much the Olympics means to Americans and the speed, shape and length of games in sevens, which is a passion of mine, make it very appealing to the American psyche.”A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.