AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan CzuprynTAMPA, Fla. — Maryland’s Lexie Brown was cradled in the hands of a slam dunk champion. She had her diapers changed by Pervis Ellison, a former N.C.A.A. tournament most valuable player and a No. 1 N.B.A. draft pick. She was raised in N.B.A. arenas.So no, a matchup with Connecticut, the No. 1 overall seed in the women’s bracket, does not scare her.“No fear,” Brown said.Her tenacity is inherited from her father, Dee Brown, who played 12 seasons with the Boston Celtics, the Toronto Raptors and the Orlando Magic.Dee Brown is best known, however, from a no-look dunk he made after inflating his signature Reebok Pumps in the 1991 N.B.A. slam dunk contest.“When you’re a little girl, you look at your dad like a superhero,” Lexie Brown said. “So when you look up at your dad and you have people wanting his autograph, wanting his picture and when you have people going, ‘Oh my gosh, I loved your dad when you were younger, and I had a picture of him in my room,’ that’s still cool to me now.”Brown said she knew she could view her situation differently, asking questions like “why is he still getting the attention and not me?” But she does not.She never has.Even after helping the top-seeded Terrapins reach consecutive Final Fours for the first time in program history, Brown continues to field questions about growing up with Dee Brown and is happy to answer them.“I don’t ever think I’ll get tired of it,” she said.Lexie Brown’s nonchalance about her background, combined with the experience she gained from essentially having a coach as a parent, has helped mold her into an ideal point guard, said Coach Brenda Frese.“I think a big reason of that is the arenas she grew up in,” said Frese, who called her “poised beyond her years.”Still, not all children of N.B.A. stars grow up to be stars, certainly not at the level Brown has reached, with her team on the verge of a second national title in less than a decade.Coach Geno Auriemma, whose Huskies will try to halt Maryland’s 28-game winning streak on Sunday night, has had players with family roots in the sport. For every success story like the Browns, there is one that ends in disappointment.“Some benefit from being in that environment, growing up in that environment, from what I’ve seen,” Auriemma said. “They learn how to compete. They understand what winning and losing is. They understand what preparing is. They understand what the expectation is.”He added: “Now the flip side of that, some of those guys are out of their mind. And their daughters are out of their mind because the expectation level is unrealistic. And the expectation level of the parents is unrealistic. And you always cross your fingers and hope that those kids can be really good on their own merit rather than live off their father’s names.”Dee Brown, who is now the director for player development for the Sacramento Kings, never put those lofty expectations on his daughter, instead pushing her to pursue her own dream with the same intensity and fire he had during his playing days.Her dream just happened to look a lot like his.Entering Sunday, the dream is still alive for Lexie Brown and the Terrapins. Many predict, though, that it will collapse in Tampa. UConn has beaten each of its N.C.A.A. tournament foes by at least 21 points, and the Huskies are heavily favored against Maryland, which has not fared well against UConn under Frese, with the Huskies winning all three games.But Lexie Brown will have her father in the crowd, which she sees as a little magic in her corner. Dee Brown has attended only one other game in her time at Maryland because of his schedule with the Kings.That was a round of 8 game last season against Louisville, which ended in a Maryland victory thanks in part to Lexie Brown’s 20-point performance.If her father can supply some more good luck Sunday, Brown said his slam dunk trophy would finally come down and be replaced by her championship award.“He can take it all the way back to Sacramento,” she said.Advertisement