By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYAPRIL 3, 2015
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla. — The duel was supposed to happen last month in the California desert in Indian Wells. But Serena Williams’s winning streak finally did collide with Simona Halep’s winning streak, and it was worth the wait.It was punch against counterpunch late on a balmy Thursday night in South Florida. It was Williams’s dictation against Halep’s deft baseline typing.Though Williams fluctuated between ruthlessly efficient and surprisingly shaky, she managed — as she has so often against her most dangerous opponents — to find the lines and the solutions under greatest duress.Her 6-2, 4-6, 7-5 victory put her into yet another final at the springtime tournament now called the Miami Open. The event has changed names and sponsors through the years but Williams has been a constant.AdvertisementShe is now 10-0 in semifinals here and will be going for her eighth singles title on Saturday. She will face an unexpected opponent: Carla Suárez Navarro, the 12th-seeded Spanish veteran who is now assured of rising into the top 10 for the first time on Monday.It has been 14 years since a Spanish woman was in the top 10, and Suárez is only the third to make it into that select group, joining Arantxa Sánchez Vicario and Conchita Martinez. Suárez, born and raised in the Canary Islands, also is that rarity in the women’s game: a leading player with a one-handed drive backhand.It is a versatile thing of beauty but it has not helped her avoid ugly results against Williams. She is 0-4 against her and has lost the eight sets that they have played prior to Saturday by the following scores: 6-0, 6-3, 6-2, 6-0, 6-0, 6-0, 6-2, 6-3.No wonder Suárez admitted that she was hoping to play Halep next.It could have happened despite a remarkable first set from Williams in which she did a fine impression of a player in the zone. It could have happened after Williams served for the match at 5-3 in the third set and faltered, winning just one point in the game.“Serena was at her best, I thought, in the first set, and then for me, after that it was a strange match,” said Patrick Mouratoglou, Williams’s coach. “Simona had been making hardly any unforced errors in that first set, and then she started missing quite a few and Serena completely lost her concentration. From then on it was an uneven match.”AdvertisementUneven but often richly entertaining despite the frequent shouts from the stands that interrupted Williams’s serving rhythm, many from the large contingent of Romanian expatriate fans in attendance.The search for a true rival for Williams continues. She has squeezed the suspense out of matchup after matchup — utterly dominating Maria Sharapova, the only player who has approached her star power in this era, and running up the head-to-head score on other members of the top 10.Halep, the Romanian who is ranked No.3, is now 1-5 against Williams with her lone victory coming in a strange round-robin match in Singapore at last year’s WTA Championships when she routed her 6-0, 6-2, only to lose to Williams a few days later in the final: 6-3, 6-0.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Thursday’s semifinal was two-way traffic for a change. They match up very well stylistically with Williams’s tremendous firepower and Halep’s tremendous defensive skills and ability to produce precision and depth on the run or the stretch.The keys are her silken footwork and her innate sense of anticipation.“Of the women, she’s the one who moves, far and away, the best,” Mouratoglou said. “There’s a fluidity that is remarkable. She holds her spot tight to the baseline very well and rarely backs up. Even on defense, she doesn’t retreat much. It’s very hard to push her back, so she has less court to cover. There are lots of women who back up as soon as they are a bit on the defensive and end up with much more court to cover. But she cuts off the angles. I think she has a very good eye.”It takes a great deal of attacking skill to make Halep look rushed, but Williams certainly managed it. However, Halep, the last woman to beat Williams, still managed to avoid the knockout punch in the second set and finally broke her serve at 4-4.Halep was so focused on the huge challenge at hand that when she held serve in the next game she was unaware at first that she had won the set. She eventually realized that it was time to sit down, and she did so, laughing to herself.“I didn’t play for the score,” she said. “I played just to try to play my best tennis, to try to be close to her, and just to hit and to fight for every ball.”That was what was required, but the No.1 seeded Williams was definitely keeping score despite her peaks and valleys, her satisfactions and frustrations.AdvertisementIt has been that sort of spring.“You can say that, but she’s not losing a match,” Mouratoglou said. “What interests me is that she finds the way to win each time. The good news is that she’s winning even if she is capable of playing a lot better.”She and Halep were supposed to play in the semifinals in Indian Wells, but Williams was forced to withdraw with a right knee injury — swelling under the knee cap, according to Mouratoglou, that required an anti-inflammatory injection and several days of rest.“She couldn’t bend her right knee; it was that swollen,” he said.Halep went on to win the title after winning in Dubai, but her 15-match streak of victories is now over. Williams, who has won the last 20 matches she has played, rolls on, but not without an admiring glance in the rearview mirror.“I’m actually a fan of hers,” she said of Halep. “I like her attitude. I like how she gets pumped up. I like how she fights. I like how she plays. I think it’s fun to watch and different. It’s a refreshing type of game.”A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »