By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 4, 2015
RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. —  The youth gale that blew a layer of pixie dust on the ANA Inspiration died down Saturday, and a few seasoned pros cleared a trail up the leaderboard. Led by the ageless Australian Karrie Webb, a two-time champion, four former winners of this event played their way into contention during the third round at Mission Hills Country Club.Webb, who turned 40 in December, posted a five-under-par 67 to move into a tie for 14th, at three-under 213. She was seven strokes behind the front-running Sei Young Kim, an L.P.G.A. rookie who will sleep on the 54-hole lead for the first time in the United States. Kim, 22, a long hitter who won a tour event in February in the Bahamas, chased her second-round 65 with a 69 and is at 10 under.“I feel under pressure right now,” said Kim, who was known for coming off the pace to win during her standout career on the Korean L.P.G.A. tour. “To be in the lead going into the final round is new for me.”In second, three strokes behind Kim, is Stacy Lewis, the 2011 champion, who recorded a 68. Another stroke back, at six under, are two other former winners, Brittany Lincicome (2009) and Morgan Pressel (2007). Lincicome posted a 70 and Pressel a 71. They are tied with Ariya Jutanugarn, a 19-year-old rookie whose 66 was the low round of the day. Jutanugarn’s sister, Moriya, is tied for sixth at five under.Advertisement“I did a good job of staying patient, more than anything,” said Lewis, who moved to nine under before giving back two strokes on her closing four holes.AdvertisementLewis, who has improved her score every day after opening with a 72, will be paired with Kim in the final grouping Sunday.“I love being in contention on Sundays in the majors,” she said, adding, “In theory, you should be playing your best golf by the end of the week, because you should be learning the golf course as the week goes on.”The course holds few surprises for Webb, who is making her 20th appearance in the event. At 21, Webb was the youngest member of the L.P.G.A. in 1996. She won her seventh L.P.G.A. Tour event the week before Lydia Ko, the women’s world No. 1, was born in 1997.The proliferation on the tour of competitors half her age is payback, Webb said.“I think I made people feel old when I first came out,” she said, adding: “Things have certainly changed. If you’re 21, you’re a seasoned veteran now.”Webb’s main rival throughout her 20s was Annika Sorenstam, whose record of 29 consecutive subpar rounds was equaled in the first round by Ko, who followed her opening 71 with a 73. She made her first birdie on her final hole Saturday for a 74.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sorenstam, a 10-time major winner, has retired to the broadcasting booth, but Webb, owner of seven major titles, shows no signs of cutting back. So committed is Webb to continuing to improve that she recently changed coaches.“When you’re 25 or 30, you think 40’s old,” she said. “Until you get to 40, then you realize it’s not as old as you once thought it was.”Webb said she did not walk slower than she once did or hit the ball a shorter distance.“I don’t feel like what I used to think 40 was,” she said.AdvertisementShe assumed she would develop more patience with age, but that has not gone the way she expected, either.“I was not at all patient in the beginning,” said Webb, who turned her day around on the par-3 No. 8, where she made a birdie, her first of six in an eight-hole stretch.“I just wanted to put a good round together and hopefully have a decent weekend and see where that puts me,” said Webb, who won here in 2000 and 2006.It is not a coincidence that so many former champions made their moves on a day when the course chewed up a few of the younger players.“It’s solely the experience of playing this golf course,” Lewis said. “I’ve played it when it’s harder than the conditions we have now, and when you play a golf course at its absolute hardest, I think anything you do from there is pretty easy.“You know, Karrie has seen it at its hardest, I’ve seen it, Morgan has seen it, so I think that plays into it a lot here, just knowing when to be aggressive and when not to.”A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP13 of the New York edition with the headline: After Starting Slowly, L.P.G.A. Veterans Make a Push.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.