AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe DrapeARCADIA, Calif. — Call it Selection Saturday — three important prep races run in a stretch of 90 minutes to determine which horses have a realistic chance to capture the 140th running of the Kentucky Derby next month. When it was over, there was little doubt about the overwhelming favorite at this moment. His name is Dortmund, a strapping and fast colt who decimated five rivals here in the Santa Anita Derby to remain undefeated, which was no small thing for his owner, Kaleem Shah. Before the race, Shah said that he was not only nervous for the first time but also thinking about history.About two previous Kentucky Derby victors, to be exact: Smarty Jones (2004) and Seattle Slew (1977).“I was looking to do what Seattle Slew did when he went to the Derby 6 for 6, Smarty Jones went there 6 for 6,” Shah said. “It was critically important that he move forward, not regress.”Dortmund, now 6 for 6, certainly looked like them. He overcame a stumble out of the gate to lead every step of the way in an emphatic four-and-one-quarter-length victory. He set fast fractions: 46.36 seconds for a half-mile, and 1 minute 10.57 seconds for three-quarters of a mile.He finished strong, covering a mile and an eighth in 1:48.73. His rider, Martin Garcia, looked as if he were out for a pleasure ride as Dortmund turned for home. His whip was idle and blowing in the wind like an antenna.“I didn’t do anything,” Garcia said. “He just dragged me around there.”How Dortmund won and where he did it mattered greatly. The best 3-year-old horses in the nation have resided at Santa Anita Park, in the shadow of the San Gabriel Mountains, for the past six months. In Dortmund’s case, he shares a trainer, Bob Baffert, and a barn with a couple of them, American Pharaoh and One Lucky Dane.American Pharaoh, last year’s 2-year-old champion, is the favorite to win the Arkansas Derby next week at Oaklawn Park. Lucky Dane finished second on Saturday and earned a trip to the Kentucky Derby as well.Don’t forget about Firing Line, either. Twice previously, he has dueled down the stretch with Dortmund, finishing a head behind in the Robert B. Lewis Stakes and the Los Alamitos Futurity. He then went to New Mexico and crushed the field in the Sunland Derby.But there will be 16 other horses lined up against Dortmund and the California contingent at Churchill Downs. Among them will be Frosted, who won the Wood Memorial on Saturday by going a mile and an eighth in 1:50.31. He had shown more potential than results, finishing fourth in the Fountain of Youth at Gulfstream Park. Afterward, his trainer, Kiaran McLaughlin, had throat surgery performed on the horse to help with his airways.“We know he has a ton of ability, and the last race really made us scratch our heads, asking why he would go to the lead and throw his head up and stop,” McLaughlin said. “We did everything we could to change everything we possibly could.”It worked.In the Bluegrass Stakes in Kentucky, Carpe Diem established himself as the class of the East Coast-based horses. He has won four of his five races and impressed his jockey, John Velazquez. He took command at the top of the stretch and rushed on for a three-length victory.“There wasn’t much speed in the race,” Velazquez said. “It was a nice slow pace, and I didn’t want to fight him very much. Down the lane, I asked him, and he responded right away.”There is little doubt, however, that Dortmund will be the horse to beat come the first Saturday in May. The son of the 2008 Derby winner, Big Brown, Dortmund may just follow his father, Seattle Slew and Smarty Jones into the winner’s circle beneath Churchill’s twin spires.Dortmund’s trainer, Baffert, has won the Derby three times before, with Silver Charm in 1997, Real Quiet in 1998 and War Emblem in 2002. But Baffert knows better than to get ahead of himself — he has lost with seemingly unbeatable horses, including Point Given and Lookin at Lucky.“The feeling is like we’ve been here before,” Baffert said. “Just enjoy the moment because the next race is going to be the one.”Advertisement