By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 4, 2015
Facing a sliding Devils squad about to miss the playoffs for a third straight season, the Rangers rolled to a 6-1 victory at Madison Square Garden on Saturday thanks to Rick Nash, Dominic Moore and Henrik Lundqvist, who made 35 saves in his best game since returning from a neck injury.With their third straight victory against the Devils, the Rangers reached 50 wins for the fourth time in their history.They also continued a surge that has vaulted them to the top of the Eastern Conference and has them closing in on home-ice advantage for the playoffs.“I’m comfortable with my game and with my focus,” said Lundqvist, whose only blemish was a late goal by Tuomo Ruutu. “I have to give credit to the guys. I’m having fun. It’s great to be back playing.”AdvertisementNash opened the scoring by tipping home his career-high 42nd goal, beating Devils goaltender Cory Schneider 5 minutes 10 seconds into the first period. Nash is having the type of season the Rangers envisioned when they acquired him in a trade with the Columbus Blue Jackets in July 2012. Only Washington’s Alex Ovechkin has more goals.AdvertisementDefenseman Keith Yandle made the score 2-0 11:59 into the first, and Moore augmented the lead 25 seconds later. That caused the Devils to pull Schneider and replace him with the backup Keith Kinkaid.“It’s an awesome atmosphere,” Yandle, acquired from Arizona last month, said of the loud Garden crowd, which chanted, “Henrik, Henrik,” multiple times for Lundqvist, their star goaltender.Derek Stepan scored on a short-handed breakaway 19:57 into the second to make the score 4-0. Nash and defenseman Ryan McDonagh were credited with assists, with McDonagh’s the 100th of his career.Derick Brassard scored his 18th goal and Moore his ninth (and second of the game) in the final period to finish the onslaught.Lundqvist was sharp while making his first home start since Feb. 2, when he defeated the Florida Panthers two days after he was struck by a puck in the throat area, which caused a blood vessel injury in his neck.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He won his third straight since losing to Boston a week ago in his return, improving to 28-12-3 this season. The Rangers were 18-4-3 while Lundqvist recovered.“We have to relax and play our game,” Lundqvist said. “We set the bar high here. We played a very smart game tonight.”The Rangers (50-21-7) last earned 50 wins three years ago, finishing with 51 en route to the Eastern Conference finals. They also won 50 games in 1991-92, when they had the league’s best record, and had a franchise-best 52 victories in 1993-94, when they won the Stanley Cup.AdvertisementWith 107 points, the Rangers are tied with Anaheim for the highest total in the N.H.L. and have two games in hand on the Ducks. The Rangers, who clinched the Metropolitan Division with a win at Minnesota on Thursday, have four games remaining, with their regular season ending on April 11.The Devils (32-34-13) lost for the seventh time in eight games and dropped to 4-8-3 in divisional road games. It has been another lost season for the Devils, who fired Peter DeBoer as coach in late December.Lundqvist also continued his domination of the Devils. He has more wins against them than any opponent, with a career mark of 33-14-6.“He looks like himself; he’s talking like himself out there,” McDonagh said of Lundqvist. “He’s carrying himself like he’s back to normal. It’s a good sign for us, for sure.”SLAP SHOTSThe Rangers have reached the playoffs in five straight seasons and in nine of the last 10. ... The Rangers and Devils meet once more, on Tuesday in Newark.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP15 of the New York edition with the headline: Lundqvist Nears Top Form; Rangers Near Top Seed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.