AdvertisementSupported byWisconsin 71, Kentucky 64By Zach SchonbrunINDIANAPOLIS — It was here, finally, after 364 days — long enough for Kentucky to reload and to rewrite history and for Wisconsin to reconcile its paralyzing defeat on this stage a year ago, or at least come close.It was not easy. Months dripped by. The Badgers eyed the Wildcats warily — they looked unstoppable at times, as everyone else in the country seemed to think. And then there were those crystalline moments when, just maybe, they looked like a team that Wisconsin had figured out.Yes, the Wildcats were undefeated: 38-0 entering Saturday’s Final Four rematch at Lucas Oil Stadium, the well-earned favorites to win a ninth national title. But if you thought Wisconsin was going to be intimidated, was going to quake before Kentucky’s mountainous frontcourt and its N.B.A.-quick guards, oh, boy, were you wrong.Wrong, too, were those who anointed Kentucky as unbeatable because, with a 71-64 victory in a national semifinal Saturday night, Wisconsin slew the dragon that few considered conquerable.“This is something we’ve been talking about since Day 1 this season,” Sam Dekker said. “Look where we are now.”The score was 66-63 with 16 seconds remaining, and Karl-Anthony Towns stood at the free-throw line with an opportunity to trim Wisconsin’s lead to a point. He missed the second free throw, though, and at the other end, Bronson Koenig delivered on both of his attempts.Ten seconds remained in Kentucky’s blissful march toward immortality. The Wildcats trailed by 4, and the fans stood. With six seconds left, Aaron Harrison missed everything with a 3-point attempt. Wisconsin’s yearlong ghosts were exorcised, and now the Badgers will face Duke on Monday for the national title.“We are a finishing team — that’s what we’ve been — and we didn’t,” Kentucky Coach John Calipari said. “They did, and we didn’t.”The losing locker room, for the first time all season, belonged to Kentucky. It was quiet and weepy. The floor was strewn with banana peels and protein-bar wrappers, and the chairs were still neatly arranged from when Calipari delivered his halftime sermon.“It doesn’t seem real,” Harrison said. Tyler Ulis said: “We wanted to win a national title, and we didn’t do it. The season was a waste.”Wisconsin’s own quest — for redemption — could be traced back to April 30, when Frank Kaminsky posted a 1,219-word essay on his personal blog titled “My Decision to Stay.” In it, he bewailed the heartache of losing to Kentucky in last year’s Final Four. “Yea, we made it to the final four,” wrote Kaminsky, who finished with a game-high 20 points and 11 rebounds on Saturday, his 22nd birthday, “but that doesn’t mean we won something.”With Kaminsky, Dekker, Nigel Hayes and Josh Gasser all returning, the core re-established, Wisconsin fixated its attention on returning here. Most of the Badgers made a point not to watch a replay of the source of their heartbreak, Harrison’s winning 3-pointer with 5.7 seconds left last year, the shot that Zak Showalter, now a redshirt sophomore, said felt like a “dagger going through my chest.”“It’s tough to forget something like that,” he said Friday.Yet the shot reappeared on a projector screen during one of the team’s video sessions last week. The room went silent, unusual for this team of chatterboxes and pranksters.On Saturday, from the outset, Wisconsin got down to business, leaping out to a 23-14 lead with a 12-3 run midway through the first half. Kentucky looked out of sorts offensively, despite a lineup taller than just about every N.B.A. team’s. The Badgers were closing in on the largest lead any team had held against Kentucky this season: 11, by Columbia, in November.The Harrison twins, Andrew and Aaron, helped bring back Kentucky, and with two minutes left in the half, the score was tied at 32-32. A thunderous dunk by Trey Lyles minutes later put the Wildcats back ahead but only for a moment because Bronson Koenig drained a fadeaway jumper with three seconds left to send the game into the intermission tied, as it appeared destined to be.The game was just the sixth between teams facing each other in a second straight Final Four, a list that included Duke and Nevada-Las Vegas. In the second of those games, in 1991, the Blue Devils upset the undefeated Running Rebels in the Hoosier Dome here in Indianapolis.No team since U.N.L.V. had lasted as long as Kentucky in a Division I college basketball season without a loss. The Wildcats were striving to be the first team since Indiana in 1976 to finish undefeated and the first team in history to go 40-0.“This season is historic,” Calipari said. “I just can’t believe anybody is going to do what these kids just did to get to this point unblemished with the schedule they played.”For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.Yet the Badgers blocked their path at every turn. A 9-0 run in the early minutes of the second half helped Wisconsin again pull in front, 52-44.With about 10 minutes remaining, the Wildcats intensified their defensive pressure, forcing the Badgers into a scoring drought of more than five minutes. With 7 minutes 47 seconds left, a layup by Aaron Harrison put Kentucky back ahead, 58-56.“We got down today a little bit, but we didn’t change our expression,” Wisconsin Coach Bo Ryan said. “We didn’t change what we did. We didn’t freak out. We knew if we played our game, we’d get back into it — come back, crawl back.”Dekker finally ended the drought with a layup with 4:26 remaining, and then he took over. After drawing a charge, he took Harrison off the dribble and soared toward the rim, missing the shot but picking up a foul. “He just knows when to step up at the right moment,” Nigel Hayes said of Dekker.Dekker missed a free throw, and a driving layup by Harrison helped the Wildcats narrow the gap back to 1.They would get no closer. Wisconsin held firm, held on and held down history.Advertisement