By TIM ROHANAPRIL 4, 2015
In recent years, as spring training wound down and the Mets debated who would fill out their bullpen, their bench and the back of their rotation, it often felt as if they were rearranging the deck chairs on a sinking ship.Now that the Mets are entering the season with at least faint hopes of making the postseason, those decisions carry more meaning. The Mets finished spring training Saturday with 19 wins, their most since 2008 (the last year they had a winning record), and they also made their final roster moves before opening day.Dillon Gee beat out Rafael Montero for the fifth starter spot, and Anthony Recker beat out Johnny Monell to remain the backup catcher. Daniel Murphy’s hamstring is expected to be healthy enough so he can open the season on Monday against the Washington Nationals, so Danny Muno and Matt Reynolds will head to the minors. And, at least to start the season, the Mets will carry an extra reliever and one fewer bench player, because, in part, of contract logistics.If Buddy Carlyle had not made the roster, he reportedly could have opted out of his contract, and if Sean Gilmartin, a Rule 5 draft pick, had not made the roster, the Mets would have lost his rights. Both, for now, are on the major league roster.AdvertisementThe bullpen could look drastically different by the middle of May, when Bobby Parnell, the former closer, is expected to return from Tommy John surgery. Vic Black, who is recovering from shoulder weakness, could be back sooner.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For now, the Mets will carry three left-handed relievers, Gilmartin and the newly acquired Jerry Blevins and Alex Torres. Manager Terry Collins will have a month or so to determine which of the three to keep on the roster.AdvertisementThe only surprising development was the failure of Eric Campbell, whom some had regarded as a potential super sub, to make the roster. This spring, in an effort to make himself even more versatile, he worked as a catcher.“It is what it is,” Campbell said in Arlington, Tex., where the Mets tied the Texas Rangers, 4-4, in their final exhibition game. “I’m happy with the way I played. I worked my butt off this off-season to make the opening day roster.“It’s not going to happen, but hopefully, it’s just one of those things where I go down, play hard for however long they want me to, and I’m back up here.”A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Baseball; Mets Complete Roster.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.