By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 4, 2015
Jaroslav Halak made 21 saves for his sixth shutout of the season and the Islanders earned a 3-0 win over the Buffalo Sabres on Saturday at Nassau Coliseum. Halak improved to 37-16-3 this season, and has the franchise’s single-season win record.BRUINS 2, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Patrice Bergeron scored the only goal in a shootout as Boston improved its playoff chances in its home finale with a win over Toronto. Boston and Pittsburgh hold the two Eastern Conference wild-card spots with 95 points each.RED WINGS 3, WILD 2 Darren Helm scored in the eighth round of a shootout, and visiting Detroit outlasted Minnesota. Officials on the ice ruled that Devan Dubnyk stopped the puck in time; video review showed the stop came after the puck crossed the goal line.STARS 4, PREDATORS 3 Cody Eakin scored on his first career penalty shot in overtime, and Dallas kept its faint playoff hopes alive by beating host Nashville. The Stars came in 6 points out of the Western Conference’s final wild-card spot and needed a win to remain there.AdvertisementBLUE JACKETS 5, PENGUINS 3 Nick Foligno scored three times and host Columbus defeated Pittsburgh to set a franchise record with its ninth consecutive win. Matt Calvert and Scott Hartnell also scored for Columbus.AdvertisementCOYOTES 5, COYOTES 3 Oliver Ekman-Larsson had two goals and an assist, Mike Smith made 42 saves and visiting Arizona beat San Jose to damage the Sharks’ playoff hopes. The Sharks fell to 5 points out of the final wild-card spot in the Western Conference with three games left.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.SENATORS 4, CAPITALS 3 Kyle Turris scored on a breakaway in overtime to lift host Ottawa over Washington. The Senators, who remain in contention for the final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference. Ottawa is 3 points back for the final wild-card spot.LIGHTNING 4, PANTHERS 0 Steven Stamkos scored two goals and added an assist to lead Tampa Bay to a victory over visiting Florida. The Lightning secured home-ice advantage for the first round of the Eastern Conference playoffs.JETS 5, CANUCKS 4 Lee Stempniak scored twice as host Winnipeg beat Vancouver. Jim Slater, Michael Frolik and Mark Scheifele also scored for Winnipeg.HURRICANES 3, FLYERS 2 Nathan Gerbe and Chris Terry scored in a shootout, and host Carolina beat Philadelphia. Jordan Staal had a goal and an assist, and Elias Lindholm also scored in regulation for the Hurricanes.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP15 of the New York edition with the headline: Sixth Shutout for Halak as Islanders Top Sabres.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.