By DAVID WALDSTEINAPRIL 4, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Just about 48 hours away from throwing the first pitch of the season for the Yankees, Masahiro Tanaka issued a warning signal of sorts.Tanaka, the Yankees’ best pitcher, is trying to reinvent himself in subtle ways, and on Saturday he said it was unlikely that his pitches would regain the velocity they had last season. Tanaka’s pitches were noticeably slower in spring training than they were in 2014, when Tanaka was dominant in the first half of the season.Yankees fans, already uncertain of the team’s prospects in 2015 and hopeful that Tanaka can regain last year’s form, are likely to be concerned that the ace of the staff is raising a caution flag on the eve of the season.“I’m trying to establish a certain pitching style for this year,” Tanaka said through an interpreter on Saturday before the Yankees’ final spring training game against the Washington Nationals. “Maybe it’s not the wisest to ask for velocity from me this year.”AdvertisementMaybe it is also not wise to change one’s style of pitching after a highly successful first season in the major leagues. A year ago, Tanaka went 13-5 with a 2.77 E.R.A., but he partly tore the ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow and elected to recover without surgery, which could explain his current approach.AdvertisementTanaka made four starts in the exhibition season and had a 3.07 E.R.A., but he said he had altered his style on the mound, and it has resulted in lower readings on the radar gun. Those readings have raised questions about the strength and health of his elbow. Tanaka said his elbow was fine, but he did not dismiss the notion that his new style was designed to protect the elbow.“My pitching style, as far as my mechanics, I’m trying to relax a little bit more when I’m throwing,” he said. “So that might have something to do with it a little bit.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This spring, Tanaka has been throwing two-seam fastballs, which he hardly threw at all last season, in the hope of getting quicker outs through ground balls. Tanaka also said he was concerned that his four-seam fastball, which tends to move in a straight line, was getting hit last year.Last year, Tanaka averaged 91.1 miles per hour on his four-seam fastball, according to Pitchf/x data. His slider averaged 83.1 m.p.h., and his split-finger fastball was clocked at an average of 86.1.Manager Joe Girardi, among others, has voiced the hope that Tanaka will throw harder once real games start and the heat of competition grips him. Tanaka himself cautioned not to expect a jump in speed.“I think it will be, as far as miles per hour, lower than last year,” he said.The Yankees did not sign Tanaka to be a power pitcher. His splitter is his signature pitch. But when he pitched in Japan, scouts spoke of his ability to ramp up his velocity to 96 or 97 m.p.h. at key junctures of the game.But now, Girardi said: “I think it’s important that he continues to use his four-seamer. I think that’s really important.”INSIDE PITCHAlex Rodriguez, returning from a yearlong suspension for his role in a scandal involving performance-enhancing drugs, played in a major league stadium for the first time since 2013 and was roundly booed. “I’m almost numb to it,” he said after the Yankees beat the Washington Nationals, 4-3, at Nationals Park. ... The Yankees designated Austin Romine for assignment and named John Ryan Murphy the backup catcher.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: Tanaka Says His Velocity May Be Lower.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.