AdvertisementSupported byDuke 81, Michigan State 61By Marc TracyINDIANAPOLIS — At first, the game seemed like a blowout. Then, briefly, it seemed close. Then it looked like a blowout in the other direction. That was all in the first half.Still, the second blowout held as Duke pummeled Michigan State, 81-61, on Saturday night to reach the N.C.A.A. championship game for the ninth time since 1980, when Mike Krzyzewski became its coach. The Blue Devils will face Wisconsin on Monday night.A Duke victory in that game, to be played here at Lucas Oil Stadium, could solidify Krzyzewski’s reputation as “a modern-day Wooden” — Michigan State Coach Tom Izzo’s description of him during a joint news conference Thursday, in reference to the legendary U.C.L.A. coach John Wooden, who won 10 national championships.In the meantime, Duke can revel in a performance that was dominant nearly from start to finish while perhaps fretting that it was against an opponent that was probably not the best — or even the fifth-best — team it faced this season.“I don’t think anybody was drinking the Kool-Aid, but I was,” Izzo said wistfully after the game.Duke might have been agitated by Michigan State’s players’ slapping the floor on defense early in the game — a Duke trademark and a clear message.“That was like a slap in the face to us,” the sophomore Matt Jones said, adding, “We just wanted to send a statement.”Jahlil Okafor, the 6-foot-11 Duke freshman who is expected to be a top pick in the N.B.A. draft in June, played like a man among smaller men, finishing with 18 points and 6 rebounds. Even when Okafor was sitting, his substitute, Marshall Plumlee — the third Plumlee brother who has played for Duke — appeared to have two to three inches on Michigan State’s tallest player.But Duke was also aided by outstanding guard play, primarily from Quinn Cook and Matt Jones, as well as stellar defense. The rise of Duke’s defense has been one of the quieter narratives of the tournament, although it is likely to be widely discussed for the next two days.Duke entered the game as the clearly better team: a 33-4 No. 1 seed facing a 27-11 No. 7 seed — or, more strikingly, the third-best team in the tournament, according to the selection committee, against the 25th. Yet Michigan State means Izzo, and Izzo means March (and early April) magic. This was Izzo’s seventh Final Four appearance since 1999. (The Spartans won it all once, in 2000.)Each run has seemed more remarkable than the last. Even Izzo seemed to acknowledge that, saying after his team’s victory over Louisville in the round of 8, “I think this was the most improbable because the team had lost some games and we had gone through some things.”Michigan State never led when it played Duke in November a few blocks away at Bankers Life Fieldhouse, but it charged ahead in the first minute Saturday when the star junior Denzel Valentine made a 3-pointer. Valentine hit two more in the first four minutes, helping the Spartans to a 14-6 lead.Valentine finished with 22 points.“I don’t think we started the game out with the intensity that we needed,” said Cook, a senior guard for the Blue Devils.During the opening minutes, Michigan State employed a drive-and-kick strategy on offense that led to open looks. On defense, the Spartans double-teamed Okafor, and when he left the game several minutes after tipoff for a brief rest, he was scoreless.Michigan State went more than five minutes without scoring, and Duke slowly climbed back. Then the Blue Devils exploded. Suddenly, it was Duke driving and kicking. In the post, Okafor manhandled his smaller defenders. When Tyus Jones hit an open 3 from the corner late in the first half to cap a 27-8 run, Izzo stared upward, seemingly in resignation.“We have a lot of weapons beyond the arc, so guys were staying home,” Cook said, referring to Michigan State’s defenders. “We saw seams we could take advantage of. Coach gives us the freedom to make the right read at the right time.”For this bracket, the more unusual that your picks are, the more points you’ll receive — so long as those picks are correct.By halftime, the Spartans trailed by 36-25. It got worse for them in the second half as Duke continued to score at a fast pace. On defense, the Blue Devils’ long arms forced Michigan State to settle for 3-pointers and floaters.Valentine and the senior guard Travis Trice seemed to be the only Spartans who could make things happen. Valentine made 5 of his 9 attempts from 3-point range while Trice had 16 points and was 6 of 13 from the floor.Duke’s defense combined for four blocks and nine steals, and the Blue Devils outrebounded Michigan State, a program that prides itself on its rebounding, with Justise Winslow, a 6-foot-6 Duke forward, accounting for nine boards by himself.The pregame notion that Michigan State could run with Duke was appealing, particularly given Izzo’s presence. After the game, he said this was not his team at its best. “I feel bad because I didn’t think people got to see the team that has won 12 out of the last 15 games,” he said.Talent usually wins. So does good coaching, and with Saturday’s victory, Krzyzewski’s career record against Izzo improved to 9-1.Advertisement