By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 4, 2015
The top golfers in the world are like orchestra leaders conducting a symphony of nutritionists monitoring their food intake, trainers tailoring their workout regimens, coaches calibrating their swings, analysts crunching their statistics and psychologists decluttering their minds. The goal is to be in perfect harmony during the majors. But if the players’ circadian rhythms are off, it is akin to trying to create beautiful music with a percussion section that is a beat slow.To help their athletes achieve their optimal performance, several professional sports teams, including the reigning World Series champion San Francisco Giants, have consulted with sleep experts whose input has affected everything from when the Giants travel cross-country to whether some N.B.A. teams hold shootarounds.Few athletes crisscross more time zones than professional golfers. In February, Lydia Ko, the women’s world No. 1, traveled to the Bahamas, Australia, New Zealand and Singapore for tournaments. Rory McIlroy, the men’s top-ranked player, opened his 2015 schedule in Dubai before making three starts in Florida in preparation for the Masters.Ask golfers how they cope with all the travel and they will share tricks of the trade like taking a melatonin pill, an antihistamine or a prescription sleep aid as soon as they board a trans-Atlantic flight, or setting their watches to the time in their arrival city to psychologically reset their body clocks. Michelle Wie said she forced herself to work out as soon as she arrived at her destination, even if it was before daybreak.AdvertisementA common strategy adopted by Graeme McDowell of Northern Ireland, among others, is to stay awake until one’s normal bedtime hour the first night in a new city. Then there are golfers like Branden Grace of South Africa, a regular on the European and the PGA tours, who said: “I don’t worry about that stuff. You look at Gary Player, Arnold Palmer, they didn’t worry about that stuff.”AdvertisementTo sleep specialists like Dr. Chris Winter, whose clients include baseball’s Giants, the golfers’ attitudes and practices are as primitive as the once-standard pregame meal of steak and potatoes.Sleeping aids, he said, often impede deep sleep, during which the body naturally creates human growth hormone, which is key to muscle and tissue recovery. Another major function of sleep is to restore neurons in the brain. The process is central to learning and mastering new information, a key component for golfers who routinely face shifting conditions.Winter shakes his head at the athletes who eat and train properly, only to spend their evenings in front of a television, watching movies or videos on their personal tablets, scrolling through their email or social media accounts on their smartphones or playing video games. What they do not realize, Winter said, is that the light from their screens is sending a message to their brains that it is daylight, making deep sleep more difficult.For years, Tiger Woods ruled golf while averaging, he said, less than five hours of sleep a night, another way in which he is exceptional. Rest is like hydration. In general, golfers cannot grab a few extra bottles of water or sleep starting the night or two before a tournament and expect optimal results in the heat of a competition. A training or competition schedule mapped out months in advance can be sabotaged by a poorly thought out sleep strategy.Winter, the medical director of the Martha Jefferson Hospital Sleep Medicine Center in Charlottesville, Va., mentioned a 2009 study he conducted with baseball players. Of the 40 he randomly surveyed, 15 were out of the majors by the end of the 2011 season, and three-quarters of those out of the game had reported being chronically sleepy during the daytime.“It’s amazing to me how many people kind of know how important sleep is for performance and still make choices that negatively impact their ability to get the proper amount,” Winter said.He added: “In 10 years, people who do what I do will be a dime a dozen in sports. The reason it’s fun now is you can use it to your advantage because most people don’t even think about it. I like the idea of being able to ingrain in somebody starting out that you can get your sleep together and you’ll be able to beat people who are better than you.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sleep specialists agree that athletes generally are at their best in the late afternoon. So golfers need a sleep program that manipulates light exposure, among other factors, so their bodies feel as if it is around 4 or 5 p.m. even when they are teeing off at 7 or 8 a.m.AdvertisementDr. Charles Czeisler, the director of the Division of Sleep Medicine at Harvard Medical School and the chief of the sleep medicine division at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, advises athletes to get at least eight hours of sleep. Golfers may be the C.E.O.s of their careers, but they should not take their cues from the corporate world, where rest is widely seen as an impediment to productivity.A better example is the Englishman Ian Poulter, a prolific sleeper who proclaims himself half man, half mattress.Czeisler, who has worked with a few N.B.A. teams, would advise golfers to get as much as nine hours of sleep, if possible, if they want to maximize the precision and the timing of their swings.The three key factors of sleep fitness, he said, are the duration, the timing and the quality. And not just during the competitive season. “A lot of people don’t realize how important the consistency of one’s sleep is,” Czeisler said.Padraig Harrington learned by accident how to improve his sleep consistency. He was wearing a heart monitor to gauge his energy output for training and dietary purposes. He kept it on at night and ascertained certain trends. If he skipped an afternoon nap, ate red meat for dinner or consumed alcohol at night, his heart rate spiked.“Anything over 50 beats a minute is stressful,” Harrington said, “and I noticed that if I ate red meat or drank alcohol, it was several beats higher.”Harrington adjusted his routine accordingly. In March, Harrington, 43, recorded his first PGA Tour victory since 2010. The root of his success, he said, is not his liberal use of training aids, his obsession with swing mechanics or his devotion to practice. “The most important thing you can do,” he said, “is sleep.”A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP13 of the New York edition with the headline: A Lift Golfers Can Get With Their Eyes Closed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.