AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressINDIANAPOLIS — The College Football Playoff selection committee liked the way the first season went so much, it will recommend the status quo for Year 2.The committee plans to release its first weekly rankings of the 2015 season on Nov. 3.The committee chairman, Jeff Long, said Thursday that the panel would recommend to conference commissioners that there should be no changes to the rankings routine. After the ninth week of the regular season, the 13-member panel will meet in the Dallas area, and the rankings will come out each Tuesday.“Generally, we think last year went very well, and we were very pleased with the reaction from fans across the country,” said Long, the athletic director at Arkansas. “Our goal, really, is to build upon that success.”The college football season starts a week later this season, so there will be six weeks of rankings instead of seven. The final rankings to determine the four teams participating in the College Football Playoff will be released Dec. 6.“The important thing is that we’re staying consistent and ranking teams after nine weeks of the season,” Long said.The conference commissioners are expected to approve the recommendations this month.Some of the commissioners spoke publicly about the possibility of reducing the number of rankings or taking a different approach to how the teams were ranked. Jim Delany, the Big Ten commissioner, suggested grouping similar teams into tiers instead of giving each team a specific ranking.Long said that although there was some discussion about tweaking the way teams were ranked, the committee decided to stick with what it felt worked well last season.There was also some talk about cutting back on the once-a-week travel for committee members.“There were discussions about it, but I think we came out feeling strongly that face-to-face meetings are very important,” Long said. “We think that’s a true strength of our rankings system, being in the room all together as committee members to discuss it.”The committee picked Alabama, Florida State, Oregon and Ohio State to play in the first College Football Playoff. The fourth-seeded Buckeyes beat Oregon in the national championship game in Arlington, Tex.This season’s championship game will be played Jan. 11 in Glendale, Ariz.The committee met on Thursday for the first time with its newest members. Texas Tech Athletic Director Kirby Hocutt is replacing Oliver Luck, who left West Virginia to take a job at the N.C.A.A., and the former Vanderbilt coach Bobby Johnson is replacing Archie Manning, who stepped down this month.Southern California Athletic Director Pat Haden skipped the meeting because of Indiana’s new law that some critics believe could lead to discrimination against gay men and lesbians. Haden has a gay son.Advertisement