AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanThe Golden State Warriors, who have looked virtually incapable of losing in the regular season, will enter the N.B.A. playoffs as the team to beat. And given the teams that have performed as well in the past, they may want to get ready to celebrate.With a record of 62-13 entering Saturday night’s game against the Mavericks, the Warriors were already tied for the 28th-most victories in an N.B.A. season. (They went on to beat Dallas, 123-110.) If they win their remaining games — which would have them ending the season on an 18-game winning streak — they will tie the 1971-72 Los Angeles Lakers and the 1996-97 Chicago Bulls for the second-most wins in history, 69, behind the record 72 of the 1995-96 Bulls. Not surprisingly, each of the three teams to win 69 or more games went on to win the N.B.A. finals. And the success keeps going even beyond that point. Of the 16 teams to win 65 or more games, only three — the 1972-73 Boston Celtics, the 2006-7 Dallas Mavericks and the 2008-9 Cleveland Cavaliers — failed to win the title. With the Warriors seemingly on their way to that victory benchmark, the cases of the three teams that failed to win it all are instructive in an evaluation of the Warriors.The 1972-73 Celtics were the most successful regular-season team in franchise history, but for a team accustomed to earning championship rings, the failure of this squad even to make the finals must still sting. John Havlicek, who became the face of the franchise when Bill Russell retired, was 32 and in the early stages of decline. Dave Cowens, in his third season, was coming into his own; he won the Most Valuable Player Award. Don Nelson and Tom Sanders were still around from the Russell days, and Jo Jo White was an All-Star at point guard. The team played fast, with the third-quickest pace in the N.B.A., but it was also tough on defense, giving up an estimated 91 points per 100 possessions. That led to an average game score of 112.7-104.5. The Celtics won 24 of their final 27 games.When the playoffs came around, the Celtics won a six-game series against the Atlanta Hawks, but they ran out of gas against the Knicks in the Eastern Conference finals. Havlicek sustained a bad arm injury during the series but decided to play through it. That injury most likely proved the difference in a tightly contested seven-game series.The 1972-73 Celtics team is especially notable for the number of future N.B.A. coaches on the roster. Of the 12 players who took the floor for the team that season, six went on to coach in the N.B.A. One, Paul Silas, was the new guy on the team; the others were Nelson, Cowens, Sanders, Don Chaney and Paul Westphal. The six combined to coach 73 seasons.The 2008-9 Cavaliers cannot lay claim to such a collection of household names. But they did have LeBron James, and that was nearly enough.In the second-to-last season of his first stint in Cleveland, James was at his best. For the season, he averaged 28.4 points, 7.9 rebounds and 7.2 assists a game, and he produced a career-high player efficiency rating of 31.7.Despite having only three players who were better than league average in player efficiency rating — Zydrunas Ilgauskas and Mo Williams were the others — Cleveland beat teams into submission, allowing just 91.4 points a game while maintaining the sixth-slowest pace of any team that season. James did his part in the Eastern Conference finals, averaging 38.5 points a game, but Cleveland ended up being overmatched by the Orlando Magic and were sent home with nothing to show for a 66-16 season.The 2006-7 Mavericks won 67 games but ran into the hottest team in basketball at the wrong time. There were few weaknesses on the Mavericks, a team led by Dirk Nowitzki that played strong offense and defense, but the Warriors of that season stormed to the playoffs and, on the strength of tremendous efforts by Baron Davis and Stephen Jackson, became one of the few No. 8 seeds in N.B.A. history to knock off a No. 1 seed.The Warriors of this season have a lot more in common with Havlicek’s Celtics than they do with James’s Cavaliers or Nowitzki’s Mavericks. Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson may get most of the attention because of their flashy 3-pointers, but the team has the best defense in the N.B.A., anchored by Andrew Bogut and Draymond Green. They entered the weekend Nos. 1 and 2 in defensive rating, which is the estimated number of points they allow per 100 possessions. The fact that the Warriors allow 99.1 points a game is misleading. They are the most efficient defensive team in the N.B.A. on a per-possession basis; they just have the fastest pace of any team in the game. No one on the roster has the championship pedigree of Havlicek, Nelson and Sanders, but the team has a mix of veterans and a deep bench, which has been exploited in a ruthlessly efficient manner by the first-year head coach Steve Kerr. With the playoffs yet to start, it is hard to find a weakness on the Warriors, but as Havlicek’s squad once proved, even a team without a weakness can be beaten under the right circumstances. So the Champagne will have to remain on ice for now.Advertisement