By KEVIN ROBBINSAPRIL 4, 2015
Harvey Penick, the golf oracle from Texas, died 20 years ago this month, on the Sunday before the Masters. He never saw a spindly amateur named Tiger Woods make his first start that spring at Augusta National Golf Club.Penick also missed the sight of his longtime friend Ben Crenshaw as he willed in the winning putt at the 1995 Masters, covered his face in trembling hands and heaved tears. The tableau on the 72nd green seemed beyond both reason and rationale: Crenshaw, 43, had not been playing well. He had missed the cut the previous week in New Orleans.On the Sunday before the Masters, Crenshaw and his wife, Julie, were dining in the Augusta National clubhouse. Tom Kite, who also learned under Penick, called to tell Crenshaw that their frail teacher had died at the age of 90. Crenshaw was staggered. Penick had been his golf coach and mentor since he was 6. He barely could summon the spirit to think about golf, let alone the first major championship of 1995.But he did, and he won it. His putting was flawless. Crenshaw credited his play that week to Penick’s ethereal presence.AdvertisementWoods finished the invitational in a tie for 41st place. He became its champion two years later and won it three more times during the next eight springs.Woods eventually won 14 major championships through 2008. But now the player who seemed anointed to break Jack Nicklaus’s record of 18 victories in majors is nowhere near a leaderboard on the PGA Tour. He has not been even anywhere near a golf tournament. Woods suspended his 2015 season in early February after a dreadful missed cut in Phoenix and an injury a week later at Torrey Pines. But he announced Friday that he would return for the Masters, his 20th start there since 1995. That tournament concluded one week to the day after Penick died in his bed.Penick taught golf, but not just the game. He was a quiet, sensible teacher, “as tender as a dove’s heart,” Crenshaw’s father, Charlie, once said. Penick used no sensors, video cameras, shot-tracking electronics or spin-measuring computers. He used aphorisms and analogies. He taught members at his beloved Austin Country Club and many professionals. His swing advice was imbued with what his pupils later framed as ethics and life principles.Penick maintained a red spiral notebook in ballpoint pen and careful cursive. He stowed it in his roll-top desk at the club, where he started as a caddie as a boy of 8. That notebook later became “Harvey Penick’s Little Red Book” — an austere manual, with language as plain as burlap, for golfers who found instruction and inspiration upon its publication in 1992. Three other books followed.The books, which sold millions of copies, are filled with stories. Crenshaw appears often. But one particular engagement goes barely mentioned. And it is as relevant today to Woods as it was in 1982 to Crenshaw, who came to Penick in that summer of distress.AdvertisementCrenshaw had last won in 1980. He had mustered only two top-10 finishes in 1982. He had fallen to 83rd on the PGA Tour money list after a missed cut at the P.G.A. Championship at Southern Hills in Tulsa, Okla.“It was the worst golf you can imagine,” he told a reporter. “I didn’t have any idea what was happening.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Crenshaw retreated to Austin and turned to the only man with answers. Penick and Crenshaw arranged an intervention at the club. Penick studied Crenshaw’s grip, feet, alignment, stance and position of the ball. He said nothing. When it started to rain, Penick suggested Crenshaw follow him to the golf shop.They spent three hours together that day. Penick inquired about Crenshaw’s family, the books he was reading and whether he felt prepared to forget.“I told him to put this year behind him,” Penick said years later.He wanted Crenshaw to ignore the well-meaning players who offered advice to resurrect his game. He really wanted him to not think at all.Crenshaw understood.“What Harvey was saying was, ‘Get back to your game, play it, live by it, do not change it,’ ” he told Sports Illustrated in 1984.He was saying nothing about golf and everything about a return to a true self. Crenshaw won the first of his two Masters jackets two years later. He knew again what was happening. He remembered who he was.In the spring of 1995, Woods was the future of golf. He was two years from winning his first major, five from his definitive nine-win season in 2000 and 13 from the summer he won a major championship for the last time. Woods in ’95 was two decades from last February, when he required 82 shots to complete the second round of the Phoenix Open, tying the worst score of an unraveling career. He had retained yet another swing coach, Chris Como, his fourth since turning professional in 1996. He was, and perhaps still is, searching.If Penick were alive today, he would not invite Woods to Austin Country Club. That was not his nature. He would wait for Woods to come to him.It would be nice to imagine how that might happen. Maybe it would rain.Woods does not need time on the practice range as much as he needs time to hear the kind of lesson a man like Penick would give him.AdvertisementIt would have nothing to do with golf. It would have to do with how to remember and how to forget.Kevin Robbins teaches sports journalism at the University of Texas.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Lion’s Instincts With a Dove’s Heart.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.