AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseWEST PALM BEACH, Fla. — Nobody would accuse the author James Patterson of dawdling. He churns out books like blocks of butter.And yet Patterson’s latest novel, “Miracle at Augusta,” on sale this week, is the sequel to a book published in 1996. Why the 19-year lag time? Like the player whose deft touch around the greens is overshadowed by his long drives, Patterson said he was viewed by his publishing house, Little, Brown & Company, as the author of suspense novels, not sports-themed ones.Patterson said he and his co-author, Peter de Jonge, had repeatedly suggested another book featuring Travis McKinley, who in “Miracle on the 17th Green” lost his job at an ad agency and gained new life as a golfer on the over-50 tour. But Patterson kept feeding the seemingly insatiable demand for more adventures from his best-known character, Alex Cross, before receiving the green light to revisit McKinley. “Miracle at Augusta” picks up where “Miracle on the 17th Green” left off, with McKinley, the overachieving underdog, returning to the PGA Tour’s over-50 circuit with his insecurities intact. By design, the book’s publication date coincides with this week’s Masters at Augusta National Golf Club. Patterson, after all, was a successful ad man before he turned his full attention to books, and he remains a shrewd marketer of his work. Patterson, 68, has been playing golf for more than 20 years. But when Time magazine extolled him as “The Man Who Can’t Miss” in 2006, they were not referring to his putting. Within his first year of taking up the game, Patterson said, he had lowered his handicap to 10, and there, essentially, it has remained. “The best I’ve ever been is a 9, and the worst I’ve been is a 12,” he said. “That’s been my range.” Basketball was Patterson’s sport growing up, but he said golf’s appeal as the brass ring of proficiency dangled in front of even the highest handicappers. “There’s no other sport where somebody who’s average can hit magical shots on occasion,” Patterson said. “Most of us can’t dunk a basketball or hit a ball out of the stadium. But on occasion we’ll hit a hole in one or a 9-iron to 1 foot like the best.” Patterson said he once made two aces in the same week. He produced the second while playing with his wife, Sue, a former all-American swimmer at Wisconsin whose competitiveness surpasses his own. Recalling the occasion, he said mirthfully: “Did she give me a hug? No. Did she say, ‘Nice shot?’ No. She said, ‘You’ve got to be kidding me.’ ” Patterson, who spends his winters in Palm Beach, Fla., is a member at the Trump International Golf Club. An early riser, he is generally one of the first on the course. Unless accompanied by his wife or their teenage son, Jack, Patterson prefers to play alone. His rounds take Patterson back to his childhood in Newburgh, N.Y., where he spent hours wandering in the woods and making up stories. “Golf for James is very therapeutic,” said Donald Trump, the club owner and business mogul, who occasionally joins Patterson for a round. “He loves the beauty of the game. Somehow that sets him up for the rest of his day.” Patterson explained his approach to golf this way: “I come out here to have fun, hit some good shots. I don’t beat myself up too much.” He is not projecting his own middle-age pipe dream onto his character, McKinley. “I’ve never had any fantasies about getting hit by lightning and suddenly being a great golfer,” said Patterson, whose pinch-me experience in golf came a few years ago when he attended the Masters. One morning, he said, before the leaders teed off at Augusta National, he played 18 holes at a nearby course with Gary Player, a three-time Masters champion. “That was pretty special,” he said. When he is not writing, Patterson is spreading the gospel of reading. He donates hundreds of thousands of books to schools. He sees parallels in golf and reading. Both skills are acquired by children over time, with parental support a key component. “So many kids and their parents want instant gratification,” Patterson said. “They want to be experts instantly. Most people don’t want to put in the time.” Advertisement