
On College Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
APRIL 4, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. — On the eve of another women’s Final Four in which heaven, earth and Geno Auriemma’s hair may have to be moved in order for a team other than Connecticut to emerge the winner, a predictable question was bound to be raised.Is the dominance of the Huskies — champions the last two years and in four of the previous six — ultimately good for the women’s game?Two steps from padding his record nine N.C.A.A. titles and with a very good Maryland team in the way of another national championship game against Sunday night’s Notre Dame-South Carolina semifinal winner, Auriemma answered, as usual, as if he had rehearsed.He may as well have been asked if oxygen was recommended for the brain.“I think the attention that comes from being really good and having a certain standard that we set and a certain level of recognition, I think it has been good in that sense,” he said. “I think coaches around the country and their athletic directors can say, hey, look, look what happened up in a small place like Storrs, Conn.; look what they’ve been able to do. Why can’t we do the same thing?Advertisement“South Carolina wasn’t today what South Carolina was 10 years ago. Neither was Notre Dame, before 2000. Just in the last 10 years, look what’s happened. So you see Dayton playing in the tournament. You see Gonzaga playing. You look around and a lot has happened in the last 10 years. Is it good? I think it’s good.”AdvertisementWith measured sarcasm, Auriemma reminded his audience during a recent telephone news conference that the men’s Final Four was not exactly hosting Northern Iowa, Valparaiso, Florida International and George Mason.“I think everybody is stunned at the four teams that are in the Final Four in the men’s round,” he said of Kentucky, Duke, Wisconsin and Michigan State. “Those guys hardly ever get to the Final Four.”Comparing the women’s game to the men’s is always an unnecessary exercise that detracts from the women’s entitlement to performance and business models of their own. But to Auriemma’s point, even he would admit that the women do not yet have the depth of the men, no matter which familiar programs were left standing in Indianapolis this weekend.He also knows that the chances of Kentucky winning its semifinal and final games by sizable margins were far less likely than his team coasting in what should be the most challenging stage of the tournament.Connecticut (36-1) has already beaten Notre Dame by 18 points this season and South Carolina by 25. How’s that for building suspense?Connecticut’s dominance during the 20 years since its first national title has at times numbed the competitive palate. And though the Huskies lost at Stanford early this season, the perception of their superiority has only grown, abetted by their two-year-old league, the American Athletic Conference, in which they have produced a steady diet of 50-point blowouts.But if the blur of Connecticut’s routs has had a deleterious effect on the women’s game, it may be based more on resentment and pettiness from within the sport.AdvertisementExhibit A was the cancellation of the sport’s most identifiable rivalry — Tennessee versus Connecticut — in 2007. The Lady Vols’ former coach, Pat Summitt, already weary of Auriemma’s acerbic personality, believed he had used less-than-honorable tactics in the recruitment of Maya Moore.Summitt retired in 2012 after a diagnosis of early-onset Alzheimer’s. Her longtime assistant and successor, Holly Warlick, has raised with Auriemma the possibility of renewing the series. But nothing materialized, and in December, Auriemma told The Hartford Courant, “I haven’t had any conversations with anyone for two years about playing that game.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added: “I don’t care whether we ever play them again. That game means nothing to me. It might mean something to them and a lot of others, but those people are decreasing every year.”Without Summitt in the mix, the rivalry may never be what it was. But the series stoppage sent a subliminal and unfortunate message that at the top of the women’s game, the ego of coaches supersedes maximized competition.Minutes away from a semifinal showdown with Connecticut, Tennessee faded down the stretch Monday night against Maryland. Who knows when, or if, these teams will play again?Next season, Duke, another perennial power typically found on Connecticut’s regular-season schedule, will fall off, reportedly not a choice made by Auriemma.This season’s score was Connecticut 83, Duke 52. Just wondering, but could some programs see a possibility of loosening Connecticut’s stranglehold on the sport by starving its schedule of marquee games, knowing the Huskies are lacking for conference challenges?If that is the plan, it is not working just yet. Connecticut will return four current starters next season, including its best player, Breanna Stewart. Auriemma’s 2015 recruiting class includes 6-foot-3 Katie Lou Samuelson, winner of several high school player of the year awards.Auriemma, 61, probably will not coach that long into the future. Without him and a premier league, Storrs may not remain the most elite destination.For now, Auriemma observes from the mountaintop, eyeing all climbers.“We’re not invincible,” he said. “We’re not unbeatable. I just think that we’ve been on an amazing run and it’s going to end. Somebody is going to knock us off, maybe.”AdvertisementHere in Tampa, make that maybe with a capital M.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: UConn’s Domination Is Win-Win for Women’s Game, Coach Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »