AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack WilliamsEverything about Forest Green Rovers says green, from its name to its jerseys to the rolling hills of the Cotswolds that surround the club’s home base in the Gloucestershire town of Nailsworth.But for the last five years, the club’s mission has been to become the self-proclaimed greenest soccer team in the world, at least off the field. It is a vision pushed by the alternative energy entrepreneur who saved the club from financial ruin in 2010, and it is obvious in everything from the solar panels that power the stadium to the robot that mows its chemical-free grass.Now the club’s mission, and its team, could be headed for a bigger stage. With four games remaining after a 3-1 loss to Aldershot on Friday, Forest Green Rovers is bidding for promotion into the professional ranks of English soccer, the Football League, for the first time in its 126-year history.“The further up the league and in football, the more impact we are going to have with our message: being the greenest football club in the world,” said Dale Vince, the chairman of Forest Green. “I actually think we already are.”For most of its existence, Forest Green has plugged along in England’s lower divisions, and it is currently in the fifth-tier Football Conference. The team attracts crowds of around 1,000 fans, far fewer than the packed stadiums of the distant Premier League. Forest Green draws its support mainly from the towns of Nailsworth and nearby Stroud, and from market towns and villages dotted about the neighboring countryside.Progress has been gradual on the field, the expectations modest. It is off the field where Forest Green has separated itself from other clubs.Forest Green’s push to be green in both name and action began in the summer of 2010. The previous season, the team announced that it was in serious debt. It was eventually relegated, only to earn a reprieve when a rival, Salisbury City, violated the conference’s financial rules and was demoted in Forest Green’s place.In its search for a financial lifeline, Forest Green turned to Vince, whose green-energy company, Ecotricity, is based in Stroud. Vince was invited to attend a game. He said that he instantly felt drawn to the club.“They had a 100-year history in football, and so we just thought, since this is our backyard, as it were, we ought to do something,” he said. “And then, at the same time, we thought that we could take our message and our work to a new audience, relatively untouched by the things we do.”Vince and Ecotricity invested tens of thousands of dollars into the club that summer, making him its majority shareholder. Because the company was local and financially stable — with more than 500 employees, it is one of the largest private-sector companies in the area — a vast majority of Rovers fans seemed supportive of the new leadership group.“My first reaction when Dale Vince took over was, fantastic news,” said Tim Barnard, the chairman of the Forest Green Rovers Supporters’ Trust. “Finally, someone with the financial clout to take the club on to the next level. It’s no skin off a fan’s nose if the chairman wants to spend his money to put solar panels on the roof.”But by February 2011, Vince and Ecotricity’s plans began to directly affect fans. Weeks after banning red meat from the players’ diets for what it said were “health and performance reasons,” the club announced that it would also eliminate red meat at the concession stands at Forest Green’s New Lawn stadium. Out went the traditional meat pies, burgers and sausages that are staples in a British fan’s game-day diet; in came vegetarian items like wraps with pumpkin hummus, grated beets and grated carrots; polenta chips with chili and thyme; and falafel.“There was a die-hard group that missed their Bovril and their sausage rolls,” said Phil Butterworth, a supporter of the club for 18 years. “But that’s long past now, and I would say 95 percent of the fans are completely behind what Dale is trying to do.”Forest Green finished just above the relegation places in Vince and Ecotricity’s first season in charge, but their investment helped the club steady itself. After three straight 10th-place finishes, the team has a chance to be promoted to the ranks of full-time professionals.At the same time, developments continue to make the club as green as possible. The south grandstand at the stadium now features 170 solar panels and LED lighting, and a water-harvesting system on the stadium roof feeds an organic playing surface that is maintained without man-made chemicals or pesticides. The grass is cut by a so-called mowbot: a solar-powered, GPS-guided device that not only saves the club’s grounds workers time, but sends them text messages if it runs into trouble. It also produces an organic mulch that helps fertilize the grass.After calculations estimated that the team combined to drive more than 10,000 miles some weeks, the players were encouraged to participate in a car-pooling system, and some members of management took to driving electric cars. To reduce carbon emissions even more, a few players live in an environmentally friendly housing unit the club has provided. It is equipped with a dozen bedrooms, a kitchen and a common living area.“I think you just naturally adapt to it,” defender James Jennings said of the club’s philosophy. “We turn the lights off when we leave rooms, for example.”All the changes — combined with the team’s rise in the league standings — have led to an attendance increase of 25 percent, the club said. Vince said that when he first became involved, an analysis showed that Forest Green had the capability to become a club in English soccer’s second tier, the Championship, within a decade.“In terms of infrastructure, we’ve got everything we need to be a League Two football club,” he said. But fans like Barnard and Butterworth are looking at things a little more short term. The money Vince and Ecotricity provided, they said, has helped the team become more professional; the green-energy aspects, for the most part, are looked upon by supporters as something positive to associate with club.“I took two kids to Forest Green, and they were most impressed by the electric cars,” said Butterworth, a semiretired teacher. “I know one lad in particular went home and his grandmother promised him an electric car when he turns 16. So it’s obviously having some impact.”Advertisement