AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressWith a 7-point lead and a game in hand, Chelsea seems nearly assured of an English Premier League title. So on Saturday, the primary thrills in the league came from spectacular goals.The most audacious shot came at Chelsea’s Stamford Bridge from visiting Stoke. Midfielder Charlie Adam beat goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois with a lob from inside his own half of the field, but it could not prevent Chelsea from winning, 2-1, and strengthening its grip on the top spot with eight matches to go. Eden Hazard put Chelsea ahead with a penalty kick, and after Adam’s equalizer, Chelsea’s winner was more mundane, with Loïc Rémy slotting the ball into an exposed net in the second half.Arsenal rose to second place by overwhelming Liverpool, 4-1, behind three goals in an eight-minute stretch just before halftime. “We were focused and clinical,” Arsenal Manager Arsene Wenger said. “We had the killer instinct.”Manchester United climbed provisionally to third with a 3-1 victory over Aston Villa that featured an exquisite turning volley by Wayne Rooney.Manchester City fell to fourth place without playing, though it can return to second on Monday by winning at Crystal Palace.It was not only the leading teams’ games that produced the sensational goals. Bobby Zamora lobbed the goalkeeper to score as Queens Park Rangers routed 10-man West Bromwich Albion, 4-1.Q.P.R. remained in the relegation zone, while Leicester was still in last despite beating West Ham by 2-1 for its first victory in three months.LEWANDOWSKI LIFTS BAYERN Robert Lewandowski scored in his return to the home of his former club as Bayern Munich defeated Borussia Dortmund, 1-0.Lewandowski headed a rebound into an unguarded net in the 39th minute after Roman Weidenfeller saved Thomas Müller’s initial shot. Lewandowski won the ball from Dortmund’s Mats Hummels to get the play underway.Marco Reus had Dortmund’s best chance in the 60th minute, but he hit the side netting with only goalkeeper Manuel Neuer to beat. Neuer later sealed the road win with a fine save on Reus’s free kick in the final minutes.Bayern, the defending league champion, maintained its 10-point advantage with seven games remaining. Dortmund, which was in last place in February, is 34 points behind, in 10th.Wolfsburg secured its second-place position with a 3-1 home win over Stuttgart. Third-place Borussia Mönchengladbach came from behind and won, 4-1, at Hoffenheim and stayed 2 points ahead of Bayer Leverkusen.ATLéTICO REACHES SECOND Atlético Madrid and Sevilla eased to comfortable wins, staying in the hunt for top-four finishes in the Spanish league.Atlético won by 2-0 at Cordoba after Antoine Griezmann and Saúl Níguez scored in the first half, giving last-place Cordoba its 10th straight defeat and provisionally lifting Atlético into third place — 2 points ahead of Valencia.Sevilla, in fifth place, got first-half goals from Aleix Vidal and Carlos Bacca to brush aside visiting Athletic Bilbao, 2-0, and pull within 2 points of Valencia. LYON KEEPS FRENCH RACE TIGHT Lyon kept the pressure on Paris St.-Germain in a close race for the French league title with a 3-1 win at Guingamp.Strikers Nabil Fekir and Alexandre Lacazette scored a goal each, and Clinton Njié grabbed the other goal in the second half.Lyon’s title challenge has gained momentum thanks largely to Lacazette and Fekir. They have 36 league goals between them so far this season, with Lacazette scoring a league-high 24.P.S.G. is 2 points behind Lyon and must win at Marseille on Sunday to reclaim the top spot.A win for Marseille would move it above P.S.G. and into second — a point behind Lyon, which has the best goal difference.Advertisement