By MIKE MALONEAPRIL 4, 2015
I left New Jersey, only to find a new jersey, a new sport and a favorite team on Long Island.It would be hypocritical for me to fault the Islanders for departing for Brooklyn. I, too, left the island for a hip city neighborhood decades ago, as did many of my friends.But years before that, I was a new arrival to the slim island east of the East River, and the wonderfully successful hockey team representing “the Island” almost immediately instilled in me a sense of civic pride.In the summer of 1980, my family left New Jersey when my father took a job on Long Island. I knew nothing about the place, other than it was an island, and seemed to have more Ground Round restaurants than any kid could hope for.I also knew nothing of the Islanders, even though they had just won the Stanley Cup. Ours was a traditional sports family: baseball and football, some basketball. If there was a fourth major sport consumed in our split-level home, it was “Jeopardy!” — as we took our positions in the family room and shouted answers at the screen.AdvertisementAt my new elementary school, I was struck by the number of students who wore hockey jerseys with “Bossy” on the back. I initially avoided those children, instead searching, in vain, for kids with “Friendly” or “Funny” on their shirts.AdvertisementThe jerseys were an homage to Mike Bossy, the sharpshooting right wing. I quickly learned which boys were Islanders fans and who rooted for the Rangers. How the barbs went back and forth, especially when a quartet of Rangers appeared in a most unmanly commercial, singing, “Ooo, la la, Sasson!” while dancing on skates, their jerseys tucked into stiff designer jeans.Long Island’s attachment to its lone elite major league franchise was intense. The island was racked by a string of crimes throughout the years that made headlines well beyond New York and painted residents as murderous louts. A man killed his family and inspired “The Amityville Horror.” When Amy Fisher shot the wife of her lover, Joey Buttafuoco, we had the Long Island Lolita.The Islanders were, like Billy Joel, a world-class export we could be proud of.And team members were part of the community. We’d ride our bikes past players’ homes, hoping to see the diminutive defenseman Tomas Jonsson fetching his copy of Newsday, or the strapping right wing Patrick Flatley taking out his garbage. I rode a bus to Huntington Village to meet Bossy as he signed pucks at a department store. I was struck by how Bossy was not much larger than I, and had similarly feathered hair. We discussed an Islanders prospect, Pat LaFontaine, before I was shooed away by the next in line.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Years later, we’d see LaFontaine and his wife at Sunday Mass. I once witnessed the helmet-free legend Bobby Nystrom stroll into a Sno-Haus ski shop on Jericho Turnpike. Friends’ older brothers told tales of caddying for Islanders like goalie Billy Smith and forward Clark Gillies — experiences worth more than the tips that came with them.I was all in as the Islanders hoisted the Stanley Cup again in 1981, 1982, and 1983. When my middle school art class was tasked with making clay sculptures, I produced an eight-inch Bryan Trottier, painstakingly painting his mustache. I asked for an Islanders jersey each Christmas: Potvin on the back one year, Trottier another, Bossy another. Indeed, after just a few years on Long Island, I, too, had become “Bossy.” I played street hockey on netless tennis courts and on cul-de-sacs. I learned to curve my stick’s blade just so, and discovered which hockey balls were for cold weather (blue) and which were best suited for warm (orange).Later, when my friends and I could drive, we’d watch the thuggish Flyers rumble into Nassau Coliseum and mock the goon Dave Brown as he warmed up. Playing the heel to the hilt, he butt-ended the glass in front of where we stood holding a bedsheet with “Brown Is a Bum” scrawled on it.After college, I left for Manhattan. I had a career and a thousand East Village pubs to check out. I had two televisions in our apartment — one providing picture, sitting atop one offering sound. We got cable a few years later, but Islanders games were not part of the package. The team was bad, the front office worse. The Islanders, and hockey, slipped out of my life.Recently, I took my son to the Cradle of Aviation Museum down the street from the coliseum; the squat old arena looked exhausted. But I felt a rash of memories flood in as I drove down Hempstead Turnpike: the taste of the hot dogs, the dulcet timbre of the organ, the announcer’s stentorian “Final minute of play in the period!”The Islanders are good once again — not early ’80s good, but good enough to appear poised for a run this postseason. I’ve been once again following their progress. I even took my son to a game at Nassau Coliseum last Sunday, driving from our home in Westchester County, braving traffic on the Long Island Expressway while listening to Billy Joel on the radio. We saw a thousand John Tavares jerseys, and even a few Mike Bossys. The Islanders pulled off a brilliant comeback in front of a rabid crowd. My son enjoyed it, but not as much as I did. Then again, he’s not an islander like his dad.Mike Malone grew up an Islanders fan in Huntington and now lives in Westchester County. A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Move Toward Islanders Mania.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.