By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 4, 2015
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. —  The former Florida State defensive back P. J. Williams, an N.F.L. prospect, was charged with driving under the influence after a traffic stop early Friday, the police said.A Florida State University police officer pulled Williams over around 3 a.m. after Williams, an N.F.L. draft prospect, appeared to have difficulty turning out of a McDonald’s parking lot and keeping his rental sport utility vehicle in a single lane, an arrest report said.Williams — whose legal name is Kenneth Williams Jr. — reportedly told the officer that he was coming from Recess, a local bar. The officer noted a strong odor of alcohol, along with red eyes, reduced dexterity and slurred speech. A records check showed that Williams had a suspended license, but Williams told the officer he was unaware of that.Williams, 21, refused to submit to a field sobriety test or a breath test, the report said. The officer then arrested Williams and charged him with D.U.I.Williams was released from Leon County Jail on $500 bail later Friday morning.In November, The New York Times revealed in an examination of how the authorities handled cases involving F.S.U. athletes that Williams was involved in an early-morning crash last October and fled the scene. Tallahassee police officers did not test him for alcohol. Rather than being cited for a hit and run, a criminal act, he was issued citations for making an improper left turn and for driving with a suspended license.Williams declared for the 2015 N.F.L. draft after his junior season with Florida State. Based on his performance during Florida State’s pro day last week, he was projected by many to be selected during an early round of the draft.A version of this article appears in print on April 5, 2015, on Page SP14 of the New York edition with the headline: F.S.U. Prospect Faces Charge In Traffic Stop .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.