AdvertisementSupported by2015 PreviewBy Tyler KepnerIn the National League, the first half of this decade has unfolded in a pattern a preschooler could understand: Giants, Cardinals, Giants, Cardinals, Giants.It should follow, then, that the St. Louis Cardinals will represent the National League in the World Series this fall. The Cardinals are strong again, and they very well could wrest the N.L. pennant back from the San Francisco Giants, who last October rode Madison Bumgarner’s left arm to their third World Series title in five seasons.But one of these years, the pattern will break. The postseason dominance of the Giants and the Cardinals has hidden the reality that five other teams have also made the N.L. playoffs in two of the last three years. They are like jets on a choked runway, desperate to take off but always behind one team or the other.The frustrated five are Atlanta, Cincinnati, the Dodgers, Pittsburgh and the Washington Nationals. Look for Washington to finally advance to the World Series this time.Admittedly, it is easy to pick the Nationals, who led the league in victories last season, with 96, and added Max Scherzer to a rotation that was already the best in the majors. The franchise has not won a playoff series since 1981, when it was the Montreal Expos, and the thinking is that once these Nationals break through the first round, they will keep rolling and win it all.“I think we’re a better team this year,” General Manager Mike Rizzo said early in spring training. “First of all, we’re a year more experienced, a year more playoff-tested. We’ve played another year of big, important games. I think the talent level is better than it was last year and there’s plenty of guys on this team that have incentive to really have some of the best years they can have. We have a lot of guys trying to prove something.”Two of those players are homegrown stars facing free agency: starter Jordan Zimmermann and shortstop Ian Desmond. Right fielder Bryce Harper, 22, seems poised for a breakout season. Ryan Zimmerman, only 30, is healthy now and has become a full-time first baseman as he starts his 11th season.The Washington lineup that will greet the Mets on Monday will have holes, with Anthony Rendon (knee), Denard Span (core surgery) and Jayson Werth (shoulder) recovering from injuries. But those players should be back before long, and a rotation of aces — Scherzer, Zimmermann, Stephen Strasburg, Doug Fister and Gio Gonzalez — will cruise through the overmatched lineups in the rest of the N.L. East.The Miami Marlins, at least, should join the Nationals in the playoff field. The Marlins have missed the postseason since 2003, the longest drought in the N.L., but they will return if their rotation can hold up until the middle of the season, when Jose Fernandez is expected to return from Tommy John surgery.What makes a baseball record unbreakable? Sometimes the game changes and that puts a record out of reach. Sometimes an exceptional performance is too dominant to be matched. When the two combine, the record could last for centuries.The Marlins’ outfield consists of Christian Yelich, Marcell Ozuna and Giancarlo Stanton, who has the game’s richest contract and is a safe pick to win the N.L.’s Most Valuable Player Award. The newcomers Dee Gordon, Michael Morse and Martin Prado bring varied skills and veteran savvy to the lineup.The Mets are on the verge of success. They should break their tie with the Houston Astros for the longest current streak of losing seasons (six), and with two wild cards in play, any team with a winning record usually plays meaningful games in September. But there are simply too many questions about their lineup, bullpen and defense for the Mets’ rotation to pull them into the playoffs.Under their new president for baseball operations, John Hart, the Atlanta Braves underwent a franchise “reset” — the Braves do not use the word rebuild — by trading Jason Heyward, Justin Upton and Evan Gattis. The offense, Hart explained, was not doing much anyway, and the deals brought long-term assets in exchange for two pending free agents and another player (Gattis) who fits best as a designated hitter.The Philadelphia Phillies waited too long to acknowledge their state of decay, and paid for it by finishing last in 2014. The Phillies have a very available ace in Cole Hamels, and their 25-man roster seems to have few players who will be a part of their next playoff team.The Phillies’ last October run ended with a loss to the Cardinals in 2011, when St. Louis began its string of four consecutive appearances in the N.L.C.S. To return, the Cardinals need more offense than they produced last season, when they averaged just 3.82 runs per game. Every other team with so few runs finished below .500.The Cardinals added Jason Heyward for a one-year look before his free agency (unless they sign him sooner). They expect the addition of Heyward and improvements from Matt Adams and Kolten Wong to boost the offense, and they retain their usual deep stable of dependable starting pitchers, led by Adam Wainwright.The rotation is the problem for the Pittsburgh Pirates, plucky runners-up to the Cardinals the last two seasons and annual hosts to the N.L. wild card game. The Pirates’ outfield ranks with the Marlins’ and the Cardinals’ among the majors’ best, and their infield is very good, too.But the rotation — Francisco Liriano, Gerrit Cole, A. J. Burnett, Charlie Morton and Jeff Locke — includes just one pitcher who has ever worked 200 innings: Burnett, who led the majors in walks and earned runs last season. And if catcher Russell Martin was as important as the Pirates always said, his departure to Toronto will be significant.Even so, the Pirates should contend in a division that, for five months last season, belonged to the Milwaukee Brewers. But baseball’s most aggressive lineup (a majors-low 3.65 pitches per plate appearance) fizzled down the stretch, and Milwaukee is largely unchanged. Closer Francisco Rodriguez does not mind: He signed a one-year contract with the Brewers for the fourth consecutive year.All of the Central teams have reached the playoffs since the last time the Chicago Cubs made it, in 2008. Realistically, the Cubs could be a juggernaut in two or three years, but for now they should settle for a 10-game improvement, to 83 wins. That seems within reach after an off-season haul that included a new manager, Joe Maddon. The Cubs expect his irreverent style to help ease the transition of their young core.The centerpiece of the Cubs’ future, the slugging third baseman Kris Bryant, will return to the minors for a bit, allowing the Cubs an extra year of control before his free agency. Bryant’s delayed arrival is discouraging after a spring training that screamed major league star. But it was an understandable business move for the Cubs.The Cincinnati Reds should have an eventful July. They are hosting the All-Star Game, and the banished Pete Rose has been cleared to take part in the festivities. Then they may play host to a trade auction — unless they are in contention.The Reds will try to be there by reviving an offense that scored just 595 runs last season, a franchise low since 1982. A healthy season from Joey Votto, 31, who is beginning the second season of a mind-bending 10-year, $225 million contract, would help. But the ace Johnny Cueto is facing free agency, and the star closer Aroldis Chapman is due for a big raise after this season. The Reds have locked up several stars, but cannot afford to keep them all.Money is no object for the Los Angeles Dodgers, whose payroll has soared past $270 million. They command attention, with the game’s most electrifying pitcher (Clayton Kershaw), most flamboyant star (Yasiel Puig) and most revered broadcaster (Vin Scully, for the few Dodgers fans who can actually watch his telecasts).There are other compelling angles throughout the roster — including center fielder Joc Pederson, the rookie who displaced Matt Kemp — but the Dodgers must hope their pitching holds up behind Kershaw and Zack Greinke. The No. 3 starter, Hyun-Jin Ryu, is out with a shoulder problem, and closer Kenley Jansen missed spring training after foot surgery.Even so, the Dodgers should win the N.L. West for the third year in a row. The San Diego Padres seem to be their strongest competition now, after General Manager A. J. Preller’s freewheeling winter that saw the arrivals of starter James Shields and five everyday position players. Preller said that the new hitters — Kemp, Upton, Will Middlebrooks, Wil Myers and Derek Norris — could handle Petco Park, which favors pitchers.“Get talented players and put them in a good atmosphere with good coaching and we think that’s going to play,” Preller said. “I don’t think we looked at getting a certain type of hitter that plays here, just the idea of getting quality guys and hopefully their strengths will feed off each other.”The Dodgers, the Padres and everyone else are chasing the Giants, who will welcome the return of Matt Cain to their aging rotation. Still, the Giants have little offense to spare and lost Pablo Sandoval and Michael Morse as free agents. Then they lost Hunter Pence for a month or so with a broken forearm. Expect a winning season, but not another title.Each of the division’s top three teams should benefit from frequent games against the Arizona Diamondbacks and the Colorado Rockies. Both teams have new general managers and a homegrown superstar: Paul Goldschmidt for Arizona and Troy Tulowitzki for the Rockies. They also have uninspiring pitching staffs, especially compared with the rest of the division.“On paper right now, the N.L. West is one of the most competitive divisions in the game, and that’s good for us,” Jeff Bridich, the Rockies’ general manager, said. “If you’re going to be the best through a season, there’s no better way to test your mettle than against the best.”With the World Series champion, the majors’ richest team and a rebuilt contender lined up along the California coast, the Rockies and the Diamondbacks will certainly be tested.Advertisement