AdvertisementSupported by2015 PreviewBy Tyler KepnerThe record shows that the Baltimore Orioles were swept in four games by the Kansas City Royals in the American League Championship Series last fall. That is a fact, and anything else may be spin. But here goes.The first two games were tied in the ninth inning before Kansas City pulled ahead. The Orioles lost the next two games by scores of 2-1. The Royals deserved their A.L. pennant, but things could have easily broken Baltimore’s way. The Orioles should not be forgotten as a new season begins.It might be easy to overlook the Orioles, who lost three well-known players in the off-season without adding brand-name replacements. The longtime right fielder Nick Markakis signed with Atlanta, the home run champion Nelson Cruz signed with Seattle and the left-handed reliever Andrew Miller signed with the Yankees.But in their three seasons together, Dan Duquette and Buck Showalter have forged a winning formula. Duquette, the Orioles’ executive vice president for baseball operations, finds useful roster pieces, and Showalter, the manager, expertly deploys them around center fielder Adam Jones, the team’s cornerstone. Names like Steve Pearce, Alejandro De Aza and Delmon Young may not be easy to market, but with Baltimore, they win.The Orioles were 96-66 last season, running away with the A.L. East by 12 games. They will win again this season for the same reasons.“We have most of our pitching staff returning, and we had a pretty solid staff last year,” Duquette said. “Our defense should be solid again. I like the depth to our lineup, and we have power at just about every position.”Duquette added: “We’re a relatively young team, but the players have quite a bit of experience, even though they’re young. We’ve got a chance to improve during the season.”The Orioles ended last season without three impact players: first baseman Chris Davis, who has one game remaining on his suspension for using Adderall; third baseman Manny Machado, who is back after knee surgery; and catcher Matt Wieters, who is in the final stages of his recovery from reconstructive elbow surgery.Their returns will soften the impact of losing Markakis and Cruz, who was rather ordinary in the second half of last season, when he hit 12 home runs and batted .249 with a .306 on-base percentage and a .463 slugging percentage. Travis Snider, a new right fielder who hits left-handed, hit .288/.356/.524 with eight homers in the second half for the Pittsburgh Pirates. He seems like the kind of player who will thrive in a platoon role for Showalter.Shortstop J. J. Hardy, 32, is the Orioles’ oldest everyday player; he is set to start the season on the disabled list with a left shoulder injury. Predictably, the Orioles have a backup ready: Everth Cabrera, who has a troubled past but is also a former All-Star. As an undervalued asset, he could fit in smoothly with an underrated team.The Toronto Blue Jays courted Duquette to become their team president over the winter, but Alex Anthopoulos, their general manager, did not need much help in reviving his roster. The Blue Jays added third baseman Josh Donaldson, catcher Russell Martin and second baseman Devon Travis, who earned the starting job despite having no experience above Class AA.The Blue Jays have other intriguing rookies, like starters Daniel Norris and Aaron Sanchez and relievers Roberto Osuna and Miguel Castro, who must stabilize a largely untested bullpen. The team should contend, but the loss of starter Marcus Stroman, who tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee during fielding drills in March, was a major blow.What makes a baseball record unbreakable? Sometimes the game changes and that puts a record out of reach. Sometimes an exceptional performance is too dominant to be matched. When the two combine, the record could last for centuries.The Yankees and the Boston Red Sox seem to offer a study in contrasts. The Yankees could have a dominant pitching staff if Masahiro Tanaka and Michael Pineda stay healthy and Nathan Eovaldi harnesses his potential. They also have a stingy bullpen. But trusting a lineup of hitters well past their primes was a futile exercise last season, and this year is not likely to be any different.The Red Sox have the fragile Clay Buchholz leading a thin rotation, and closer Koji Uehara, by far their best reliever, is out with a hamstring problem. But their fortified offense looks strong, and center fielder Mookie Betts was a breakout star of spring training. Shortstop Xander Bogaerts will have a chance to bounce back from a poor rookie season. Betts and Bogaerts are both 22.Kevin Cash, the new manager of the Tampa Bay Rays, is not quite that young, but at 37 he is the youngest manager or head coach in any of the four major professional sports leagues. The Rays’ recent pitching injuries, and their meager lineup, could age him quickly.Another former catcher, Brad Ausmus, had a smoother managing debut last season. Ausmus guided the Detroit Tigers to their fourth consecutive A.L. Central title, then experienced the Tigers’ tradition of falling short in October. They should make it back for another chance, but in a stacked division, the journey will test them.The Tigers’ best hitters, Miguel Cabrera and Victor Martinez, were slowed by injuries over the winter, but the offense is still among the league’s best, and the Tigers’ athleticism up the middle — shortstop Jose Iglesias, second baseman Ian Kinsler and center fielder Anthony Gose — is impressive. A weak bullpen, though, could keep the team from an elusive championship.The Chicago White Sox invested heavily in their bullpen, one of several areas they improved. The team traded for starter Jeff Samardzija and signed left fielder Melky Cabrera, designated hitter Adam LaRoche and relievers David Robertson and Zach Duke.“We’ve had ideas like this for three years,” Manager Robin Ventura said. “But they have to say yes, at some point.”Those players did, and they are joining a core with a top slugger (Jose Abreu), a top starter (Chris Sale) and a top rookie pitcher waiting for a call to the majors (Carlos Rodon). Put it all together and the White Sox, despite a lingering lineup question or two, should win a wild card spot.The Royals and the Cleveland Indians will challenge them, especially if one of Cleveland’s rotation breakout candidates — Carlos Carrasco, Trevor Bauer and Zach McAllister — follows Corey Kluber’s lead and becomes an ace.The Royals have a more stable rotation, and hitters in their primes like Lorenzo Cain, Eric Hosmer, Mike Moustakas and Salvador Perez who could continue to improve. But the newcomers Kendrys Morales and Alex Rios appear to be sharp downgrades from Billy Butler and Nori Aoki. For all of the Royals’ October magic, they often struggled to score last season and won only 89 games.The Minnesota Twins finished fifth in the A.L. in runs last season, outscoring the Indians, the White Sox and the Royals, and Torii Hunter, 39, has returned for a farewell. But the Twins had the worst pitching staff in the A.L. last season, and their $55 million free agent, Ervin Santana, was given an 80-game suspension Friday for using performance-enhancing drugs.The best team in the A.L. West is the Seattle Mariners, and a possible championship series with Baltimore would be a matchup of the A.L. teams that have gone the longest without a trip to the World Series. The Orioles last made it in 1983, and the Mariners never have.Seattle’s chances depend somewhat on Cruz, who seems unlikely to match his career year (or half-year, anyway) in Baltimore. But Cruz is still a monumental upgrade in the heart of the Mariners’ lineup, which desperately needed right-handed thump to go with Robinson Cano and Kyle Seager. Smart platoons in left field (Dustin Ackley and Rickie Weeks) and right (Seth Smith and Justin Ruggiano) add depth to the lineup, and Seattle’s pitching, led by Felix Hernandez, is among the league’s best.“There’s been a lot of additions offensively here,” General Manager Jack Zduriencik said. “We’ve been waiting for the pitching to grow up and I think we’re right on the verge of seeing that, and we also added J. A. Happ. It’s an interesting club. If I’m a fan out there, I’m going to want to watch the Mariners.”Lloyd McClendon, Seattle’s manager, said the goal for the offense should be 700 runs. The Los Angeles Angels cleared that mark easily last season, leading the majors in runs, with 773. They sacrificed some offense for pitching in the winter, dealing second baseman Howie Kendrick in a deal that brought a young starter, Andrew Heaney, from Miami.The rotation still looks a bit shaky, but doubt Jered Weaver at your peril. His velocity continues to dip, but Weaver keeps finding ways to win, with at least 18 victories in three of the last four seasons.“I don’t get caught up in what everybody else thinks,” he said. “I’m going to go out there and be a competitor and be a winner and that’s all I really care about — competing and giving my team a good chance to win.”The Angels should still win enough to grab a wild card spot, but until the Oakland Athletics lost Coco Crisp for what could be the first two months, the A’s were a better bet. Crisp is the engine of the A’s, who made an extensive and impressive overhaul that confirmed their ethos: They never really tear down, they just mix up the pieces and keep going for it.Newcomers like Billy Butler, Tyler Clippard, Kendall Graveman, Jesse Hahn, Brett Lawrie, Marcus Semien and Ben Zobrist (the list could keep going) will make the A’s competitive. But Crisp’s damaged elbow, combined with a lack of power in the lineup, could be just enough to keep Oakland out of the playoffs for the first time since 2011.That brings us to the Texas teams, the Houston Astros and the Texas Rangers, who combined for 187 losses last season. Both teams will give up a lot of runs, but the Astros’ offense should be fascinating: a stew of strikeouts, homers, steals and untapped potential. The Rangers just hope to be healthy again, but losing two impact players for the season (Jurickson Profar and Yu Darvish) was an ominous start.Advertisement