By MARC TRACYOCT. 16, 2015
ANN ARBOR, Mich. —  During the 1998 and 1999 seasons, Marshall’s football team lost only one game. It came on Halloween 1998, when the Thundering Herd, then 8-0, traveled to Bowling Green, which was 2-5.On the opening drive, quarterback Chad Pennington drove Marshall to the Bowling Green 18-yard-line before the Falcons sophomore D. J. Durkin sacked him. Pennington fumbled the ball and recovered it, but Marshall had the wind knocked out of it.“D. J. set the tone right away, got after them really good,” Eric Curl, who was a Bowling Green offensive lineman, said, recalling the Falcons’ 34-13 upset.Durkin, 37, is now Michigan’s first-year defensive coordinator, and his new job is off to an equally auspicious start. No. 12 Michigan (5-1, 2-0 Big Ten) has recorded three consecutive shutouts — the first top-tier college football team to do so in 20 years — as it prepares to host No. 7 Michigan State (6-0, 2-0) here Saturday afternoon. The game involves not only state bragging rights and conference pecking order but historical implications: The last time a similar team blanked four opponents in a row was reportedly in 1931.AdvertisementMichigan’s defense, featuring budding stars such as cornerback Jourdan Lewis, a junior, and safety Jabrill Peppers, a redshirt freshman, has allowed only 181.3 yards and 6.3 points per game, second-best and best in the Football Bowl Subdivision. Its personality can be summed up in Durkin’s mantra of choice: “Stamp your personality.”Advertisement“That was my way of saying, ‘Yeah, we’ll teach you how to play a position, a scheme, but it’s not robotic,’ ” Durkin said Friday. “Go above and beyond, and stamp your personality on it.”When describing Durkin, others — current and former players, a former coach and a former colleague, even his mother — sound as if they are talking about the famously driven man who hired him at Michigan, Jim Harbaugh. From 2007 through 2009, Durkin was Harbaugh’s special teams coordinator at Stanford.“He approaches the game the same way Jim does — ‘With Enthusiasm Unknown to Mankind,’ ” Ron Lynn, Stanford’s director of player development, said, quoting one of Harbaugh’s Twitter posts. “That’s the way every day D. J. would come to work and Jim would come to work.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s a type-A personality,” said Nevada Coach Brian Polian, who has gotten to know Durkin throughout the years. “Very, very passionate about ball. Very enthusiastic as a coach.”Michigan defensive end Chris Wormley, a senior, said Durkin had “that certain kind of edge.”And Marianne Durkin, who will travel with her husband, Dan, from D. J. Durkin’s hometown in northeastern Ohio to see Saturday’s game, said of her son, “He throws himself into it, and he does a very thorough job.”One thing that singles out Durkin has been his ability — sweetened by good luck — to work under well-regarded mentors.After his final season as a player, Durkin was a Bowling Green graduate assistant under a first-time head coach named Urban Meyer. When Meyer, now the coach at top-ranked Ohio State, left for Utah, he helped land Durkin a graduate assistant position at Notre Dame.AdvertisementAfter a second stint at Bowling Green, Durkin spent three years as defensive ends coach and special teams coordinator at Stanford under Harbaugh. Then Meyer lured him to Florida, where Durkin coached for five seasons under Meyer and, later, his successor Will Muschamp and the defensive coordinator Dan Quinn, who left to run the Seattle Seahawks’ Super Bowl-winning defense and is now head coach of the Atlanta Falcons.Chuck Heater, Marshall’s defensive coordinator, said Meyer had brought in Durkin — then in his early 30s — to run the Gators’ special teams.“He basically gave it all to D. J.,” said Heater, who was one of Meyer’s defensive coordinators. Durkin, Heater added, “enhanced it,” putting in the face time necessary to motivate special-teams players.Perhaps Meyer had gotten wind of the special-teams meetings Durkin ran at Stanford.“He was so good that that was the last thing that would happen on the day of the game before we got on the bus,” Lynn said.At Stanford and especially at Florida, Durkin also polished a reputation as a top-notch recruiter; Rivals.com named him 2012’s recruiter of the year. He lured Alex Anzalone to Florida after the coveted linebacker had committed to (and decommitted from) both Ohio State and Notre Dame, and also landed the star linebacker Matt Rolin even after he had undergone knee surgery at the hands of the orthopedist for South Carolina, to which he had committed.This year, Durkin jumped at the chance to work for Harbaugh again. He cited Harbaugh’s desire not to “do things just because that’s the way it’s done,” pointing to Harbaugh’s decision to spend the N.C.A.A.-allotted four hours a day of spring practice entirely on the field.“I enjoy his intensity, his competitiveness — he’s a very, very competitive guy,” Durkin said. “Obviously, I am as well.”In addition to Harbaugh, Durkin said he relished reuniting with Greg Mattison, under whom he had coached at Notre Dame.AdvertisementMattison stayed at Michigan after the previous coach, Brady Hoke, was fired, effectively accepting a demotion from coordinator to defensive line coach. Despite a 5-7 record last season under Hoke, the Wolverines had an excellent defense. It helped that Harbaugh was the third Harbaugh whom Mattison has coached for, having been John Harbaugh’s defensive coordinator with the Baltimore Ravens and Jack Harbaugh’s defensive coordinator at Western Michigan in the mid-1980s. (Mattison, too, has also coached under Meyer.)“It takes a special person to do what he did,” Durkin said of Mattison. As the new coordinator, he said, it was also extremely helpful to have someone who knew all the players.Part of Durkin’s skill as a recruiter no doubt derives from his relative youth. But even youthful coaches get older. Durkin is married and has a 5-year-old daughter and a 2-year-old son. Though he still pledges allegiance to the team whose uniform he used to put on every day after elementary school, the Cleveland Browns, today he acts less like another one of the youngsters and more like a grown-up.Justin Tuck, the former Giants defensive end now with the Oakland Raiders, played under Durkin at Notre Dame. He recalled the Durkin of more than a decade ago as a coach who, though capable, was not yet completely self-assured. When Durkin criticized players, it was not with the intensity to which his current players testify, but rather, according to Tuck, with humor, on the order of comments such as, “When I was a player, I used to do stupid things like that.”Marianne Durkin recalled this phase of D. J.’s career similarly. “I think the one thing that surprised him when he started coaching was the importance of the relationship and the influence you have on the players,” she said. “When you’re a player, you don’t realize the influence you can have on them.”She added, “I think that’s been a pleasant surprise.”A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: To Craft Miserly Defense, Michigan Assistant Gives All.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.