

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE BASKETBALL
APRIL 5, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS — On Monday night, Wisconsin will face a team with at least eight former McDonald’s all-Americans for the second consecutive game.Asked how Wisconsin, which has zero former McDonald’s all-Americans, might beat Duke in the N.C.A.A. tournament final, as it did Kentucky in a semifinal, guard Josh Gasser referred to his fellow starter Bronson Koenig.“Bronson sent out a tweet a little while ago that said we have seven Wisconsin All-Stars and they don’t have any of those,” Gasser told reporters Sunday.It was a joke that also told the truth. Wisconsin’s success under Coach Bo Ryan — including appearances in the Final Four the last two years and a .742 winning percentage over 14 seasons since his arrival in 2001 — has occurred precisely because Ryan has focused on attracting less-heralded local talent as opposed to the nationally recognized players that the other top programs chase.AdvertisementWhat makes this remarkable and — to borrow Gasser’s point — a bit funny is that Ryan does not seem to have devised his strategy as a response to trends in college basketball.Advertisement“I don’t think it’s deliberate,” said Pat Richter, the former Wisconsin athletic director who hired Ryan. “It’s just the way he’s always done it.”The Wisconsin-Kentucky semifinal Saturday night, which Wisconsin won, 71-64, was billed as a clash of styles: the best offense in college basketball (Wisconsin) against the best defense (Kentucky). But much more significant was the collision between two overarching methods for trying to win championships, a clash that will be replicated when Wisconsin faces Duke.The most obvious way to build the best college basketball team is to recruit the best players, at which Kentucky Coach John Calipari excels. If five current Wildcats are drafted into the N.B.A. in the first round in June, no informed observer will bat an eye.Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski is not quite the recruiter Calipari is, but Duke boasts three freshmen who play significant minutes, two of whom will be high draft picks.National recruiting is a winner-takes-all economy, though.In an interview last month, no less than John Wall — the star guard for the Washington Wizards who, as a highly regarded prospect out of high school, played for Calipari at Kentucky for one season — said the increased prevalence of so-called one-and-dones had damaged parity.“My year, you had a lot of teams that would dominate,” he said, referring to the 2009-10 season. “Now you have one dominant team a year, and a couple of others that are just O.K. It’s not the same as it used to be, in my opinion. A lot of guys were not doing one-and-done as much when I came in.”But Wisconsin does not participate in the chase.In Gasser, Wisconsin starts a fifth-year senior. Frank Kaminsky, winner of the Associated Press Player of the Year award, is a senior who steadily improved each year. The star forward Sam Dekker is a junior.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ryan does not run a charity for scrappy, underappreciated players. He wants the best players for his system, but his system favors a certain kind of player: He must be able to play all five positions on offense, or be willing to learn; on defense, he must limit fouls; and he must work on free-throw shooting and fundamentals.AdvertisementIn practice, this means players who very likely will stay a few years to develop. These are players with chips on their shoulders. Players who are willing to adapt.It means, in other words, that Ryan is usually not chasing the prospects whom Calipari, Krzyzewski and many other top coaches are.Ryan’s ability to step back from the recruiting arms race and shape recruiting around his program also has the merit of reinforcing his system — the swing offense, his man-to-man defenses — which works because everyone understands that it is bigger than any one player.Otto Puls, 82, the Badgers’ official scorekeeper for 51 years, and Ron Rainey, 79, Ryan’s coach at Chester High School and Wilkes University, were hanging around the locker room Sunday, as if reminding the players that they are part of something much larger and durable.When a reporter suggested that Rainey coached Ryan, who is 67, as many as 40 years ago, Dekker corrected him: “50.”Dekker elaborated on what the system means to the team.“He’s not going to change for one person or one group of people,” Dekker said of Ryan. “He’s going to make you buy into it.”The assistant coach Greg Gard added that the continuity of Ryan’s system — which Gard first learned when he attended Ryan’s summer basketball camps in tiny Platteville in the 1980s — was “huge.”“We understand the culture,” he said. “We understand the philosophy, and we understand what works at Wisconsin.”A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Wisconsin Has Avoided Arms Race in Recruiting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »