By STUART ELLIOTTAPRIL 6, 2015
This is the best time of the year for Mets fans. Sure, the Mets haven’t won any regular-season games yet, but they haven’t lost any, either.Fatalistic? Of course! “Mets” is a four-letter word. To paraphrase recent remarks by Daniel Murphy, the Mets’ second baseman, about the gay former player Billy Bean, I disagree with the lifestyle of losing that the team has embraced since 2006 — including two collapses and six consecutive losing seasons from 2009 through 2014 — and wonder if it has made defeatism a choice.So it has been heartening to read and watch the Grapefruit League reports suggesting that 2015 might just be the end of the long Nationals nightmare for the Mets, not to mention their woeful records against other teams. One hopeful sign has been the re-emergence of the Mets’ majority owner, Fred Wilpon, who seemed to have entered a witness protection program of his own making after becoming entangled in the Bernard L. Madoff financial scandal.Wilpon has even delivered a pep talk to his players, which may have startled them: An owner who hasn’t spent much to help them win is now rooting them to victory.Even so, the Mets have (fingers crossed) pulled together a promising roster (knock wood), led by a cadre of talented pitchers. (Insert the inevitable counterfact to rain on the Mets’ potential parade.) The shiniest star in the pitching firmament is of course Matt Harvey, whose stellar season in 2013 was cut short. His subsequent Tommy John surgery, which left him on the sideline until now, was a quintessential Mets moment: sweet success followed by, well, nothing.AdvertisementIn a look at the position players, there is hope that David Wright is getting his groove back, perhaps because of the arrival on the roster of his friend Michael Cuddyer, who plays the part of Wright’s older brother from another mother. Juan Lagares’s numbers in center field augur many happy recaps. And Lucas Duda has seemingly made enough progress at first base to reassure fans that management did right to keep him rather than Ike Davis. (An ur-Mets drama, that.)AdvertisementStill, fans are vexed by blah results from Murphy at second base; Travis d’Arnaud, the catcher; Curtis Granderson in the outfield; and the new starting shortstop, Wilmer Flores. Is Flores good enough to take on so crucial a role? Fans can’t be optimistic about anyone who shares his given name with the ineffectual punk gunman from “The Maltese Falcon.”Ah, the stuff that dreams are made of. Now that I’m not working full time for the first year since 1974 (when the Mets went — what else? — 71-91), I plan to go to more games. It would be nice if they were finally good again.Editor’s note: Stuart Elliott was the advertising columnist of The New York Times from 1991 (Mets, 77-84) to 2014 (79-83).A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Some Time on My Hands, a Little Hope in My Heart.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.