AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseRANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — A week that began with many people in golf dissecting Tiger Woods’s preparedness for the Masters and debating the future of the men’s game ended with the world’s best women showcasing a product that has never been more hale or less predictable.The American Stacy Lewis, a once and almost certain future world No. 1, has a cumulative score of 79 under par in her first seven starts, but she left the ANA Inspiration, the first major of the year, still looking for her first victory of 2015.Lewis, playing in the final group, closed with a two-under-par 70 to finish tied at nine-under 279 with Brittany Lincicome, who carded a 69 while playing in the second-to-last pairing. Lincicome, the 2009 winner, eagled the par-5 18th to grab a share of the lead, then won on the third extra hole.Morgan Pressel, the 2007 champion, came within inches of holing her approach for an eagle at the 18th that would have propelled her into the playoff. She closed with a 70 to finish third at eight under.Sei Young Kim, the latest in a line of South Korean prodigies, was the 54-hole leader. But she struggled down the stretch. On a 39-stroke back nine, she did not have a par until No. 18. She closed with a 75 that left her tied for fourth with Anna Nordqvist and Carlota Ciganda at seven under. Lydia Ko, the women’s world No. 1, never contended. After equaling Annika Sorenstam’s L.P.G.A. record of 29 consecutive subpar rounds with an opening 71, she posted three over-par scores, including a closing 73. With her 72-hole total of three over, Ko snapped two other impressive streaks. Her tie for 51st marked the first time she has finished outside the top 10 in her past 11 starts. It was also the first time in the last 18 tournaments, dating to last year’s Women’s British Open, that Ko failed to break par for 72 holes. “Obviously a little disappointing,” said Ko, who does not have a top-20 finish in three starts here.Ko, a South Korean-born New Zealander, added: “All majors, you need your A game, and to win every week, you need your A game. But especially here, you need to be straight and make a lot of good putts.”Alluding to her self-imposed retirement age, Ko said, “Hopefully that will come before I’m 30.”It was not long ago that South Korea’s supremacy showed signs of tailing off. Last June, Inbee Park, the former world No. 1, won her first tour event of the year to end a title drought for South Koreans of 17 tournaments, which had dated to the end of the 2013 season.Park, a five-time major champion, was not worried about the perceived drop-off in the performance of the South Koreans. She told anybody who would listen that the pipeline was bursting with talent, and sure enough, by the end of 2014, Kyu-Jung Baek and Hyo Joo Kim, both 19, had broken into the winner’s circle. “Inbee and some of the girls were kind of telling us that there were some young Koreans coming that were pretty good,” Lewis said. “We didn’t really know what to expect, but they’ve been there. You can tell they’ve got a lot of experience from playing in Korea, and they know how to win.”Lewis singled out Hyo Joo Kim, who won the Evian Championship, the women’s fifth major, last September before becoming an L.P.G.A. member. She won again last month at the Founders Cup with four sub-70 rounds.“I threw everything I had at her in Phoenix,” said Lewis, “and she kept responding by making putts and hitting shots.”Michael Whan, the L.P.G.A. commissioner, believes the tour is on the right track.“To me, we’ve proven that we don’t have to have one superstar or an American as the dominant player,” he said. “None of those things matter. What goes on inside the ropes is compelling and interesting no matter who the winner turns out to be.”Advertisement