By ZACH SCHONBRUNAPRIL 5, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS —  With 6 minutes 7 seconds remaining in the first quarter of the Indiana Pacers’ game against Miami on Sunday, Coach Frank Vogel looked down his bench and said only one word: “Paul.”With that, Paul George stood up from his chair and, for the first time all season, checked himself into an N.B.A. game. The fans at Bankers Life Fieldhouse rose to their feet and waved signs the Pacers had distributed that read, “Welcome Back PG.” They kept cheering — when he first touched the ball and when he first took a shot, and they even booed the referee who first whistled him for a foul.Fans understood the implications. With six games left in the regular season entering Sunday, Indiana was in a dogfight with at least four other teams, separated by just a few games, to earn one of the final two spots in the Eastern Conference playoffs. And reinserting George, who averaged 21.7 points per game last season, into the lineup might add another wrinkle to the race in the season’s final days.George, a two-time All-Star, played only 15 minutes but scored 13 points, with 2 rebounds and 2 assists, to help the Pacers cruise past Miami, 112-89, and jump ahead of the Heat and one game behind Boston for the East’s eighth seed.Advertisement“The welcome back was probably the greatest moment that I’ve had,” George said. “It was so hard to not get caught up in the moment.”On Aug. 1, George sustained a horrific injury to his right leg during an intrasquad scrimmage with the United States national team in Las Vegas as it prepared for the World Cup. Immediate surgery was necessary to repair the compound fractures of the bones in his lower leg, and the recovery time was initially said to be a year. The injury was so disconcerting that the team canceled the rest of the scrimmage.“I think about it each step I take,” George said. “Each step gives me flashbacks. It’s almost like remembering what happened, and overcoming that, with the next step that I take.”George remained optimistic that he could return this season. He started dunking in January. He returned to practice on Feb. 26. The team was cautious about bringing him along. But on Saturday morning, he sent out a message on Twitter: “Time to get some burn Sunday night!!! Can’t wait!!!”“This was just the right time,” George said. “It had no significance that it was Miami, or it being a holiday. But leading up to this week, we knew time was winding down. Not in the sense of the season ending, but I was starting to feel better and better by the week.”AdvertisementGeorge’s return seemed to usurp even the Final Four as the topic of conversation on Sunday in Indianapolis. At his news conference in preparation for Monday’s national title game, Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski, the coach of the United States team, was asked about seeing George come back so soon, and Krzyzewski said he had corresponded with him often.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s handled everything magnificently,” Krzyzewski said. “Certainly, we hope that he has a complete comeback and helps the Pacers in their playoff hunt.”Before the game, Krzyzewski also stopped by the arena to greet George in person.“It meant everything,” George said. “It’s almost been like I played for him my whole life — that’s the relationship I have with him.”George wore a different uniform number, having switched to No. 13 from No. 24 during the off-season, although the change had nothing to do with the injury; he has called it a better branding opportunity, using PG-13. He eased his way into the action, hitting his first shot, a leaning jumper that required him to land somewhat awkwardly on his recovered leg. Fans seemed to hold their breath.There was another nerve-racking moment when George was presented with a leak-out opportunity and nobody ahead of him. But he seemed to hesitate as he gathered himself for a dunk with Luol Deng barreling down on him, so he tried laying it up instead, and missed.“It was an embarrassing moment,” he said.With 9:33 remaining in the game, George slipped open for his third 3-pointer, giving Indiana an 85-71 lead.“It was just a matter of getting his feet wet,” Vogel said. “He shot the ball well, and you can see how much we missed him on the defensive end.”The Pacers held the sixth spot in the East in early March, but a six-game losing streak knocked them back into the scrum with the Heat, the Nets, the Boston Celtics and the Charlotte Hornets, all jockeying for the final spots in the postseason. Entering Sunday, Indiana had lost nine of its past 12 games.“With what we’re up against, we’ve got an uphill battle,” Vogel said. “It’s good to have him back.”A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page D10 of the New York edition with the headline: George’s Long-Awaited Return Electrifies Pacers’ Push.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.