AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.San Antonio at Houston, Friday, 8 p.m. Eastern, NBA TVWith less than two weeks left in the N.B.A. season, even Western Conference contenders like the Houston Rockets and the San Antonio Spurs are still jockeying for position in the standings. The second-place Rockets, who have won seven of their last eight games, including a 115-112 victory over the Oklahoma City Thunder on Sunday, are trying to extend their one-game lead on the Memphis Grizzlies, who have had a lousy couple of weeks. The Spurs, meanwhile, entered Sunday a half-game behind the fifth-place Los Angeles Clippers, a dark horse that is on a roll but has not shown a consistent ability to beat the conference’s top teams.Houston’s push is being led by James Harden, a leading candidate for the Most Valuable Player Award who will have to improve on his lackluster performance from last year’s playoffs for the team to succeed in the postseason. But the Rockets, perhaps the team best equipped to challenge the Spurs and the Golden State Warriors in the West, will also need center Dwight Howard to accept the fact that he is once again playing second fiddle to a talented guard.Howard recently returned from a two-month absence because of a knee injury, but he is still sitting out the second of back-to-back games and generally taking things easy. The Rockets will need him on defense, where he is essential to their scheme, with his presence deterring opposing players close to the basket. But the team will also need Howard to play the right way on offense — to fit into the system rather than stubbornly clog up the middle and demand the ball. If Howard eases the burden on Harden by setting picks and getting into the offense’s flow, the Rockets may be dangerous.Patrick Beverley, another key defender for Houston, will miss the postseason, having injured his wrist. His absence has created space for Jason Terry in the Rockets’ starting lineup, which seems like a fair trade-off: Beverley may be the better defender, but Terry is a better shooter and a championship-ring-wielding veteran whose experience should aid a team that has struggled in the postseason. The real problem is that the move weakens the bench. With Terry starting, the reserve forward Josh Smith becomes even more important to Houston’s success. Smith was roundly mocked when Detroit waived him in December and the Pistons promptly rolled off a seven-game winning streak. But Smith has been a boon to the Rockets. His shooting has improved, and he seems more comfortable in a reduced role. In Detroit, he was expected to carry the team. In Houston, he is one contributor among many.This iteration of the Rockets is relatively new to success, which explains some of the doubt around the team’s chances at a title. In each of the past two seasons, the Rockets were ousted from the playoffs in the first round. In fact, in Houston’s last nine playoff appearances (dating to 1998), the team fell in the first round eight times.In the Spurs’ last nine playoff appearances, dating to 2006, they won two championships and failed to advance out of the first round two times. On Friday, the Spurs reached 50 wins for a 16th straight season.The Rockets are set to play the Spurs twice this week, although only the second matchup, on Friday, will be nationally televised. The teams split their previous games this season, with San Antonio missing key contributors in each. Healthier now, the Spurs have the second-best record in the league since the beginning of March and had won nine of their last 10 entering Sunday. The Rockets are playing well, too, though, so Friday’s game should be a treat, with each team still playing with something to gain.Advertisement