

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
APRIL 5, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS — The Kentucky Wildcats, college hoops’ pro-ready squad, came to a baffling end Saturday night, as their potent offense became cement-footed.They kept jamming the ball inside, and as a savvy Wisconsin team packed it in on defense, they failed to adapt. So their magical undefeated season ran onto shoals. Coach John Calipari displayed an admirable willingness to carry the weight for the loss.“There are some things I probably should have done,” he said after praising his players. “We normally execute down the stretch, and we didn’t.”The Kentucky squad departed on its luxury bus early Sunday morning — with perhaps a half-dozen players weighing their N.B.A. draft prospects. Much is made of the talent that was stacked like cordwood on the Kentucky bench, including nine McDonald’s all-Americans.AdvertisementFear not; the final is not bereft.Welcome to Coach Mike Krzyzewski and his Duke recruiting factory, which gives us a squad that features eight McDonald’s all-Americans.AdvertisementCalipari’s embrace of big college hoops and its compromises is unabashed. An unfortunate number of his former programs were stripped of victories and placed on N.C.A.A. probation, but he has always pirouetted clear. At Kentucky, he encourages his best players to become one-semester students before they depart for the pros.(Thanks for this state of affairs is owed to N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver, who refuses to admit teenagers out of high school into the pro ranks).Coach Krzyzewski, too, made his peace with this system. Like Calipari, he harbors genuine affection for his players. And like Calipari, he is more than willing to bid them adieu after a year if that is the price of championships.In each of the past three years, Duke’s star freshman player has departed for the pros. The freshman center Jahlil Okafor, with his balletic offensive footwork and soft hands, will make that four years in a row.Duke being Duke, its officials insist theirs remains a high-minded exercise. “Even with the kids we know are going to be one and done,” the assistant Jeff Capel told USA Today, “we felt like they fit the profile of the kind of guys we want.”The Duke players on display the last few days appear gentlemanly. (The same was true of Karl-Anthony Towns and Willie Cauley-Stein, the twin-headed hydra center for Kentucky. Both are reported to be fine students).Duke had another prominent player, Rasheed Sulaimon, a junior and a top reserve guard. Krzyzewski tossed him off the team without explanation this winter. It came out that Sulaimon had been accused of sexually assaulting two women. The university investigated and could not substantiate the accusations.AdvertisementThe coach has not addressed the accusations, nor has he said whether they played a role in his decision to excise Sulaimon, also a former McDonald’s all-American. When a reporter asked Duke guard Matt Jones about this on Sunday, he offered the sort of enigmatic shrug that would bring a smile to the coach’s lips.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As far as Rasheed, we’re a very different team,” Jones said. “I’m going to leave it at that.”Coach K reportedly draws a salary of more than $7 million. (Salaries for football coaches in the Football Bowl Subdivision, according to the Drake Group, have increased 700 percent since 1985. Their basketball brethren enjoy about the same rate of inflation, which tends to define nice work if you can get it).Calipari makes about the same salary, give or take a few shekels. He also receives a $3 million annual payment for agreeing to abide by the university’s endorsements. He conducts a basketball camp on campus, using the university’s facilities, and he retains all the income. His bonuses for his Final Four appearances are close to $500,000.The university agreed to pay him $1 million — it is called a retention bonus — for the act of remaining in his job on March 31. He gets another $1.25 million if he remains on campus at this time next year.I don’t mean to kick Calipari, really. All of this is more or less typical for top coaches.Wisconsin Coach Bo Ryan is no pauper. He draws a salary of close to $3 million, which makes him the highest-paid man on campus.The football coach occupies the second spot, at more than $2 million. The athletic director holds down No. 3, at more than $1 million.The chancellor? She makes about $500,000. Did I mention that Gov. Scott Walker wants to cut the budget for this fine state university system by $300 million?As for the Wisconsin players, they are an endearing and loose lot. As their sneakered feet stuck out from under the dais table and wiggle-waggled, they offered a useful reminder that these are overgrown kids, as well as marvelous athletes.May the most talented remain healthy and make it to the professional ranks, where one day, they could make as much as their coaches. For the rest, let’s hope that they enjoy this strange mix of joyful and brilliant athleticism and big business.Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Names, and Big Money, Remain After Wildcats’ Exit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »