AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressINDIANAPOLIS — Michigan State arrived at the Final Four as the odd team out, the only one that was not a No. 1 seed.Coach Tom Izzo was hoping his Spartans would prove worthy of such elite company, but instead, they looked out of their element.“I feel bad because I didn’t think people got to see the team that won 12 out of the last 15 games,” Izzo said.Michigan State’s unexpected run ended quietly Saturday night when the Spartans lost, 81-61, to Duke in a national semifinal. A thrilling March turned an up-and-down season into a success for Michigan State, but Spartans fans have learned over the years that even Izzo cannot always make up for a gap in talent.Michigan State is now 1-9 against Duke under Izzo, and the latest matchup was not close. An early 8-point lead for the Spartans was quickly wiped out, and seventh-seeded Michigan State spent the second half trying to manage significant foul trouble while facing an opponent at the top of its game.Michigan State went into the game “believing we could win, thinking we were going to win, just because the way we practiced,” Izzo said. “I did not think we played very well. I think Duke had something to do with that, and Michigan State had something to do with that. You can’t sit there, and the way we played these last 15 games — we moved that ball early, we got a lot of good shots. We just kind of settled.”Izzo’s lone national championship came in 2000, the middle season of a three-year streak of Final Four appearances for the Spartans. Michigan State was a No. 1 seed each of those years, but lately the Spartans have made their mark more as a dangerous postseason dark horse. They have turned the unexpected Final Four run into something of an art form, but the magic runs out at a certain point.Specifically, Izzo has had a hard time beating either Tobacco Road power. Izzo’s struggles against Duke have been well documented, but his record against North Carolina is similar. The Spartans reached the Final Four as a No. 5 seed in 2005, only to lose, 87-71, to the Tar Heels in a semifinal. As a No. 2 seed in the 2009 title game, Michigan State lost to North Carolina by 89-72.In 2010, the Spartans were a No. 5 seed again, and this time the opponent was fifth-seeded Butler. The Bulldogs held off the Spartans by 2 in the semifinals. Had Michigan State won that game, Duke would have been waiting in the final.This year’s Spartans were led by the seniors Travis Trice and Branden Dawson, who will be hard to replace. Denzel Valentine, a junior, led all scorers with 22 points Saturday, and he and Izzo shared a brief moment right after the game ended.“I just looked at him, I said, ‘I’m going to get you here next year,’ ” Valentine said. “It was a heck of a run.”That is how these runs seem to end for Michigan State. The Spartans upset higher-seeded teams for a couple weeks — until they cannot. Izzo felt Michigan State was capable of putting up a better fight against Duke, but there was a clear difference between the teams Saturday.That is not to say the Spartans cannot measure up with the best. Last season, Michigan State was among the favorites to win the title before the N.C.A.A. tournament started, and in 2012, the Spartans were a No. 1 seed. But this year, they were an underdog playing in a Final Four with three powerful opponents, and it showed.“I felt like we panicked a little bit because maybe certain guys that had been shooting well didn’t get shots,” Izzo said. “I thought they did a good job of taking that away. We’re not real deep in talent. But we’ll get more. We’ll be better.”Advertisement