By ZACH SCHONBRUNAPRIL 5, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS —  He spent hours dunking outside at the hoop in his driveway, with the rim low at first, then raising it just a tad, higher and higher, until no height seemed insurmountable.Grayson Allen, Duke’s freshman skywalker, said Sunday that the player he loved to emulate most was Vince Carter, the former North Carolina Tar Heel.“I liked to think I was Vince,” Allen said sheepishly, hiding a smile. “But that definitely wasn’t the case.”The comparison could not have seemed more valid on Saturday, though, when Allen soared to the hoop, right arm extended, with 14 minutes remaining in Duke’s blowout victory against Michigan State in the Final Four, sending the Blue Devils’ bench — and many in the crowd of more than 70,000 — into hysterics.AdvertisementDuke had been waiting awhile to see an explosive move like that from Allen, who won the slam dunk contest at the McDonald’s all-American game a year ago by dunking over his future teammate Jahlil Okafor, who is 6 feet 10 inches, a good 6 inches taller than Allen.AdvertisementBut since high school, Allen has worked hard to show that his athleticism can pay dividends in a variety of ways. On Saturday, Allen scored 9 points and grabbed 5 rebounds in 17 minutes, entering as the first player off the bench and, within minutes, doing what he does best: attacking the rim. He went to the free-throw line six times, the third-highest of any player in the game.“He gave us the toughness and edge we really needed,” forward Justise Winslow said. “He attacked the glass. Knowing that presence, that he was going to stay aggressive the whole game, was something that really helped us.”Part of Allen’s athletic gift is how deceptive it is: He weighs about 190 pounds, with a boyish physique, and he is often overlooked as the toss-in member of Duke’s freshman quartet, overshadowed by Jahlil Okafor, Tyus Jones and Winslow.Allen’s teammates, though, have known what he is capable of, and they like to think of Allen as a little brother, the kind who can surprise people if they are not careful, as Wisconsin surely will be in Monday night’s national title game.“G, he has bounce, he can jump,” said Matt Jones, a sophomore. “When he dunks like that, it gives us energy.”As a ninth grader, Allen was cut by the varsity team at Providence School, a prep school in Jacksonville, Fla., his hometown. It did not come as a surprise.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I didn’t have all this hype around me where I expected to play varsity,” Allen said. “Expectations weren’t really that high. I was happy to be on the J. V. team.”The summer before, Allen had dunked on a regulation-size hoop for the first time, and his first in-game dunk came with the J. V. squad on a fast break during that freshman season. But the varsity coaching staff, when he made the team as a sophomore, quickly helped Allen understand that his game needed to be more complete to advance to the next level. In particular, he needed to mature as a shooter.Advertisement“That just comes from honesty, and I’m thankful that I had honest people around me,” Allen said. “Not people that were just telling me I was great. They were telling me what I had to work on.”His athleticism was undeniable, though, and videos of his dunks — leaping over two players, or looping the ball through his legs in midair, or dunking from the free-throw line — were attracting considerable attention. A video of his airborne exploits, created last year, has received more than 420,000 views.Teammates saw it in practice, but Allen had not had much opportunity to reveal his athleticism to a larger audience early in the season. In the first six games of conference play, he played a total of only 17 minutes.But Allen said Coach Mike Krzyzewski reassured him that the Blue Devils would need him to become a reliable reserve this season.“Coach K had been telling me since the beginning of the season that even though we had a loaded roster, that my time was now,” Allen said. “Not to just sit and wait for my opportunity next year, to be ready.”His time continued to fluctuate — he played only eight minutes against Syracuse on Feb. 28, but a week later he scored 27 points in 24 minutes against Wake Forest. Against Gonzaga, in a regional final, Allen played three minutes, attempting just one shot.But his impact was felt on Saturday, with a dunk that seemed to still reverberate a day later. He could say he had something in common with Vince Carter now: Both have dunked in the Final Four.“You can’t ask for much better than that,” Allen said.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Biding His Time, Duke Reserve Delivers the Boom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.