AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinWASHINGTON — It was 59 degrees and sunny in the Bronx when Tony Fernandez jogged out to shortstop on April 26, 1995, for the Yankees’ season opener. Fernandez, who was 32, was just a fill-in, someone to hold the position until the team could promote Derek Jeter from the minor leagues and usher in another great period in its history.For the next 19 years, that position was Jeter’s throne. On Monday, though, a new era will begin when Didi Gregorius steps out of the dugout for the first time to take that space. A team that loves to look backward with old-timers’ games and uniform retirement ceremonies, the Yankees must now step into a future without Jeter, Mariano Rivera, Jorge Posada or Andy Pettitte, a group collectively known as the Core Four.As the team readies itself on the field for Masahiro Tanaka’s first pitch, first baseman Mark Teixeira will bounce a warm-up throw to shortstop, and Gregorius — not Jeter — will return it.“It will be a little bit strange,” Teixeira said. “But as players, this game is hard enough with the task at hand. You don’t really have time to be nostalgic.”Still, the nostalgia is never far away for the Yankees, especially with Joe Torre throwing Monday’s ceremonial first pitch, and Yankee Stadium still practically vibrates with the echoes of cheers from the last baseball game played there.That game was Sept. 25, and the last play was a reminder of Jeter’s magic. He singled to the right side in the bottom of the ninth inning to drive in the winning run and close out his home career.That is the void into which Gregorius will step on Monday afternoon against the Toronto Blue Jays, in front of a stadium full of hopeful but skeptical fans.“Life had to go on without Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig and Yogi and Mantle,” said Manager Joe Girardi, Jeter’s teammate from 1996 to 1999.Along with the change at shortstop, there will be another passing of the scepter. Jeter retired last year as the longest-serving and oldest member of the Yankees, a title that now falls to Alex Rodriguez, who joined the team in 2004 and will turn 40 in July.Rodriguez missed all of last season while serving a suspension for allegations that he used performance-enhancing drugs, so despite his age, this season represents a rebirth for his baseball career. On Saturday, after the Yankees played their final exhibition game, against the Nationals in Washington, Rodriguez could barely contain his exuberance for the upcoming season.Spring training had gone well for him, and he seemed energized even by the loud boos rolling out of the stands at Nationals Park because they took him one step closer to a real game. “I feel like a rookie all over again,” he said, repeating his mantra from the day he arrived at spring training in February. Despite the sense of tectonic change, Rodriguez and Gregorius are actually the only Yankees position players who were not on the team at the end of last season. Chase Headley and Stephen Drew joined late; Brian McCann, Jacoby Ellsbury, Carlos Beltran, Brett Gardner and Teixeira were all there from the beginning. That team won 84 games and missed out on the playoffs for a second consecutive year. But in the way of improvement, this group offers starting pitcher Nathan Eovaldi, the relief ace Andrew Miller and Gregorius, who promises to improve the defense instantly. There is, of course, no expectation that Gregorius will ever hit like Jeter, at least not over the course of his career. “I’m playing the same position,” said Gregorius, whom the Yankees acquired in a Dec. 5 trade in which they gave up pitcher Shane Greene, “but I am not trying to replace him. I can only be the player I am and try my hardest.”Gregorius — who with Headley, Drew and Teixeira should give the Yankees an above-average infield — had a decent spring training, batting .271 with five doubles and two triples in 20 games, although his on-base percentage was only .308. His fielding at shortstop could be a joy for fans to watch, and the Yankees could have a bigger defensive upgrade at that critical position than any other team in baseball.A .243 hitter over three seasons with the Arizona Diamondbacks and the Cincinnati Reds, Gregorius has a .313 career on-base percentage and struggles against left-handed pitchers. But he is barely 25, and during the six weeks of spring training, when the Yankees got to see him up close, they were reassured that he had the necessary temperament to take over for a fan hero. “I think he’s got the right type of personality to handle this,” Girardi said, adding: “He’s been through some ups and downs. He’s not a rookie, and that helps.” Girardi was asked if he was excited to be ushering in a new era, with new names for fans to embrace. He responded that without the Core Four, other players would have a chance to become superstars. He said that what really excited him was the future beyond this season. Without mentioning names, he talked up the team’s minor league prospects, players like Aaron Judge, Greg Bird, Gary Sanchez, Rob Refsnyder and Luis Severino. But this is the Yankees, and the future is measured in weeks, not years. They must still contend with 2015 and trying to get back to the playoffs without Jeter on the roster for the first time since 1995.Outside expectations for that are modest at best. But Teixeira said those expectations did not match those of the players, who are never as nostalgic, and are often not as jaded, as the fans.“Internally, we always have high expectations,” Teixeira said. “First of all, get to the playoffs. And second of all, win the World Series.”Advertisement