AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirDerek Jeter’s first spring training as a retired Yankee has taken him far from George M. Steinbrenner Field in Tampa. First, he joined his former teammate Hideki Matsui for a charity exhibition game in Japan to raise money for survivors of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami. Then he traveled to Australia, where he attended the Cricket World Cup final in Melbourne. His immediate to-do list does not include attending opening day Monday at Yankee Stadium, but when he eventually shows up, he will notice that pitcher C. C. Sabathia is inhabiting his old locker.After 20 seasons in pinstripes, Jeter has shifted into his second career, in business, with two ventures. One, The Players’ Tribune, is a website that gives athletes a first-person forum for speaking to fans without the news media acting as the middleman. The other, Jeter Publishing, an adult and children’s book imprint at Simon & Schuster, is about to release the second book in a series about Jeter’s childhood.“He’s been as busy as ever, but he won’t know what it feels like to be retired until midsummer,” said Casey Close, his longtime agent, who accompanied him to Japan.As a player, Jeter had myriad endorsements and a lucrative arrangement to sign memorabilia for Steiner Sports — the sort of opportunities that come to superstar athletes.But he has been planning the next phase of his career since at least 2012, when he fractured his left ankle during the American League Championship Series. Around that time, Jaymee Messler, who was then the chief marketing officer of Excel Sports Management, Close’s agency, shared with him her idea that athletes needed a website to tell their stories on their own terms, rather than see their postgame quotes subjected to how reporters and columnists chose to use them.“It was something I’d been thinking about for a long time,” said Messler, who became the site’s president earlier this year. “After Derek and I first talked about it, it evolved into a much bigger idea.”The six-month-old, slickly produced site has achieved a fairly high profile, partly because of its identification with Jeter, who was unavailable to be interviewed for this article. Dozens of athletes have contributed to it, some of them more famous than others. And recently, two posts were newsy exclusives: David Ortiz ranted about being unfairly labeled a drug cheat because of a positive test in 2003 for what he said was an over-the-counter supplement, and pitcher Brady Aiken, the No. 1 choice in last year’s draft who did not sign with the Houston Astros, gave his account of having Tommy John surgery. Aiken’s post was brokered by Close, his agent.“We want to make it as easy as possible for athletes to communicate,” Messler said during an interview at The Players’ Tribune’s 14th-floor office in a converted warehouse in the Chelsea section of Manhattan. “At the core of this is to make sure athletes have a stress-free way to offer their perspectives. It’s a different conversation when you set the agenda with your story.”The site is financed by Thomas Tull, a producer of “42,” the film about Jackie Robinson breaking baseball’s color barrier in 1947, and the chairman of Legendary Pictures, who has a growing interest in digital media. His backing has allowed the site to find its voice without worrying much about advertising. Dove has sponsored a series of articles by men’s and women’s basketball players recalling their postseason experiences.“And we’re working with Porsche about ways to integrate with our content and some other brands to do that the right way,” Messler said. “We’re trying to be very strategic.”A website and publishing imprint may be unusual pursuits for a former athlete, but Jeter may enter a more traditional business for a retired star: a restaurant. According to The Tampa Bay Business Journal, Jeter is bidding with a hospitality company to open The Players’ Tribune Bar & Grill at Tampa International Airport.Close said he was not aware of Jeter’s involvement. Jeter, who lives in Tampa, Fla., is not a 9-to-5 executive. He has been an irregular presence in The Players’ Tribune’s office but communicates by telephone and texts and by video conferencing, offering ideas and suggestions about which athletes to pursue for articles.“Sometimes, he’ll see we got one guy to write for us, he’ll say, ‘Why didn’t you get this guy?’ ” said Gary Hoenig, the editorial director of the site.(The site may eventually acknowledge that the articles are crafted by its producers from interviews with athletes.)Jeter is less of a personal presence with his publishing partners at Simon & Schuster, whose offices he has not yet visited. His sister, Sharlee, is deeply involved in the side of the imprint that handles children’s books.Jeter is not proofreading the books, but his influence on the content — and using his clean image — is evident. The children’s books feature a series for 8- to 12-year-olds, written with Paul Mantell, about the young Jeter’s dreams of becoming a ballplayer. Another is a guide for youngsters to the 2015 baseball season that has Jeter’s handwritten comments reproduced from Post-it notes. One read: “I remember being taught at an early age to put my head down and run around the bases after a home run.” The first adult book released was “Jeter Unfiltered,” a best-selling book of photographs from his final season, accompanied by his as-told-to commentary. One book in the works is an autobiography of New England Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski, who signed up after meeting Jeter at a Players’ Tribune function in February.“When you have a celebrity with a platform, it’s good for everybody,” said Louise Burke, the president and publisher of Gallery Books, which handles the Jeter imprint’s books for adults. “He doesn’t do a lot of day-to-day running around for us. The best use of his time is something major.”Something like using a “Today” show interview to promote the first children’s book, “The Contract.”Jon Anderson, president of Simon & Schuster’s children’s publishing division, said, “There isn’t a parent who doesn’t have strong positive feelings about him or wouldn’t take anything with his name on it.”Jeter’s reputation is at the heart of The Players’ Tribune and the book imprint: Not only should parents trust him, so should athletes, whether in a digital article or in a book.To tell those stories in a different way, the website has a deal with the Blue Jeans Network, a cloud-based video conferencing company, to allow athletes to speak directly to fans. Last fall, Jeter met an investor in Blue Jeans, which led to a meeting, via video, with Stu Aaron, the company’s chief commercial officer. A deal was eventually struck for the website to use a technology that blends interactive video conferencing with online streaming. The Players’ Tribune could charge a fan for athlete-to-fan conversations. Jeter is now a member of the Blue Jeans advisory board.“He’s a great crossover personality to have on our board,” Aaron said. “He brings value to the equation besides his name.”Advertisement