
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
APRIL 5, 2015
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla. — It was not much of a wedding present.With Andy Murray, a part-time Miami resident, preparing to cross the Atlantic to marry Kim Sears on Saturday in Scotland, you might think that Novak Djokovic would have let some warm and charitable thoughts creep into his agile mind or his elastic groundstrokes.Instead, it was tennis business as usual on Sunday as Djokovic bent but refused to crack, going from vacant-eyed to gimlet-eyed in a matter of a few points and ultimately rolling to a 7-6 (3), 4-6, 6-0 victory in the Miami Open final for his fifth title in Key Biscayne.Has there ever been such a dominant player who sent such mixed signals?Djokovic wobbles. He winces. He comes out of a slide limping as if he has done season-threatening damage. He calls for the ice towel on the changeover. But just when his opponents think they have built a solid foundation for a breakthrough, their construction projects turn out to be made of sand instead of bricks and mortar.Murray knows this better than anyone else — perhaps too well for his own good at this frustrating stage.AdvertisementIt got to him in this year’s Australian Open final, when Djokovic staggered along the baseline in the middle of the match and Murray kept imploring himself aloud not to fall into the trap.AdvertisementDown the chute he went.There were no such monologues from Murray on this hot and humid afternoon. The only thing resembling a meltdown came from Djokovic after he dropped the second set and walked in a huff toward his chair, shouting to his team in the players’ box in Serbian while grabbing a towel from the hand of an unfortunate ball boy, who flinched at Djokovic’s bark.At that stage, a reasonable, uninitiated observer might have thought that Murray had Djokovic right where he wanted him, but Djokovic’s body language is one of the great ciphers in sports.All he did from there was pull himself together and not lose another game. It is his staying power, much more than his power, that has allowed him to keep a grip on the No. 1 ranking.He does not just break serve. He breaks spirits. Consider his work in Key Biscayne this year: He was not at his sharpest and was pushed to three sets in three matches. But now look at the third-set scores: 6-1 over Martin Klizan in the second round, 6-0 over Alexandr Dolgopolov in the fourth round and 6-0 over Murray on Sunday.“In a couple of the matches we played this year, I feel like I’ve been able to hang with him, but just not quite for long enough, unfortunately,” Murray said. “I need to try to work out why that is. I can’t do loads more than what I’m doing to get myself in the best condition possible.”Murray has had his epochal victories over Djokovic, none bigger than in the 2013 Wimbledon final, in which Murray ended a 77-year losing streak for British men at the All England Club.“He’s one of my biggest rivals; there is no doubt about that,” Djokovic said Sunday.But it does not feel like much of a rivalry at the moment.AdvertisementDjokovic has now beaten Murray seven straight times, and 10 straight times on hardcourts, the surface that best allows Djokovic to reboot points and express his full range of talents — which, for the moment at least, do not include hitting overheads.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He missed several on Sunday, including one from remarkably close range in the opening game that was not hit into the sun, which was brutal from the opposite end throughout the first set.Neither man managed to hold serve from that end until Djokovic did so at 5-5. Murray then followed suit, only to lose his edge in the tiebreaker.It was an up-and-down day, with each player making the difficult look easy and the easy look difficult. But it was also a match brimming with intensity, variety and athleticism. Their similar styles have made some of their past matches too symmetrical for the good of the audience. But there were plenty of high-risk winners mixed in with the draining rallies on Sunday, even if the match took an aesthetic dip down the stretch.There are, of course, no style points in tennis. There are ranking points, however, and on Monday, with his 141st week on top, Djokovic will tie Rafael Nadal for sixth on the overall list. It is hard to believe he will not soon chase down John McEnroe and his 170 weeks for fifth place.This definitely looks like Djokovic’s time, even if Roger Federer, at 33, can still trouble him and even if Nadal’s prime hunting season — the clay-court swing — is about to begin.For now, Djokovic is 25-2 this season; he has won another Australian Open, and now Indian Wells and Miami back-to-back for the third time in his career.A Grand Slam is unlikely but not out of the question, although Djokovic would presumably settle for winning his first French Open this June.“I don’t want to predict anything; I don’t want to put some additional, unnecessary pressure on myself,” Djokovic said. “There is already a lot of expectations, of course. Everywhere I go, I have to deal with it. But I could not ask for a better start of the season, winning three big titles. Hopefully I’m able to use this for the clay court coming up.”Roland Garros is his next big objective, and while Murray hustles back to his hometown, Dunblane, for his wedding, Djokovic — already married and a father — will head for his training base of Monte Carlo and the red clay.Advertisement“Not invited,” Djokovic said of Murray’s big day. “But I wish him all the best.”All the best unless the ball is in play.A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page D9 of the New York edition with the headline: Before His Vows, Murray Again Plays Bridesmaid to Djokovic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »