AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben StraussCHICAGO — In its more than 100 years of hosting Chicago Cubs openers, Wrigley Field had assuredly never seen one quite like this: Outfield bleachers were missing; a new and huge video board loomed in left field; a celebrity manager was in the dugout; and a bona fide ace was on the mound. It was wacky and weird, but this being the long-suffering Cubs, it was all imbued with something familiar: hope.The Cubs opened the 2015 baseball season Sunday night on national television with outsize expectations to emerge from five straight fifth-place finishes and challenge the St. Louis Cardinals, rivals and opening night opponents, in the National League Central. That the stadium was still a work in progress hardly seemed to matter. This was a coming-out party for these new-look Cubs, even if it felt a couple of months early.“I’m part of the hope now,” the new manager, Joe Maddon, said before the game, adding, “We’re trying to make this magic occur.”The mood was festive, indeed, but Cardinals starter Adam Wainwright dampened it, throwing six shutout innings as St. Louis cruised to a 3-0 victory. Matt Holliday, Matt Carpenter and Jason Heyward delivered run-scoring singles against the off-season prize Jon Lester, who labored through four and a third innings.On the bright side for the Cubs, Wrigley did host the game, though one side effect of the construction appeared to be interminable bathroom lines for fans. In recent weeks, some had worried that Wrigley might not be ready for prime time. Even as the neighborhood teemed with fans late in the sun-soaked afternoon, an idle crane sat beyond the center-field wall while construction workers in hard hats milled around. The back of the video board remained unfinished, with wires and ladders exposed on the back.The video board, gleaming like a shiny toy at 42 feet by 95 feet, was one of the sticking points of the Wrigley face-lift. Proponents argued that it was a necessary piece of the modern stadium experience and a crucial revenue generator. Critics worried that it would rob the park of its quaint charm and block the views from rooftops across the street. Early returns seemed positive.“People said lights would ruin Wrigley, and they didn’t change it,” the Hall of Fame Cubs pitcher Ferguson Jenkins said. “You just get used to it.”Fans, too, sounded willing to offer the modern addition a pass, and the Cubs have promised to avoid gimmicks like a Kiss-cam.“Five years ago, we needed nets to catch the falling concrete here, and now we have a Jumbotron,” said Dave Zylstra, a lifelong Cubs fan and season-ticket holder. “Things are changing here. Watch out for the Cubs — three years from now, we’re going to have a dynasty.”Like its venerable home, the team is also in transformation, relevant for the first time since the team president Theo Epstein and General Manager Jed Hoyer arrived three seasons ago. Over the winter, the Cubs signed Maddon, a former manager of the year, after he left Tampa Bay (a tampering investigation is pending), and signed Lester, to a six-year, $155 million deal to head the rotation. Catcher Miguel Montero and outfielder Dexter Fowler were added through trades.While the Cubs mustered just five hits Sunday, the veterans still complement one of baseball’s best collections of young talent, some of it already in the big leagues (Starlin Castro, Anthony Rizzo and Jorge Soler) and some churning its way through the minors (Kris Bryant, Javier Baez, Albert Almora, Addison Russell and Kyle Schwarber).The excitement around the team has been palpable all spring. The Cubs’ odds of winning the World Series have improved to 6 to 1 at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas; only the Washington Nationals have better odds. Maddon acknowledged that he checked his Twitter feed to gauge the optimism, while the new Cubs reliever Jason Motte said he had to fight to keep his foot off the accelerator driving to the ballpark on Sunday. “I wanted to do 100 up Clark,” he said, referring to a street that passes Wrigley.The roster makeover is not finished, as the young Cubs hope to be playing meaningful games for the first time in their careers, and there may be a learning curve. The Wrigley construction, too, will proceed after being delayed by snow, cold weather and high winds. The left-field bleachers are expected to be finished by May 11, and in right field, mid-June is the goal. Until the bleachers are ready, the Cubs have covered them with tarps featuring images of Ernie Banks, the Hall of Famer who died during the off-season. In ensuing years, new clubhouses and a press-box redesign will follow.But all of that can wait. And even after a loss to the Cardinals, Cubs fans could still look around and imagine the possibilities — on and off the field.Matt Hazaban, who flew in from Tampa, Fla., for the game, noted that the movie “Back to the Future Part II” predicted that the Cubs would win the World Series. “I’m thinking 2015 could be a very good year,” he said.Advertisement