AdvertisementSupported byConnecticut 81, Maryland 58By Harvey AratonTAMPA, Fla. — If there was one sequence of athletic precision that best illustrated the often cruel challenge of dealing with the Connecticut women’s basketball team, it came early in the second half of its national semifinal against Maryland on Sunday night.Already trailing by 47-33, the Terrapins found a rare open shooter, guard Laurin Mincy, in the left corner. As Mincy set her feet and was about to launch from behind the 3-point line, the 6-foot-4 junior forward Breanna Stewart lunged with her long arms from what had seemed to be a safe distance away.Stewart, recently named the Associated Press player of the year, deflected the shot. The freshman Kia Nurse caught the air ball, dribbled out of the pack and found a streaking Morgan Tuck filling the left lane. Tuck, a bruising 6-2 forward who missed last season with a knee injury, handled Nurse’s pass in stride, then made a gorgeous touch pass to Stewart, hustling back into the play, for a layup.There was still 17 minutes 50 seconds left in the game, but it was all over except for the shouting, and the tabulating.With their 81-58 victory, the Huskies moved on to play for a third straight national title, and a 10th over all, on Tuesday night in a rematch with Notre Dame, which they defeated by 18 points in South Bend, Ind., in December. The Huskies (37-1) were led by Stewart’s 25 points and Tuck’s 24; the two also combined for 17 rebounds. Brionna Jones had 14 points and Lexie Brown 12 for Maryland, which finished 34-3. Two of those losses were to the teams that will play Tuesday night for the title.“We thought going into the game we had an advantage with these two,” Connecticut Coach Geno Auriemma said as Stewart and Tuck sat alongside him in the interview room. “And they both played great.” Having won 28 straight games after their only two losses this season, which came back-to-back in late November and early December, the Terrapins had every right to believe they were on a roll of their own. And that had put Coach Brenda Frese in a playfully feisty mood.Asked if she thought Maryland was the sentimental favorite against big, bad Huskies, she said: “I think everybody’s rooting for us. I think we’re ready for some new stories. And our sport needs it, to be quite honest.” The counterpoint was that Maryland was not exactly David aiming a slingshot at Goliath, having come to Tampa with victories over the established powers Duke and Tennessee. Added to that was the fact that Frese’s team was a semifinalist last year in Nashville and a national champion in 2006.With Mincy as its one returning senior, many experts had made preseason forecasts of a transition year for Maryland in its first season in the Big Ten, which it wound up dominating with an 18-0 league record.But Auriemma — in addition to saying, “I don’t think they sneak up on anybody anymore” — said that any team with superior guard play was dangerous at this time of year.“I don’t care how many big guys you have, your guards are going to win your games in March,” he said. “You have to have great guards who play great. Their guards play great the whole tournament.”That was what made the matchup of Brown — a sophomore and daughter of the former N.B.A. guard Dee Brown — against Connecticut’s junior point guard, Moriah Jefferson, a potential key to the game.“She’s one of the elite defenders in college,” Brown said of Jefferson.Not a bad offensive player either. That is the most daunting aspect of dealing with Connecticut. Most of its key rotation players — and especially the tall and ultratalented Stewart and Tuck — are far from specialists. They hurt opponents in a variety of ways on both sides of the floor. In the early going, Maryland’s guards could not keep the slender 5-7 Jefferson in front of them. Her 6 straight points — two free throws off a lane penetration, a driving scoop shot and another drive to bank in a layup — gave the Huskies an 18-12 lead and set the tone for the remainder of the first half.Led by Brown’s 9 points, the Terrapins did not do badly on the offensive end in the first half, making 15 of 31 shots from the floor. But Auriemma, one day after his oration on the essential meaning of guard play in March, turned loose a front line of Stewart, Tuck and the 6-3 Kiah Stokes off the bench.“We knew we were going to have a problem playing them man-to-man, so we went zone, and that’s Kia,” Auriemma said. “It freed up Stewie and Tuck to move out on the perimeter.”The result was an 8-3 run with Stokes scoring inside and Tuck channeling her inner Frank Kaminsky, a post player stepping far outside to calmly sink a 3-pointer to give the Huskies a 44-33 lead at the half.Stewart, Tuck and Jefferson had combined for 34 points, or 1 more than Maryland’s total. The Terrapins had 20 minutes to figure out a way to defend. They could not, so Connecticut will defend its titles of the last two seasons, once more against its most heated rival of the past few years, Notre Dame.“They do a great job of sharing the ball,” the Terrapins’ Brown said, in deference to the Huskies’ too-often underplayed commitment to team.No new stories here Sunday night. Just more of the same old.Advertisement