AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseThe last time a European triumphed at the Masters was shortly after Northern Ireland’s Rory McIlroy won his first tournament in the United States. In December 1998, a 9-year-old McIlroy won his age division at the Doral-Publix Junior Golf Classic in Florida. Four months later, José María Olazábal of Spain prevailed by two strokes over Davis Love III at Augusta National Golf Club. “José María?” McIlroy said recently, his eyes widening. “Yeah. It’s been a long time.” Olazábal’s Masters victory, his second, was the eighth by a European in 12 years. In the more than 15 years since, European players have won 13 majors — but no green jackets. “It is an obscene stat, really, when you think about it,” said Graeme McDowell, McIlroy’s countryman. Since the 1999 tournament, Europe has taken six of eight Ryder Cups and celebrated the ascension to No. 1 of four of its own: Lee Westwood, Martin Kaymer, Luke Donald and McIlroy. And yet in the same span, the Europeans have not just failed to win the Masters, they have also struggled to contend. Twice since 1999, European golfers have failed to place in the top 10. Only once since 1999 has a European come within two strokes of victory. Nine times, the low European has been at least five strokes back. In 2011, Kaymer, a German, arrived at the Masters as the reigning P.G.A. Championship titlist. To improve his chances at success, he abandoned his natural fade and tried to hit high and low draws. Playing the course instead of his game, Kaymer was rewarded with a free weekend. He posted rounds of 78 and 72 to miss the cut.“I don’t know what I have to do here,” he said at the time. “Maybe one day it will work out.” This week, Kaymer will again come in as a reigning major titleholder. He won last year’s United States Open by eight strokes. To try to turn around his fortunes at Augusta National, Kaymer has played a lighter schedule leading up to this year’s tournament. “I want to be my very, very best,” he said. McDowell’s performance at Augusta National is representative of the Europeans’ woes. He has failed to advance to the weekend in three of the four Masters contested since he won the 2010 United States Open. McIlroy and Sweden’s Henrik Stenson enter this week’s tournament ranked No. 1 and No. 2, and are among the favorites to be in the final mix Sunday. With a victory, McIlroy, 25, will complete a career Slam. Is this the year the Europeans end the curse? “I think Rory’s got a great chance, I think Henrik’s got a great chance,” McDowell said.And if McDowell were a betting man? “I think the Europeans would be a good value this year,” he said. But no matter how well the Europeans are playing in the lead-up to the tournament, it is as if they develop a collective allergy to azaleas when they drive down the club’s Magnolia Lane. In 2012, Europeans ranked 1-2-3 in the world the week of the Masters, and Bubba Watson, the American ranked No. 4, won. Westwood, an Englishman, tied for third, two strokes back. The previous year, Europeans occupied five of the top six spots in the rankings, and the green jacket ended up draped on the shoulders of the South African Charl Schwartzel after McIlroy, the 54-hole leader, closed with an 80. Westwood was asked in 2012 how long it took him to feel at home on the course. “I’ll let you know when I get there,” he replied. Stenson, whose laserlike irons would seem to set him up nicely at a second-shot course like Augusta, has no top-10 finishes in nine starts. His best finish was a 14th in 2014. “If any place can be filled with tricks and dangers lurking around every corner, it’s Augusta,” Stenson said, adding, “I think it took five or six times to see your mistakes, see others make mistakes and figure out your game plan.” In his opening round in 2012, Stenson was at five under and leading by three when he came to the 18th hole, an uphill par 4 lined by pine trees. His tee shot landed in the pine straw, and his fortunes went downhill from there. Stenson walked off the green with a quadruple bogey 8 and a one-under 71, his lead and his composure shot. He held it together for two more rounds before closing with an 81 to finish 40th. “I’m not going to try to build it up too much,” said Stenson, who withdrew from last week’s tournament with an illness and has not played since the Arnold Palmer Invitational on March 22. “I’m going to go in there this year with a good chance of playing well and try to stay at it. I don’t want to say this is the one time, if it doesn’t happen now it’s not going to happen.” Why has this generation of Europeans not been able to leave its mark on the Masters? “Tiger Woods has been one of the reasons,” McIlroy said with a laugh. He was referring to the fact that Woods won three of his four green jackets after Olazábal’s 1999 victory. McIlroy added: “You look at the early ‘90s, you had a lot of Europeans win. Bernhard Langer. Sandy Lyle. Ian Woosnam. Maybe that will change, and it will start to happen again.” The Englishman Ian Poulter doubts it. “How many left-handers have won?” he asked. Mike Weir of Canada was the first, in 2003. He was followed by Phil Mickelson in 2004, ’06 and ’10 and Watson in 2012 and ’14. “You can do the math and figure it out yourself,” Poulter said. “Nine of the 15 winners since 1999 — what is that, 60 percent? — have been left-handers and a funny guy named Tiger Woods.” He laughed. “That doesn’t leave many other years, does it?”Poulter, a right-handed player with two top-10 finishes in 10 Masters starts, mentioned the par-5 13th, which doglegs left along with Nos. 2, 5, 9, 10 and 14). Since the 13th tee was moved back in 2002, he said, the hole plays into the hands of a left-hander who is able to hit a long cut and use the terrain to get the most roll without finding trouble. “Bubba Watson is the guy to beat,” Poulter said. “That’s all I’m going to say. It’s an easy golf course for him when he hits a 350-yard cut.” McDowell did not disagree. “Yes, but it has to be Bubba on form,” he said. “He still has to putt well. The stars still have to align for a guy like that. There’s no doubt, when Bubba tees it up on the first tee, he’s two shots ahead of me per round.” McDowell has felt that way in a major before. During the third round of the 2010 United States Open, McDowell was paired with Dustin Johnson, who scorched the Pebble Beach Golf Links for a five-under 66 to take a three-stroke lead into the final round. “That was probably one of the best rounds of golf to this day that I’ve seen,” McDowell said. The next day, Johnson ballooned to an 82, and McDowell carded a steely 74 to become the first European to win the tournament in 40 years. slide showAdvertisement