AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenINDIANAPOLIS — Shortly after midnight, Traevon Jackson sat in a Wisconsin locker room that was neither euphoric nor delirious but rather filled with a calm. Less than an hour earlier, the Badgers had ended Kentucky’s 38-game winning streak and avenged a heartbreaking loss to the Wildcats in a national semifinal last year.Jackson was in Wisconsin’s lineup for that game, when a shot in the final seconds catapulted Kentucky into the title game and sent the Badgers home. A year later, the Badgers have a championship game date with Duke. A reporter asked Jackson if Wisconsin was looking for revenge in its matchups with the Wildcats and the Blue Devils, who defeated the Badgers in Madison in December. I was eager to hear the response from Jackson, whose answers had already been filled with religious references. “I prayed for this,” he said of Wisconsin’s victory Saturday night. “Literally, Jesus was here; he came through, on his word.”Jackson attributed Wisconsin’s victory to divine intervention, saying of a late Kentucky scoreless stretch, “Come on, man: They don’t get a shot off in three possessions?” Referring to a tying basket from Nigel Hayes that did not appear to beat the 35-second shot clock, Jackson added: “The way Nigel just got that shot off? The buzzer doesn’t go off. That’s not a coincidence. The game just had to go our way. The Lord was with us.”I don’t put much stock in religious explanations for athletic victories. On Saturday, questionable coaching decisions and poor execution down the stretch appeared to play a far greater role in Wisconsin’s upset. Then again, the victory was also a result of persistence and resolve, the kind that Jackson built up as he was tested this season. Alongside the all-American center Frank Kaminsky, Jackson, a senior, was a star for the Badgers, a point guard who could be counted on to hit critical shots. After its December loss to Duke, Wisconsin won eight straight games. The streak ended with a defeat at Rutgers in which Jackson injured his foot. Jackson, who had been an iron man, with 84 straight starts, had to remain out of the lineup for 19 agonizing games, including Wisconsin’s first two of the N.C.A.A. tournament. Still, his father, Jim Jackson, an all-American at Ohio State who played in the N.B.A. for 14 seasons, characterized the missed time as “an outstanding learning tool for my son to figure out how to deal with something he hadn’t dealt with before.”“It was a growing moment for him to shift his mind-set to continue to stay engaged by helping the team, by being a mentor, so when he came back on the court, he wasn’t totally in left field,” Jim Jackson added of his son, who helped his replacement in the starting lineup, the sophomore Bronson Koenig, assume a leadership role. “He had been engaged the whole time.” Jim Jackson said that because he had also gone through an injury, he could convey the importance of letting the injury heal. “Secondly, I told him, ‘Don’t expect to come back and be the same guy you were before, because it’s going to take time to get your rhythm back,’ ” said Jackson, who had a stress fracture in his foot at Ohio State and an ankle injury in the N.B.A.He added, “I knew that he would have an impact whenever he got back on the court, whether it was two minutes, three minutes, 10 minutes, 12 minutes, whatever.”On Saturday, in his third game back, Traevon Jackson played 12 minutes off the bench and scored 6 points, making four free throws. He was on the court for a pivotal stretch in the second half, using his strength and his one-on-one acumen to drive to the basket when Wisconsin needed someone to take Kentucky’s guards off the dribble and draw fouls. Jackson’s path back to the court has had a happy ending, but he acknowledged that reaching this point, while dealing with the frustrations of rehabilitation, was a nightmare. “I’ve been this close to quitting at times,” he said.On Monday night, though, Jackson will take the floor against Duke with another opportunity for redemption. “No revenge,” he said. “We don’t need all that bitterness in our hearts — just move forward and keep our mind-set on what we need to accomplish.”Jackson’s ordeal brings to mind a timeless adage: Good things come to those who wait.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement