AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael PowellOy vey, kreplach, I’ve been this way so many times before.I am an Upper West Sider by birth, a National League fan by birthright. (My father grew up a Boston Braves fan. My parents rooted for the Giants before that team stole away to points west.) This time of the year was my own form of peyote worship.As a kid, I wrote out annual forecasts for the Mets. I had John (Little Hammer) Milner down for 35 home runs. Pat Zachry would break out with a 20-win season. Steve Henderson, that All-Star Game has a locker reserved for you. Skip Lockwood, man, oh man, you’re going to save 35 games, maybe 40!I presented the list to my father and demanded he match me. He looked at me as a doctor would a patient at a mental health ward.Too much spring optimism, followed by too much midseason darkness and end-season chaos, wore me down. I’ve ceded hallucinogenic optimism to my sons, Nick and Aidan. Aidan, in particular, forever sees the promise of a Met-Jet-Knick sun breaking over the ridge.With acknowledgment that my crystal ball is a cracked and foggy receptacle of my hopes and fears, I’ll lead with my chin:The Mets, accustomed to dwelling in a canyon of darkness, will walk blinking into the light this season, led by Matt Harvey and strong young arms everywhere. Wilmer Flores, the tall, out-of-place shortstop, will stroke the ball hard and prove sure-handed enough. The flight path of David Wright’s career has passed its apex, but if he would stop sliding headfirst into bases (note to self: Why does this custom persist?), he might have a fine year. Dilson Herrera, a little second baseman with a sweet stroke, will start the year in Las Vegas but could be looking for a Whitestone condo before season’s end.If only Sandy Alderson, who displayed a sure hand with pitchers and in rebuilding the minors, had not spent so much Mets coin acquiring geriatric corner outfielders. A closer fence seems unlikely to immunize Curtis Granderson against the encroachments of age. Michael Cuddyer, a professional hitter, had a fine spring. But he’s spent much of the last three years injured. To bet that pattern will break at 35 would have been a cinch when I was 14.So here’s my prediction: The Mets will break the .500 mark, perhaps standing in the sunlight of 84 wins.As for The Other Team? I was a teenage tribalist. With my friends Peter and Fred, I would hop the D train to Yankee Stadium to root loudly against the home team. I’m more mature now (note to self: Not really, but give the appearance of rationality).C. C. Sabathia is a splendid, if rapidly aging, pitcher. Michael Pineda has a rocket launcher arm. The brilliant Masahiro Tanaka has an elbow hanging by threads. Mark Teixeira has a beautiful swing, if only he did not harbor religious objections to hitting to the opposite field. Didi Gregorius has a questionable bat and an acrobat’s delicacy at shortstop. Alex Rodriguez in this lifetime has ingested enough performance-enhancing drugs to ensure that his muscles will twitch well into his next life.The Yankees are the law firm of If, If, If & If. Manager Joe Girardi is one of the game’s best, and if healthy, his team could cop a playoff spot.If you read this in the corporeal edition of my newspaper, please tear this up. If you read it online, and know what’s good for you, click spike.Advertisement