AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — After this weekend, Charlie Adam can claim he was able to accomplish something that even the great Pelé was famously unable to do. It was an iconic moment during the 1970 World Cup when Pelé saw that Czechoslovakia goalkeeper Ivo Viktor had advanced yards in front of his goal line, which prompted the Brazilian to audaciously lob the ball in from the center circle. With Viktor backpedaling, the ball just missed, sailing a foot wide of the goalpost.But on Saturday, Adam, a Scottish player for Stoke City, scored from inside his own half at Chelsea under a similar circumstance. It was, without question, a deliberate shot. Adam will never score a thousand goals, as Pelé did, or be compared with the passing, the dribbling and the movement that set Pelé apart.But Adam’s left-footed shot was among the purest ever struck. It was launched from 66 yards away, yet cleared the 6-foot-6 goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois, who, like Viktor in 1970, tried to scramble back. Courtois, who is among the most agile of keepers today, got his fingertips to the ball but could not prevent it from crossing his line.“I’ve had an effort, and luckily it went in,” Adam said on TV after the game in which Chelsea beat Stoke, 2-1. “I always have a look to see where the goalkeeper is, and if you get the right back lift and the right power, well once in a lifetime it can happen to you.”He paused, then added with a chuckle: “Actually, I was quite upset he touched the ball.”The modern ball is lighter, by far, than the one used at the World Cup in Mexico 45 years ago. But the thinner air during that game — Brazil and Czechoslovakia played 5,200 feet above sea level in Guadalajara — made the ball travel faster and dip alarmingly. The Brazilian players on that team were able to master how the ball flew, just as the likes of Cristiano Ronaldo, Leo Messi and Gareth Bale can induce devilish movement with today’s ball.Adam can do that, too. He used his left foot to cut across the face of the ball, lifting and slicing it precisely where he intended.That goal surpassed any other long-range shot driven over keepers in recent years by players like David Beckham, Xabi Alonso and Wayne Rooney. With just a touch of hyperbole, Glenn Hoddle, a master of the ball in his playing prime, called the Charlie Adam shot “The Goal of the Century” on Sky TV.As it happened, it was a loser’s goal because Chelsea — with Eden Hazard yet again pulling the strings — deservedly won the match. Chelsea remains on course to regain the English league title and the standings by seven points with eight games to play.Arsenal beat Liverpool, 4-1, on Saturday, knocking the Reds down and almost out of Champions League qualifying. More importantly, Arsenal moved into second place, although that could change on Monday if Manchester City manages to win at Crystal Palace.The buildup to the Arsenal game had been dominated by the fallout after Raheem Sterling, Liverpool’s promising 20-year-old, rather ill-advisedly told BBC television that he was avoiding signing a long-term deal to stay at Liverpool, at least until the season is over.The rumors were that Liverpool had offered him a new deal of 100,000 pounds per week, or about $7.75 million a year, but that he and his adviser were looking for something way above that. Arsenal was known to be one admirer of the fast and versatile forward, but Manchester City, Chelsea and even Real Madrid are also said to be on his radar.Sterling is a novice to the game, though clearly a spectacularly gifted and ambitious one. He combines quickness with upper-body strength and has a precocious ability to be able to move faster with the ball than defenders can without it. The young Jamaican, who played on the wing for England at the last World Cup, is getting ahead of himself. He has in his head that Liverpool is moving him around by having him play wide, or deep or center forward, whereas seasoned observers see that Manager Brendan Rodgers is giving him extraordinary insight into the game by playing him in so many roles at such a young age.Under the circumstances, Sterling played quite well at Arsenal. But the Gunners played immeasurably better. Héctor Bellerin, a young right back, preyed on a woeful Liverpool defense when he cut into the penalty area to score Arsenal’s first goal with a low, curved left-footed shot. Mesut Ozil hit the same sweet spot with a free kick from 20 yards out, and then Alexis Sánchez scored from a similar distance to make it 3-0.After Jordan Henderson had given Liverpool a glimmer of hope from the penalty spot, two more blows finished the rout. First, Liverpool’s Emre Can got himself sent off for two yellow-card offenses, and then Olivier Giroud scored in his sixth straight game for Arsenal.Arsenal has collected 30 points out of a possible 33 in its last 11 Premier League games, gathering strength in the new year as it habitually has done throughout Arsène Wenger’s long tenure as manager. The run comes too late to topple Chelsea, but it puts the pressure on the Manchester clubs and makes it ever harder for Liverpool, Tottenham or Southampton to finish in the top four and get a Champions League berth.This is partly determined by budgets. Liverpool could not hold onto Luis Suárez when Barcelona wanted him, and Borussia Dortmund cannot stop its rival Bayern Munich from romping to the Bundesliga title. Bayern’s 1-0 victory in Dortmund’s stadium on Saturday came through a header from Robert Lewandowski, the Polish player it stole from Dortmund last summer. Bayern plays hardball the same way that Barcelona, Real Madrid, Chelsea and Manchester City do, buying outstanding players not just to build their own teams, but to directly weaken their closest rivals at home.Advertisement