AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe prosecution at the first-degree murder trial of the former Patriots tight end Aaron Hernandez in Fall River, Mass., took more than two months with 131 witnesses.On Monday, April 6, the defense began its case. And ended it, after calling only three witnesses.Here is what you need to know:■ Mr. Hernandez, 25, is charged with killing a friend, Odin Lloyd, who was dating the sister of his fiancée, Shayanna Jenkins. Mr. Lloyd, a 27-year-old semiprofessional football player, was found shot six times in a pit near Mr. Hernandez’s home in North Attleboro, Mass., in June 2013.Prosecutors have said that Mr. Hernandez’s motive was that Mr. Lloyd spoke at a Boston bar with people Mr. Hernandez did not like.Defense lawyers note that Mr. Hernandez had signed a $40 million contract extension, so had little motive to be involved in a murder. They also accuse the police of conducting a sloppy investigation.In covering the opening day of the trial, Jeré Longman of The New York Times noted: “Legal experts have said the largely circumstantial case does not appear to be as open-and-shut as many once believed. No murder weapon has been located. No independent witness to the shooting has come forward publicly.”■ The days of testimony before Ms. Jenkins took the stand included much back and forth, scores of witnesses and minor revelations, but little indication of which side is prevailing.Prosecutors painstakingly tried to build a case with pieces of evidence as tiny as a wad of gum on a shell casing found in a car rented by Mr. Hernandez. Also under scrutiny were Mr. Hernandez’s Size 13 Air Jordans, which may or may not have matched footprints found at the scene of the crime.The first defense witness, Dr. David Greenblatt, spoke about the effects of the drug PCP. The defense seems to be trying to raise the possibility that two other men, who are charged separately for the crime, committed it while high on PCP, which can cause violent episodes.The two other witnesses testified about Hernandez DNA found on a shell casing in the rental car. The defense is suggesting that the DNA came from a wad of chewing gum that Hernandez left in the car.Closing arguments are next, very likely in the next day or two.■ There is no consensus among the commentators who have been closely following the trial over how it will eventually be decided. Ultimately, jurors will have to decide if the pieces of suggestive forensic evidence, Mr. Hernandez’s strange behavior and Ms. Jenkins’s sometimes improbable testimony add up to murder.■ There was much speculation about whether Ms. Jenkins would testify, and, if so, which side her testimony would benefit. Eventually Judge E. Susan Garsh agreed to a deal to give Ms. Jenkins immunity in exchange for her testimony, seemingly setting her up to be a key prosecution witness.But after two days on the stand, it is not entirely clear how much of a benefit she will be, or whether a jury will find her credible.On March 27, she testified that late on the night that Mr. Lloyd’s body was found, but before she knew about his death, Mr. Hernandez called her from the police station and asked her to give some money to Ernest Wallace, a friend who would eventually also be charged in the killing. She said she drove to Rhode Island, met Mr. Wallace, took out the maximum $500 from an A.T.M. and gave it to him.This seemingly unusual incident led Dan Wetzel to write on Yahoo Sports:“At this point, if not many points prior, if you were that young mother, wouldn’t you call your boyfriend and ask, ‘Hey, hun, what exactly is going on here?’ Apparently not if you are Shayanna Jenkins.”■ The most discussed part of Ms. Jenkins’s testimony was when she spoke of a mysterious box that she said Mr. Hernandez instructed her to remove from their house and discard the day after Mr. Lloyd was found.On March 30, she said that she disposed of the box after driving to a Dumpster, but did not recall where that was. She also admitted that she had put baby clothes on top of the box, concealing its contents from surveillance footage, and brought those baby clothes back home after discarding the box. The trip took more than a half-hour.Most curiously, she claimed Mr. Hernandez did not tell her what was in the box, nor did she look inside.Michael McCann at Sports Illustrated had this take on this testimony:“While it’s plausible that Jenkins would not look inside the box — Jenkins, after all, had no legal duty to look inside — it constituted an unlikely reaction. This is especially so given what had already occurred by this point in time: Jenkins had asked Hernandez if he had killed Lloyd (Hernandez responded he had not). It would seem peculiar that Jenkins, whose questioning of Hernandez suggested she had imagined a possible link between Lloyd’s death and Hernandez, would not peek inside the mysterious box that Hernandez urgently wanted out of the house.”■ The defense appears to be trying to make the case that some of Mr. Hernandez’s suspicious actions were efforts to hide his marijuana use, not his involvement in a murder. Though Ms. Jenkins said she did not look into the box, she did say it smelled like marijuana. The defense has openly stated that Mr. Hernandez used marijuana regularly and that Mr. Lloyd was his supplier.■ Last Tuesday, the prosecution called Robert K. Kraft, the owner of the Patriots. During his brief testimony, he was questioned about a conversation he had with Mr. Hernandez shortly after the killing and recounted that Mr. Hernandez had looked him in the eye and said he was innocent. Mr. Kraft also said that Mr. Hernandez had hugged and kissed him as a greeting, which was common for them.Advertisement