By PAT BORZIAPRIL 7, 2015
MINNEAPOLIS —  University of Minnesota center Amanda Zahui B., a sophomore and one of the most dominant post players in women’s college basketball, declared for the W.N.B.A. draft on Monday, putting her in line to perhaps be selected first over all next week.The university confirmed Zahui B.’s intentions in a statement. The 6-foot-5 Zahui B. played only two seasons at Minnesota but will be 22 years old on Sept. 8. Under W.N.B.A. rules, players may be drafted the year they turn 22 whether or not they have graduated or completed their college eligibility.“Over the past few years I’ve learned a lot about making difficult decisions involving my life, education, and future starting with a major move from my home country to the United States,” Zahui B., who is from Stockholm, said in a statement. “Though challenging, that initial decision has proved to be a step in the right direction.”Zahui B., who shortened her surname, Zahui Bazoukou, in part to fit on the back of her Gophers jersey, led the team to a 23-10 record this season and its first N.C.A.A. tournament berth since 2009. Zahui B. averaged 18.8 points, 12.9 rebounds and 4.1 blocks per game, making up for the absence of the senior guard Rachel Banham, the preseason Big Ten player of the year, who tore a right knee ligament in December and missed the final 23 games.AdvertisementA finalist for the Wade Trophy and the Naismith Award as the women’s college player of the year and an Associated Press first-team all-American, Zahui B. ranked fourth in Division I in rebounds and blocks per game. She put together one of the nation’s best performances of the season on Feb. 17, with 39 points, a career high, and a Big Ten-record 29 rebounds in a 93-80 victory over Iowa.AdvertisementOne of Zahui B.’s two triple-doubles — 25 points, 11 rebounds and 11 blocks — came in a Big Ten tournament quarterfinal loss to Ohio State, with the blocks a tournament record. Zahui B. closed her college career with 21 points and 22 rebounds in a first-round N.C.A.A. tournament loss to DePaul. In two seasons, she scored more than 1,000 points and blocked a team-record 240 shots.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are extremely proud of Amanda and the opportunities that await her professional career,” Minnesota Coach Marlene Stollings said in a statement. “In just a short amount of time, her maturity and skills advanced greatly, culminating in this incredible opportunity.”Stollings just completed her first season as Minnesota’s coach after two years at Virginia Commonwealth and one at Winthrop. Zahui B. is the sixth player to leave the team since January; five others transferred. Banham will return next year on a medical waiver.The W.N.B.A. draft is April 16, and the pool of players lacks a consensus top pick. The Seattle Storm hold the first and third picks. With the uncertain future of Seattle forward Lauren Jackson, the three-time league most valuable player, after multiple leg injuries — she missed the last two seasons — the Storm may be looking for size if they keep the pick.Zahui B. will not be the first underclassman to join the W.N.B.A. Candace Parker left Tennessee after her junior year in 2008 and was drafted No. 1 over all by the Los Angeles Sparks. Parker went on to become the league’s rookie of the year and most valuable player in the same season.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Turning Pro Early, Minnesota Center Could Be Taken First in the W.N.B.A. Draft .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.