By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 7, 2015
On Monday morning, the Nets’ Brook Lopez was named the Eastern Conference’s player of the week for the second straight week. That night, he calmly went about his business of dismantling another opposing center — even if, this time around, it was his twin brother.Lopez, who was defended by his brother, Robin, for much of the game, collected 32 points and 9 rebounds as the Nets survived a rally by the Portland Trail Blazers to prevail, 106-96, at Barclays Center in another game they very much wanted to win. Deron Williams added 24 points and 10 assists.The Nets (36-41) have won 11 of their last 14 games, pulling a full game ahead of the Boston Celtics for seventh place in the East. The Indiana Pacers are two games back in ninth.The Nets also showed some resolve Monday by bouncing back from Saturday’s blowout loss to the Atlanta Hawks, a rare lapse amid a solid stretch of basketball.AdvertisementIf the Nets, based solely on their season record, are roughly mediocre, they are the hottest, most dangerous example of mediocrity in the N.B.A.AdvertisementMonday’s game was scheduled for Jan. 26, but the weather forced a postponement. That proved less than ideal for the Trail Blazers (50-27), who wound up having to fly across the country on a one-game trip, although they left three players at home: LaMarcus Aldridge (left thumb sprain), Nicolas Batum (low back sprain) and Chris Kaman (right thumb sprain).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the Trail Blazers assured of having one of the top four seeds in the Western Conference by virtue of their Northwest Division title, Coach Terry Stotts acknowledged that he had been searching for an opportunity to rest some of his key players. The Trail Blazers are still fighting for playoff seeding and home-court advantage, but Stotts has other priorities.“Getting our players healthy is the most important thing right now,” he said.It was not as if the Nets were facing a bunch of pushovers. Damian Lillard, in particular, figured to cause problems. “All I know is we have to go out and play our butts off,” Nets Coach Lionel Hollins said before the game.Sure enough, Lillard, who finished with 36 points, made four of his first seven shots as Portland ran out to a 21-15 lead. The Nets found their footing, though. Lopez and Williams combined for 28 points to give the Nets a 54-38 lead heading into the third quarter.HALL OF FAME CLASS The Celtics star Jo Jo White, Boston Coach Tom Heinsohn and the four-time N.B.A. defensive player of the year Dikembe Mutombo are among 11 new inductees into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. The rest of the class includes Spencer Haywood, who paved the way for underclassmen to enter the N.B.A. draft, Kentucky Coach John Calipari, the former W.N.B.A. star Lisa Leslie, the referee Dick Bavetta, the former coach George Raveling, the former Kentucky and A.B.A. star Louis Dampier, the Australian player Lindsay Gaze and John Isaacs, who died in 2009.  (AP)A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets, Bouncing Back, Move Closer to the Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.