AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenINDIANAPOLIS — If there’s anything to be taken away from Duke’s national championship victory over Wisconsin on Monday night, it’s a simple axiom: Experience matters, but talent wins.Mike Krzyzewski won his fifth national championship, and he did it with a core of first-year players who may playing professional basketball next season.One of them, Jahlil Okafor, the 6-foot-ll freshman, gave Duke a 61-58 lead when he scored over Frank Kaminsky and drew a foul. Another freshman, Justise Winslow, extended the lead to 63-58 on a putback. The freshman Tyus Jones was voted the tournament’s most valuable player..For some, Wisconsin was a sentimental favorite on Monday, in large part because fans were rooting for nostalgia, for the days when college teams were built around junior and senior leadership. Those days are gone for good.The new reality, crassly exploited by John Calipari at Kentucky but executed to perfection by Krzyzewski, is that a high-powered, well-coached team led by freshmen can win the national championship.In many ways, Monday’s championship game between Duke and Wisconsin represented a three-decade evolution from an industry based on patience to one based on expedience.Krzyzewski has adapted to the reality that in order to compete consistently in the Atlantic Coast Conference and strive to win national championships, you must recruit elite players, knowing that they will leave school after one or two years. He didn’t always subscribe to this process.“The ability to adapt is key in everything," Krzyzewski said after Monday’s victory. "I think I’ve adapted well.”This year’s tournament represented the 30th anniversary of my first Final Four. In 1985, the Big East was represented by three teams: St John’s, led by Chis Mullin; Georgetown, the defending national champion, led by Patrick Ewing; and Villanova, led by Ed Pinckney.The Big East was the Roman Empire of college basketball: a powerful, sprawling force led by great coaches who were a magnet for elite players with championship dreams. Those were the banquet years, the long-lost days when fans would watch players and programs grow, when each season was a narrative of evolution: Freshmen became sophomores who grew ripe as juniors and mature as seniors.The Big East of 1985 exists largely in name only. The influence it once wielded is gone. Syracuse and Boston College now play in the A.C.C. The most talented players are looking to play for coaches who can prepare them as rapidly as possible for the N.B.A.In April 1985, Mike Krzyzewski, was the 38-year-old head coach at Duke. Bo Ryan, who would turn 38 that December, was beginning his second season as coach at Division III Wisconsin-Platteville.Far from being the emperor that he would become, Krzyzewski tried mightily to convince fans that he could make Duke basketball relevant and pull it away from the long shadow cast by Dean Smith at North Carolina.There were a string of NCAA tournament losses from 1985 to 1990. But in 1991, Krzyzewski and Ryan broke through. Ryan won the first of four Division III championships. Duke defeated U.N.L.V. and then Kansas to win its first title under Krzyzewski.“I’ve just watched him grow in the profession,” Ryan said Sunday. “He didn’t have instant success at Duke when he was there. He just kept working through it, made Duke relevant again, so to speak, meaning championships. They had a down period, as all schools tend to every once in a while.”After winning four Division III titles, Ryan left Wisconsin-Platteville, first for Wisconsin-Milwaukee and then for the flagship at Madison. With the move to Wisconsin, Ryan found himself in the Big Ten, a tributary that emptied into the vast ocean of upper echelon college hoops.Still, Ryan would not get the N.B.A.-ready freshman players, but players like Frank Kaminsky and Sam Dekker, who needed to be nurtured and developed over three and four years. Ryan recruits players who need time to master their craft. When the marinating process was complete Ryan would have himself a great veteran team.Three decades later, Krzyzewski and Ryan faced each other in the national championship game. Krzyzewski is the legend whose fifth national leaves him alone in second place behind John Wooden’s 10. Ryan, 67, was attempting to win his first in Division I. Last year, Wisconsin lost to a freshman-led Kentucky team. On Saturday, the Badgers avenged that loss. On Monday, however, they lost to an equally talented but better-coached team of freshmen from Duke.With the championship decided, Final Four fanfare over, college coaches will hit the recruiting trail in earnest, scouring the country for The One.While Wisconsin’s veteran-led success this season was heartening, Kentucky’s 38-game winning streak and Duke’s championship run were poignant reminders of a timeless truth. Patience is a truly a virtue, but talent wins. Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement