AdvertisementSupported byRangers 4, Blue Jackets 3, OvertimeBy Allan KredaHaving already secured the Metropolitan Division title, the Rangers entered this final week of the regular season focused on staying healthy and securing the N.H.L.’s best record.Against a Columbus squad that had been eliminated from playoff contention but that entered the contest on a nine-game winning streak, the Rangers picked up a 4-3 victory that pushed them 2 points ahead of Anaheim in the race for league superiority, but they needed late-game heroics from Derek Stepan.Stepan scored a tying goal with 28 seconds left in regulation at Madison Square Garden and then beat Blue Jackets goaltender Sergei Bobrovsky 4 minutes 10 seconds into overtime.“We’ve been able to find ways to win hockey games when we haven’t been as sharp as we’d like to be,” said Stepan, who became the first Ranger to score a tying goal in the last minute of regulation and the winner in overtime since overtime was implemented in 1983-84. “You have to give credit to Hank because he was arguably our best player all night long.”Stepan was referring to Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, who has been beaten only once in his five games since returning from a neck injury.“It was a great test for us,” Lundqvist said of the Rangers, who have won 21 of their last 28. “It was fun the way we battled back in this game. I think we earned it by working extremely hard. It feels really good to continue winning at home.”Martin St. Louis opened the scoring 5:38 into the first period, banging a rebound of a Kevin Hayes shot past Bobrovsky. The goal was his 21st of the season, tying him for second on the team with Chris Kreider, behind Rick Nash. St. Louis has three goals in four games since missing eight with a knee injury. Columbus’s Matt Calvert tied the score 17:20 into the period, but Dan Girardi restored the Rangers’ lead 36 seconds into the second with his fourth goal.Lundqvist stopped 29 shots as the Rangers improved their record to 51-21-7 and their point total to 109, one win and 3 points shy of the franchise records from 1993-94, when the team went on to win the Stanley Cup. That is also the last time the Rangers won the Presidents’ Trophy, given to the team with the most points in the standings.With one point from their remaining three games, the Rangers will clinch the Eastern Conference championship and secure home-ice advantage for the first three rounds of the playoffs. With two, they will clinch the Presidents’ Trophy.Coming off one of his best showings of the season in Saturday’s 6-1 thrashing of the Devils, Lundqvist denied Blue Jackets defenseman Cody Goloubef on a breakaway midway through the middle period and then stopped Ryan Johansen on a burst down the right wing with a glove save about three minutes later. The Garden crowd serenaded Lundqvist with their usual chorus of “Henrik, Henrik.”But Marko Dano found a way to knot the score at 2-2 with 5:18 left in the period, knocking in a rebound after Lundqvist stopped a point-blank shot from the former Ranger Artem Anisimov.The Blue Jackets took the lead 8:14 into the third period on a goal by Brandon Dubinsky, who was traded from the Rangers to the Blue Jackets in the Nash deal in July 2012 and who celebrated his score with a fist pump to Lundqvist’s left.It appeared that the goal would give Columbus the victory as Bobrovsky stopped one Rangers shot after another, finishing with 38 saves in all. He failed to deny a shot in the waning seconds, though, with Stepan receiving the puck from Kreider alone to Bobrovsky’s right and whipping the puck into the net. Then, in overtime, Stepan bested Bobrovsky again to send the disconsolate Blue Jackets to the dressing room and send the Rangers, already in the midst of only their fourth 50-win season ever, closer to a franchise record.SLAP SHOTSGoaltender Cam Talbot, who won 16 games while Henrik Lundqvist was out of action, was named the winner of the Rangers’ Steven McDonald Extra Effort Award, an honor presented since 1987-88 by a police officer who was shot and paralyzed in July 1986.Advertisement