By MARC TRACYAPRIL 6, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS — Stand next to the obelisk in the middle of Monument Circle here, and you are within one mile of an N.F.L. stadium, an N.B.A. arena and a minor league ballpark; the American College of Sports Medicine; the offices of U.S.A. Gymnastics, U.S.A. Track & Field and U.S.A. Synchronized Swimming; and the headquarters of the Black Coaches Association, the National Federation of State High School Associations and the N.C.A.A.You are also two blocks from the Indiana State Capitol.“We’re all within walking distance,” Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A. president, said before the start of the Final Four in Indianapolis. “We can pretty much yell to each other from the rooftops.”This geography, which was a result of a decades-long strategy, appeared to help persuade the Republican-dominated state legislature and Gov. Mike Pence, also a Republican, to pass a series of changes to a religious freedom law that had been criticized as antigay.“Our state is rightly celebrated for our pro-business environment,” Pence said Thursday in a statement announcing that he had signed the law altering the original legislation, “and we enjoy an international reputation for the hospitality, generosity, tolerance and kindness of our people. Hoosier hospitality is not a slogan; it is our way of life.”AdvertisementIndianapolis is a crucial hub for American sports, particularly amateur sports. Several sports organizations with significant presences in the city, including Nascar, the N.B.A. and the N.C.A.A., publicly objected to the original law, which was designed to support religious freedom but which critics said could allow businesses to discriminate against gay couples.AdvertisementAccording to several major stakeholders in the alliance between Indianapolis and sports, the original law was ill suited to a state where “Hoosier hospitality” is not only, as Pence said, a way of life, but also an economic imperative.“There’s a reason we get conventions and sports events coming back again and again,” said Greg Ballard, the mayor of Indianapolis and a Republican who opposed the original law.Emmert said he had expressed his opposition to the governor and other lawmakers.“While we don’t want to overplay the role we had in it, we were pleased the legislative bodies and the governor and others have decided to respond,” Emmert said Thursday, before the newer law was passed.Of his decision to object to the law publicly, he added: “I think it was the right thing to do it quickly. It seems to have had an appropriate impact.”A half-century ago, Indianapolis — often mocked with the nicknames India-no-place and Naptown — was a depleted Rust Belt city with a downtown that frequently emptied out after business hours.Ted Boehm, a former Indiana Supreme Court justice who was the first president of the city’s sports commission, confirmed that the junior chamber of commerce once organized Sunday morning pigeon-hunting expeditions in Monument Circle.About that time, leaders in government and at the Lilly Endowment — created by members of the Lilly family from the Indianapolis-based pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly and Company — set out to revitalize the downtown area with sports.Advertisement“Lots of people were involved, trying to think through the future of Indianapolis — how we could become a great, dynamic, attractive city,” said Jim Morris, a mayoral chief of staff in the late 1960s and early 1970s who subsequently worked for the Lilly Endowment.The city was already home to the Amateur Athletic Union headquarters and the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, home of the Indy 500. The Indiana Pacers began play in 1967 in the American Basketball Association.A turning point in Indianapolis’s sports strategy was the federal Amateur Sports Act of 1978, which created the United States Olympic Committee and required each Olympic sport to have its own national governing body.“We seized upon that as a way to accomplish several things simultaneously,” Boehm said. The national governing bodies “were all of a sudden 37 new separate corporations with their own boards of directors and leaderships from around the country in influential positions.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added: “They had to have board meetings somewhere; they had to have executive staff. Why shouldn’t it be in Indianapolis?”The opportunity, Boehm said, “fit nicely with the strategy of attempting to attract events here,” prompting the construction of sites to host those events.In 1982, the city hosted the National Sports Festival. In 1987, when Chile could not meet its obligations, Indianapolis hosted the Pan American Games.Indianapolis also built an indoor football stadium — about a block north of where Lucas Oil Stadium now sits — allowing it to lure the Colts of the N.F.L. away from Baltimore before the 1984 season.In 1999, when the N.C.A.A.’s lease was about to expire in Overland Park, Kan., 10 cities made viable offers. The association decided to move to Indianapolis. Doing so, it said at the time, would save more than $50 million during the next two decades.AdvertisementIndianapolis also cultivated a performing arts scene, attracted conventions and built several museums, including the world’s largest children’s museum.But sports “was the glue that held everything together,” said Mark S. Rosentraub, a professor of sports management at the University of Michigan.Sports events — including the 2012 Super Bowl and seven men’s Final Fours since 1980 — have brought in $4 billion since 1979, and this year’s Final Four, which culminated Monday with Duke’s victory over Wisconsin for the national title, was expected to bring in around $70 million, said John Dedman, vice president for communications at Indiana Sports Corp.Though major sports events are frequently perceived as money-losing endeavors for cities, that fails to account for the breadth of Indianapolis’s grand plan, Rosentraub said.“If you said, ‘What’s the value of holding one men’s Final Four?’ It’s a drop in the bucket,” he said. “But it’s not the Final Four. It’s a development strategy.”He added: “The real value is the neighborhoods that were built. If you pulled up a picture of what downtown Indianapolis looked like in 1970 and what it looked like in 2010 — that’s where the return is.”That strategy — dependent upon streams of people from outside the state coming in — was also a main reason business and sports groups opposed the original religious freedom law, according to several members of those groups.Last week, Morris, now the Pacers’ vice chairman, insisted that there was “no more welcoming, inclusive, upbeat, positive, friendly city in the world.”He continued: “We’ve had this little aberration this week of something confusing, but it got straightened out. It was a tremendous gathering of people that said, Hey, everyone’s welcome here, and we’re not going to put up with this foolishness.”An article in some editions on Tuesday about Indianapolis’s history of hosting major sporting events referred incorrectly to the relationship between Eli Lilly and Company and the Lilly Endowment, which helped revitalize the downtown area. The endowment was created by the members of the Lilly family; it is not the charitable arm of the company.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Groups Fight to Keep Their City Welcoming.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.