AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan CzuprynTAMPA, Fla. — The kid from Philly started with just a bit of hope.Maybe Geno Auriemma’s ambition sprang from the fact that in his town, even a fictional character can cement his place in sports lore with a nonfictional memento.“It’s that whole Rocky Balboa thing in Philadelphia,” Auriemma said.Auriemma, the 61-year-old UConn coach, has made his home in Connecticut for the past 30 years, but his Philadelphia accent creeps up every now and then.“The city has a statue of a guy who made a movie, a fake boxer, in front of one of the great art museums in the world,” he said. “You know what I mean? It’s a crazy city.”Whether it was his environment or simply a stubborn personality, Auriemma had hope in 1985, when he took over a program that had had just one winning season in 11 years of existence.But with each winning season he brought to Storrs, Conn., hope manifested into expectations of finishing above .500. Then the Huskies were expected to make the N.C.A.A. tournament, then win a game, then continue further than ever before.Today, none of the current UConn players can remember a time when the program’s expectation was not a national title. Auriemma’s first title, in 1995, actually predates the births of some of his current freshmen.The UConn associate head coach Chris Dailey makes her current student-athletes learn about the players who have come before them. Dailey, who has sat by Auriemma on the bench since he took the job 30 years ago, speaks of the past generation of Huskies as if they were fallen soldiers who deserve respect, honor and remembrance.“There’s a price that had to be paid to get us to this place, and we’re not going to just be disrespectful to those players,” she said, adding: “So the way they play, they have a responsibility not just to each other, but certainly to the players before them to play a certain way and to act certain way and to be a certain way, and they’re held to that.”Dailey went on to rattle off names of players who paid their service to the program: Shea Ralph, Meghan Pattyson, Wendy Davis and more.If those UConn legends do not sound familiar to you, Dailey does not mind spending a minute to explain their importance to the game. And that is exactly what she does with her current roster.Last season, Dailey, 55, challenged the players with trivia on the Huskies’ women’s program.She handed them a thick media guide with all of UConn’s greatest feats — from individual records to team accomplishments in the N.C.A.A. tournament. Learn it, Dailey told them, because you will be quizzed.“I just gave them a trivia question the other day,” she said Tuesday. “I said, ‘When was the last time we had a Final Four game on Easter; which team; who they played; and where did they play?’ Some of them got the year, some of them got the place.”No one got the who, though.For those wondering, the answer was 2010 in San Antonio. Baylor was the team nobody could remember.Although Auriemma, Dailey and the rest of the coaching staff do much of the teaching, the former UConn greats do their part, too. Upon graduation, it becomes almost expected for recent alumnae to schedule return visits in order to impart their wisdom to current players.The lessons usually end in laughter after the visitors share what Auriemma was like when his signature slicked-back hair was more brown than gray.“Well, he was a lot crazier from what I heard,” the senior Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis said. “And they think he’s softened up on us as the years have gone by. But he’s old. He can’t be like he was. But you know his expectations are still the same, and you know the way he’s able to push his players and press their buttons hasn’t changed.”With each ring Auriemma collected, he learned a bit more on how to approach the tournament and how to convey that message to the Huskies.“In the late ’90s, he kind of figured out exactly what he needs to do in March to get his teams prepared to win a national championship,” said the ESPN analyst Rebecca Lobo, whom many consider the spark that ignited UConn’s dash to a dynasty when she headlined the undefeated 1995 national championship squad.“So I think the teams now get the benefit of that knowledge,” she said. “They don’t have quite the wild and crazy Geno, perhaps, that we had in those days, just in terms of his coaching in March.”So for now, current stars like Breanna Stewart and Moriah Jefferson will continue to entertain Dailey’s trivia, and they will remember the ones like Lobo who forged a path for their own careers.But come Tuesday night, history is thrown out the window when the Huskies face Notre Dame. It does not matter that the Irish have lost their past three national championship games, including one to UConn last year.It does not matter that this team could help Auriemma tie the 10-championship record forged by John Wooden at U.C.L.A.On Tuesday night, the Huskies will have to make their own history, and simply expecting greatness will not cut it.Advertisement