
On College Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
APRIL 6, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. — Ball in the air. Game on the line. Season on the brink.Strangely enough, Niele Ivey did not have a Katie Douglas flashback to 2001, did not feel that old, familiar dread of a championship dream floating toward the rim, a balloon still with the possibility of being burst.She’s a coach now, and from the higher vantage point of standing in heels in front of the Notre Dame bench, she could plainly see that South Carolina’s Tiffany Mitchell was positioned to fail, left with only a heave and a prayer.“She was hemmed in the corner, under pressure,” Ivey said in a postgame locker room infused with jubilation and relief after Notre Dame’s 66-65 victory in the women’s semifinals Sunday night. “So, no, I really didn’t think back to 2001.”Mitchell’s shot did not come close. Surviving as much as advancing, the Irish were on to their fourth title game in five years, still looking for their first national championship in 14 years, or back when Ivey was a gritty 5-foot-8 point guard for Muffet McGraw, the coach she now serves as an assistant and recruiting coordinator.AdvertisementNow Notre Dame has earned another chance at ascending Mount (Geno) Auriemma and Connecticut’s two-time defending champions. Tuesday night’s title game will be a rematch of the game won handily last year by the Huskies, who also vanquished Notre Dame in December with relative 18-point ease.Do the Irish need to believe in magic, miracles, or at least an extension into April of March Madness? For an inspirational lift to what would be the improbable rewrite to the ending of a storybook, they need look no further than the 2001 run to St. Louis, to Ivey’s hometown, where she somehow crossed the finish line with a pronounced limp.“I believe that’s why I’m here, because I can share my experiences with our players,” she said, referring to her effort on a sprained ankle and two surgically repaired knees in a 68-66 victory over Purdue that ended with Douglas, the Boilermakers’ star, launching a southpaw 18-footer as time expired.Douglas’s shot, a relatively clean look, hit the front rim and backboard and bounced away, assuring McGraw of her lone national title. She has been coaching at Notre Dame for nearly three decades, but it wasn’t until the late 1990s that her program began to flourish seriously. Ivey, who arrived in the fall of 1996, and the center, Ruth Riley, who came a year later, were the championship building blocks, the cornerstones.Only bad luck kept Ivey around for a serendipitous fifth year. Five games into her freshman season, she tore the anterior cruciate ligament in her right knee, missing out on a run to the Final Four — left behind, she said, “sad, lonely and needing someone to talk to.”AdvertisementThe left knee buckled two years later in the Big East tournament semifinals against Rutgers, leaving Ivey on the floor sobbing, screaming: “I did it again. I did it again.”So, yes, she knows about sacrifice and a belief against forbidding odds. She loves talking about that championship season, the statement Notre Dame made when it beat a Connecticut team with Diana Taurasi, Sue Bird, Svetlana Abrosimova and Swin Cash in January 2001 before 11,418 fans in South Bend, Ind., and again in the national semifinals.It was all happening just as Ivey had prophesied, or fantasized, when she took measure of her injury-marred career and sensed the opportunity to bring it all home to St. Louis. Her parents and four older brothers were behind the Notre Dame bench, jubilant one moment, aghast the next when she hit the floor late in the Connecticut semifinal that was already in hand.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was not the knee — the scourge of women’s sports — just the ankle. But, yes, there was another game, Ivey’s Willis Reed, play-with-pain commitment to fulfill.Against Purdue, she dragged the swollen and taped ankle around, bodied up on defense, had six steals and a huge baseline jumper and made the passes that led to the winning points.She went to the W.N.B.A. for five years, had another knee operation and accepted a coaching internship at Xavier. In 2007, McGraw brought her back to her college home, her young son, now 13, in tow. Among others, Ivey was instrumental in recruiting and mentoring the former Irish star Skylar Diggins.“Best decision I ever made,” McGraw said Monday of hiring Ivey. “She’s a rising star in the coaching profession, constantly getting calls. She does it all for us — the scouting, the recruiting. She speaks the players’ language.”Will Jewell Loyd, Lindsay Allen, Taya Reimer and the others really hear Ivey when she reminds them that a tournament of one-and-done essentially means yes, you can?Unlike the 2001 team, this group has a core consisting largely of underclassmen.Of five consecutive Final Four teams, McGraw called it “the least experienced and probably the least talented team in recent years.”AdvertisementHence, the comparison to 2001 does not hold up, she said, while conceding that Ivey’s personal story is one that covers all would-be contenders, and especially when the opposition is the likes of Connecticut.On Monday, Auriemma said he occasionally wished he could still be the classic underdog and “capture the imagination of the people.” A Philadelphia guy, he called it “that whole Rocky Balboa thing.”With Breanna Stewart, Morgan Tuck and Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis on his side, that is not happening. If Notre Dame isn’t quite Rocky, Ivey might as well be Adrian, ready to stand up and tell her team, in so many words, “Win!”She promised to have her say sometime before tipoff.“We’ve been so close, but we haven’t won it,” she said. “I want so much for them to get that ring.”But wished good luck, she added, in a nod to reality and not quite under her breath, “We can use some.”A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Inspiration Walks the Irish’s Sideline, a Reminder of What Can Be.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »