AdvertisementSupported byMets 3, Nationals 1By Tim RohanWASHINGTON — This was not an easy way to start the season. The Mets were playing the powerful Washington Nationals, and their new $210 million ace, Max Scherzer, in front of a pumped-up crowd of Nationals fans with visions of a World Series in October.In the Mets’ favor was that they do have a strong record on opening day — a lot better, in fact, than what they have usually done in the 161 games that followed. Still, this was, by any measure, a daunting assignment.And it grew more difficult when Scherzer carried a no-hitter into the sixth inning and looked as if he might just keep the Mets hitless the entire game. But for one game at least the Mets showed that they had the talent and fortitude to stand up to a Nationals team that has bullied them around the National League East for years. The Mets capitalized on two errors by the shortstop, Ian Desmond. Lucas Duda and Travis d’Arnaud delivered big hits. Bartolo Colon, the doughy 41-year-old starter, kept the Nationals off balance for six innings.And the Mets ended up with a 3-1 victory that reinforced the idea that this season might be the one in which all the losing finally stops and a contender actually emerges in Queens.All winter and early spring, the Mets talked about changing their mind-set. They said that they expected to have a winning record for the first time in seven years and that they expected to make the playoffs. As something to shoot for, they said they also expected to win 90 games. Fred Wilpon, the team’s owner, caught the fever, too; he gave an impassioned speech to the team in spring training, something no one remembered him doing in the past.Sandy Alderson, the team’s general manager, was on board as well, wearing a blue and orange tie — Mets colors — at Monday’s game.“First impressions are always important,” he said.And playing well against the Nationals was going to be a good measuring stick of the Mets’ progress. Over the last three years, the Nationals had beaten the Mets 41 times in 55 meetings and had dominated them in every aspect of the game. Then, for good measure, the Nationals added Scherzer to a rotation that was already one of the best in baseball.And Monday, Scherzer could not have started out any better than he did despite walking the first batter, Curtis Granderson. Scherzer then retired 17 consecutive hitters without once falling into a two-ball count. Scherzer was throwing hard, and the late-afternoon start was making it harder.“You’re half in the shadow, you’re half in the sun,” said the Mets’ David Wright. “It’s tough enough to face Max Scherzer, tougher when it’s Max Scherzer in the shadows.”Scherzer had his own handicap because the Nationals began the game with three regular position players on the disabled list: center fielder Denard Span; third baseman Anthony Rendon and outfielder Jayson Werth.Colon was handling the Nationals’ lineup with ease. Except, that is, for Bryce Harper, who had two hits, including a solo home run that put Washington ahead, 1-0, in the bottom of the fourth.The rest of the Nationals managed one hit all game. Colon went six innings, threw 86 pitches, compiled eight strikeouts (the same number as Scherzer) and reaffirmed the Mets’ controversial decision to choose him as the opening day starter over two flashier choices — Matt Harvey and Jacob deGrom.How Colon still manages to be so effective after all these years and with all that weight, is something of a mystery. In contrast, there is nothing head-scratching about Scherzer. He’s just consistently dominant.He still had his no-hitter with two outs in the sixth when he walked Granderson for the second time. The next batter, Wright, hit a pop fly to shallow right. Both Dan Uggla, the second baseman, and Desmond called for the ball. Uggla settled under it, but at the last moment moved out of the way when he heard Desmond. Desmond reached but dropped the ball.“I just looked at it and didn’t hear anything so I kept on going for it,” Desmond said. “I didn’t want to let it hit the ground. I figured I’m going to call for it and get it.”The error put runners on second and third. If Scherzer was flustered, he did not show it. He attacked the next batter, Lucas Duda, got ahead 1-2 in the count, and fired a 98-mile-per-hour fastball to put him away. But Duda singled into right field, scoring both runners with the Mets’ first hit of the game.“I just got enough barrel on it,” Duda said.In the seventh, Desmond rushed a throw to first that Ryan Zimmerman, the newly converted first baseman, could not handle. The next batter, d’Arnaud, tripled off the center-field wall to make it 3-1.Four Mets relievers then closed out the game, with Buddy Carlyle, a journeyman right-hander, getting the final outs. But Carlyle was only on the mound because Jenrry Mejia, the Mets’ regular closer, was not.Mejia, who did not have an impressive spring, felt pain in his right elbow while warming up on Monday and sat back down. He may undergo a magnetic resonance imaging test on Tuesday. Already, the Mets have lost Zack Wheeler and Josh Edgin to Tommy John surgery this spring, and to have another front-line pitcher with elbow issues was not what they wanted to hear, particularly because Mejia has already had the same surgery. Still, the Mets were determined to savor their victory over a team that is the gold standard of their division.“There’s nothing better than an afternoon win, followed by an off-day, followed by a night game,” Alderson said. “You get a chance to enjoy it slightly longer than normal.”Advertisement