
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
APRIL 6, 2015
WASHINGTON — In ways that you would expect, and in others that you wouldn’t, Monday turned out to be a fitting way for Rob Manfred to spend his first opening day as commissioner of Major League Baseball.For the Washington Nationals’ game against the Mets, the weather could not have been sweeter: mid-70s, just enough breeze for the flags in left field to dance every few seconds, a few wispy clouds in the powder blue sky.Manfred had come to the ballpark to announce that Washington would host the 2018 All-Star Game, and when a video of his pronouncement was shown on the big screen in center field, the crowd roared so loudly that it shook the stands. Ah, the Nationals — the very same franchise that cast the swing vote that made Manfred commissioner. He soaked up the cheers, flashed the dimple on his left cheek and soon walked toward the mound for the ceremonial first pitch.Too bad, then, about those three doping positives in recent days.First, on March 27, came news that Seattle Mariners pitcher David Rollins had tested positive for the steroid stanozolol. Then Atlanta Braves pitcher Arodys Vizcaino tested positive for stanozolol. Then Minnesota Twins pitcher Ervin Santana, a top-shelf player, tested positive for stanozolol, too. Each has been suspended for 80 games.AdvertisementIt seemed to be terrible timing for Manfred — almost comical, actually — because he is also the guy who oversaw baseball’s drug-testing program for the past decade and who had to keep fighting doping in the sport even after Bud Selig, his boss and predecessor, wishfully declared that the steroid era, dominated by dirty players, was over.AdvertisementManfred is eager to take on all sorts of interesting issues as the new commissioner, yet he is right back where he used to be, dealing with drug cheats. The issue seems to be stalking him.You would think, of course, that if three players were caught one after another using stanozolol, it must be some new, cutting-edge stuff, something to sidestep the more stringent drug testing that baseball now employs.But no — what surprised Manfred the most about the flurry of positive tests was that stanozolol was actually old-school stuff, a powerful steroid that the Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson used to win a gold medal at the 1988 Summer Olympics before he tested positive and was stripped of his award.Nowadays, drug testers could detect stanozolol in a urine sample with their eyes closed, which makes using it akin to speeding around a neighborhood full of police officers and thinking that you would somehow get away with it.On Monday, Manfred said he was so surprised that players were using stanozolol that he had made sure the sport’s investigative arm began searching for a possible connection among the three positives — maybe a coach or a doctor, maybe the next Anthony Bosch, the fake physician at the center of the Biogenesis scandal that caught Alex Rodriguez and Ryan Braun, among other big names.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But so far, Manfred said on Monday, no connection has been found.“The thing you need to remember is that the players might not be aware of the exact substance they are using,” he said. “I’m sure they knew it was a performance-enhancing substance, but whether they knew it was testosterone or stanozolol, I don’t know. The possibility I’m raising is that they are getting advice from someone, and it’s bad advice.”Whatever happened, those players should have been more careful. This is not the stanozolol era. Baseball was late to testing but has now moved ahead of other professional sports. It has bolstered the number of out-of-competition tests it conducts and has a biological passport that monitors the effects of doping in an athlete’s system.Even Travis Tygart, the chief executive of the United States Anti-Doping Agency, praised Manfred on Monday for his stance on doping — and compliments from Tygart when it comes to doping programs in professional sports are few and far between. (So few and so far that in the past decade of covering doping in sports, I can’t remember any, until now.)AdvertisementHe said Manfred had gone “all in” in the fight against doping, especially after the 2007 Mitchell report exposed the pervasiveness of drug use in baseball. And he said Manfred’s continuing efforts to fight doping — “He’s been in the trenches for years,” Tygart said — had helped change the culture in baseball for the better.”Give credit where credit is due,” Tygart said.As for the three recent positive tests, Tygart said they showed that baseball’s out-of-competition surprise drug tests were working. You could argue that they also showed that no matter how hard baseball tried, players still felt tempted to find ways to use performance enhancers and that the problem might not go away any time soon. Or ever.Manfred, 57, seemed to acknowledge that possibility. “We would prefer not to have any drug positives, but it’s just the way it is now,” he said. It was the statement of someone who seemed to have a realistic sense of his sport’s strengths and weaknesses, and maybe his own.Which may be why he never did throw out the first pitch. Instead, he let a young local baseball player, the 9-year-old scholar-athlete Duane Dargin, have that honor. From my perspective, the ball went right over the plate. The crowd erupted in applause.Doping positives or no doping positives, it was a nice, clean way to start the season.Email: juliet@nytimes.comA version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Welcome, Commissioner. Here’s a New Doping Problem.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »