By KEN BELSONAPRIL 6, 2015
One of the limitations of studying chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., the degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head trauma, has been that researchers have been able to detect it only in tissue obtained posthumously.A study published Monday by Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, though, suggests that researchers trying to develop a test that will detect the disease in living patients have taken a small step forward.The study, conducted at U.C.L.A., included 14 retired N.F.L. players who suffered from mood swings, depression and cognitive problems associated with C.T.E. The players were given PET, or positron emission tomography, scans that revealed tau protein deposits in their brains, a signature of C.T.E. Although the results were not conclusive, the distribution of tau in their brains was consistent with those found in the autopsies of players who had C.T.E.The 14 players were compared with 24 patients with Alzheimer’s disease and 28 patients in a control group with no significant cognitive problems.AdvertisementThe scans showed that the tau deposits in the 14 players were “distinctly different” from those in the patients with Alzheimer’s disease.“There seems to be an emerging new pattern we haven’t seen in any known forms of dementia, and it is definitely not normal,” said Dr. Julian Bailes, a coauthor of the study and the chairman of neurosurgery at NorthShore Neurological Institute in Evanston, Ill.AdvertisementThe new findings build on research that was first published two years ago. The PET scan technology being developed at U.C.L.A. has been criticized as imprecise and the findings premature. And while researchers have been able to detect C.T.E., they have yet to determine why some people are predisposed to developing the disease.Dr. Bailes said that far more research at multiple medical centers was needed to determine the technology’s effectiveness. The current battery of tests, including the PET scan, costs about $10,000 per patient. Still, he called the results published Monday “another step in trying to detect C.T.E. in living patients.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The results of the PET scan study are likely to fuel criticism of the pending settlement between the N.F.L. and the retired players who contend that the league hid the dangers of concussions from them.Under the terms of the settlement, which a federal judge is considering, only players who have been found to have C.T.E. from 2006 to the date when the settlement receives final approval will be eligible for payments of as much as $4 million.Players found to have chronic traumatic encephalopathy in the future will not be eligible for cash awards. Critics contend that the N.F.L. pushed for this limitation because tests like those being developed by Dr. Bailes and others could lead to a large number of payouts in the future.Lawyers representing the plaintiffs argue that while the proposed settlement does not compensate living players with C.T.E., it does compensate them if they develop some of the ailments consistent with C.T.E., including dementia.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Progress Seen in Detecting Brain Disease in the Living.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.