By HARVEY ARATONAPRIL 6, 2015
Having long marketed its product to the far reaches of the planet, the N.B.A. will soon be planting seeds closer to home, in a country that has been commercially off limits.The league plans to announce Tuesday that it will send a group to Cuba for a four-day men’s and women’s basketball clinic in Havana from April 23 to 26.FIBA, basketball’s international governing body, will coordinate the clinic, but the N.B.A. will be well represented on the executive and basketball sides under its Basketball Without Borders program.The N.B.A. will be the first American professional sports organization to visit Cuba since the White House announced in December that it would restore diplomatic relations between the countries.AdvertisementSteve Nash, the recently retired point guard, will make the trip, along with Dikembe Mutombo, the former center who works for the league as a global ambassador and whose election to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame was announced Monday.AdvertisementFrom the women’s side, Ticha Penicheiro, who retired from the W.N.B.A. in 2012, will help conduct the clinics and other community outreach projects in conjunction with the Cuban sports ministry and the Cuban Basketball Federation.Mark Tatum, the N.B.A.’s deputy commissioner, said in a telephone interview that Nash, Mutombo and Penicheiro were selected, in part, because they all speak Spanish.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tatum will also make the trip, as will Utah Jazz Coach Quin Snyder and other league and team staff members. The league has had a planning group in Cuba in advance of the clinics.Tatum said that the league had been in contact with the State Department and that “they’re supportive of it.”He added, “We’ve seen the bridges that basketball can build between cultures.”While none of the N.B.A.’s broadcast partners have shown games in Cuba, they hope to at some point.As a nation, Cuba has had successes in basketball, Tatum noted, saying the sport had been played there for more than a century. The country’s women’s team has been a consistent medalist in the Pan-American Games, and it finished first in FIBA’s 2013 Americas competition. The Cuban men’s team won a bronze medal at the 1972 Munich Olympics.Two Cuban-born players have played in the N.B.A., both only briefly: Lazaro Borrell with Seattle in the 1999-2000 season and Andres Guibert with Minnesota from 1993 to 1995. A third Cuban-born player, Al Cueto, is listed as having competed in the old American Basketball Association, from 1969 to 1971.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A. to Send Delegation to Clinic in Cuba.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.