AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaMuhammad Wilkerson, a premier defensive end who has sought a new contract to no avail, was conspicuously absent when the Jets opened the voluntary portion of their off-season training program Monday under their new head coach, Todd Bowles.Wilkerson was apparently frustrated by the seeming lack of urgency attached to negotiations by Mike Maccagnan, the new general manager. Maccagnan committed nearly $90 million in guaranteed money to overhaul a 4-12 team that missed the playoffs the last four years.Maccagnan’s spending spree included a five-year deal totaling $70 million — with approximately $39 million guaranteed — to bring cornerback Darrelle Revis back to the organization. Antonio Cromartie, another top cornerback, was brought back for four years at $32 million.Wilkerson has been a mainstay since the Jets drafted him in the first round in 2011. The team exercised the fifth-year option on Wilkerson’s rookie contract and will pay him $6.969 million for this season. He has sought a new contract for the last year, although the dismissal of John Idzik as general manager at the end of last season may have been a setback.Maccagnan has repeatedly expressed the desire to retain Wilkerson and said the front office allowed for a new deal in its management of the salary cap. In a conference call with season-ticket holders last week, Maccagnan emphasized that negotiations would have to wait until after the draft from April 30 to May 2. Maccagnan said of Wilkerson’s situation: “That’s something we’re going to discuss here in the off-season at some point in time with him. Obviously, for us, first we’re going to work ourselves through the draft process. After that, that’s something we’re going to address going forward. I think, for a lot of these things, it may be a process.”The sides are not considered close to an agreement.“Obviously, the agent and Muhammad have their perspective,” Maccagnan has said. “We’re going to have our point and, at the end of the day, hopefully find a middle ground we’re both comfortable with.”Wilkerson, who is solid against the run, was credited with 56 tackles and six sacks as part of a defensive line that represented one of the Jets’ few strengths under Rex Ryan, the team’s former coach, in 2014. Wilkerson impressed teammates when he returned from turf toe to play the final two games, even though nothing was at stake. He has 24 ½ sacks through his first four seasons.If the Jets fail to agree with Wilkerson on a new long-term deal, they could elect to place a franchise tag on him for 2016. Wilkerson is not required to report until June 9, when the Jets hold their first mandatory team activity.The third-year quarterback Geno Smith was among the players who arrived at the Jets’ complex in Florham Park, N.J. He told reporters during a conference call that he spent part of the off-season drilling with Tom House, a former major league pitching coach who also has worked with quarterbacks, consulting with Tom Brady, Drew Brees and Tim Tebow, among others.“I’m working really hard on improving my mechanics and some other things I thought I needed to improve on,” Smith said.Smith is expected to compete with Ryan Fitzpatrick, a newly acquired journeyman who is familiar with the system of the new offensive coordinator, Chan Gailey. The Jets also may be in position to draft Marcus Mariota, a top quarterback prospect from Oregon, with the sixth pick over all.Advertisement