By FRED BIERMANOCT. 16, 2015
 Saturday 7 Michigan State at 12 Michigan3:30 p.m. Eastern, ESPNMorale is sky high in Ann Arbor after three straight shutouts. The Wolverines are giving up only 6.3 points a game (fewest in the Football Bowl Subdivision) and have been steadily climbing the rankings under their new coach, Jim Harbaugh. The offense has been taking care of the ball, special teams have come up big, and the Wolverines are rolling. In East Lansing, the outlook is a little shakier. The Spartans have had a rash of injuries (particularly on the offensive line) and have struggled to put away inferior opponents like Purdue and Rutgers. While they are underdogs in this one, Michigan State has owned this rivalry lately, winning six of the last seven meetings. The Spartans’ Connor Cook is the quarterback with the most wins in the program’s history (29-3), and he has a knack for coming through when the spotlight is on. The matchup between Michigan State receiver Aaron Burbridge and Michigan cornerback Jourdan Lewis is as good as it gets.10 Alabama at 9 Texas A&M3:30 p.m., CBSA lot has changed at Texas A&M since Alabama blew out the Aggies, 59-0, last season. Texas A&M’s Kyle Allen has taken over at quarterback and emerged as one of the best passers in the Southeastern Conference. With a solid running game and a host of fine receivers, there is little chance that the Aggies are going to be blown out again. On the other side of the ball, Texas A&M has a new defensive coordinator, and end Myles Garrett leads the conference with seven and a half sacks. Alabama has bounced back well from its loss to Mississippi, but a loss here would all but eliminate the Crimson Tide from contention in the SEC West — and from the national championship playoff. One player to watch: Alabama kicker Adam Griffith is just 6 of 12 on field-goal attempts this season.8 Florida at 6 Louisiana State7 p.m., ESPNThis game has been overshadowed by the suspension of Florida quarterback Will Grier for violating the N.C.A.A.’s policy on performance-enhancing drugs. Florida was ascendant, but this changes the narrative. Treon Harris, who is not without experience, will step in. L.S.U. has one of the best players in college football in running back Leonard Fournette, who is the favorite to win the Heisman Trophy. Quarterback Brandon Harris is coming off a solid game against South Carolina, but the Gators will look to slow Fournette and force Harris to beat them. Of course, slowing Fournette is something yet to be accomplished this season. Still, this Gators defense is probably the best one that L.S.U. has seen this season.Penn State at 1 Ohio State8 p.m., ABCThe Buckeyes might have figured out their two-quarterback system last week. Cardale Jones marches Ohio State down the field, and J. T. Barrett takes it into the end zone. This week, a solid Penn State defense, which leads the F.B.S. with 25 sacks, comes into this prime-time matchup.Advertisement17 Iowa at 20 NorthwesternNoon, ABCIowa has been one of the biggest surprises in college football. A win here, and the Hawkeyes have a real shot to go undefeated. They do not play Ohio State, Michigan State or Michigan this season, and after this game, they do not face a ranked opponent. Northwestern is hoping to bounce back after a 38-0 drubbing at Michigan last week.13 Mississippi at MemphisNoon, ABC/ESPN2 (Regional)This a huge game for Memphis, which is 5-0 and has won 12 consecutive games dating to last season. The fourth-year coach Justin Fuente is a rising star in the coaching world.AdvertisementSouthern California at 14 Notre Dame7:30 p.m., NBCFirst, the Trojans lost to Washington, a team they were favored to beat by more than two touchdowns. Then, on Monday, Coach Steve Sarkisian was dismissed. Now they play an Irish team that is fighting to work its way back into the playoff conversation.Arizona State at 4 Utah10 p.m., ESPNUnbeaten Utah forced five interceptions last week against Cal. This week, the Utes get a tricky matchup against a Sun Devils team that needs a victory to stay in the Pac-12 South race. FRED BIERMANA version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Games to Watch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.