By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 16, 2015
The Chicago Cubs staggered into Citi Field the last time they visited the Mets, at the end of June. They had just been swept in St. Louis by the Cardinals, and Joe Maddon, their freethinking manager, wanted to relax them. He hired a magician to perform in the clubhouse, and the Cubs swept the series.The Cubs took all seven games from the Mets this season, and now the teams will play in the best-of-seven National League Championship Series, their first postseason meeting. The regular-season matchups mean little now.“You know, the Cubs won 97, we won 90, and the difference in the two records was the 0-7 that we had against the Cubs,” Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson said in the clubhouse at Dodger Stadium on Thursday night, after the players had drenched him in Champagne and beer.“But this is a different team. The young pitching that we have has a little more experience; the offense is better. But they’re a very good team; they’ve got great pitching and some outstanding young and experienced hitters as well. It’s going to be a great series. We’re happy they’re on their way to New York.”A different team? You could say that. The last time the Mets played the Cubs, on July 2, Darrell Ceciliani started in center field, Eric Campbell started in left field, Johnny Monell was the catcher and John Mayberry Jr. was the first bat off the bench. The Mets lost to Jake Arrieta, and Jacob deGrom punched a Gatorade bucket in the dugout.AdvertisementBy the end of the month, the Mets had added center fielder Yoenis Cespedes, promoted left fielder Michael Conforto, activated catcher Travis d’Arnaud from the disabled list and added Kelly Johnson to the bench. David Wright returned in August. The difference has been striking.Though Daniel Murphy seemed to do it all by himself in the division series clincher, the offense as a whole has been hot for a while. After July 25, the Mets led the National League in runs, homers and slugging percentage. They will need that firepower to match the Cubs’ wrecking crew of Anthony Rizzo, Kris Bryant, Kyle Schwarber, Jorge Soler and more.AdvertisementThe Cubs bruised the Cardinals for 10 home runs in a four-game division series victory, after homering twice off the Pittsburgh ace Gerrit Cole in the wild card game.“It’s obviously been part of Theo’s strategy to look for guys with a little more power,” the Cubs owner Tom Ricketts said, referring to his baseball operations president, Theo Epstein. “Power is something that’s been declining in M.L.B. over all. But he’s found the right guys. The key is they’re loose, relaxed, they’re looking for their pitch and taking advantage of it.”The Cubs’ emphasis shows in the makeup of their roster. The lineup is young and largely built from within, while the pitching staff was assembled with one pricey free agent (the Game 1 starter, Jon Lester) and other teams’ castoffs.That includes the ace, Arrieta, who often struggled in Baltimore before the Cubs traded for him in 2013. They let him break out his deceptive crossfire delivery again, and Arrieta has used it to dominate the league.The Mets have built around their own power pitchers, with deGrom the ace but Matt Harvey, the Game 1 starter, the marquee name. DeGrom, Harvey, Noah Syndergaard and Steven Matz combined for a 2.99 E.R.A. against the Dodgers, and closer Jeurys Familia retired all 16 batters he faced.History should be on the Mets’ side in this clash. They roared back to overtake the Cubs in 1969 on the way to their first title, and clinched the N.L. East with a victory over the Cubs in 1986 as they stormed toward their other crown.AdvertisementAnd while “Back to the Future 2” decreed that the Cubs would win the 2015 World Series (against a team from Miami with an alligator mascot) there is also this: When Familia closed out the Dodgers on Thursday, it was the Mets’ first two-inning save in the postseason since Oct. 27, 1986. That was the night Jesse Orosco secured the Mets’ last championship.LESTER, ARRIETA AND ... The Cubs have two types of games — those started by Jon Lester and Jake Arrieta, and bullpen games. Their other starters in the division series were Kyle Hendricks and Jason Hammel, and Joe Maddon does not hesitate to remove them at the first sign of trouble. Hendricks has not thrown more than 93 pitches in any of his last 12 starts, and Hammel has gone past five innings just once in his last eight starts.SAME STATS, DIFFERENT STORIES Both closers, Jeurys Familia and the Cubs’ Hector Rondon, had a 1.00 WHIP (walks plus hits per inning pitched) with an earned run average below 2.00 this season. But while Familia has stayed with the Mets since signing from the Dominican Republic in 2007, Rondon joined the Cubs as a Rule 5 draft pick in December 2012. He was the Cleveland Indians’ minor league pitcher of the year in 2009, before Tommy John surgery in 2010 and an elbow fracture the next year. The gamble on his health has paid off for the Cubs, who got 30 saves in 34 chances from Rondon this season.FEEL THE BREEZE The Cubs’ hitters led the majors in strikeouts — and so did their pitchers. No team offense was within 100 strikeouts of the Cubs, but the Mets, who have a power pitching staff, must be careful: The Cubs’ hitters also average the most pitches per plate appearance in the majors (3.97). The Cubs may stick with their patient approach to try to drive up the pitch counts of the Mets’ starters, but they, too, cannot emphasize that strategy too much. The Mets’ pitchers have exceptional control, issuing the second fewest walks in the majors.INSURANCE PLAN When the Cubs acquired Addison Russell last summer, speculation raged that they could offer the Mets a shortstop solution. After all, the Cubs had Russell, Starlin Castro and Javier Baez to play short, and the Mets had a surplus of pitching to send back. In reality, the teams never matched up — Castro now plays second base, and Russell will miss the N.L.C.S. with a strained left hamstring. Baez replaced him in Game 3 of the division series and homered in the Game 4 clincher. A consensus top 10 prospect last year, Baez, 22, hit .324 with 13 homers at Class AAA Iowa this season.STATION TO STATION The Mets had only 51 stolen bases this season, the fewest in the National League. That’s good news for the Cubs’ Jon Lester, who does not like throwing to first and allowed a major league-high 44 steals this season. Joe Maddon said that Lester was quick to the plate and that his preferred catcher, David Ross, helped him control the running game better. “The biggest thing with Jon, I really like the fact that he is able to still maintain his concentration at the plate,” Maddon said. “It’s always going to be paramount. Honestly, you can’t underestimate the value of David in those moments.”UNIFORMS The Cubs have worn their blue alternate jerseys in all three of their road games this postseason. That jersey, somewhat oddly, includes a National League logo patch on the right sleeve — the only jersey in the majors that features a league patch. The Cubs’ gray pants also have a look all their own — they come with a tiny version of the Cubs’ famous bull’s-eye logo, right below the belt on the player’s left side. No other team does this, either.ALMOST PERFECT More than 40 years before their only franchise no-hitter (by Johan Santana in 2012), the Mets’ Tom Seaver nearly spun a perfect game against the Cubs on July 9, 1969, at Shea Stadium. With one out in the ninth, the Cubs’ Jimmy Qualls swung at a first-pitch sinker and rapped a clean single to left to ruin Seaver’s bid. “When I got to first base, I was never booed so bad in my life,” Qualls told The Palm Beach Post in 2008. “We got back to Chicago and I got all this hate mail. You could tell by the handwriting it was just kids, little Mets fans: ‘You bum, don’t show up in New York.’ I don’t get any letters like that anymore.” Qualls, a rookie, finished with 31 career hits and a .223 average. Seaver would throw one no-hitter, for Cincinnati, in 1978.COMMON ALUMNI More than 100 players, from David Aardsma to Don Zimmer, have suited up for both teams. Dave Kingman led the N.L. in homers and strikeouts for the Cubs in 1979, and did it again for the Mets three years later. Turk Wendell, the superstitious reliever, wore No. 13 for the Cubs and No. 99 for the Mets. Aaron Heilman, who allowed Yadier Molina’s game-winning homer in Game 7 of the N.L.C.S. in 2006, moved on to the Cubs three years later. Shawon Dunston, an inspirational leader of the Mets’ 1999 playoff team, spent 12 years with the Cubs, who drafted him first over all (four picks before Dwight Gooden) in 1982. The original Met Jim Hickman, the intense reliever Randy Myers, the excitable catcher Todd Pratt and the methodical starter Steve Trachsel are among the many others who wore the blue of both teams. Mets Manager Terry Collins did not play for either organization, but the last year the Mets reached the World Series, in 2000, he worked as an advance scout for the Cubs.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Cubs Swept Mets, but Now Slate Is Clean.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.