AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe final of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament Monday night is freshmen versus seniors, traditional power versus upstart, Jahlil Okafor versus Frank Kaminsky, Mike Krzyzewski versus Bo Ryan.And maybe too close to call.Though there are a few places that have Wisconsin a 1-point favorite, at this hour most bookmakers around the country have made the game a 50-50 proposition: pick ’em.There has not been a true pick ’em championship game in the last 30 years. The closest recent game was in 2006, when Florida was a 1-point favorite over U.C.L.A. Despite the line, that game turned out not to be close, with Florida winning, 73-57.A pick ’em game is a particularly challenging test for those prognosticators daring enough to go on the record with a pick.It is not hard to find someone predicting just about every possible outcome. But despite the apparent closeness of the matchup, many of the experts seem to be leaning one way:Here is what they are saying.Seth Davis in a Sports Illustrated video says the key will be Wisconsin stopping Duke from making 3s.Tim Cato on sbnation sees Sam Dekker as a key to a Wisconsin win:“Even if Kaminsky is slowed, though, no one has been able to bother Dekker. His 16 points on Saturday was his lowest point total all tournament, and he still nailed a huge and-1 layup and the step-back 3-pointer that gave Wisconsin a lead for good.”A quintessentially American event, this year’s N.C.A.A. tournament has attracted attention from across the pond. D.J. Gallo of The Guardian picks Wisconsin, but perhaps more controversially, writes of Duke:“This is hard to admit in my own brain, let alone write in a public forum with my name attached to it — they are ... here goes ... not loathsome.”The Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel rounded up the picks of 11 experts, and they tilt, 8-3, in favor of Wisconsin, though Charles Barkley and Dick Vitale are among those picking Duke.Chip Patterson on CBS Sports says Duke is peaking at the right time.Jeff Sagarin, the dean of computer rankers, has three similar systems that rate Duke between 0.3 and 1.8 points better than Wisconsin. (Sagarin’s ELO system, which does not take into account margin of victory and is considered, even by him, to be less accurate, favors Wisconsin.)At The New York Post, Howie Kussoy likes Wisconsin’s experience and confidence, while Zach Braziller sees Quinn Cook hitting the winning shot for Duke.Detroit News writers are also split: Two pick Duke and two pick Wisconsin. Bob Wojnowski likes Duke’s defense, and John Niyo touts Wisconsin’s size advantage.On balance, it seems, more experts see Wisconsin winning its first title since 1941 than Duke winning the fifth of the Krzyzewski era. But being the favored team of the experts does not bring a guarantee of victory. Just ask a Kentucky fan. Or maybe be kind, and wait a few more days.Advertisement