By ROBERT HARMSAPRIL 8, 2015
DURHAM, N.C. —  About halfway through the 11-mile drive along Route 15-501 from Chapel Hill to Durham stands a green sign that welcomes drivers to Durham, or as it says, “the city of champions.” The sign, which features the Duke logo, bears reminders of national championships the Blue Devils have won, including the 2010 men’s basketball title.As of 3:26 p.m. Tuesday — the day after Duke, powered by four freshmen, won its fifth national title by defeating Wisconsin, 68-63, in Indianapolis — the sign had no mention of the 2015 championship.On Duke’s campus, though, the celebration had been going since the game ended. And thousands of fans welcomed back the Blue Devils during a ceremony at Cameron Indoor Stadium.The fans, many of them already wearing 2015 national championship T-shirts, watched a replay of the game on the giant screen hanging above midcourt, cheering and gasping as if they had no idea what would happen next. The scoreboard read, “Duke 68, Wisconsin 63,” and the time was stuck at 20:15.AdvertisementWhen the replay finished, with images of players and coaches celebrating on the court of Lucas Oil Stadium and inside the locker room, the crowd at Cameron Indoor erupted into cheers.AdvertisementSoon, at 5:02 p.m., those players and coaches, most wearing Duke blue T-shirts and black hats with gold lettering that read, “NATIONAL CHAMPIONS,” walked onto the court to a standing ovation and loud cheers. Several players, including the senior guard Quinn Cook and the freshman center Jahlil Okafor, wore a strand of net, cut down in the postgame celebration in Indianapolis, between their foreheads and their hats.Most of the gear, excluding the pieces of nylon, was available for sale in the team store, in an arena adjacent to Cameron Indoor. Patricia Dickinson, a petite woman with a thick Southern accent and an infectious smile, was running the small and stuffy store, next to Conise Alston, a co-worker wearing a neon shirt that read, “Duke National Championship Staff.”Dickinson has been working at Duke since 1980, so she has been around for all five titles. “They just seem to get better and better,” she said.The store, Dickinson said, opened 30 minutes early Tuesday because of the increased customer interest. Sales started slowly, Dickinson said, but soon picked up. “It’s been booming,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dickinson said the day-after sales were running far more smoothly than they did after Duke’s first title, in 1991. “We’d never done it before,” she said, so it was overwhelming.Mike Krzyzewski, the team’s coach, was also around for the 1991 championship, and he was at Tuesday’s celebration at Cameron. Bob Harris, the team’s announcer for the past 39 years, opened by saying: “I just have one thing to say, folks. How sweet it is!” The crowd shouted the catchphrase in unison.Then Krzyzewski took the stage. “It’s good to be back home,” he said, and fans cheered loudly. For about 20 minutes, Krzyzewski, relaxed and jovial, joked about his players and praised his team’s unity and resolve throughout the season.He said that before every game this season, he listened to a song that “gets me ready.”“Do we have that song?” he asked, and a few seconds later “Everytime We Touch” by Cascada was thumping throughout the arena. Krzyzewski, 68, clapped and thrust his right arm forward, pumping up the crowd.AdvertisementOn several occasions, Krzyzewski referred to current music or popular culture — he said he had gained an appreciation for the rapper Meek Mill — and his players smiled during all of them. Krzyzewski said it was important to adapt, and his flexibility throughout his career was a big reason he was celebrating a fifth championship.The coach concluded his speech with a request: “Savor this for a little bit, all right? Before you start talking about next year.”Seconds later, “We Are the Champions” by Queen blared on the speakers, and Krzyzewski and his players walked out.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.