By PAT PICKENSAPRIL 7, 2015
NEWARK — The Rangers and the Islanders are gearing up for the playoffs again. The Rangers, who clinched the Presidents’ Trophy for the best regular-season record on Tuesday, are intent on defending their crown as Eastern Conference champions. The Islanders are nearing their second postseason trip in three seasons.But for the Devils, there will be no playoff push, no run to the Stanley Cup.For the third straight season, the Devils’ season will end on the last day of the regular season, and for an organization as prideful as theirs, that simply is not good enough.“Obviously, we’re not where we need to be, and it’s tough,” forward Adam Henrique, who reached the Stanley Cup finals in his rookie season in New Jersey, 2011-12, said after the Devils fell to the Rangers, 4-2. Two seasons ago, injuries to Martin Brodeur and Ilya Kovalchuk sabotaged the Devils; last season, they lost all 13 shootouts, falling in overtime 18 times as they fell 5 points short of a playoff berth.This season, they have been outplayed for long stretches. The Devils sported a hodgepodge of young defensemen and aging forwards who have combined to score only 176 goals through 80 games, the N.H.L.’s third-fewest ahead of only the conference cellar-dwellers Buffalo and Arizona.AdvertisementThe lack of offense cost Peter DeBoer his job, as Lou Lamoriello, the team president and general manager, replaced him and added the co-coaches Scott Stevens and Adam Oates.Advertisement“There are some pieces that have to be taken care of up front,” Lamoriello said.The Devils have gone 20-19-6 since the coaching change.There were other bright spots: the emergence of the defenseman and former No. 4 overall pick Adam Larsson, and goalie Cory Schneider’s .926 save percentage, which ranks fourth, in his first season as an N.H.L. starter. Schneider started the first 20 games and entered Tuesday having faced the third-most shots against (1,916) and having played the fifth-most minutes (3,806).All that rings hollow for Schneider.“Anybody can come and play 70 games and not make the playoffs,” he said. “The level I want to get to next is to help this team make the playoffs, and help the team in the process.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, if they fail to win one of their last two, the Devils will finish with their lowest point total in an 80-or-more-game season since 1990-91. The Devils also failed to claim any wins against the Islanders and the Rangers, losing all four to the Rangers for the first time since 1993-94.Schneider kept the Devils in Tuesday’s game, with 36 saves. The Devils were outshot by 19-4 in the first period and managed only 10 shots through two periods and 21 over all.Even without Mats Zuccarello, who sat because of “overall soreness,” the Rangers’ speed and skill frustrated the Devils, as they earned seven power plays in the first two periods. Kevin Hayes and Ryan McDonagh scored just 47 seconds apart in the first period to give the Rangers a 2-0 lead.Patrik Elias, who registered his 1,000th point earlier in the season, cut the Devils’ deficit to 2-1 at 17 minutes 44 seconds of the period with a power-play goal on the Devils’ only man advantage of the game. James Sheppard’s second goal with the Rangers made the score 3-1 at 10:41 of the third period.The Devils controlled play for much of the third, outshooting the Rangers, 11-7, but could manage only Steve Bernier’s goal at 11:32, failing to come up with the equalizer.“They’re clearly having a fantastic year,” Schneider said of the Rangers. “It’s not an easy team to play against, but we pride ourselves on making things difficult.”AdvertisementSLAP SHOTSCarl Hagelin scored his 17th goal late in the third period for the Rangers (52-21-7), who have won five straight games. ... The Rangers’ 52 wins tie the franchise record, and their 111 points are 1 fewer than the club mark set in 1993-94, the last time they won the Stanley Cup.An article in some editions on Wednesday about the Rangers’ 4-2 victory over the Devils on Tuesday referred incorrectly to the Islanders’ qualification for the postseason. The Islanders clinched a postseason berth on Thursday; they had not yet qualified for their second postseason trip in three seasons on Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Devils Can Only Watch Rangers’ Playoff Preparation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.