

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
APRIL 7, 2015
The Nets were fresh off their 11th victory in their past 14 games, and their locker room at Barclays Center on Monday night was just a few notches short of festive. Bojan Bogdanovic fielded questions about the team’s strong bench play. Brook Lopez reminisced about the team’s defunct mascot, BrooklyKnight, and his old pals, Sly Fox and Mini Sly.“I miss those guys,” Lopez said.And then there was Deron Williams, who mused aloud about how well he and Lopez had been playing together amid the team’s push for the playoffs. Williams and Lopez have been teammates for four-plus seasons, but given their injury-marred histories, there have been times when they have felt more like strangers.“I don’t know how many games total we’ve played together,” Williams said after the 106-96 victory over the Portland Trail Blazers, “but I don’t think it’s been as many as one would think.”Consider that the Nets have played 351 games, including the playoffs, since Williams joined the team in February 2011. Williams and Lopez have both dressed for work, at the same time and in the same place, as ambulatory members of the Nets, in just 161 of them. That works out to 45.9 percent of the team’s total games.AdvertisementIt is difficult enough for N.B.A. teams to build chemistry and confidence when players are healthy and lineups are stable. Remove one or two high-priced stars from an already fragile formula, and the challenge becomes that much more daunting. This is the life that the Nets have lived in recent seasons, as Williams and Lopez have coped with a smorgasbord of injuries.AdvertisementDuring the past six weeks, though, the Nets have surged, a swirl of positive numbers. They are scoring more points, collecting more steals and winning more games. But their most important number might be 31, which is the number of consecutive games that Lopez and Williams have appeared in together in uniform.“We’ve had stretches of the past where we’ve played well together in the pick-and-roll, and we know how to play with each other,” Lopez said after finishing with 32 points and 9 rebounds against the Trail Blazers. “But unfortunately, it’s been very limited these past few years.”Given their recent play, it almost seems like a statistical anomaly that the Nets (36-41) still have a losing record. But after slapping together an early-season body of work that was full of leaks, the Nets have discovered that the Eastern Conference is a forgiving place. The playoffs are well within reach barring a collapse during their final five games of the regular season.“I just think that Brook and Deron, they’re both healthier,” said Coach Lionel Hollins, who paused slightly before adding the final “er” to that statement, aware that Lopez and Williams have spent a good portion of their careers on trainers’ tables. “As the season has gone on, they’ve gotten more confidence in what they can and can’t do.”Entering Tuesday, the Nets were a full game ahead of the Boston Celtics for seventh place in the East. The Miami Heat and the Indiana Pacers were two games back in a tie for ninth. The Nets are in control, a new reality for them and something to savor ahead of their game Wednesday night against the Atlanta Hawks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’re trying to close the door on those other teams,” Hollins said, “and the only way you can do that is by winning.”Hollins cited another important factor in the team’s upswing: the Feb. 19 trade that sent Kevin Garnett to the Minnesota Timberwolves in exchange for Thaddeus Young. The Nets instantly got younger and more agile, and Young has been able to draw attention from defenders in ways that the aging Garnett no longer could.“We changed the dynamics of our team,” Hollins said, adding: “Thaddeus has just been good for us since he’s been here. Kind of a garbage man. We run a few plays for him, but a lot of times, he’s just running the court, getting offensive rebounds and doing whatever he can to score.”AdvertisementFor Lopez, in particular, Young has operated as a pressure valve, clearing space for pick-and-rolls and post-ups. Before the trade, Lopez averaged 15.3 points and 6.2 rebounds a game. Since then, Lopez has averaged 20 points and 9.2 rebounds, earning consecutive Eastern Conference Player of the Week Awards in the process.It has been an extraordinary resurgence for Lopez, who appeared in just 17 games last season before having foot surgery. What followed was an extended period of rehabilitation mixed with another round of questions about his durability and trade discussions — a potentially toxic blend for someone seeking to reassemble his game.“He’s a stubborn guy,” said the Trail Blazers’ Robin Lopez, who had the unenviable task of defending his twin brother on Monday. “No matter what people say about him, no matter what happens, he’s just going to stick with what he knows how to do. That’s what he’s been doing. He’s always been capable like that.”Their pairing on Monday made for a strange scene. For the length of the game, the Lopez brothers did not say a word to each other. It has always been that way between them, a tacit understanding that basketball is business — that their discussions about comic books and the virtues of the drive-through window at fast-food joints can wait.“I’m sure it looks really weird to you guys,” Brook Lopez said.More unusual, perhaps, was the sight of Lopez and Williams controlling the game late in the fourth quarter, a two-man game that finally has its missing parts.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Long an Unfinished Puzzle, the Nets Find the Missing Pieces.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »