By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 8, 2015
The Atlanta Braves scored seven runs in the first inning off Mat Latos and beat the host Miami Marlins for the second day in a row, 12-2, on Tuesday night.Latos, acquired from Cincinnati in the off-season, lasted only two-thirds of an inning in the shortest outing of his career. He was booed as he left the game, his first for his hometown team, and departed with a 94.50 E.R.A.It was the shortest outing by a starting pitcher in his Marlins debut, according to Stats. Latos failed to record a strikeout for the first time in 154 career starts.The Braves’ big inning included run-scoring doubles by Freddie Freeman, Christian Bethancourt and Chris Johnson, and a two-run single by Andrelton Simmons.AdvertisementROCKIES 5, BREWERS 2 Jordan Lyles pitched six effective innings, and visiting Colorado hit six doubles for the second consecutive game in a win over Milwaukee.AdvertisementLyles limited the Brewers to two runs and five hits.Six players doubled for the Rockies, who had 12 hits over all. The Rockies, who managed only one hit off Brewers starter Matt Garza through three innings, scored three runs in the third.ORIOLES 6, RAYS 5 Adam Jones drove in two runs with a double during a four-run first inning, and visiting Baltimore hung on to beat Tampa Bay.Steve Pearce homered for the second straight game, a two-run drive that made it 6-0 in the second for the Orioles.Baltimore’s Chris Davis went 0 for 3 and was hit by a pitch as the designated hitter in his return after a 25-game suspension for a positive amphetamine test.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CARDINALS-CUBS POSTPONED The St. Louis Cardinals’ game at the Chicago Cubs was postponed after rain and cold weather were forecast for Tuesday. No makeup date was announced.INDIANS SIGN NO. 2 PITCHER Carlos Carrasco finalized a four-year, $22 million contract with the Cleveland Indians, a day before he was to make his season debut against Houston and two days after the Indians completed a five-year, $38 million deal with their ace, Corey Kluber. Carrasco’s agreement includes club options for 2019 and 2020.SPRING ATTENDANCE RECORD Major League Baseball set a spring training attendance record this year, surpassing four million and averaging nearly 8,400 fans a game.The league said attendance was up 11.7 percent from last season’s total of 3,610,738, and the average rose 3.8 percent from a year ago.AdvertisementThis spring, the 481 dates drew 4,034,708 fans for an average of 8,388. That topped the record 3,823,479 set in 2013, while the average attendance eclipsed the previous best of 8,078 in 2014.GIANTS’ CAIN ON THE D.L. Before throwing a pitch in the regular season, San Francisco’s Matt Cain wound up on the disabled list.The Giants said that Cain, a 30-year-old right-hander, had a flexor tendon strain in his right forearm and put him on the disabled list retroactive to Saturday.Cain could miss a few weeks.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Marlins Starter’s Debut Is One to Forget as Braves Roll.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.