By HARVEY ARATONAPRIL 7, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  Connecticut’s third straight N.C.A.A. women’s basketball championship was impassioned, not pretty. But in the end, it was perfect.Withstanding a rugged challenge from Notre Dame in a rematch of last year’s national title game, the Huskies earned a 63-53 victory on Tuesday night and a record 10th championship for Coach Geno Auriemma, whose teams have never lost in the title game and who tied the U.C.L.A. legend John Wooden for the most titles in college basketball history.The victory also made forward Breanna Stewart, who was named the Final Four’s most outstanding player, 3 for 3 in title games, and point guard Moriah Jefferson on the path for a chance at an unprecedented fourth championship next season.“I said that I wanted to win four championships, but you can’t win four without winning three,” a tearful Stewart said.AdvertisementNotre Dame, which has lost in four title games in the last five years, made Stewart and Connecticut sweat for this one. The Irish stayed in the game deep into the second half and limited Stewart to 8 points on 8 shots from the floor. But the 6-foot-4, long-armed Stewart dominated the lane with 15 rebounds and four blocked shots, and her teammates — mainly Connecticut’s lone senior starter, Kaleena Mosqueda-Lewis, and Jefferson, each with 15 points — picked her up.AdvertisementThe versatile forward Morgan Tuck added 12 points and 7 assists, and Connecticut’s aggressive perimeter defense — particularly Jefferson’s — forced Notre Dame’s star guard, Jewell Loyd, into 4-for-18 shooting.“An incredible group,” Auriemma said of his team, which finished the season 38-1.What was different about this latest showdown between the premier women’s programs was the absence of the mutual hostility that had crept into the rivalry and surfaced on the path to last season’s final, a battle of unbeaten teams.Auriemma attributed those prickly feelings to the number of Big East Conference collisions before Notre Dame left for the Atlantic Coast Conference last season and simultaneously disappeared from Connecticut’s regular-season schedule.The rivalry was restored in December, with Connecticut rallying from an early 10-point deficit to win by 18, though in that game the Irish were without Brianna Turner, an athletic 6-3 forward, who struggled with nerves in the first half Tuesday but became an inside force and led Coach Muffet McGraw’s team with 14 points and 10 rebounds.“You know, we have a really good relationship,” McGraw said. “I think that both being from Philly, we just share some sort of bond.”Beyond the bond was a shared benefit of maintaining a united front at the top of the food chain. In the aftermath of the now-dated fallout between Connecticut and Tennessee and the discontinuation of their popular series, Auriemma and McGraw understand the need to get along for the good of a sport trying to generate all the attention it can get.Auriemma and McGraw have also consistently landed a healthy number of the best high school players — for next season, too — and that has created a false narrative reminiscent of what John Calipari faces at Kentucky, that it’s not about the coaching.Advertisement“We don’t get all of them; we just get some,” Auriemma said of the talent. “So whatever expectations these kids have, they still have to come and prove it. They just don’t show up in September, go to practice, and somebody says here’s when the championship game is and here’s when the parade is.”Not many people believed Notre Dame’s young team could halt Connecticut’s title march, but McGraw had promised to challenge Stewart with new looks on defense, and did so. Stewart was largely contained, with Irish defenders taking turns bumping, face-guarding and providing weak-side help on passes into the post.Stewart also gave Auriemma and the large Connecticut fan contingent a fright by falling awkwardly with 8 minutes 4 seconds left in the first half and limping off to have her ankle retaped.The Huskies had an early lead but struggled to get good looks and often wound up settling for misfired jumpers. That led to no free throws being taken until 1:37 remained in the half and 38 percent shooting from the floor, along with eight turnovers.Connecticut’s defense was also stout, while Notre Dame was sloppy with the ball. After committing no more than 11 turnovers over all in their three previous games, the Irish coughed the ball up a whopping 13 times in the first half and made things worse by shooting 30 percent from the floor, including several blown layups.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, thanks to Turner’s agile presence inside, the Irish were trailing by only 51-46 with 7:36 left. That was when Jefferson and the freshman Kia Nurse — by reputation Connecticut’s least desirable perimeter threats — hit consecutive 3-pointers. Mosqueda-Lewis, running the floor off with Jefferson breaking out of the backcourt, nailed another 3 from the right wing before hitting again from 16 feet.“The two buckets K made down the stretch was kind of the difference,” Auriemma said.The lead was 61-50, and Wooden was soon joined as college basketball’s most decorated coach by Auriemma, who recalled having met the Wizard of Westwood at a clinic about 15 years ago.“We talked for about 15 minutes,” said Auriemma, who several years later opened Sports Illustrated to find a story quoting Wooden, who died in 2010, on why he loved the Connecticut women’s team.“He says, ‘I’ve never met their coach, but he seems like a nice young fellow,’ ” Auriemma said. “I’m like, O.K., so much for my impression I made on Coach Wooden.”Now history will now remember Auriemma as Wooden’s equal — at least until next year.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: UConn’s Win Isn’t Pretty, but Title Is a Perfect 10th for Its Coach.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.