By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 7, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS —  Across the street from the hotel where the Wisconsin men’s basketball team was staying, Andy North stood next to his wife, Sue, staring blankly into the distance. It was the same look he had 70 minutes earlier while shoulder to shoulder with Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers in the Badgers’ section at Lucas Oil Stadium.North’s shot clock was running down. In a little over eight hours, he was due on the ESPN set on the grounds of Augusta National Golf Club at to begin his workweek of on-air Masters analysis. He had no time to waste getting to the airport for his overnight flight to Georgia. But after packing the last of his luggage in a rental car, North lingered at the curb for a few minutes, hoping to see the Badgers players and their coach, Bo Ryan, a longtime friend of North’s, before he left.A familiar presence in the Wisconsin locker room during its enchanted season, North did not have the proper credentials to gain access to the Badgers’ inner sanctum to console them after their 68-63 loss to Duke in the N.C.A.A. championship game.North’s wife asked if he wanted to wait a few more minutes. North glanced at the time and sighed. “No,” he said. “We better get going.”AdvertisementHe pulled into the parking lot of the executive aviation center at Indianapolis International Airport shortly before 1 a.m., parked and waded through a multitude of Duke fans waiting to board private jets for the trip home.North, a two-time United States Open champion, and his wife were driven on the tarmac to an eight-seat corporate jet operated by Wheels Up, a company for which North does promotional work.Usually, the Norths fly into Augusta the Sunday of Masters week, a day before his broadcasting duties begin, and watch the N.C.A.A. title game the next night over plates of spaghetti with Tom Watson and his wife.AdvertisementNorth, 65, is not easily thrown off his routine, but he did not need much of a push from this year’s Wisconsin team to rearrange his work and travel schedule. (Curtis Strange substituted for him on Monday’s broadcast.) The Badgers, with a core of seniors, lodged themselves deeper in the hearts of Ryan, their irascible coach, and the Wisconsin family, of which North has long been a part, because of the way they rebounded from a disappointing loss to Kentucky in last year’s national semifinals.“Oh, shoot,” North said as the plane idled in an hourlong line on the tarmac. “I feel bad for the guys.”It was after 2 o’clock in the morning when the plane took off. North had had more than two and a half hours to process the loss, and yet it remained in some respects unfathomable.“These teams don’t come along all the time,” North said. “You don’t find the mix of big guys who can do a lot of things, guys who get better every year, who are so close and so selfless. Bo will take a bunch of kids next season, and he’ll make them better by the end of the year. But this was a special team. I suspect this group will stay connected for quite some time.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.North’s ties to Wisconsin basketball go back decades. A son of a basketball coach, North considered playing hoops at Wisconsin before deciding to compete in golf at Florida. After college, he moved into the same Madison neighborhood as Ryan, then an assistant at Wisconsin.North and his wife donated money a few years ago to have a new floor installed at the Kohl Center on campus. He has attended Wisconsin games for as long as he can remember, but he felt a special affinity for this season’s team. “Because it was so loose and had so much fun,” he said.Using his smartphone, North reviewed the game statistics. He sighed again.“Josh took one shot,” he said, referring to guard Josh Gasser, a fifth-year senior who averaged 6.6 points during the regular season. He sighed. He scrolled through the Wisconsin players’ Twitter feeds.“It’s hard because you know how the guys are feeling,” North said. “That’s the worst part.”After the final buzzer, North and Rodgers, who attended the game with his girlfriend, the actress Olivia Munn, stood, saying little, for eight minutes and watched the Blue Devils’ on-court celebration. Rodgers and North, both beloved Wisconsin sports figures, share a shorthand that made words unnecessary.Advertisement“There’s such a bond between people who have done this,” North said, “who have failed and succeeded, failed and succeeded, who have experienced the most exhilarating victories and the most gut-wrenching losses. Anyone who’s played sports at a high level, we’ve all felt that, we’ve all been a part of it.”As the plane made its way to Augusta at an altitude of 25,000 feet, through sometimes heavy rain, North exchanged text messages with Rodgers. It was after 3 a.m., and the two pilots expressed surprise that North was still awake.“I don’t sleep very well after these,” North said.The plane landed at the Augusta regional airport at 3:45 a.m. (Another private plane that took off from the Indianapolis airport Monday night crashed in Illinois, killing all seven people aboard.)North and his wife packed their luggage into another rental car. It was time for him to turn his attention to Tiger Woods’s return from a two-month layoff and Rory McIlroy’s bid for the one major title he needs to complete a career Grand Slam.“Another week starts right now,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Golfing Analyst Knows Thrill and Agony of the Badgers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.