By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 1, 2015
PHILADELPHIA —  Citizens Bank Park was so empty and silent Thursday afternoon that Kirk Nieuwenhuis could hear the radio broadcast wafting in from the stands as he stood in center field.“It was a little weird,” Nieuwenhuis said. “Being able to hear that, it was like, ‘Wow, there is absolutely no one here.’ But that’s going to change, soon.”In a matter of days, the Mets will be playing high-intensity playoff games in stadiums loaded with loud, raucous fans. But first they had to check off their final road game of the season, a desultory affair that was played in front of what seemed to be only several hundred fans — and the radio broadcasters.The game was originally scheduled for 7 p.m., but with bad weather approaching, it was moved to noon, and very few fans rearranged their schedule to watch the worst team in baseball play the Mets.AdvertisementThe Mets were resting most of their regular players in preparation for the playoffs, adding to the quiet, spring training feeling of the game, which the Phillies won, 3-0.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s a little odd,” David Wright said. “But I’ve been through things like this before where bad weather and time changes make things a little more awkward.”AdvertisementWright did not play, in order to rest his back, and neither did Yoenis Cespedes, who was struck on the left hand with a pitch in Wednesday’s sloppy game and sustained bruises to his middle and ring fingers. Cespedes told Manager Terry Collins that he could have played, but the Mets gave him the day off to recuperate. Collins said he was not certain if Cespedes would play Friday against the Nationals.Juan Uribe was sent back to New York to have his chest injury examined more closely. Collins said Uribe’s injury had showed little improvement, but the Mets will not have to decide whether Uribe can be on the division series roster until the day of the first game, next Friday.Steven Matz, who missed his scheduled start on Thursday because of a stiff upper back, felt much better. The Mets hope he can pitch in one of the three games against the Nationals to close out the regular season this weekend at Citi Field. If he gets through that in good health, he could pitch against the Los Angeles Dodgers in the division series.Collins said he was not certain when Wilmer Flores (back spasms) would be able to play. Flores said Thursday that he felt better and hoped to play this weekend. Daniel Murphy was also banged up from taking foul balls off his knee and feet, Collins said.Collins added that if the Mets and the Nationals play their series as scheduled — forecasts call for heavy rain — then the starters will play Friday, Saturday and part of Sunday’s game.Wright said he wanted to play in all three. He said his back felt strong heading into the playoffs, and he wants to be in proper rhythm as the Mets ramp back up for their first postseason appearance since 2006.Advertisement“We really need to bear down these last three games and get into the playoffs with some momentum, and kind of spring into the playoffs,” he said.The Mets have 89 wins, as do the Dodgers. The Mets hold the tiebreaker against the Dodgers because of their head-to-head record. Wright said the Mets still coveted home-field advantage, both for tactical reasons — the Dodgers are well below .500 on the road — and as a reward to their fans.Even if the weather is bad, the Mets still expect many more fans to attend the weekend series than showed up in Philadelphia on Thursday. The attendance was announced as 13,238, but there may have been fewer than 3,000 people in seats.Wright indicated the Mets would demonstrate their appreciation to fans at Citi Field this weekend, in their first encounter since clinching the East division. A tip of the cap, he said, would be in order.“It would be nice to give them a good series win against the Nationals before the playoff series begin,” Wright said. “It would be a nice gesture for us to play well in front of them and thank them for their support this year.”Inside PitchHANSEL ROBLES was suspended for three games and fined an undisclosed amount for intentionally throwing a pitch at Cameron Rupp of the Phillies on Wednesday night. Robles can serve the suspension this weekend and be eligible for the postseason.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: In Mets’ Road Finale, Empty Victory for the Phillies .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.