AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinWASHINGTON — As Rob Manfred walked out to the pitcher’s mound at Nationals Park on Monday for the ceremonial first pitch, he glanced at the baseball that had been handed to him and noticed something striking.It was his name, scribbled in his cursive script, staring up at him, right smack in the middle of the ball, between the seams of red stitches: Robert D. Manfred Jr.Under that, in tiny capital letters, was his title: Commissioner.Manfred had seen it before. But there, on opening day, he felt the personal impact of it.“It was one of those moments where it really hit me,” Manfred said. “They are about to play a game, with my name on the baseball. It’s an amazing feeling. Really, an amazing feeling.”For the first time since 2000, when Allan H. Selig was scrawled across the baseballs, Major League Baseball has a new commissioner and therefore a new signature. If there is one tiny symbol to carry the sport into a new era after Bud Selig’s reign, it is Manfred’s signature on the baseball.One of Manfred’s first duties as commissioner was to begin the process of replacing Selig’s name on the roughly 100,000 balls that will be used in games this year.Selig’s signature was put on the balls 15 years ago after M.L.B. began to dissolve the barriers between its leagues. Before that, balls bore the signature of either the American League or the National League president.On the day after Manfred was elected commissioner in August, representatives of Rawlings, the company that manufactures the balls, went to New York to obtain several samples of his signature on 5-by-7-inch index cards.“It’s like being in grammar school again,” Manfred said Monday, shortly after the opening pitch ceremony. “They ask you to sign until they find a pen and a signature that they are satisfied with.”Scott Keene, vice president for spring hard goods at Rawlings, said those cards were sent to company headquarters in St. Louis, scanned and turned into a drawing. The sample signatures were returned to Manfred, who picked the one he liked.From there, Keene and his team at Rawlings went to work. They had to come up with a design to fit the new signature into the small space between the seams. It was complicated by the idiosyncrasies of Manfred’s signature.His signature, with the big capital D for his middle name and the Jr. at the end, is wider than Selig’s. And the F in Manfred extends into the line below. To make it fit, designers moved the word Commissioner slightly to the left, although it still appears to be centered.“We hadn’t done this in a long time, so it took some care,” said Keene, who was involved in the entire process. “It’s nice to have it in there all nice and neat and still be his genuine signature. We’re very happy with it, and I think they are, too.”The specifications for the signature and its placement were delivered to the factory in Costa Rica where Rawlings manufactures the balls. (The printing on the ball is the final step.) A dozen samples were produced. Those were sent to Manfred for his final approval.Manfred gave one of the original mock-ups to his father, Rob Manfred Sr., in North Carolina for his 85th birthday.Rawlings then began to manufacture the new baseballs in bulk, and they went on sale to the public on Feb. 1. Later that month, they were used for the first time in major league exhibition games. For the most part, players found no difference.“They look good,” Toronto Blue Jays catcher Russell Martin said in spring training. “I didn’t even notice at first, to be honest with you. They’re baseballs.”Manfred said he practiced his signature, and got help from Joe Torre, one of the best autograph practitioners in the business. Torre, baseball’s executive vice president for baseball operations, coached Manfred on some tricks to write legibly.“I am a poor second in our office,” Manfred said. “Joe Torre, best handwriting on a baseball, all time. But I’m working at it.”Manfred and Rawlings said that besides the signature, the baseballs were no different this year. Offense has been down in baseball, something the game’s administrators would like to change. But they promise that Manfred’s signature will not add any bounce to the ball.“It will not be due to my signature,” he said. “Actually, if there is a surge in offense, we’ll all be happy.”On Monday, before a 3-1 Mets victory over the Nationals, Manfred did not actually throw out the ceremonial first pitch. Instead, he handed the ball to 9-year-old Duane Dargin and asked him to throw it out, a symbol of Manfred’s efforts to involve more children in baseball.But that ball, and balls in all major league games until the end of Manfred’s tenure as commissioner, will bear his signature.Duane went home with the baseball he threw out for the first pitch. It was in a nice plastic case and it bore Manfred’s clear signature — in two places.“For somebody who wants your signature, it’s nice for them to be able to read it,” Manfred said. “That’s a good thing.”Advertisement