AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirBill Raftery proved that he belonged as the lead analyst for the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament over the past few weeks. He brought his onions, his lingerie and his tin to Monday night’s Duke-Wisconsin final — as well as his commentary. Raftery will always win the contest for laugh lines in a game broadcast, so, combined with his often-underrated analysis, why would you need another analyst beside him?Grant Hill, his rookie partner, still has much to prove. Why wouldn’t he? Retired from the N.B.A. since 2013, Hill had only a few college games under his belt before beginning his leading role in CBS and Turner Sports’ tournament coverage.He improved over the past three weeks. In his first game, he sounded most comfortable speaking only after Raftery had said his piece or when Raftery and Jim Nantz asked him a question. Soon after, he began to assert himself so that, at times, he and Raftery were vying for airspace in a three-man booth created after Steve Kerr left last year to coach the Golden State Warriors and Greg Anthony was arrested in January on suspicion of soliciting a prostitute. In replacing Anthony, Hill quickly had to become a No. 1 analyst.But the tournament showed that Hill has flaws. He tends to shout too often, out of nervousness or a lack of awareness that even in loud arenas or stadiums, his voice can be heard thanks to modern audio technology. He offers commentary that is too often standard issue. And he tends to rely on verbal crutches. As Duke beat Wisconsin, he threw in too many variations of “step up”; borrowed too many of Raftery’s “big fellas”; and showed too much fondness for saying that Duke’s Tyus Jones was “putting his team on his back.”(Duke’s 68-63 victory was seen by an average of 28.3 million viewers, up 33 percent from 21.3 million last year. This year’s viewership was the most since 28.4 million watched Arizona beat Kentucky in 1997.)Hill has quickly learned the art of repartee — setting up his partner and knowing what to do when his partner sets him up — and he and Raftery demonstrated a level of teamwork that they can build for next season. But listening to one’s partner is critical to camaraderie; in the second half Monday night, Raftery said, “Good D by Okafor,” to which Hill responded, “Good D by Okafor.” At another point, before CBS went to commercials, Raftery noted that Duke, trailing by 4 points, was being the aggressor. Hill agreed and added, “We’ll figure it out when we get back, Coach.” Not only was Duke’s aggressiveness not a point to figure out, it was also not a subject to which they returned.By contrast, as CBS went to another break after a Jones jumper, Raftery offered his characteristically lighter touch: “The little knockdown. Tyus — big of heart, big of game!” That sort of comment is more likely to be recalled in highlights than a throwaway analysis that sounds like a need to force in the last word before two and a half minutes of ads.Raftery’s ability to bring his brand of twinkling enthusiasm makes him likable, although even after more than 30 years in television, he can speak too quickly and try to be too cute. He cheered — “Woo-hoo!” — at great plays, as if were a fan. He offered a little wordplay — “Duje Can Do!” — after a putback by Duje Dukan of Wisconsin. After a balletic post move by Frank Kaminsky, the Badgers’ star, he created a phrase — “You don’t need a dietitian. Just give him a taste, a morsel” — as loopy as any uttered by the master of hoops silliness, Al McGuire.A 3-pointer by Jones elicited, “Onions by the little guy!” It was, by my count, Raftery’s only use of his famous phrase all night, as if he were rationing his bulbs.And after a disputed out-of-bounds play in which replays made it appear that Duke’s Justise Winslow had been the last to touch the ball, but only with a fingertip, Raftery said, “He needed a mani.” But neither Raftery nor Hill challenged the officials when they — presumably after looking at the same replays CBS had — did not reverse their call, which had handed possession to the Blue Devils.Nor did they criticize some of Wisconsin’s shots down the stretch, most notably after Hill said, “The Badgers can’t rely on one-on-one play,” and Bronson Koenig drove the lane and tossed up an air ball. No nylon, yet no censure.Raftery and Hill could have chastised Wisconsin Coach Bo Ryan when, with nearly 35 seconds left, his Badgers dawdled on their way upcourt despite trailing by 68-63. Hill rightly said: “Wisconsin doesn’t play fast. They’re a team that’s methodical.” But this was a moment for Ryan to tell his team to play urgently. Yet the Badgers held on to the ball for nearly 14 seconds before a Duke foul led to another inbounds play — and another poor shot by Koenig. And again, no criticism of Ryan, or Koenig.With Duke beginning to celebrate its fifth national title, Raftery described Kaminsky’s disappointment as he walked to the other end of the court (CBS did not follow his lead until it showed a belated, static shot of Kaminsky). And Hill credited Duke’s helping defense, which he said had made it “difficult for Wisconsin to run its offense” — undermining his earlier comment that “great offense always trumps great defense.”Email: sandor@nytimes.com Advertisement