By MARC TRACYAPRIL 7, 2015
INDIANAPOLIS —  As the song “One Shining Moment” played Monday night, Duke’s Tyus Jones, a freshman guard, beamed as his freshman teammate Jahlil Okafor extended his large left hand to grasp Jones’s shoulder.The Blue Devils, who capped their season with a 68-63 victory against Wisconsin in the national championship game, exited the podium stage right and headed for the locker room. But Jones, the Final Four’s most outstanding player, broke away from the group, ran across the confetti-strewn court and scanned the crowd. His high school sweetheart, Alyssa Goehner, had made her way to the base of the elevated court for a hug.“Hey shoutout to the security guard for letting me hop the fence,” she later wrote on Twitter.Goehner, a freshman standout on Minnesota’s volleyball team, said she had told Jones before the game: “Good luck. The only person who can stop you is you.”Jones was not Duke’s most highly regarded player this season; that designation belonged to Okafor. And Jones did not do the most this season to improve his reputation as an elite player; that was another freshman, Justise Winslow. Okafor and Winslow are both probable top-10 picks in the N.B.A. draft in June.AdvertisementRather, Jones was the point guard with great hands who facilitated Duke’s storybook season and who came through when it mattered most Monday night. He scored 23 points, taking 13 shots, with 5 rebounds and only 1 turnover in 37 minutes. With just over four minutes left, he made a 3-pointer to give Duke a lead that, during a tight game, it never surrendered.Advertisement“We just said, ‘Tyus, run high ball screen and be you,’ ” Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski said. “That’s great coaching, I guess.”Beyond coaching, it was the fruition of a strategy years in the making that included compiling a poised and talented core of four freshmen who, on Monday night, combined for 60 of the Blue Devils’ 68 points — and all 37 in the crucial second half.In 2012, Jones, Winslow and Okafor competed on U.S.A. Basketball’s under-17 team, winning a FIBA world title in Lithuania.While there, they walked around Kaunas, a town 150 miles down the Neman River from the Baltic Sea, in search of hamburgers, Okafor said. Mostly they hung out in their hotel, compelled into deep friendships by the things they shared: a love of basketball, a desire to win a national title and a lack of English-language TV programming.They also, to some extent, got to know Krzyzewski, who coaches the men’s national team, although Okafor said everyone abided by N.C.A.A. rules regarding contact between college coaches and precollege players.While there was no clear ringleader, Jones does have a point guard’s personality, Okafor said.“Tyus is the one who’s always composed,” Okafor said. “I think he knows everybody’s secrets, things like that. We’re always telling Tyus. Eventually we’ll all know, but he’s the first person we’ll tell.”At some point, Jones and Okafor agreed to play together at the next level, said Jones’s father, Rob. Later, the three players befriended Grayson Allen. The four committed to Duke partly because they knew the others were likely to as well.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The arrangement made Duke’s team something of a happy medium between what is thought of as the archetypal Duke team — in which experienced upperclassmen with years of chemistry are the main contributors — and the freshmen-laden team it ended up with this season.AdvertisementThe four players had the talent and athleticism typical of freshmen who can define a team (and potentially leave after one year). Yet because they came as a package, they already knew one another and why they were there.“We talked a lot about winning the national championship,” Jones said Sunday. “That was a big reason why we decided to play for Coach, because we knew we’d have the best chance and opportunity to do that.”That goal, and their single-mindedness about achieving it, encouraged them to put the team first, whether by making it clear that the senior guard Quinn Cook was the players’ leader or by integrating their four-way friendship into the fabric of the team.“They had no problem jelling from Day 1, but what I was most impressed with was how they let everybody else in,” said Marshall Plumlee, a 7-foot junior who was Okafor’s backup Monday night.Plumlee added, “Everyone was consumed with winning.”Cook agreed.“They came in so humble,” he said of the four freshmen. “It was all about the team.”The freshmen called themselves the Four Quarters. Winslow explained the nickname after the game: “Four guys adding up. All guys being equal.”On the back of a quarter is the phrase “E pluribus unum,” which is Latin for “out of many, one.” The Blue Devils adopted that credo this season, Jones said.“As soon as I stepped on campus, you could just feel the family atmosphere,” Jones said. “It was just always positive energy, everyone caring for one another.”As a result, he added, “you could just tell that this year was going to be special.”A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Duke’s Four Freshmen Long Held One Goal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.