AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherJorge Soler, the Chicago Cubs’ rookie right fielder, did not just have a great division series against the St. Louis Cardinals. He had one of the greatest postseason series in history.A Cuban defector, Soler signed with the Cubs in 2012 on a nine-year, $30 million contract. After a good 24-game cameo in 2014, he was handed the starting job this spring at age 23. He was rated as the team’s third best prospect going into the season by Baseball America behind third baseman Kris Bryant and shortstop Addison Russell.But based on his regular-season performance, Soler seemed unlikely to be a playoff star this year. He hit .262 with 10 home runs and missed two separate monthlong stretches with a sprained ankle and a strained abdomen muscle. Baseball-Reference actually gave him a negative wins above replacement score for the year, mostly because of a poor defensive rating.But in the division series, the Cardinals could not seem to get him out. In 13 plate appearances, he was 4 for 7 with six walks. Two of the hits were home runs.Cubs Manager Joe Maddon opted for the left-hander Kyle Schwarber in right field for Game 1, which the Cubs lost. Soler drew a walk as a pinch-hitter.In Game 2, with the lefty Jaime Garcia pitching for St. Louis, the right-handed Soler started and hit a two-run homer that put the Cubs up by 5-1 in game they eventually won, 6-3. He added another two-run shot in Game 3. In both games he batted four times and did not make an out.Soler finally came back to earth at the plate in Game 4, the clincher, going 0 for 3 with another walk. But he made perhaps the defensive play of the series, throwing a bullet that nailed Tony Cruz at the plate in the sixth inning to keep the score tied at 4-4.Curiously, despite his big series, Soler never played a full game. He was replaced in right in the seventh inning of Game 2 and removed in late double-switches in Games 3 and 4.Soler’s on-base plus slugging in the series was 2.341. Baseball-Reference requires 18 plate appearances or seven hits plus walks to qualify as a statistical leader in a series. By that measure, Soler’s series was the fourth greatest ever.Two of those that rank above him are justly famous. In the 1928 World Series, Lou Gehrig was 6 for 11 with six walks and four home runs for a 2.433 O.P.S. in an easy sweep of the Cardinals. (His teammate Babe Ruth was 10 for 16 with three homers, for a top 10 series of his own.)In a three-game sweep of the Angels in the 2007 division series, David Ortiz of the Red Sox tallied a 2.418 O.P.S., going 5 for 7 with six walks and two home runs.But ranking first, by this metric at least, is the mostly forgotten American League Championship Series by the journeyman outfielder Gary Roenicke of the Orioles. In 10 plate appearances, Roenicke was 3 for 4 with five walks, a hit-by-pitch and a home run, giving him an on-base average of .900, a slugging average of 1.750 and a record O.P.S. of 2.650. He scored four runs and had a team-leading four R.B.I., but lost out on the Most Valuable Player Award to starter Mike Boddicker, who had a 14-strikeout shutout in Game 2. The Orioles won the World Series, but Roenicke was 0 for 7.The Cubs certainly do not lack for big hitters this year. Schwarber also had a big series, going 5 for 10 with two homers, and Anthony Rizzo had two homers as well. Bryant, the team’s best hitter along with Rizzo this year, underachieved a bit in the four-game series, but did have a home run and would not figure to remain silent for long.If Soler puts up anything like his division series numbers in the next round, the Cubs will have a formidable lineup to face the Mets’ aces.Advertisement