AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Michael PowellINDIANAPOLIS — It was a scampering, spinning, diving, sometimes airborne affair, this championship match between two fine teams.Duke and Wisconsin traded baskets and surges, both coming back several times from what appeared to be the verge of extinction. If Duke won in the end, well, one of them had to.The game was moments old when Wisconsin’s Frank Kaminsky, the lanky 7-footer whose seeming awkwardness disguises fine handling and a shooting guard’s nose for the basket, drained a 3-point shot. He raised his shooting hand high and curled it — saaaah! — like a scrawny Dirk Nowitzki.Less than a minute later, Jahlil Okafor, at 6 feet 11 inches and 270 pounds one of Duke’s several preternaturally talented freshman man-children, grabbed the basketball like a grapefruit and rammed it into the basket. He can float listlessly in the stream of the game for minutes at a time, but when he starts to swim, he is formidable.Back and forth it went. Tyus Jones — another Duke freshman, this time a baby-faced point guard from Apple Valley, Minn. — drained a jumper. Sam Dekker, Wisconsin’s pale-faced forward, usually possesses a fine 3-point shooting touch. Monday night that touch was like a wallet that had been lifted from his back pocket.Dekker’s game is hyperactive, and he kept pushing and hitting and driving to the hoop. He finished the half with 8 points and 5 rebounds.Bo Ryan, the white-haired veteran Wisconsin coach, complained afterward that the game had gotten too physical, and suggested that the referees had let Duke knock his team off its sweet game. “It’s just a shame it had to be played that way,” he told CBS after the game.This is like the legendary boxing cornerman Angelo Dundee complaining about rough fisticuffs. Both Wisconsin and Duke gave and got with abandon, and if the referees missed a few calls, it was at least equal opportunity blindness.Kentucky was widely expected to make the final game, until Wisconsin knocked off the Wildcats on Saturday night. Kentucky had a massive and physical team, anchored by two talented 7-footers. In the absence of those giants, Duke and Wisconsin scampered up and down the court, taking the ball to the hoop with abandon.At the half, the teams were knotted with 31 apiece.We journalists love narratives, and we had several suitable for pressing. Duke, with eight McDonald’s all-Americans, had the deeper well of talent. Coach Mike Krzyzewski long ago made his peace with the new world of college basketball, where freshmen often leave after a single year; to be able to bring the freshman Grayson Allen off the bench speaks to riches beyond measure.Allen was a high school all-American guard, with the sort of spongy bounce in his legs that lets him play with elbows above the rim. He more or less treated the championship game as his coming-out party.Several times, Allen, who could almost pass for a young Ted Cruz, took flight to the basket, a whirling dervish. He got whacked about the head, smacked across the arms. And still he scored.“He put us on his back,” Krzyzewski noted.The opposing narrative is that Wisconsin deserves retro props for playing it old style. Its players tend to stay in college for four years, carefully building a team.This one had developed a goofy and endearing identity. Kaminsky has grown into his body, and his spinning journeys to the hoop are deeply entertaining, not the least when he puts spin on the ball and it bounces off the backboard and into the basket like a perfect pool shot.He is expert at shielding the ball with his body, and even when stumbling he can toss a pass to waiting teammates.After the game, Ryan grumped proudly about his team’s dinosaur status. We don’t, he said, play “rent-a-player” like some other teams. By which you might infer he was talking about the two teams he played in the Final Four, Kentucky and Duke.I prefer to watch teams take careful flower; that is more interesting than a university as a rest stop on the highway to the pros. And Wisconsin plays a pleasing style of hoops, filled with passing, deception and cuts. But honesty requires noting that while the Wisconsin Badgers retain their players, not so many players actually graduate.Wisconsin in 2014, the last year for which statistics are available, posted a six-year graduation rate for its basketball players of 44 percent. That’s the second worst record in the Big Ten. (Last year’s N.C.A.A. champion, Connecticut, recorded an 8 percent graduation rate.)We’ll save this for another day.In the end, this game came down to a series of scoring runs. Kaminsky spun and laid in the ball. Wisconsin went up 9 points and you thought: Perhaps the Badgers will slay two giants in a single Final Four.That thought no sooner took shape than Duke countered. In came Allen with all his sparks-flying energy. Jones, the baby-faced guard, hit one improbable jumper after another. A year ago, as a high school senior committed to attending Duke, he watched the team suffer a crushing defeat and get knocked out of the N.C.A.A. tournament.With his high school sense of invulnerability, he texted his future coach: “This won’t happen next year.”Next year was here, and he was right. Down the stretch, Jones drained one gutsy shot after another, often with other hands in his face or slapping his arms.Wisconsin did not go softly into the night. Kaminsky was relentless, spinning layups off the backboards. With time running out, he hit a 3-pointer.Wisconsin, however, was a question for which Duke had too many answers.Duke won, 68-63, Krzyzewski had his fifth national championship, and in an ode to the reality of this strange new basketball world, the Duke students pointed to their freshman stars and began chanting: “One more year! One more year!”At the far end of the court, Dekker bent over, hands on his knees. Bronson Koenig, the Native American guard who played with rez ball abandon, draped his arm around a teammate. Kaminsky peered at the Duke celebrators and looked away.The Badgers had nothing to apologize for, and their emptiness was near total. They filed silently off the floor without a look over their shoulders.Email: powellm@nytimes.com Advertisement