AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherOpening day brings the smell of newly mowed grass, the resumption of peanut devouring and the crack of wood on leather.Only this year, there was not all that much crack.Here are the runs scored by the losing teams in Monday’s openers (as well as the single game Sunday night): 4, 3, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.Four of the losing teams were limited to three hits, and the Rangers managed just one hit against Sonny Gray (19 career wins) and Evan Scribner (one career save) of the Athletics.That’s a lot of offensive futility.As Tyler Kepner pointed out last week in The New York Times,  baseball is mired in an offensive slump:“Last season, major league teams scored roughly 5,000 fewer runs, and hit roughly 1,500 fewer homers, than they did in 2000 — statistically, the height of the steroid era. The average team scored 4.07 runs per game last season, down from 5.14 in 2000.”Even with some of the winning teams showing offensive muscle — the Rockies and the Royals scored 10 runs each, the A’s and the Red Sox eight — the teams scored an average of just 3.27 runs on opening day this year.The Rangers stood out, failing to get a hit against Gray until Ryan Rua singled in the eighth inning. Designated hitter Mitch Moreland hit into a double play immediately after. The Rangers did get three other runners to first in the game: on a walk, an error and a hit by pitch.There were numerous other poor team performances. The Phillies got a double from Ryan Howard in an 8-0 loss to the Red Sox, but got only one other man to second all game, and no one further. The Indians had just three singles and never got the ball out of the infield when a man was on base. And that was against the Astros, who were 70-92 last year.One common theme was an inability to string together hits for sustained rallies. Four of the five teams that scored only one run did it on solo homers, by Brett Gardner of the Yankees, Mike Trout of the Angels, Jose Abreu of the White Sox and Bryce Harper of the Nationals. Despite being trumpeted as the World Series favorite, Washington got just three hits off 41-year-old Bartolo Colon and none against four Met relievers.While it is true that teams often roll out their best pitchers on opening day, that alone cannot explain the drought: None of the six shutouts were a complete game, and several winning teams used three or even four pitchers.It is a little too soon to panic. Though important, opening day is only one day. Scoring also typically drops in April and September, when temperatures are lower. And teams have 161 more games to prove that they remember how to hit.But if baseball administrators and fans are concerned about run scoring, the sport’s first showpiece day did nothing to reassure.Advertisement