AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Three years ago, the Nets first said, “Hello, Brooklyn” — and then they stuck around New Jersey.While playing games under the theatrical lights of Barclays Center, the team has quietly continued running its basketball operations and conducting practices out of an unassuming office park in East Rutherford, where clusters of nondescript buildings sit alongside water reeds as tall as center Brook Lopez.The goodbyes, then, are incomplete. Since last year, the Nets have been busily converting a 70,000-square-foot warehouse space on the waterfront in Brooklyn’s Sunset Park neighborhood into a grand basketball complex, and barring any delays, the players and coaches will relocate there over the summer. Only then will the team’s colorful decades-long presence in the New Jersey Meadowlands truly come to a close.“It’ll be the end of an era,” said Emanuel Logothetis, whose father, James, owns Candlewyck Diner, a 24-hour restaurant that is a five-minute drive from the Nets’ current practice complex. “It was our team, from our town, but they have to finish the move eventually.”The diner is one of a number of places in town where the team’s presence continues to be felt. Logothetis noted, for example, that the assistant coach John Welch often stopped in for late-night meals, spending hours in the back of the restaurant picking at food while studying game film on his tablet.People ordering the Lawrence wrap — which features breaded chicken, grilled onions, romaine lettuce, two kinds of cheese, jalapeño peppers, mayonnaise and honey mustard — may not know that it was inspired by the former Nets coach Lawrence Frank, who ordered a similar dish on frequent visits.Up the road, Ralph Casale, an owner of Caffe Capri, once kept his restaurant open late during the 2002 playoffs so that members of the coaching staff and front office could come in and celebrate a two-overtime, series-deciding victory over the Indiana Pacers.“They loved our wood-fired pizza,” said Casale, who admitted that he preferred soccer to basketball.The team’s East Rutherford complex opened in 1998, and until 2012 it housed the basketball and business departments of the organization. Hidden away and drab, the building nevertheless symbolizes a few vital moments in the franchise’s evolution — when the Nets, often in the shadow of more glamorous teams like the Knicks, made big strides to keep pace in the modernizing, big-money N.B.A.After a number of itinerant years as an American Basketball Association franchise in New York, the Nets joined the N.B.A. in 1976, moving to New Jersey a year later. After about two years in a small office in the middle of Rutherford, the staff — back then comprising about a half-dozen people — moved to an office on a dead-end street in East Rutherford, a block from the team’s current space.Practices were held at a gym built for employees of APA Transport, a trucking company, where players sometimes used the same locker room as the drivers.“I’d talk to them all the time: ‘Where you driving today? Oh, South Jersey? All right, man, have a great day,’ ” said Mike O’Koren, who played seven seasons for the Nets in the 1980s and was later an assistant. But not everyone appreciated the quirky charms of the arrangement, particularly as the years passed and more teams built state-of-the-art facilities.Butch Beard, who coached the Nets from 1994 to 1996, said teams at that time needed to do more to attract free agents, including providing support and luxuries outside of game day. He laughed when recalling the minor inconveniences at the trucking company’s gym.“We parked all up and down the street — double-parked, triple-parked, every damn thing else — and guys that stayed extra to shoot sometimes had to go out and move their cars,” Beard said. “I mean, come on.”Jon Spoelstra, the team’s president in the early ’90s, said, “The players complained that there were so many ruts in the road that their Mercedes would bottom out.”Spoelstra helped lead an important change when he began working as a consultant for the Nets in 1991. The team had moved its business operations to the Meadowlands arena. Spoelstra, when he signed on, was surprised to find a small team of sales representatives there sharing desks and phones. “The space was extraordinarily cramped,” he said. “It was something you’d picture in a Charles Dickens novel.”In a lease signed with the team, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, which owned the arena, took a greater percentage of the ticket revenue the more seats the team sold, Spoelstra said. So he was able to persuade the authority to finance the team’s move — including rent, furniture and more phone lines — to a big office space at 405 Murray Hill Parkway, across the street from the team’s current East Rutherford headquarters, at 390.The Nets, who were perennially near the bottom of the league in attendance, were thus able to hire a larger business staff to amplify their marketing. (Spoelstra, the father of Miami Heat Coach Erik Spoelstra, drew on these early experiences with the Nets when he wrote the book “Ice to Eskimos: How to Market a Product Nobody Wants.”)The team, though, was still practicing at the truckers’ gym, and Michael Rowe, who succeeded Jon Spoelstra as team president, helped remedy that. He and his staff spent a season studying other teams’ facilities, which featured spas, treatment rooms, fancy lounges and other amenities. The not-yet-built gym was supposedly an important part of luring John Calipari to coach the Nets in 1996.“It was no mystery that most of the other teams were doing better than us,” Rowe said, citing the Heat and the Seattle SuperSonics as examples at the time.Somewhat serendipitously, the landlord of their office space, Richard Branca, came up with a solution. He suggested that the Nets relocate across the street, to 390, where he owned a building with office and warehouse space. He would nudge the two tenants there into different spaces and pay for most of the renovations to make it a basketball complex. Branca said the idea had come to him on a golf course.Quickly, Branca and the Nets agreed to a five-year lease with a five-year option, and in the middle of the 1997-98 season, employees began wheeling their belongings across the street.“It was like a fire drill,” Branca said of the move, noting that he would have lost money on the deal if the Nets had stayed for only the first five years. “They’ve been a wonderful tenant. I wish they would stay for another 30 years. But that’s business.”Rowe said the changes in the mid-1990s, which put the business and sports operations in one new building, helped a larger effort to provide the Nets “the marks and practices that stabilized the team and gave it some legitimacy as a professional organization.” And in the early 2000s, the team sustained success on the court over several seasons.In his 2002 book, “More Than a Game,” Phil Jackson, the current president of the Knicks, recalled being courted by the Nets in 1999. Writing that the Nets had an “image problem,” Jackson noted that the new complex showed they were “well on their way to becoming a first-class organization.”The image has been changed again with the team’s relocation to Brooklyn — a transformation that will conclude when work at the building in Sunset Park is completed.Branca is not sure what he will do with the East Rutherford building, though he has had conversations with a potential tenant whose use of the space, he said, “would not be much different than the Nets.”For now, the complex feels a bit like a ghost town. The reception desk these days tends to be left unattended, and all around the building are unused offices and large swaths of empty space. Geese stroll around the parking lot.Many of the Nets’ new fans are oblivious to the team’s continued presence in New Jersey. But many in the East Rutherford area became nostalgic when asked about the Nets’ departure.Ralph Magliocchetti, the owner of Il Villaggio, an elegant Italian restaurant rising incongruously on the side of Route 17, smiled when remembering how often Rod Thorn, who spent more than a decade as the team’s president for basketball operations, would eat at the restaurant, ordering spaghetti with meat sauce. Jason Kidd, who played for the Nets from 2001 to 2008, came often, too, once giving Magliocchetti’s wife a pair of his sneakers.“Sometimes, when they interview a new player, they bring them here,” Magliocchetti said. “We’ll miss them.”Barry Barone, the owner of Park Cleaners in Rutherford, has been helping the Nets stitch lettering on their uniforms for more than 30 years. He keeps several blank Nets jerseys in his store, working quickly whenever the Nets sign a new player. Barone said he used to charge the team for each letter but eventually changed to a flat fee of about $30.“The office couldn’t understand why Jason Kidd’s only cost like $8,” Barone said, “and the one guy, whose name fit all the way around. ...” He started laughing before he could finish his sentence.Barone was unsure if the Nets would continue to use him after they finished their move to Brooklyn.“They said as long as they’re here, they’ll continue to use me,” he said. “I hope I perform a valuable enough service for them.”Advertisement