By BILLY WITZAPRIL 8, 2015
The pomp and circumstance of opening day had disappeared — along with the capacity crowd and the warm, sunny skies. Yankee Stadium was a vastly different place Wednesday night from what it had been two days earlier, a mostly vacant ballpark that was occupied by the hearty few who braved temperatures that dipped into the 30s and the wind that accompanied them.The celebratory bunting was gone, as was the festive atmosphere.The change of scenery was a reminder of what lies ahead for the Yankees: a six-month slog, a sharp change from the routines they built during the two months they spent in the comforting Florida clime.“There’s definitely a rhythm to the season, and after opening day, that’s when you start hoping the rhythm gets there,” first baseman Mark Teixeira said. “Some seasons, it’s one or two games; some seasons, it’s one or two weeks. Hopefully, it’s one or two games.”There has been nothing rhythmic about the Yankees thus far, but they could at least smile at the end of the night with a come-from-behind 4-3 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays that was made possible by an eighth-inning rally that produced runs on a walk, a hit batter and a base hit that ricocheted off reliever Brett Cecil.AdvertisementAfter that outburst, which came in a light drizzle, Andrew Miller pitched a perfect ninth for his second career save.Advertisement“It’s like you stole something,” said Chase Headley, who drove in the winning run. “Certainly there was some good fortune on our part.”For much of the night, the Yankees were befuddled by R. A. Dickey’s knuckleball and looked just as out of sorts in the field and on the basepaths.Besides their play, the atmosphere was also a reminder of what early-season baseball in the Northeast can be — a sparse crowd on a weeknight with customary chilly weather. On a night when hoodies and hand warmers were necessities for the fans, even the players sought refuge from the cold.A number of Yankees, including Teixeira, Jacoby Ellsbury and Miller, took the field for batting practice wearing wool beanies instead of their navy caps. Only Alex Rodriguez took the field for batting practice in short sleeves.“I’ve said for the past four or five years that Houston and Texas and Tampa and every team down South and on the West Coast should have home games the first couple weeks of the season,” said Brett Gardner, whose left wrist was wrapped in ice where he was hit by a pitch. “But it’s something everybody has to deal with.”It was this type of weather that got Michael Pineda in trouble last April, when he was ejected from a game at Boston for having pine tar on his neck. Pineda said he used it to help get a grip on the ball in cold weather.“I’m sure we’ll have a lot of eyes on him tonight,” Manager Joe Girardi said.Did Pineda understand?Advertisement“I think he understands, yes,” Girardi said with a smile. “I hope.”Girardi spent most of the spring extolling the defense, which he expected to be greatly improved, and emphasizing base running, which would help an offense that was 13th in the American League in runs last season. Through two games, those areas hurt the Yankees more than they helped.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Headley threw away a bunt on Monday, contributing to the Blue Jays’ five-run third inning, and the defense let the Yankees down again Wednesday. With Devon Travis at first base, a Jose Reyes chopper bounced off the glove of a leaping Teixeira and then off the glove of a lunging Stephen Drew at second.Drew quickly retrieved the ball, but his throw to Headley at third was wide, preventing Headley from being able to tag Travis when he slid past the base. Travis then scored on a sacrifice fly by Russell Martin.The Blue Jays scored another run when a pickoff throw from catcher Brian McCann bounced away from Teixeira.On the basepaths, after Didi Gregorius was thrown out while foolishly trying to steal third late in the Yankees’ 6-1 loss on Monday, Ellsbury was picked off in the first inning Wednesday on a 3-2 pitch.The Yankees trailed by 3-1 entering the eighth, but they finally cashed in on their breaks. Chris Young led off with a pinch-hit bloop double down the right-field line and went to third when Ellsbury lined a single to center. Reliever Aaron Loup then hit Gardner. He was replaced by Cecil, who threw a wild pitch to score Young.After Carlos Beltran struck out and Teixeira was intentionally walked, Cecil hit McCann to force in the tying run. Headley’s single then put the Yankees ahead.Although it was just the second game of the season, Miller, who received a game ball, observed, “Twenty-five guys in here probably have a sense of relief.”Among them would be Rodriguez, who twice had the chance to drive in runs late in the game but had to do so against hard-throwing 20-year-old rookies: Miguel Castro and Roberto Osuna.In the seventh, swinging at a first-pitch, 96-mile-an-hour fastball from Castro, Rodriguez lifted a high fly ball that was caught short of the warning track. He slammed the bat down as he ran to first. In the eighth, after Headley had given the Yankees the lead, he took a called third strike on a 2-2 changeup from Osuna.AdvertisementINSIDE PITCHThe crowd was announced at 31,020, although it appeared about half as many were in attendance.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Eighth-Inning Rally Chases Chill Out of Yankees’ Second Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.