By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 8, 2015
Just two weeks ago, Wednesday night’s schedule of basketball games in New York held little intrigue. The Nets were one of four teams separated by a half-game for the eighth playoff spot in the Eastern Conference but, at 30-40, had showed that they would probably be little more than an appetizer for the top-seeded Atlanta Hawks if they qualified for the postseason.The Nets won seven of eight games going into Wednesday’s, however, while climbing into seventh. Coinciding with the recent success, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the Nets’ boastful billionaire owner, made a rare appearance at Barclays Center.The Knicks have struggled all season, but their game Wednesday, against the Indiana Pacers, one of the teams chasing the Nets in the playoff race, suddenly had interest, too.Early that morning, Pacers forward Chris Copeland was stabbed in his left elbow and abdomen outside 1 Oak, a nightclub in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan. Copeland, who played for the Knicks in the 2012-13 season, was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center. The injury was not considered life-threatening, the police said.AdvertisementMaking the circumstances even more unusual, two Atlanta Hawks players, Thabo Sefolosha and Pero Antic, were arrested and charged with interfering in the investigation of Copeland’s case.In the shadow of this episode, the Knicks fell, 102-86, to the Pacers while the Nets lost to the short-handed Hawks, 114-111.Sefolosha and Antic were released before the game but were not on the Hawks’ bench. The All-Star Paul Millsap was also inactive because of a shoulder injury.“We’re very supportive of our players,” Hawks Coach Mike Budenholzer said before the game. “You never want to put yourself in a position where you can bring negativity to yourself or the organization or your teammates. But they’re great guys. I think right now what’s most important is to support them.”As for the Knicks, they wasted little time in losing for the 63rd time this season. The Pacers had a 16-point lead by halftime and coasted to victory at Madison Square Garden, where fans were at least treated to the sight of Carmelo Anthony behind the bench for the first time since he had season-ending knee surgery in February.AdvertisementChris Mullin, newly appointed as the men’s basketball coach at St. John’s, was also courtside. So he had a good view when the Knicks’ Cole Aldrich accidentally scored on his own basket after tipping a rebound late in the first quarter.The Pacers (35-43) were able to shake off any potential distractions and give their playoff hopes a boost. Paul George, appearing in his second game since returning from a broken leg, came off the bench to score 10 points in 16 minutes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Knicks were led by Langston Galloway’s 19 points.The nightclub fracas did not appear to have any effect on the Hawks early in the game as they jumped to a 17-6 lead.Hawks center Al Horford said the “focus is on this game, this team, and we did a good job of that.”He added, “We were very ready to play.”With the help of guard Jeff Teague, who had 12 assists, the Hawks proved adept at running an up-tempo offense that allowed DeMarre Carroll (19 points) to hit several open 3-pointers and Mike Scott (20 points) to make numerous field goals beneath the basket.Horford led the Hawks with 24 points and put his team ahead, 112-111, with a dunk with 19 seconds remaining. Teague, who had 15 points, made two free throws for a 114-111 lead. The Nets’ Joe Johnson missed a 3-point attempt as time expired.The loss dropped the Nets to 36-42, the same record as the Boston Celtics’. The teams occupy the final two playoff spots, with the Pacers and the Miami Heat one game behind.The Hawks, a possible first-round opponent for the Nets, took all four games they played against the Nets this season, winning by a combined 69 points.Speaking to reporters earlier in the day, Prokhorov said he was excited to watch a Nets team that was relying on more athletic lineups compared with when he last saw them in November.“I think that young players like Thaddeus Young and Markel Brown bring speed, power, some emotions for us,” Prokhorov said.AdvertisementProkhorov said recent uncertainty in the Russian economy had kept him attached to business matters there and away from Brooklyn. He reiterated that he did not intend to sell the team.Scott Cacciola contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Stabbing Hangs Over Games in New York.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.