By TIM ROHANAPRIL 8, 2015
WASHINGTON — Mets Manager Terry Collins was surrounded by members of the news media Wednesday, answering a pregame question, when General Manager Sandy Alderson interrupted him from the back of the room.“Hey, Terry, here’s your lineup for tomorrow,” Alderson said, handing Collins a folded card.“Oh,” Collins said, grinning. “I’ve been waiting for that all day.”It was a stunt by the Mets, and it drew the laughter they wanted. The move was designed to mock some speculation that Collins did not have full say over his opening day lineup on Monday. Collins was apparently in on the gag.But for all the laughter, the scene had a bit of uneasiness to it. This, after all, was just the second game of the season, and the Mets were already denying that they had an internal power struggle. Making matters worse, the Mets looked particularly meek in a 2-1 loss to the Nationals on Wednesday night.AdvertisementAlthough Alderson was the one who hired Collins, their relationship may be getting a little complicated. Expectations are rising throughout the organization. The Mets are talking about making the playoffs this year. That raises the stakes for Collins, who is in the final year of his contract. He could easily find his job in jeopardy if the Mets struggle yet again.AdvertisementAccording to “Baseball Maverick,” a newly published biography of Alderson, he became frustrated last August by the team’s continuing futility and began to sour on Collins. At the time, he told the author of the book, Steve Kettmann, that there was only a 51 percent chance that Collins would return as the Mets’ manager in 2015.And, Alderson told Kettmann, “that percentage has been eroding.”In stark contrast, on Wednesday, Alderson and Collins laughed off the idea that there was any disconnect between them. They insisted that Collins had authority over his own lineup. They said that while the front office offered input, the majority of the discussion was between Collins and his coaching staff.“My job is to provide information,” Alderson said. “In this particular area, it’s their prerogative to make the decisions. It’s not different than defensive positioning, statistics on third time through the order, whatever it may be. The idea is to provide information and let people make decisions.”The opening day lineup might never have become an issue if it did not look somewhat surprising. Juan Lagares was dropped to the No. 6 spot in the order, Curtis Granderson was in the leadoff spot, and David Wright batted second, after hitting third for years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, the lineup looked the same except Jacob deGrom, the starting pitcher, was batting eighth and Wilmer Flores was batting ninth — a strategy that Collins tinkered with last year and might try more this year.In one critical instance, it seemed to backfire.The Mets staged a rally in the second inning — two runners on and one out — but when deGrom, hitting where Flores conceivably could have, came to bat against Jordan Zimmermann, he popped a bunt into the air. Ryan Zimmerman, the first baseman, made a diving catch.Flores, the next batter, singled to load the bases. But Granderson struck out looking on a 3-2 slider to end the threat. The Mets had just three base runners over the final seven innings.Collins indicated that his assistants were heavily involved in making the lineup. For instance, he said that Bob Geren — the bench coach, recruited by Alderson, not Collins — had conceived how the opening day lineup would look on Monday. The general idea was to bunch the best hitters in the top of the lineup and get them the most at-bats.Advertisement“In the perfect world,” Collins said, “if we had that great leadoff hitter that got on 40 percent of the time, we’d leave him there. You’d hit the pitcher ninth. But we don’t have that. So we have to mix and match and do what we think is best for the team.”For much of spring training, Lagares batted leadoff and excelled, compiling a .406 on-base percentage. Collins often spoke highly of him and his potential. But Collins decided to drop the right-handed-hitting Lagares in the order to start the season so as not overwhelm him in the first series, when the Mets would face three elite right-handed starters: Max Scherzer, Zimmermann and Stephen Strasburg.Lagares’s spot in the order could change, Collins suggested. By all indications, it would be his decision.“I will tell you, the one thing the manager has in his power is this,” Collins said, pulling out the lineup card that Alderson had handed him. “You’ve got one hammer, and that’s who plays. I’m certainly very, very lucky to have that.”An article in some editions on Thursday about the Mets’ 2-1 loss to the Washington Nationals misstated, in some copies, the way in which Curtis Granderson struck out in the second inning. It was looking, not swinging.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Before Loss, Mets Scoff at Rumors of Tension.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.