AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonAUGUSTA, Ga. — The Masters is viewed as the unofficial start to the consequential golf season, which makes this year’s opening round a first among lasts.After this season, golfers will no longer be permitted to anchor putters against their bodies while making a stroke. That means that this Masters is the final Masters that will feature long, broomstick-like putters pressed against a player’s chest, or slightly elongated putters jutting into a player’s stomach.That has drawn attention to the remaining competitors still using an anchored putting stroke. Most prominent in that group is the 2013 Masters champion, Adam Scott, who appeared to be making the switch to a shorter putter several weeks ago — until he switched back.Scott said his results with the conventional putter were mixed. He decided that the longer putter still gave him the best chance at victory.“The odds are that I’ll putt better with the long putter because I’ve practiced with it for the last four years,” Scott said.He called his switch to the conventional putter for three tournaments this year “a little bit of an experiment.”But Scott said he was not worried about next year, when he has to switch back to the conventional putter.“I’ve got time, and it’s a bit of a process,” he said.EXPECTATION SEEN AS BURDEN Once upon a time, Tiger Woods was the acknowledged favorite to win every major championship. Woods welcomed the designation in the buildup to tournaments.But Woods has not won a major in seven years, and it seems no one in the field wants to be called the pretournament favorite.As strange as it sounds, Henrik Stenson, the world’s second-ranked player, was almost gleeful that he was sick last week with the flu. That caused him to come into this year’s Masters somewhat under the radar because his illness caused him to miss last week’s Shell Houston Open.“Expectations are going to be a bit lower now given the circumstances, and that could be a good thing,” Stenson said.Not being mentioned as one of the favorites was a blessing?“To be honest, I’m quite pleased,” Stenson said.When the defending champion, Bubba Watson, heard that Adam Scott had named him one of the favorites, Watson acted aghast.“That’s because he didn’t want the media on him,” Watson said. “I see what he’s doing.”Asked whom he would call the favorite to win, Watson answered: “Obviously, Adam Scott. And then there’s Rory and there’s Tiger and everybody else, and I’m at the very bottom.”When the world No. 1 player, Rory McIlroy, had his chance, he also pointed the finger elsewhere. He put the burden of expectation on Watson.“I mean, he’s won here two of the last three years,” McIlroy said of Watson. “He’s the main guy.”Then McIlroy smiled.“Not trying to put any pressure on him or anything,” he said.At the tournament’s par-3 contest, McIlroy was accompanied by Niall Horan, a member of the band One Direction, who served as a caddie. TRYING TO REPEAT It has been 13 years since there was a repeat champion at the Masters. But the last man to do it is not surprised.“The golf course is just so demanding,” said Tiger Woods, who in 2002 became the third golfer to successfully defend a Masters title. The other golfers to win back-to-back green jackets were Jack Nicklaus and Nick Faldo.Woods continued: “There is so much you have to know. You have to understand how to miss it — in what spots. You have to have the ability to hit certain chip shots with a draw spin or a cut spin. You have to know when to bounce the ball and where to have it check up. So you have to have all these things going right and have them going together at the same time.“You’ve seen some of the best players in the world come through here, and only three guys have done it. That’s because it’s just hard.”Advertisement