AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressJake Arrieta allowed three hits over seven innings, and Starlin Castro had a go-ahead R.B.I. single in the seventh to lead the host Chicago Cubs over the St. Louis Cardinals, 2-0, on Wednesday for their first win this season.Backed by just two hits from Chicago’s offense, Arrieta struck out seven and walked three, and Phil Coke, Neil Ramirez, Pedro Strop and Hector Rondon did not give up any hits in relief. Rondon pitched a perfect ninth for the save for the Cubs, who lost, 3-0, to St. Louis in Sunday’s opener.Lance Lynn struck out nine in six-plus innings but took the loss.TIGERS 11, TWINS 0 Anibal Sanchez helped host Detroit shut out Minnesota for the second straight game, allowing three hits, striking out six and walking two in six and two-thirds innings. Wednesday’s game was his first start since Aug. 8. Jose Iglesias had four hits, Alex Avila scored four runs, and Ian Kinsler drove in four runs for the Tigers.The Twins’ Ricky Nolasco gave up six runs and six hits in three-plus innings, walking four and striking out two.Detroit called up the left-hander Kyle Lobstein after Justin Verlander officially went on the 15-day disabled list. Lobstein is scheduled to pitch Sunday in Cleveland. BRAVES 2, MARLINS 0 A. J. Pierzynski hit a two-run homer, and five pitchers combined on a six-hit shutout to help Atlanta complete a three-game sweep of host Miami, the Braves’ first season-opening sweep since 2007. Atlanta outscored Miami, 16-3, in the series.Pierzynski, playing in his first game with the Braves broke a scoreless tie in the seventh inning against Tom Koehler. Shelby Miller, making his first start with the Braves, allowed four hits in five innings. Brandon Cunniff followed with one and two-thirds perfect innings for his first major league win.PHILLIES 4, RED SOX 2 Jeff Francoeur hit a three-run homer, Aaron Harang took a one-hitter into the seventh inning, and Philadelphia beat visiting Boston. Rick Porcello, making his Red Sox debut, allowed three runs and six hits in six innings. Harang gave up two hits, walked one and struck out eight in six and a third innings in his first start for the Phillies. Jonathan Papelbon got four outs against Boston, his former team, for the save.RAYS 2, ORIOLES 0 Jake Odorizzi took a two-hitter into the seventh inning, and Tampa Bay coaxed four consecutive walks with two outs to score the go-ahead run against visiting Baltimore. Odorizzi allowed two hits and struck out seven in six and two-thirds innings. Baltimore’s Miguel Gonzalez retired the first two batters in the sixth but then walked Evan Longoria, who went on to score the decisive run.INDIANS 2, ASTROS 0 Carlos Carrasco struck out 10 while pitching three-hit ball into the seventh inning, Carlos Santana and Mike Aviles each homered, and Cleveland defeated host Houston. Carrasco walked one in six and a third innings. Cody Allen pitched a perfect ninth for the save.Houston starter Scott Feldman yielded five hits and a run in six and two-thirds innings and took the loss.ROCKIES 5, BREWERS 4 Wilin Rosario, who was scratched from the starting lineup, homered as a pinch-hitter in the 10th inning, leading visiting Colorado past Milwaukee.Rosario hit a full-count pitch from Milwaukee closer Francisco Rodriguez over the wall in center field, giving the Rockies a three-game sweep. Colorado closer LaTroy Hawkins got the win despite giving up two runs in the ninth to send the game into extra innings.ROYALS 7, WHITE SOX 5 Lorenzo Cain hit a go-ahead two-run homer in the eighth inning, his third hit, and host Kansas beat Chicago. Cain homered off Zach Putnam, the fourth White Sox pitcher, after Alcides Escobar led off the inning with a single for his third hit.Advertisement