AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseAUGUSTA, Ga. — On the sixth hole of the par-3 contest at Augusta National Golf Club, Tiger Woods called his caddie over to confer on strategy. Woods’s regular caddie, Joe LaCava, held back as the golfer’s son, Charlie Axel, wearing a white pint-size coverall, went over and listened. Woods pointed to where he wanted to land his tee shot. As Woods prepared for his 20th Masters, and his first competitive round since Feb. 5, the change in him was striking. Not in his short game, although Woods’s play around the greens looked much improved from the hackerlike whacks he made in Scottsdale, Ariz., and San Diego. Woods, 39, is noticeably more lighthearted.When he won the 1997 Masters for the first of his 14 major championships, Paul Azinger, one of Woods’s playing competitors that week, described being “outconcentrated” by him. Where Woods once thrummed with intensity and had an unblinking focus, he now comes across as an old softy.On Wednesday, in the practice area, he mingled with other players and interrupted his chipping practice to hug his children, his daughter, Sam Alexis, who is 7, and 6-year-old Charlie. “He seems in a good mood and happy out there,” said the Australian Geoff Ogilvy, who is making his eighth start at Augusta National. Woods, who shares custody of his children with his ex-wife, Elin Nordegren, is here this week with his girlfriend, Lindsey Vonn. She shepherded his son and his daughter around the course while LaCava enjoyed a leisurely walk unspoiled. “I’m feeling older; there’s no doubt about it,” Woods said. “Try chasing around 6- and 7-year-olds all day; you start feeling it. But the good news is my soccer game has gotten a lot better.” Would the Woods of five years ago have offered up an image of kicking a soccer ball around in the backyard with his children? If Woods has mellowed, he is the last to notice. Asked if he was looser, Woods laughed and said: “I have no idea. I’m just enjoying just competing again. Whether I have blinders on or not, I don’t feel any different. I feel like I’m preparing to try and win the Masters.” The par-3 contest, which was won Wednesday by Kevin Streelman, had not been a part of Woods’s preparation since 2004. Woods, a four-time Masters champion, once described the event as an unnecessary distraction. Then he had children, and as they have grown older, he has better appreciated the parent-child bond that sports facilitates. Woods grew reflective in his news conference Tuesday, talking about the 1997 Masters and how special it was to have his father, Earl, who had had heart bypass surgery earlier in the year, at the course on the final day. “To now have come full circle and to have a chance to have my kids out there and be able to share that with them, it’s special,” Woods said, adding, “It just means the world to me.” Woods was on the sixth green when there was a roar almost as loud as a plane taking off. On the fourth hole, Jack Nicklaus, whose 18 major titles Woods is chasing, had recorded his first ace at Augusta. Woods did not summon that kind of magic, but he did summon his daughter to stroke a putt, which she made. Before teeing off in the par-3 contest, Woods said he had two goals: have fun and don’t win (the winner of the Wednesday event has never won that year’s Masters). Check and check. “We had an absolutely great time,” Woods said in a statement released by Augusta National. “These were memories for a lifetime.” He also wrote on Twitter: “I’ll always have memories of my pop at Augusta, and now Sam and Charlie. An amazing day.” Now comes what used to be the easy part.On Thursday, Woods, who is paired with Jamie Donaldson and Jimmy Walker, will search for the peaceful, easy feeling inside the ropes that he has found away from the course. He will officially return to competition after a two-month absence knowing every errant shot will be thoroughly dissected. Woods said the scrutiny had not cut into his affection for the game he fell in love with as a toddler.“I’ve come to the understanding that I live it,” he said. “I know exactly what I’m doing out here, and I’ve hit the shots, and I don’t really need someone else’s secondhand opinion of what I was thinking of. I know exactly what I’m doing out there.” Advertisement