By GARY SANTANIELLOAPRIL 8, 2015
When Nebraska-Omaha and Providence open the men’s Frozen Four on Thursday afternoon at TD Garden in Boston, it will be three days after the N.C.A.A men’s basketball championship game and four days after opening night in Major League Baseball, as well as the first day of the Masters.It will also be 18 days after Minnesota won the women’s hockey championship and 11 days after Nebraska-Omaha and Providence joined North Dakota and Boston University in the Frozen Four by winning regional titles.Men’s hockey is the longest continuous season in college athletics: This season, the first games were played Oct. 4, 189 days before this year’s championship game, set for Saturday. (Duke, which won the basketball championship, played its first game on Nov. 14.) The hockey season concludes as spring sports like college baseball, softball and lacrosse are winding down their regular seasons.But for a variety of reasons, the college hockey community accepts — and even embraces — its place at the end of the winter sports calendar.“We’re well aware of where we sit on the food chain,” Quinnipiac Coach Rand Pecknold said, referring to the greater national appeal of college basketball at this time of year. “But we have a great niche right now.”AdvertisementHistorically, hockey’s final weekend — it was not called the Frozen Four until 1999 — preceded the basketball Final Four.AdvertisementFrom the mid-1980s through the mid-’90s, the final weekends for men’s and women’s basketball and men’s hockey overlapped. In 1997, the hockey tournament ended on the same Saturday night that the men’s basketball semifinals were held. The next year, hockey’s championship weekend followed basketball’s, and it has ever since.By moving its final weekend beyond basketball’s, hockey separated itself from the other championships, although the games periodically coincide with the end of the N.H.L regular season, as they do this year. Consequently, ESPN expanded the coverage of the tournament, and it has carried every game in the event for the past 10 years on its family of networks or on its streaming service.“That’s as good as we can get for prime time,” said Brent Colborne, ESPN’s director of programming and acquisitions. “If it was any other weekend, I don’t think we’d be able to do it because of everything else that’s going on.”Hockey’s having its own weekend has also created greater opportunities for promotion, as well as an exclusive window for the N.C.A.A.’s corporate sponsors. Since 2012, the N.C.A.A. has held a festival during the Frozen Four, similar to Major League Baseball’s FanFest for its All-Star Game and the N.F.L. Experience during Super Bowl week.“I don’t think college hockey has ever been more visible than it is today,” Boston University Coach David Quinn told reporters Wednesday. “You can find a college hockey game from October to April on TV every weekend.”He added, “It just has certainly helped the growth of hockey in general.”Still, every year, the coaches and the Division I men’s ice hockey committee discuss changing the tournament, including its schedule.“On the sports calendar that time of year, there’s no great weekend to move it to,” said the former Denver coach George Gwozdecky, who won N.C.A.A. titles in 2004 and 2005.AdvertisementSince 2000, teams qualifying for the Frozen Four have had an extra week to prepare. Before that, teams sometimes had as few as four days between the regional finals and the national semifinals, which created logistical nightmares.In 1999, Boston College upset North Dakota in the West Regional in Madison, Wis., on a Sunday night to reach the Frozen Four. Rather than return home, the Eagles flew directly to Anaheim, Calif., where they lost to Maine, 2-1, in overtime in the semifinals on Thursday night.“A chaotic trip,” said Boston College Coach Jerry York, who has won five national titles and is the winningest coach in college hockey. “We had to pack for both cities before we left Boston. And it ended up being warmer in Madison than it was in Anaheim.”Michigan Coach Red Berenson took his team to the championship weekend in 1992 and 1993. Each time, Michigan arrived back on campus from the regional finals on Sunday night, only to leave again on Tuesday. He called the decision to extend the schedule “kind of a Catch-22.”“When you’re coming off a regional victory, you have emotion and momentum and all the excitement around it,” he said.Quinn, though, welcomed the extra time to savor success.“It gives the teams an opportunity to reflect and enjoy the fact that they’ve had some success, and getting here isn’t easy,” he said.Gwozdecky said his 2004 championship team at Denver benefited from the new schedule.“We were kind of a dark horse that year,” he said. “All of our guys were banged up, and our captain never practiced the last five or six weeks of the season. The extra time certainly helped some of our guys. I’m a fan of the weekend off.”When Quinnipiac reached its first Frozen Four in 2013, Pecknold said, he was thankful he had a week to handle the logistics, from ticket requests to travel arrangements.Advertisement“It was overwhelming from an administrative standpoint to do everything that was needed to get ready for the Frozen Four,” he said.Those who get to compete in the Frozen Four barely notice what other sporting events are going on or how long their season has become.“This is a long year, but I know I don’t want it to end,” Quinn said. “I know they don’t want it to end. When you’re around a group like this, it can’t go long enough.”SLAP SHOTSBoston University (27-7-5) is led by the freshman Jack Eichel, a Hobey Baker finalist who has 24 goals and 43 assists. ... Goaltender Zane McIntyre of North Dakota (29-9-3) led Division I in wins and is a Hobey Baker finalist, along with Harvard’s JimMY Vesey. ... Providence (24-13-2) finished second to B.U. in the Hockey East Conference. Goaltender Jon Gillies has a .929 save percentage. ... Nebraska-Omaha (20-12-6) is making its first appearance in the Frozen Four. The Mavericks are led by goalie Ryan Massa, who leads Division I with a .944 save percentage.Peter May contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: College Hockey’s Long Trek Gives It Time in the Sun.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.