By VICTOR MATHERAPRIL 8, 2015
It is a field unlike any other.Most of the year on the PGA Tour, the same players turn up at the tee week in and week out. That is because the main criterion to qualify for a tournament, finishing in the top 125 on the previous year’s money list, never changes.But it is all different at the Masters, where the smaller field is invited in its own idiosyncratic way. As a result, there will be many notable names missing this week, and, more strikingly, many players surprisingly teeing off.There are 19 ways to qualify for an invitation to the Masters. Some of the categories are ones you might expect, like being in the top 50 in the world rankings or winning a major in the last five years.The top contenders like Rory McIlroy, Bubba Watson and Jordan Spieth all qualify in multiple ways.Others playing Thursday barely made it in. Finishing in the top 12 in last year’s Masters was all that got Kevin Stadler into this year’s tournament, and Erik Compton will play in his first Masters by virtue of his surprise finish in the top four at last year’s United States Open.AdvertisementThe Masters has a long history of welcoming amateurs into its field. Those eligible this year are the United States Amateur winner and runner-up, and the winners of the British Amateur, Mid-Amateur, Amateur Public Links, Asia-Pacific Amateur and a new event, the Latin America Amateur.AdvertisementThose seven amateurs are realistically only competing against one other for the honorary title of low amateur. Last year only one amateur, Oliver Goss, made the cut, and he finished 49th in a final-round field of 51.The last amateur to make the top 10 was Charles Coe in 1962. Still, a number of future stars made their Masters debuts as amateurs, including Tiger Woods, Sergio Garcia and Phil Mickelson.Perhaps this year’s most unlikely Masters entrant is Scott Harvey, 36, a real-estate company owner from Greensboro, N.C. He is in the field because he won the United States Mid-Amateur, an event for players 25 and older, which disqualifies the top college players who usually win major amateur events.“You can only dream about participating in the event, and you never really think it’s going to happen,” he told The News and Record of Greensboro.Though it is highly improbable that an amateur will win this year, there are even less likely contenders from another eligible category: All past Masters champions have a lifetime exemption.There are 11 players in the field who qualify only by virtue of being a former champion, and though Fred Couples can still play well at times, as a group they are nearly as weak as the amateurs.Among those expected to play this year are Ben Crenshaw, 63; Sandy Lyle, 57; Ian Woosnam, 57; and Larry Mize, 56. Crenshaw, who says this will be his last appearance, finished last in 2014, shooting 83-85.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even the older Masters winners have the right to be in the field. Immortals like Jack Nicklaus, who last played at Augusta in 2005, and Arnold Palmer, who last played in 2004, and lesser lights like Bob Goalby and Doug Ford are among those who could theoretically tee it up, but have chosen not to.AdvertisementThe field’s compact size — expected to be 98 this year, compared with 132 to 156 for a typical PGA Tour event — means a number of good golfers are left out.Among those who failed to meet any qualifying criteria this year are Harris English and Graham DeLaet, both in the top 30 of last year’s money list, and Daniel Berger and Nick Watney, who are in the top 30 this year.Perhaps the hardest luck story this year belongs to Johnson Wagner, a 35-year-old three-time winner on the Tour.Because the winners of Tour events over the past year qualify for the Masters, last week’s Houston Open was the last chance for the many players not yet eligible. In 2008, Wagner took advantage of this and earned his way to Augusta by winning in Houston.This year, the tournament went to a three-way playoff, including Wagner, as well as two players who were Masters-eligible, J.B. Holmes and Spieth.Sadly for Wagner, who was playing at Houston only because of a sponsor’s exemption, he lost to Holmes on the second playoff hole.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.