By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYAPRIL 8, 2015
Even after all the surgeries and the slippage, it does not feel quite right to think of Tiger Woods as a Masters underdog, as just another a golfing hopeful among many, still removed from the ceremonial oldsters yet far removed from the true contenders, too.But here he is in that role this week at Augusta National, with his 40th birthday coming later this year and nothing but doubt and, more jarring, a fair bit of pity swirling around his game and his familiar, now often grim — visage.Woods has rarely been a sentimental favorite, although there was his emotional journey at Royal Liverpool in 2006, when he won the British Open shortly after the death of his father, Earl, who had always been the driving force behind his career. But Woods has seldom been much for projecting vulnerability, even when he was vulnerable. He has expected to win even when he shouldn’t have expected to win.He is magnetic yet not beloved. His hard edge and personal indiscretions have contributed to that. But there can be no doubt that golf remains more interesting with him in the mix, and although he has not won a major tournament in nearly seven years and not won the Masters in a decade, his opening round will be the main event on Thursday.AdvertisementThe question is whether it will be best watched through splayed fingers.“I really hope Tiger plays well,” said Dave Stockton, a two-time winner of the P.G.A. Championship and a Masters runner-up. “I would be pleasantly surprised if he did, though, because he talks about reps, and I think you have to have reps. And you don’t get reps playing around home or even going to Augusta and playing without pressure.”AdvertisementWoods may not have won the Masters since 2005, but he has had plenty of success there, with six top-five finishes. This time, there will be a new kind of major pressure, however, with Woods playing to avoid not just defeat but a repeat of the embarrassment he experienced after chunking chips that a Sunday duffer might chunk in his recent P.G.A. Tour appearances. Those gaffes helped prompt a two-month, self-imposed leave of absence designed to get his act back together.The yips? Hank Haney, Woods’s former swing coach, certainly thinks so. “People think it came out of nowhere, and no, it hasn’t come out of nowhere,” Haney said in a podcast with Bythemin Golf last week. “It’s been gradually coming.”But Stockton, who has worked with Rory McIlroy and is now one of the world’s premier short-game instructors, is not so certain.“I was shocked at some of the shots he missed, because I think they were something he should be able to correct really quickly,” he said. “Without talking to him, I think it started because he was working so much on his long game. When he switched teachers, he worked so hard on creating his new swing that he thought he needed that he neglected the short game.”“I suspect with the length of time he’s had off, he certainly has been able to correct some of the problems he had,’ ’ Stockton added, “because he was really missing — and I’m not telling anyone anything they don’t know — shots that he should never miss. I don’t think it was necessarily the yips. Certainly it looked like it, but fundamentally as soon as he puts some work into it, I think he would get back to the level he wanted.”Champions from other sports will also be watching Woods intently, including Roger Federer, who was once closer to Woods when each was dominating his sport. The Swiss tennis star said in a recent interview that they continued to exchange messages.“It’s not what you like to see,” Federer said of Woods’s struggles. “But at the same time, I think it’s a very interesting period of his career. I always thought golf was unbelievably mental. It’s easy as an athlete when you are winning and things are going good. It’s very easy to be positive and all that. The real test comes at times like this. I definitely think he’s had also tougher moments, but he overcame those knowing that he will win again and again, and he did.”AdvertisementWoods has had tougher moments personally, notably his public mea culpa in 2010 after revelations of his philandering and then the breakup of his marriage.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But he resumed winning, even if not at majors. He had three P.G.A. Tour victories in 2012, and five victories and player of the year honors in 2013. Back problems ruined 2014, though, and this year has brought little relief.Federer, 33, has had back problems of his own. But since his rise to prominence more than a decade ago, he has never sunk as low in the tennis rankings or gone as long without a major victory as Woods, now out of the top 100 golfers.“It may take him a bit of time until he figures it all out,” said Federer, ranked No.2 in the world. “It may be physical or mental. I don’t exactly know. But I do think this is a time he can learn a lot and come out of this very strong. I hope he’ll be back and competing for the top spot and winning majors, because that’s what you want to see. You want to see Tiger winning and dominating. At least I do.”The conundrum is not only that Woods has lost his golfing way but that others — like McIlroy — are now accustomed to winning the big ones, even if McIlroy, 25, has not yet won the Masters.Haney, who coached Woods from 2004 to 2010 and has not spoken to him since, believes Woods lost some of his drive along the way and that his golfing problems extend well beyond his short game.“He’s 39 years old, four knee operations, a back operation; I think it’s more, ‘Can he win again?”’ Haney said. “I don’t think at 39 years old, with all the water that has gone under the bridge, it’s realistic to think he’s going to supplant Rory as the best player in the world now. I don’t think there’s anybody that could think that. Even if you took the chipping part away, it’s not going to happen.”But Stockton and others are not prepared to call it an era just yet.“When Tiger signed his first contract for 40-plus million or whatever, I was so proud of the kid to put that much effort into his career when financially he had it made,” Stockton said. “Tiger has the will, and he’s always had it. He made 142 cuts in a row, never having a bad week, and that tells you what’s inside that guy, and I don’t think that’s left.”“Sure it’s probably harder,” he added. “You get to your 40s. It’s harder, but it’s not an insurmountable hurdle if you have the mental strength and do what Tiger has already done. He knows what coming back is all about. I’m not ready to cross him off yet.”A version of this special report appears in print on April 9, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »