AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: U.S. Masters GolfBy Jeff ShainPerhaps Magnolia Lane really does possess anti-aging powers.That notion bubbles up every time Fred Couples plays his way into Masters contention, a common occurrence that continued even as the Hall of Famer zoomed past age 50. Creaky back or not, simply driving along Augusta National’s famed lane to the club’s entrance seems to drop years off the 55-year-old’s birth certificate.Ditto for Phil Mickelson, who is a decade younger than Couples but is showing signs that his career is approaching its downslope. The drive under the magnolias seems to renew a passion that can grow stale after two decades of PGA Tour life.Magnolia Lane’s elixir is apparently not reserved for that duo only, though. Ángel Cabrera, 45, has partaken. So have Steve Stricker, 48; Miguel Ángel Jiménez, 51; Kenny Perry, 54; and Bernhard Langer, 57.“They can still play at that age,” said Paul Azinger, the 2008 United States Ryder Cup captain and now an ESPN analyst. “They have got the experience that’s required and they generally have the nerve that’s required.”Indeed, even as Augusta National spent a decade getting longer and tighter, no other major — perhaps no other tournament — has seen so many elder statesmen so high on the leaderboard.In eight of the past nine Masters, at least two players age 40 or older have placed among the top 12. Last year there were three — including Langer’s tie for eighth, which made him, at 56, the second-oldest player to place in the top 10 at Augusta.It’s not just a recent trend. Ben Hogan posted seven top-10 finishes at the Masters after turning 40 in 1952. Jack Nicklaus and Sam Snead each had six, including Nicklaus’s 1986 triumph at age 46.The Masters is the only major that returns to the same venue year after year, and there is no substitute for knowing the nuances of the Augusta National course. “Sometimes we tend to overstate things,” said the two-time U.S. Open champion Curtis Strange, “but we don’t overstate the importance of knowing Augusta National.”So it’s fair to assume a few grizzled veterans are going to make their way near the top of the leaderboard this week. The trick is identifying which ones — and whether Mickelson or 39-year-old Tiger Woods, recently back from hiatus, might be among them.“What we are looking for now are flashes of brilliance,” Azinger said. “We are looking for reminders of what used to be, not of who they are now.” Mickelson, Azinger continued, has had one top-10 finish since the start of 2014, “and that’s not like Phil. And we all know the plight of Tiger Woods.”Although Woods is one year short of the 40-and-older set, his body certainly acts older. He hasn’t struck a competitive shot in eight weeks, since a bad back cut short his play at Torrey Pines — where he has won nine times — after just 11 holes.His balky short game has also commanded attention, with Woods stunningly unable to find the touch around the greens. So Woods decided to take a break, saying he wouldn’t return until his game was competitive again.“I’ve worked a lot on my game and I’m looking forward to competing,” he said last week on his website.Only once before has he come to Augusta after such a long layoff. That was in 2010, when he finished fourth, playing for the first time after a self-imposed four-month break following a sex scandal.“Going to Augusta, for Tiger, is like going home,” said Chris DiMarco, whom Woods beat in a playoff to win his last Masters a decade ago. “I think he’s as comfortable around there as he is around his home course.”Mickelson hasn’t won at Augusta since taking the green jacket in 2010. His game has looked sharper in recent weeks, especially on the greens, but he hasn’t had all the pieces together at once.“The only way to play Augusta effectively,” Mickelson said, “is to have good visualization, see the shots and have confidence in your swing. As I continue to play well, I’m building more and more confidence each day. You can never have enough heading into the Masters.”Five men have won the Masters in their 40s, most recently Mark O’Meara, at 41 in 1998. There were nearly two additional older winners in recent editions.In 2009, Kenny Perry, 48 at the time, was on the brink of becoming the game’s oldest major champion when he held a two-shot lead with two holes to play. A bogey/bogey finish opened the door to a three-man playoff that Cabrera eventually won.In 2013, Cabrera, by then 43, gallantly took Adam Scott, 32, to a playoff before succumbing.Last year produced an even more intriguing anomaly, when no fewer than a half-dozen pros age 50 or over made the cut. It ended up being only the second Masters featuring a pair of fiftysomethings in the top 10, with Langer tied for eighth and Jiménez, 50 at the time, tied for fourth, even shooting a 66 that was the week’s low round. The other came in 1967, when Hogan and Snead — both 54 — tied for 10th.“There’s a lot of good over-50 players,” Langer said at a Champions Tour stop earlier this year. “We can compete at the highest level and even on a very, very long golf course” like Augusta. The 1967 edition was Hogan’s final Masters, and he went out on a high note, becoming the first golfer to play Augusta National’s back nine in 6-under-par 30. That remained the standard for a quarter-century, until Mark Calcavecchia beat it with a 29 in 1992. (David Toms equaled that score in 1998.)While Nicklaus’s 1986 triumph may go down as the greatest Masters in history, few may recall his performance 12 years later. A closing 68 left Nicklaus — then 58 — in a tie for sixth behind O’Meara.Better yet, Nicklaus improved his score every day that year, going 73-72-70.“Every time they come back, they learn something else,” said the Golf Channel analyst Brandel Chamblee. “There’s some other nuance that they know that somebody who has only played there two or three times doesn’t know.”Most places, that is considered simply local knowledge. But at Augusta, it’s a fountain of youth.Advertisement