By DAVE SEMINARAAPRIL 10, 2015
As a native Buffalonian, consigned by geographic fate to root for the Bills and the Sabres for four decades and counting, I’ve had more than a few occasions to taste the agony of defeat.I barricaded the door of my dorm room after Scott Norwood’s kick and the Bills’ Super Bowl hopes sailed wide right in 1991. In the wake of the three subsequent Super Bowl blowouts, the so-called Music City Miracle and the Sabres’ “no goal” debacle in the 1999 Stanley Cup finals, among many others heartbreaks, I have damaged furniture, broken remote controls, stomped holes into the floor, cursed, spat and exhibited other antisocial behavior commonly observed in asylums.The one thing I haven’t done, until now, is actively root against my teams.The Sabres’ train wreck of a season — they’ve lost an N.H.L.-worst 49 games and (hopefully) counting — has been tolerable, even enjoyable in a subversive way, thanks to the tantalizing prospect that they might land one of the phenoms available in the draft, Connor McDavid or Jack Eichel.The Sabres finished with the league’s worst record last season, too, but I felt no need to root against them because the competition for the cellar was meek. Despite Buffalo’s peerless futility, though, the Florida Panthers, who finished 14 points ahead of the Sabres, snared the first overall pick in the lottery. This season, the stakes are higher because of the McEichel Derby. Buffalo sports teams have often been bad in recent years, but they have not been bad enough — or lucky enough — to secure the first overall pick in an N.F.L. or N.H.L. draft since the Sabres landed Pierre Turgeon in 1987.AdvertisementBefore this season, the N.H.L. reconfigured the lottery system to reduce the incentive for teams to tank — no doubt anticipating that plenty of teams might do just that to improve their odds of landing McDavid or Eichel, who are considered franchise-changing talents. Now the last-place team has a 20 percent chance of getting the first pick, down from 25 percent, but even if it does not win the lottery, the last-place team is guaranteed to pick second.AdvertisementFor most of the season, save for a disturbingly fruitful stretch last winter when the Sabres went 10-3, they have been as dreadful as fans hoped.Buffalo, the N.H.L.’s lowest-scoring team, failed to win a single game in January, then dropped 12 of 13 in late February into March. It seemed that a dead-last finish and a top-two pick were locked up.But tensions between the players and the fans have mounted.“It’s tough to get momentum when your fans are rooting against you,” defenseman Mike Weber told The Buffalo News on March 26, after the Sabres lost at home to Arizona, their primary rival in the race to the bottom. Many Sabres fans cheered the Coyotes’ overtime winner.That embarrassment seemed to motivate the team. Four days later, the Sabres trounced the Coyotes in Arizona, outscoring them by 4-1 and outhitting them by 41-21, probably Buffalo’s most spirited effort of the season. Instead of going up (down) by 8 points in the standings with six games to play, the Sabres saw their McEichel margin cut to 4.Sabres fans, myself included, took to Twitter to denounce the team for having the audacity to win this must-lose game. The team, according to The Buffalo News, “partied hard in their Gila River Arena dressing room, gleefully shouting, singing and dancing.”Singing and dancing? This atrocious team, which has always found a way to lose — except now, when its fans really wanted it to — danced and sang, delirious after prevailing in a meaningless game that could cost the franchise the next Wayne Gretzky or Mario Lemieux?After the win, left wing Nicolas Deslauriers said: “We’ve got one win. We’ll try to get six other ones.”AdvertisementThe swagger was befitting a team trying to clinch a playoff spot. Are our spiteful players now trying to win at all costs just to get back at us for turning on them?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Things went from bad to worse when the Sabres beat the Maple Leafs on April 1, cutting their McEichel Derby cushion to 2 points. On Friday night, the Sabres carried an improbable 3-2 lead into the final two minutes of a home contest against the Chicago Blackhawks, but Jonathan Toews — bless him — scored twice in 47 seconds to keep Buffalo in sole possession of 30th place.Sabres fans, who had been hurling abuse at the team in the stands and on Twitter for playing well, exulted. “Do you believe in miracles? YES!” was among the heartfelt tributes.The Sabres had a chance Monday to clinch last place, but they could not close the deal. They had the nerve to jump to a 4-0 lead against the Hurricanes and hold on to win, 4-3, behind 49 saves by goalie Anders Lindback.With two games left, the Sabres have a 2-point cushion and the tiebreaker edge over the Coyotes, who lost, 4-0, on Thursday night to the Vancouver Canucks. Buffalo can clinch 30th place with a loss Friday night against the Columbus Blue Jackets, the hottest team in the league.But I’m not getting cocky. Buffalo sports teams have a habit of abusing their fans — losing when it matters, but perhaps in this case winning when it doesn’t.Losing out on the McEichel Derby to the moribund Coyotes, a team that has finished no better than 22nd in league attendance in a decade, would be one of the most painful injustices in Buffalo’s notorious sporting history. McDavid or Eichel belongs in a hockey town like Buffalo, not in a sweltering limbo with an ambivalent fan base.Let’s assume for a moment that McDavid and Eichel are the next Great One and Super Mario. Imagine losing out on such a player because your team won a few throwaway games near the end of a catastrophic season.Players change uniforms all too frequently, but if you’re from Buffalo, you support the Bills and the Sabres and pass these allegiances down to your children, cruel as that may be. It’s a curse, but it’s also an integral part of our culture, our identity, more important than wings, lake-effect snow and beef on weck sandwiches.AdvertisementMy sons, James, 5, and Leo, 7, have never lived in Buffalo, but they support the Bills and the Sabres. In 2011, Leo got an autographed football bearing the inscription “Never Give Up” from the former Bills quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick after being punched at school for supporting the Bills. So last week he couldn’t understand why I was so angry that the Sabres were beating the Blackhawks.“Why are you rooting against our team?” he asked.I tried to explain that we were fighting for last place and needed to keep losing to get a really good player, but he wasn’t buying it.“Fitzpatrick said never give up, Dad,” Leo said.I took his point, but as this ignominious season winds down, I will be rooting hard for a fitting conclusion: another loss. I believe in you, Sabres. I know you can do it.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.