By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 10, 2015
Roberto Luongo earned his 401st career win, and Jaromir Jagr got his 1,800th career point as the host Florida Panthers beat Boston, 4-2, hurting the Bruins’ playoff chances. The Bruins have lost two straight after winning their previous five games. They trail Ottawa by 2 points and Pittsburgh by 1 for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.■ Tyler Johnson scored in overtime during a power play, his second goal of the night, and the host Tampa Bay Lightning beat the Devils, 4-3. The playoff-bound Lightning are battling the Montreal Canadiens for the Atlantic Division title. The Devils, 1-6-3 over their last 10 games, got two goals from Steve Bernier, while Patrik Elias had the other Devils goal. Elias tied John LeClair and Rod Gilbert for 87th place on the career list with 406 goals.■ Brett Bellemore and Ryan Murphy each scored a goal to lead the Carolina Hurricanes to a 3-1 victory over the host Philadelphia Flyers. Jordan Staal added an empty-net goal for the Hurricanes, who ended a five-game road losing streak while taking their fourth victory in five games against Philadelphia this season. Sean Couturier scored for the Flyers, while Jakub Voracek went without a point for Philadelphia. Voracek entered Thursday fourth in the league with 81 points, 2 behind John Tavares, Jamie Benn and Sidney Crosby, who lead the N.H.L.■ The Kontinental Hockey League team in Sochi, Russia, has not paid its players in more than two months. H.C. Sochi and the head of the league’s players’ union, the former Edmonton Oilers forward Andrei Kovalenko, said the club has financial problems. Many of the K.H.L.’s teams, which are mostly Russian, have had financial problems this season because international sanctions and low oil price have caused problems for the state-owned energy companies and regional governments that fund most of the league’s teams.■ The Nashville Predators signed the free-agent forward Steve Moses to a one-year, $1 million contract for the 2015-16 season. Moses, 25, set a K.H.L. single-season record in 2014-15 by scoring 36 goals.A version of this brief appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Hockey; Setback for Bruins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.