AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensOn Feb. 1, the eighth-seeded Washington Capitals were tied with the Rangers for the Metropolitan Division’s third spot at 60 points — 8 ahead of ninth-place Florida, 9 in front of Philadelphia and 11 on top of Ottawa.Many believed the playoff field was set, but fast-forward nine weeks and the postseason picture is not only unset, it is also a mess.Since Feb. 1, the Senators have won 22 of 33 games and have picked up points in 26 of those contests — including Thursday’s 3-0 win at Madison Square Garden in the Rangers’ regular-season home finale. “I knew we were going to go on this,” Senators Coach Dave Cameron said sarcastically after the game. “I don’t care how good your team is, you never sit back and say you know you’re going on a roll. We knew we put in the work, and right now, things are going good for us.”The Islanders and the Red Wings reached the postseason Thursday thanks to the Bruins’ loss in Florida and Detroit’s overtime loss in Montreal. But Pittsburgh or Boston or Ottawa will be left outside when the regular season ends Saturday night. The Senators’ run from also-ran to playoff contender has endured inconsistent play from youngsters, goaltending injuries and even a coaching change.The rookie goaltender Andrew Hammond has inspired Ottawa. The 27-year-old Hammond has lost just once in regulation — March 26 against the Rangers — since making his N.H.L. debut Feb. 16 in relief of the injured Robin Lehner. Hammond exacted his revenge Thursday, stopping 26 shots for his third shutout in his first start at the Garden.Without injuries to Lehner and Craig Anderson, Hammond may have never seen the net. Yet “The Hamburglar” — a moniker based on the McDonald’s character’s prominent spot on his mask — has infused excitement into the league and its smallest Eastern Canadian market.“I think it’s obviously very improbable,” Hammond said. “As big of a hill as it has been to climb, I don’t think anyone’s been overwhelmed at any stage because we’ve honestly worried about each stage as it’s come, and tonight was no different.”But Hammond has not been alone. Two late-round draft picks turned Calder Trophy candidates have enhanced Ottawa’s playoff position. The sixth-round pick Mark Stone and the fifth-round selection Mike Hoffman rank second and fourth in points among rookies.“If Mark Stone isn’t in the Calder consideration right now, I don’t know what else he has to do, because he’s been our M.V.P. the last few games,” Hammond said. “Mike Hoffman is almost at 30 goals as a rookie. I think they speak for themselves as far as what they’ve been able to do.”Stone netted the game-winning goal in his first career two-goal game against Pittsburgh on Tuesday when the Senators rallied from 3-0 down to claim a 4-3 overtime win. The Penguins enjoyed a 19-point advantage over the Senators on Feb. 8.“Even when we get behind Pittsburgh and we get behind, 3-0, we know we haven’t played our game yet,” Hammond said. “When we got back to our game, we were able to have some success.”The Senators struggled to find that game under the former Jack Adams Award winner Paul MacLean, and an 11-11-5 start cost him his job. Cameron, an assistant coach, took over and has righted the ship. Ottawa has a 31-15-8 record under him.Hammond’s highlight-reel save on Kevin Hayes came late in the second period — in which he fell, then stumbled to his feet to kick away the chance.“I wouldn’t say I necessarily saved it, but I got in a position to not let it hurt me,” Hammond said, adding, “I think I just hit a rut and went down.”Seconds later, Clarke MacArthur deposited a Stone pass past Henrik Lundqvist, putting Ottawa on top.MacArthur’s was the first of two second-period goals — the other coming from Kyle Turris — which were enough for the Senators to remain in the thick of the playoff hunt with one game left. SLAP SHOTSThe Rangers rested the sore players Mats Zuccarello, Rick Nash and Marc Staal.Advertisement