
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
APRIL 9, 2015
WASHINGTON — For his first official day back on the mound for the Mets on Thursday, Matt Harvey wanted everything to be just right. So before the game, he played D.J.As his teammates lounged in the clubhouse, he walked over to a silver amplifier that sat on one side of the room. He plugged in his smartphone, chose a song and cranked up the volume.It was Aerosmith’s “Back in the Saddle.” (“I’m calling all the shots tonight.”) Chest puffed out, knit orange-and-blue Mets hat pulled down to his brow, he strutted away to chew tobacco and spit into a plastic bottle, glancing at a video stream of the Nationals’ batting practice.When the song was over, he returned to his phone to play the Beastie Boys’ “Sure Shot.” (“You can’t, you won’t and you don’t stop.”) Then he strutted off again, in silence. He soon was back to change the song again.AdvertisementYou’d figure that a starting pitcher, less than 90 minutes before his first game in a year and a half, would have better things to do. But that’s Matt Harvey: Even after coming back from Tommy John surgery to repair his right elbow in October 2013, he acted as if he owned the place. On Thursday, he appeared to be in charge of the Mets’ clubhouse — right down to the detail of their pregame playlist.AdvertisementIn only a matter of time, he also took charge of the game.He was so good that he pitched six scoreless innings, throwing 91 pitches, 63 of which were strikes. He struck out nine hitters, including the dangerous Bryce Harper not once, not twice, but three times. At times, he appeared to be jet-fueled, as his pitches shot past hitters at 95, 96, even 98 miles per hour.Those questions of whether he could come back from surgery to match his pre-injury heights as one of the top pitchers in the game — answered.At 26, with a few gray hairs shining within his dark hair, he returned nearly as sharp as ever, outpitching Stephen Strasburg — another Tommy John specimen — to help the Mets beat the Nationals, 6-3, and win two of the three games in the series.In light of his performance, it was very possible that the sound of Mets fans, and likely the Mets’ front office, exhaling could be heard all the way from Queens.“We’re taking about winning pennants here,” Manager Terry Collins said after the victory. “When you’ve got a No. 1 guy that you can run out there and you know that, hey, if we give him two or three runs a game, he’s going to win games, we’ve got that animal.”The Mets were careful not to put too much importance on this single game, though, or on Harvey’s showing. They did admit that they had high expectations.On the eve of Harvey’s return, Sandy Alderson, the general manager, told me that a successful performance from Harvey would be “a seven-inning shutout.” I thought he was kidding. Evidently, he was not. Harvey is just so talented that there’s no use in setting a low bar, Alderson said.AdvertisementSo when Harvey nearly made it seven innings without allowing any runs, his teammates tried hard not to smile about it. But they know, just as the fans know, that Harvey can do things most other players cannot. He may just be exactly what the Mets need to make them — not the Yankees — the talk of the city again. The last time that happened was way back in 1986, the last time the Mets won the World Series.Harvey and anyone of his generation must wonder what that was like. He wasn’t born until 1989.He is aware of what the Mets have done lately: six straight losing seasons. Before that, back-to-back September collapses, each one ending with a loss to the Marlins in the final game of the year to miss the playoffs. And the owners’ entanglement in the Bernard L. Madoff financial scandal has left the Mets with paltry payrolls not befitting a big-market club.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Harvey could change all that.He comes with his bravado, fastball and heart-pumping playlist. And suddenly, the entire tone of the team is more positive.It’s exactly what the Mets have been waiting for — an intense, limelight-loving star who can guide them out of their sad and sorry era of baseball in which fans have been vanishing from the seats at Citi Field.Harvey’s a guy tough enough to say forget it to the front office when it wanted him to rehabilitate his elbow in Florida, even though he wanted to remain in New York so he could live life outside of baseball. And he’s a guy who was tough enough, in the spring of 2013, to throw a near perfect game against the Chicago White Sox, even with blood streaming from his nose.He’s also a guy who is cocky enough to use bats with the nickname “Dark Knight” emblazoned on the undersides of the handles. Would a dark, steel-willed knight allow the Yankees to rule New York, even when they haven’t made the playoffs for two straight years? No chance.After Thursday’s game, though, in a room beneath Nationals Park, all was quiet and mellow. Harvey’s work, for the day, was done.He hugged his parents. His elbow showed no signs of being weak or sore. (The ripped-open pack of Tylenol in his locker was evidence, though, that something must have been ailing.) He said it was just like old times.“It really made me feel like I didn’t skip a beat from 2013,” he told reporters.He added, “I was able to throw anything at any count,” as if describing how much effort it took to blink.AdvertisementEarlier in the week, Harvey played down his return, calling it “just another game.” But this wasn’t just any game. This was a game that Mets fans everywhere will use as barometer for the entire season.It’s always good to start off strong, and even better to do so against a team like the Nationals, who nearly made it to last year’s World Series.It helps, of course, that Harvey is back, laying down the soundtrack. And right now, the music is blasting.Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: In Dominant Return to Mets, Harvey Doesn’t Miss a Beat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »