By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 9, 2015
It was, if nothing else, a feat of extraordinary endurance.About six hours after Thabo Sefolosha and Pero Antic helped the Atlanta Hawks to a 27-point victory over the Phoenix Suns in Atlanta, they were on a city sidewalk in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan at 4 a.m. Wednesday, detained by the police in the wake of an incident involving a third N.B.A. player outside 1Oak, a Manhattan nightclub favored by athletes and celebrities.And lest anyone forget — and this might be the most surprising element of the ordeal — the Hawks had a game scheduled for Wednesday night.Sefolosha, 30, and Antic, 32, were absent from the Hawks’ victory that night over the Nets, as they dealt with the fallout from their alleged actions outside 1Oak, an expansive, dimly lighted club on 17th Street that caters to the young, rich and beautiful.Some of the details are well known. Minutes after Chris Copeland of the Indiana Pacers was stabbed in the abdomen during an argument with another individual, Sefolosha and Antic were arrested and charged with interfering in the investigation, the authorities said.AdvertisementSefolosha was told on Thursday that he had a broken ankle, a season-ending injury the team said he sustained during the incident. He also has ligament damage and will require surgery.AdvertisementThe incident shined a light on some athletes’ late-night appetites. Consider, for example, that Antic and Sefolosha happened to be at 1Oak at the same time as Copeland, said Lauren Menache, a senior account executive at Berk Communications, which counts 1Oak as one of its clients.But it was more than mere coincidence. The club is one of several in the city popular among players, Menache said. Visiting teams often stay at nearby hotels, and players know — largely through word of mouth — that they will be taken care of by management.“There’s a comfort level that their anonymity will hold up and they’ll be treated nicely,” Menache said. “They know exactly who to ask for when they arrive.”Back when he played for the Knicks, J. R. Smith was a regular at 1Oak. Last season, when he was in the midst of getting in trouble with the league for untying opponents’ shoelaces, Smith was photographed at 1Oak pretending to untie the shoelaces of another patron. The photograph made the rounds on social media.Smith now plays for the Cleveland Cavaliers, and he recently told reporters that he owed his newfound success, at least in part, to the city’s lack of night life. There are fewer distractions in Cleveland, he said, which has made it easier for him to focus on basketball.Of course, professional athletes going out late at night, especially in New York, is a ritual as old as professional sports themselves. Wayne Embry, 78, who works as a special adviser for the Toronto Raptors, spent the bulk of his 11-year playing career with the Cincinnati Royals before he retired in 1969. Road trips to New York, he said, were always a treat, because he and his teammates often took advantage of opportunities to visit the city’s great jazz clubs, like the Village Vanguard.Afterward, players would make their way to Big Wilt’s Smalls Paradise, a late-night lounge in Harlem that was co-owned at the time by Wilt Chamberlain.Advertisement“It was just a great place,” Embry said in a telephone interview. “What made it special was that all the entertainers would head there after their shows. They’d come to Smalls and keep the jam going.”Smalls, as it was known, typically stayed open until 4 or 5 a.m. Embry recalled seeing Otis Redding at the club one night.“It was unbelievable,” Embry said. “And I was out past curfew, but it was after a game against the Knicks. We definitely weren’t playing the next day.”Jon Barry, an analyst for ABC and ESPN, cited New York, Los Angeles and Miami as cities that are particularly popular among players.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“People aren’t going to be going out in Milwaukee,” he said.While Barry said his night-life days were “long past” — his playing career ended in 2006 — he recalled trips to the China Club, a staple of New York’s club scene in the 1990s.The China Club, whose original location was on 75th Street, on the Upper West Side, was the 1Oak of its day, a go-to spot for the elite. Members of the N.H.L.’s Rangers were frequent guests. “The China Club was hot,” Barry said. “I remember seeing Mark Messier, after they won in 1994, with a tableful of 20 women.”At the same time, Barry said, it was unusual for athletes to stay out past 4 a.m., especially when they have a game the next day. In light of this week’s events, Barry did note that Copeland had fallen out of the Pacers’ regular rotation. As for Antic and Sefolosha, they are valued contributors off the bench.“I’m sure that you might take a few more liberties if you know you’re not playing,” Barry said. “But you shouldn’t be anywhere at 4 a.m. Only bad things can happen at 4 a.m.”Curfews are uncommon in the N.B.A. Neither the Hawks nor the Pacers impose them. Derek Fisher, the coach of the Knicks, said he expected his players to act responsibly.Advertisement“We’re talking about adult men,” Fisher said. “I don’t think you get into defining what time guys go to bed.”Of the five teams that he played for during his career, only one, he said, imposed a curfew: the Utah Jazz.“Every guy is different,” Fisher said. “I played with guys who couldn’t sleep at night. They watched television. They watched film on their computers. They went to music studios. They did tons of stuff that allowed them to decompress or be away from the game, or whatever it was they like to do. It’s about your performance in the games.”Sefolosha was arraigned on charges of resisting arrest, obstructing governmental administration and disorderly conduct. Antic was arraigned on charges of obstructing governmental administration, harassment and disorderly conduct. A lawyer for the two players said he expected the case to dismissed.Copeland’s alleged assailant, Shevoy Bleary Murdock, 22, was arraigned Thursday on assault charges. According to the criminal complaint, Bleary Murdock got into an argument with Copeland and a female companion, and then stabbed Copeland in the diaphragm with a switchblade. A judge set bail at $20,000.After graduating from high school, Bleary Murdock received an athletic scholarship for track and field to Coppin State University in Baltimore. But after he was injured and lost his scholarship, he joined the Army, his legal aide lawyer, Michael Perkins, said. Bleary Murdock was honorably discharged in 2014 and currently works at the James Hotel, Perkins said.Copeland, 31, who remained hospitalized Thursday, issued a statement through the team in which he apologized for his “bad choice at being out at that time.”James C. McKinley Jr. contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: New York’s Night Life Carries Perks, and Risks, for Athletes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.