AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonAUGUSTA, Ga. — Standing over his drive in the middle of the fairway on the par-5 15th hole at Augusta National Golf Club on Thursday, Jordan Spieth was eight under par for the day. Spieth, who is 21 years old, said he had no idea that the record for the lowest 18-hole score in Masters tournament history was nine-under 63.Instead, Spieth plotted a loftier goal. He wanted to finish at 10 under par.Why?“Because I’ve never shot 10 under in a professional tournament,” Spieth said with his eyes widening, as if the answer was obvious.He also did not know that the record for the lowest round in any major championship was 63.But Spieth’s second shot on the 15th hole sailed over the green, and his subsequent chip back toward the hole came up well short. Three strokes with his putter later, Spieth had a bogey.Roughly an hour later, Spieth birdied the 18th hole and had to settle for an eight-under 64 and the first-round lead.“Unfortunately, I took the wrong club at the 15th,” said Spieth, who finished last year’s Masters tied for second. “But eight under? That’s nothing to complain about. I’ll take that.”Spieth, who is almost always understated and measured in his responses, offered a thin smile.“I’ll take three more rounds like that,” he said.Four players — Jason Day, Ernie Els, Justin Rose and Charley Hoffman — were three strokes behind Spieth. With the Augusta National greens softened by consecutive days of intermittent rain earlier in the week, the scoring conditions were favorable. Day had briefly threatened to tie Spieth with five successive birdies beginning at the 12th hole.Sergio García was four strokes back, Phil Mickelson shot a two-under 70 and Rory McIlroy was one behind Mickelson. Tiger Woods, playing his first competitive round in almost two months, finished with a one-over 73.But the story of the day was Spieth’s continued ascendancy on the golf circuit. In his last three tournaments, Spieth has one victory and two second-place finishes.Billy Horschel, Spieth’s playing partner, at one point told Spieth that he was getting tired of complimenting him. He wanted a tape recorder to help him get through the round.“Billy said he’d have the tape recorder on each tee box say: ‘Nice hole, Jordan,’ ” Spieth said.Spieth’s round was a combination of brilliant play and the kind of good karma that comes with being the hottest player in the game. Spieth hit spectacular shots, and even when he did not, good things happened anyway.Spieth was two under after six holes, but his driver had been wayward off the tee and at the seventh hole he was once again in trouble to the right of the fairway. He slapped his second shot through a narrow opening in a grove of trees and made par anyway.At the eighth green, he thought his second shot was going to miss the green, but it rolled up close enough for an easy two-putt birdie. After sinking shortish birdie putts on the ninth and the 10th holes, Spieth thought he hit his 6-foot birdie putt on the 12th green so off-line, he started walking after it before it reached the hole.He was getting ready for the tap-in par putt when the ball curved left and dipped into the hole for the sixth of his nine birdies.His tee shot on the 13th hole soared deep into the trees right of the fairway, then ricocheted back into the fairway. That led to another birdie after a deft chip on his third shot.“I did get some good breaks but you’ve got to grind it out, too, because that will only last so long,” Spieth said.Indeed, another errant tee shot at the 14th hole left him in a tough spot in the right rough. He curled his second shot around a tree and it floated toward the green, bouncing a couple times before striking the flagstick and coming to rest a few feet from the hole. Another birdie.That brought Spieth to the middle of the fairway at the 15th hole. The distance remaining to the hole called for him to use either a 4-iron or a hybrid club. While the 4-iron might have given Spieth the best chance at an eagle, the hybrid was the safer choice to clear the pond protecting the front of the green. And hybrid is what Spieth hit.It ended up 20 yards past the green. His ball had small smudge of mud on it, which helped keep his chip just short of the green.“That’s a little frustrating now that I know that 63 was the low score not just for the Masters but for any round in a major,” Spieth said. “But it’s still one of the better rounds I’ve ever played.”In his modest, low-key way, Spieth added, “I’m certainly O.K. with the day.”While Spieth had finished near dusk, Hoffman had arrived at Augusta National before sunup. The honorary starters, Arnold Palmer, Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player, were on the practice green preparing to tee off and Hoffman grabbed two Masters flags he had bought at the club’s merchandise shop and had Palmer and Nicklaus autograph them. Player had already left for the tee box.“I have a charity foundation and want to auction them off, but I was a little worried about whether I was doing the right thing,” said Hoffman, who is appearing in his second Masters. “But they were great to me.”Then it was Hoffman’s turn to hit his first drive.“I don’t normally get nervous, but I was following those guys,” said Hoffman, who nonetheless made par on the opening hole.Consecutive birdies on the next two holes buoyed Hoffman, but it was an eagle on the 15th hole that made his round.Rose scrambled to start his round. At one point, he saved par by hooking a 9-iron 30 yards to reach the fourth green.“I’m playing Bubba golf,” he said to his playing partner and the Masters defending champion Bubba Watson.But Rose settled down with four birdies and one bogey in his last 13 holes, although he had to continue to be inventive, channeling one of his boyhood heroes, Seve Ballesteros, who would have turned 58 Thursday.Els, who also eagled the 15th hole, was six under and threatening to tie for the lead, but stumbled with a bogey on the final hole.Still, Els’s 67 was the first time in 21 Masters appearances that he scored under 70 in an opening round of the tournament.There were some notable players over par. J. B. Holmes, fresh off his victory last week at the Houston Open, shot a four-over 76, as did the defending United States Open champion, Martin Kaymer.Advertisement