By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 9, 2015
Jed Lowrie broke up a combined no-hit bid by Cleveland with a one-out home run in the ninth inning on Thursday as the Astros lost to the Indians, 5-1, in Houston.Indians starter Trevor Bauer was pulled after throwing 111 pitches through six innings. He struck out a career-high 11 and walked five.“It’s a weight lifted off the whole dugout, the whole team,” Lowrie said. “Hopefully it was good for morale.”Kyle Crockett and Scott Atchison each pitched a scoreless inning before Nick Hagadone took over. Hagadone struck out Chris Carter to begin the ninth. Lowrie then sent a 94-mile-per-hour fastball far over the left-center field wall for the Astros’ only hit.AdvertisementAstros starter Asher Wojciechowski (0-1) gave up four runs and eight hits in four-plus innings in his major league debut. ROYALS 4, WHITE SOX 1 Edinson Volquez dazzled for eight innings in his Royals debut, and Lorenzo Cain made two spectacular catches after driving in a run as host Kansas City beat Chicago to finish a season-opening sweep.Salvador Perez added a two-run homer, Kendrys Morales also drove in a run and the American League champion Royals improved to 3-0 for the first time since an opening sweep of Detroit in 2008.Volquez (1-0) allowed four hits, including Alexei Ramirez’s run-scoring single. Greg Holland worked a perfect ninth for his second save in less than 24 hours.The Royals pounded John Danks (0-1), who had been 7-0 in 16 career starts against them. Danks allowed all four runs on seven hits and a walk in five and two-thirds innings.AdvertisementRANGERS 10, ATHLETICS 1 Shin-Soo Choo hit a three-run homer, Mitch Moreland added a two-run blast and Texas’ dormant bats broke out as the visiting Rangers spoiled Kendall Graveman’s Oakland debut.Adrian Beltre and Rougned Odor added solo home runs for Texas.RED 3, PIRATES 2 Joey Votto added to his resurgent series, and Gregory Polanco’s ninth-inning error sent host Cincinnati past Pittsburgh for a season-opening sweep.The Reds improved to 3-0 for the first time since 2011, when they won their first five.The Pirates hadn’t lost their first three games of a season since 2006, when they started 0-6 on the road.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Votto hit a tying two-run homer in the sixth inning.TIGERS 7, TWINS 1  Shane Greene helped Detroit set the modern A.L. record for the longest shutout streak to start a season, at 24 innings, in a victory over visiting Minnesota.After the start was delayed by rain for over three and a half hours, Twins Manager Paul Molitor’s team dropped to 0-3. And when Minnesota scored its lone run in the seventh, the run was unearned.Detroit broke the A.L. mark of 22 innings set by the 1947 Chicago White Sox, Stats L.L.C. said. The longest such streak in the majors since 1912 is 32 innings by the 1963 St. Louis Cardinals.Greene (1-0) gave up four hits in eight innings and struck out five.Kyle Gibson (0-1) allowed six runs, eight hits and five walks in three and two-thirds innings.The Twins scored when Joe Mauer walked and Kennys Vargas hit a double that was misplayed by left fielder Yoenis Cespedes.The franchise’s previous worst run drought at the start of a year was 20 innings by the 1940 Washington Senators.AdvertisementGIANTS 1, PADRES 0  The pinch-hitter Justin Maxwell delivered a run-scoring single with two outs in the 12th inning as San Francisco spoiled San Diego’s home opener.The Giants won despite being held to six hits by six pitchers.The lone run came against Nick Vincent (0-1) and came after an error, an intentional walk and Maxwell’s single.RED SOX 6, PHILLIES 2  Xander Bogaerts had three hits and three R.B.I. to back Justin Masterson, and Boston won in Philadelphia.Masterson (1-0) allowed two runs and three hits in six innings, striking out seven in his first start for the Red Sox since 2009. He also had a career-best two hits and an R.B.I.The Phillies right-hander David Buchanan (0-1) struggled, giving up six runs and seven hits in three innings.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Indians Lose No-Hit Bid in the 9th in a Victory Over the Astros.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.