AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanWASHINGTON — When the Washington Nationals finished batting practice here on Wednesday at Nationals Park and the Mets took the field, the slow, soothing tones of “Rainy Days and Mondays,” by the Carpenters, came over the loudspeakers.Some Mets around the batting cage looked at one another and laughed. It was a stark change from the upbeat, contemporary music that had been playing while the Nationals batted, the kind of soundtrack played at baseball games everywhere.All of this was by design. Starting this season, for now at least, the Nationals are playing slow soft-rock songs during the visiting team’s batting practice. As if their standout starting rotation were not daunting enough, the Nationals are also trying to gain a psychological edge on their opponents, at least in some small way.Because the Mets were in town for the first series of the season, they served as guinea pigs. Over three games, they heard the Carpenters, Elton John, Sarah McLachlan, Sinead O’Connor, R.E.M. and Kansas (“Dust in the Wind”).It was the type of music designed to lull, to pacify, the type of music that was not played at ballparks even when it was contemporary. At one point, Kevin Long, the Mets’ hitting coach, turned to someone and said, “Is that George Michael?”Some Mets claimed not to hear the songs. But their general strategy during the three-game series was to laugh it off. On Wednesday, when the Carpenters came on, Long turned toward the Nationals’ dugout, smiled and shouted: “We’re not buying this! You can’t bring us down!”“You laugh at it, go along with it and don’t let it affect you one way or another,” Long said later. “You have it, psychologically, play in your favor somehow.”Julia Kim, a clinical psychologist at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, said in a phone interview that the slower music the Nationals drenched the Mets with would not necessarily have a noticeable effect.Upbeat music is energizing, and positive lyrics can create positive thoughts, Kim said. But slower music can help some players slow down and relax, which is not a bad thing. The question is whether any Nationals’ opponents will become too relaxed while listening to an unrelenting playlist of soothing tunes.“It’s very individualized,” Kim said. “It depends on the music, depends on what you like. But it also depends on if you believe it. If you believe that music is going to affect your performance, it will.”During the series with the Mets, the batting-practice music designed to harass them added a quirky feel to the ballpark. Because the gates are typically opened around the same time that the visiting players take the field to get in their swings, the fans were greeted by slow, heartfelt ballads that sounded more appropriate for a karaoke bar.“We like to be fun and creative with our in-game entertainment, and the songs we play during visiting team batting practice is part of the show,” Valerie Camillo, the Nationals’ chief revenue and marketing officer, said in a statement.“Hopefully, our fans will find it funny, and maybe we can even get a smile out of some of the visiting team players,” she added.This kind of strategy is not rare. Teams are always looking for an edge. The Yankees often play their own highlights during the visiting team’s batting practice. And in San Diego on Thursday, as the Padres prepared for their home opener against the champion San Francisco Giants, the home team took batting practice to a bouncy salsa tune. When it was the Giants’ turn, the music shifted to organ renditions of “Roll Out the Barrels” and “It’s a Small World.”At Citi Field, the Mets play the same type of music for both teams. Maybe that has been their problem.At least two Mets, Curtis Granderson and Daniel Murphy, said they had not heard the Nationals’ music over the last few days. David Wright said he was typically so focused that he tuned everything out. And the Mets, to their credit, won the series, two games to one. (It did not hurt that Matt Harvey cranked up the rock ’n’ roll in the Mets’ clubhouse on Thursday before he went out and shut down the Nationals for six innings.) “Whatever they want to do,” Wright said, brushing away the Nationals’ stunt. “If teams want to try to gain however slight an advantage, why not? I don’t think it was in any of our heads.”Long, though, seemed to enjoy it. The music took him back to his youth.“If this doesn’t fire you up, what will?” he said to his batters at one point.Kim noted that professional athletes were trained to deal with a variety of variables. They travel on long trips; frequently sleep in hotels; deal with the news media, fans and issues at home; and, no matter what, are expected to produce. They are playing at this level, in part, because of their intense focus, she added.“But, you know,” she said, “every little bit counts.”Advertisement