By PETER MAYAPRIL 9, 2015
BOSTON — They were impossible to miss, decked out in red, white and black Nebraska-Omaha apparel: the last fans standing at a North Station bar, four hours before the first semifinal game of the Frozen Four.Their university, the third-youngest Division I hockey program in the country, made its Frozen Four debut Thursday against Providence. The Maverick die-hards went from celebratory to wistful as Nebraska-Omaha made a hasty exit from TD Garden, dropping a 4-1 decision to the Friars.In Saturday night’s championship game, Providence (25-13-2) will face its Hockey East rival Boston University, which held on to defeat North Dakota, 5-3, in the second semifinal.It will be the Friars’ second time in the title game; they lost, 2-1, to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1985.AdvertisementBoston University (28-7-5) will be seeking its sixth national title, having last won in 2009. It will be the Terriers’ 11th appearance in the N.C.A.A. title game.AdvertisementThe matchup represents the first time in 16 years that two Hockey East teams have played for the title. In 1999, Maine beat New Hampshire, 3-2, in overtime. B.U. and Providence split their regular-season games, each winning on the road.B.U. led by 4-1 after two periods and was coasting to an easy win when two mistakes allowed North Dakota (29-10-3) to get into the game. Goalie Matt O’Connor misplayed a clear during a B.U. power play, which led to one goal. The other score came on a North Dakota power play, after B.U. was called for having too many men on the ice.The Terriers got two goals and an assist from the freshman standout Jack Eichel in winning their 28th game and eighth straight. Eichel scored B.U.’s first goal and sealed the win with an empty-netter in the final 20 seconds.Eichel is a finalist for the Hobey Baker Award as college hockey’s top player. North Dakota goaltender Zane McIntyre is also a finalist.Providence dominated the first game, outshooting Nebraska-Omaha, 48-26. The Friars broke open a close game with two goals in the second period by the captain Noel Acciari and Mark Jankowski, finally beating Omaha goalie Ryan Massa (44 saves). Each team scored in the third period, and the Friars added an empty-net goal with 30.7 seconds to play.The Nebraska-Omaha contingent included professors who had driven 25 hours in a van. It also included a senior associate athletic director and an Omaha lawyer who is a longtime supporter of the Mavericks and flew to Boston.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’ve been around since that first year,” said Rick Jeffries, who describes himself as the “spiritual leader of a fan collective” called the Red Army. “I’ve watched the program grow and suffer and grow again.”Jeffries added, “This is the most excited I’ve ever been for a sporting event.”Nebraska-Omaha started its hockey program in 1996, and its first game was a year later. Josh White, a senior associate athletic director, explained the university’s thinking in establishing a Division I program.Advertisement“We can’t compete with Nebraska in football,” he said. “Creighton, across town, has basketball. So we focused on hockey. We’re true to our name — Mavericks.”The top assistant and head recruiter for that first U.N.O. team was David Quinn, the current Boston University coach. He worked with Mike Kemp, who was then head coach, to build the program before leaving six years later.“It was an incredible opportunity to be part of something from the ground up,” Quinn said. “It was a unique experience. It was hard, but when you have a university that’s committed to hockey like U.N.O. was, it certainly makes your job a lot easier. I look back on those six years with a lot of satisfaction and a lot of pride.”Both Nebraska-Omaha and Providence were surprising semifinalists. The Mavericks were the No. 2 seed in the Midwest Regional while Providence was the No. 4 seed in the East Regional and the last at-large selection in the 16-team field. The Friars upset the top two seeds in their regional — Miami of Ohio and Denver. Nebraska-Omaha took out Harvard and Rochester Institute of Technology by a combined score of 8-1.But the Mavericks, who have 18 freshmen and sophomores on their roster, were no match for the seasoned Friars. Providence was faster and sharper, and only the play of Massa kept the game from being a rout. Providence even generated scoring opportunities while killing penalties.“I just think they were more relaxed than us,” said Nebraska-Omaha Coach Dean Blais after the game. “You get into a routine, no matter if you’re in the regular season or the Frozen Four. But I thought when we hit the ice, we didn’t execute like we wanted to. We had simple rules — yell for the puck, get it in deep, try not to turn it over. And we didn’t accomplish that.”The Nebraska-Omaha contingent plans to stick around for the championship game. The prospect of delaying another 24-hour road trip is one reason. The other, according to Jeffries, speaks more to the fans’ affection for the sport.“We love the big, weird fraternity of college hockey,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Rivals Providence and Boston U. Will Play for Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.