By MARC TRACYAPRIL 9, 2015
In October, the Kentucky men’s basketball team held a two-hour open practice expressly designed for N.B.A. scouts who wanted to see the Wildcats’ draft prospects up close.Then came a longer look as the Wildcats went undefeated through the regular season, the Southeastern Conference tournament and their first four games in the N.C.A.A. tournament. The run for the record books ended on Saturday with a loss to Wisconsin in the Four Four, but on Thursday afternoon, the Kentucky players’ seemingly unstoppable march to the pros took another step.At a crowded news conference in Kentucky’s practice gym in Lexington, seven Wildcats players — three of them freshmen, and not one of them a senior — announced that they would leave college early and make themselves available for the N.B.A. draft set for June.Seven early entries into the draft is believed to be a record for one program in a single year. Most experts say at least four of the Wildcats will be selected in the first round, led by the 6-foot-11 freshman Karl-Anthony Towns, who is likely to be a top-three pick.AdvertisementIn addition to Towns, the departing Wildcats are forwards Willie Cauley-Stein, a junior, and Trey Lyles, a freshman; the sophomore center Dakari Johnson; and three guards: the freshman Devin Booker and the sophomore twins Aaron and Andrew Harrison.AdvertisementAll seven players had been expected to declare for the draft, along with Alex Poythress, a junior who sustained a season-ending anterior cruciate ligament injury in December. Coach John Calipari said Poythress, a 6-foot-8 forward, had not decided whether to return. The deadline to declare is April 26.Asked whether it surprised him that so many of his players had entered the draft, Calipari said: “Probably shouldn’t say this, but if Alex didn’t get hurt, it would’ve been eight. So, no, it doesn’t.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Calipari said he had met individually with his players after Saturday’s game to see if they wanted Calipari and his staff to make inquiries in N.B.A. circles about their draft prospects. The coaches spoke with at least 20 N.B.A. teams, Calipari said, and let the players’ parents speak directly with them as well.Calipari said that before the players announced their decisions, he again met with each of them. He said he did not try to push any player in either direction, even if his comments suggested he knew that all seven would be leaving.Summing up the sentiments expressed by most players, Johnson said: “It’s a tough decision. Everybody up here wants to chase their dreams and reach their goal.”Since Calipari’s arrival before the 2009-10 season, the Kentucky program has been a veritable factory for N.B.A. draft picks, producing at least two first-round selections in each of the past five years. In the 2010 draft, five of the 30 first-round picks were Kentucky players. In the 2012 draft, four Wildcats were selected in the first round, including the No. 1 and No. 2 picks over all, Anthony Davis and Michael Kidd-Gilchrist.That pipeline is expected to be refilled. Calipari’s team next season could include Poythress; the 6-foot-9 forward Marcus Lee, who is nicknamed Pogo for his leaping ability; and guard Tyler Ulis, whose playing time increased in the postseason. Kentucky has also received commitments from two highly regarded high school players: point guard Isaiah Briscoe and the 6-11 center Skal Labissiere.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: After Bitter Loss, a Bittersweet One: Seven Are Leaving Kentucky Early.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.