AdvertisementSupported byOn RugbyBy Emma StoneyWELLINGTON, New Zealand — So the battle lines have been drawn along the north-south divide, but what will the Rugby World Cup quarterfinals really tell us about the state of play in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres?Well, first, it’s not quite a pure north-south split, given that three of the four coaches of the Northern Hemisphere teams — Wales, Scotland and Ireland — are coached by New Zealanders. Only one — Philippe Saint-André, of France — is actually from the north.Second, with that Kiwi influence, there has been some blurring of lines when it comes to definite styles, although the power game is still very much the forte of the European teams.Here’s a look at each quarterfinal and where the teams differ.South Africa vs. Wales There’s not actually much that separates these two teams when it comes to their styles. Both have a decent forward pack, quality loose forwards and good goal-kickers in Dan Biggar and Handré Pollard. They use the blitz defense — where they come off the line quickly and move in toward the attacking player and the direction of the ball — and their offense is based more on power than finesse.But the Springboks probably have slightly more variety on attack as the flyhalf Pollard is more willing to attack the line than Biggar, which makes him just a little bit more unpredictable.Midfielders Damian de Allende and Jesse Kriel are also more dynamic than their Welsh counterparts, able to put others into space and good at supporting fullback Willie le Roux when he counterattacks.Wales’s attack — named “Warrenball” after Coach Warren Gatland — is based on carrying the ball into contact again and again until the opposition defenders are sucked in and the ball is flung wide to expose the gaps in defense. It is, however, very one-dimensional, and smart defending, as Australia showed in its win last weekend, even when it was reduced to 13 players, can contain key runners like Jamie Roberts and George North. The biggest hurdle for Wales, however, is mental. It has a very poor record against Southern Hemisphere teams. It has lost 11 straight to Australia, not beaten New Zealand since 1953 and has won just once in its last 10 matches against South Africa.Prediction: South Africa.New Zealand vs. France  Ah, the ghosts of World Cups past. This is a repeat of the 2007 quarterfinal, when France condemned New Zealand to its earliest-ever World Cup exit. It is fair to say since then New Zealand has gone on to bigger and better things, while the French have been — well, the French.New Zealand, the defending champion, has not hit top gear yet, but it has done enough to go through the pool phase unbeaten. At their best the All Blacks play the game at a fast pace, with forwards who pass and offload like backs. They are ruthless at the breakdown and are strong at set pieces — lineouts and scrums — and excellent finishers out wide. While they have been disjointed and lacking their usual pinpoint execution, they have still scored the most tries in the tournament so far.France may well have been the All Blacks’ bogey team in the 1999 semifinal and again in 2007, but it has lost two finals (1987 and 2011) to New Zealand.This current French team, once again beset by internal strife, is a shadow of the one that produced the stirring comeback in 1999, where flair and risk-taking were its hallmarks. Under Saint-André, France has none of the panache the coach himself displayed in his playing days. Instead its game is based on its formidable pack — led superbly by Thierry Dusautoir and Louis Picamoles — doing the damage and backs carrying hard into contact. It’s a shame when you consider the match-winning potential the exciting Wesley Fofana has, if only he got the ball more often and space to work in.Prediction: New Zealand.Ireland vs. Argentina  This is likely to be the closest of the quarterfinals and, again, there is not much difference in the playing styles of the two teams. Dominance in the forwards is a key feature and they like to use the scrum and lineout as the platform for attack. Ireland has perhaps the more pragmatic, less risky approach, while Argentina is now much more confident in its abilities to launch counterattacks from inside its own half than it used to be.Nicolás Sánchez and Juan Martín Hernández give the Pumas dual playmakers in the back line and the wingers Juan Imhoff, Lucas González Amorosino and Horacio Agulla have profited.Ireland, which has already lost its hugely influential captain and lock Paul O’Connell and back-row forward Peter O’Mahony to injury, and flanker Sean O’Brien to suspension, is also sweating on the fitness of Jonathan Sexton, who will be a huge loss if he is ruled out with a groin injury. Flyhalf Sexton is the conductor. He is astute at knowing when to kick for territory, when to carry the ball to the line himself and when and how to bring his other backs into play.Argentina has a good history against the Irish at the World Cup with victories in 2007 and 1999 and a narrow 16-15 defeat in 2003.Prediction: Argentina.Australia vs. Scotland  Australia is in the best form of any World Cup team so far. The Wallabies have won by scoring tries. They have won on the back of dogged defense and shown that their scrum is no longer their Achilles’ heel. Star fullback Israel Folau has been underwhelming in pool play, but flyhalf Bernard Foley has not. He gave a master-class performance against England, showing he can set up and score tries as well as kick his goals. Australia has not shied away from the bruising confrontation at the breakdown, and in David Pocock it has one of the best turnover exponents in the game.But Australia has also shown skill in moving the ball quickly and putting players in space, and if it can lay the platform upfront against the Scots, it will probably have too much speed and strength for them to cope with.Scotland’s most recent success against Australia came on a cold, wet and windy night in Newcastle, New South Wales, in 2012. In an attritional match Greig Laidlaw kicked a late penalty for the 9-6 victory. It is hard to see the Scots getting another win this weekend, although they showed enough against Samoa to suggest they will at least push Australia.Scotland’s strength has been to stick to what it knows. It has played for territory and used the scrum and lineout to launch attacks. Laidlaw has kicked his goals. But with two key players — lock Jonny Gray and hooker Ross Ford — suspended for the match (pending an appeal) — it’s hard to see another upset in the cards.Prediction: Australia.Advertisement