AdvertisementSupported byMets 6, Nationals 3By Tim RohanWASHINGTON — When Matt Harvey took the mound Thursday for his first professional baseball game in 593 days, he kicked at the dirt in front of the rubber, paced off four steps toward the plate and drew a straight line. Every time he threw a pitch, his left foot would land on, or somewhere near, the end of the line.Before each inning, he repeated the process. Then he would repeat his delivery, his foot landing in that sweet spot each time, with ease.Harvey had spent the last year and a half recovering from Tommy John surgery and waiting for this moment. The Mets and their fans had been waiting, too, wondering if their ace would return with the same dominance he had displayed before being injured. No one, not even Harvey, knew for certain if he would.Now they do know. In a commanding performance against the Nationals, Harvey threw six scoreless innings, allowed just four hits, struck out nine, walked one and got his first victory since a complete-game shutout of the Colorado Rockies on Aug. 7, 2013. In all, Harvey threw 91 pitches in the Mets’ 6-3 win, which is just about the workload the Mets wanted for him in his first game back. “Beautiful,” Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson said.Harvey said, “I don’t know if I could draw it up any better.”As he worked toward this day in spring training, Harvey took comfort in the familiar parts of the game, the little things that made it feel routine, such as being around his teammates, taking fielding practice and landing his foot on that line.He had actually wanted to make his comeback last September, less than a year after his surgery, but the Mets held him back, hoping the extra time off would make him stronger. And in his exhibition-game outings last month, Harvey did look tough, throwing in the 90s, locating all his pitches for strikes, developing a better angle for his fastball and a tighter spin on his curve. He looked as good as ever, or maybe better. Amid these performances, his pitching coach, Dan Warthen, could not help but laugh. “I don’t know how you get better than before,” he said.The only caveat was that spring training is not the same as a game that counts. So Thursday would be the real test, and Mets fans traveled here carrying Harvey signs and cutouts of his face. They wanted to see him for themselves. And Harvey did not disappoint. His first pitch was a 96-mile-per-hour fastball. He struck out his first batter, Michael Taylor, on a nasty curveball. Over Harvey’s six innings, barely anyone hit him hard.Through his young career, Harvey has seemed fueled by moments like these. In his major league debut, he struck out 11. Early in his second year, he outdueled Stephen Strasburg, the Nationals ace. When he started the 2013 All-Star game, he struck out three batters in two innings.The most electric moments Thursday came against Bryce Harper, the Nationals’ best hitter. Harvey attacked him viciously and struck him out three times, each time with a fastball that Harper could not catch up with. The speed of those pitches: 97 m.p.h., 97 m.p.h., and 96 m.p.h.“He’s like the big block bully,” Manager Terry Collins said.Strasburg was the opposing starter on Thursday, and the Mets, with the help of an error by Ian Desmond, took a 4-0 lead in the second inning. They added two more runs in the sixth and then coasted to the victory.Harvey, meanwhile, faced real trouble just once, when the Nationals had runners on first and third with two outs in the second inning. He proceeded to buckle Jose Lobaton’s knees with a 3-2 curveball to end the threat. Harvey finished his day nicely, too, striking out Clint Robinson, swinging.Harvey said afterward that he tried to concentrate on every pitch, something he said he may not have done well before he was hurt. “For me, it was really just being thankful for being out there, and compete, and not giving up any free passes, which is something I may have had trouble with in the past,” he said.“But I think, now, especially, I’m going to make those guys earn it.”When Harvey left the mound after the sixth, he nodded toward Collins, a sign that he knew his day was done. As the season progresses, the Mets will monitor his pitch counts and his innings carefully. There may be instances where Harvey is pulled from a game in which he has a shutout working. Arguments seem inevitable. Much of his rehabilitation, after all, was a tug of war between his desire to pitch as soon as possible and the Mets’ insistence that he slow down.Alderson knows all this. He recognizes that Harvey is a player with both great talent and a good deal of bravado, which is just what the Mets need. “He talks the talk but he walks the walk,” Alderson said outside the clubhouse after the game. “There’s nothing wrong with that. Let’s face it, that’s a good combo. The talk provides some sizzle, and that’s a good thing.”Alderson had one thing to add, but he waited until Harvey walked by. “Nice going, guy,” he told him.Advertisement