AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerPHILADELPHIA — The last time the Boston Red Sox played the Yankees in the regular season, Derek Jeter retired. On his way off the field for the last time, Jeter paused to shake hands with Clay Buchholz, the Boston pitcher who had been warming in the bullpen when Jeter shook the hands of the other Red Sox before the game.“That was awesome,” Buchholz said Wednesday. “He was my favorite player of all time growing up, when I was a shortstop. It’s going to be a little different. But honestly, I’m glad he’s not there.”Jeter will not be the only one missing when the Red Sox visit Yankee Stadium this weekend for a three-game series. A lot of the place-holders who filled out Boston’s roster last September have been supplanted by imported stars. The Red Sox, who pulled off a worst-to-first turnaround to win the 2013 World Series, believe they can do it again.The first time, the Red Sox signed seven free agents without guaranteeing more than $40 million to anyone. Their extensive renovations now include five new players on the major league roster to whom they have committed $306.75 million: third baseman Pablo Sandoval, left fielder Hanley Ramirez and starters Rick Porcello, Wade Miley and Justin Masterson.“It’s great when you see the front office pull all the pieces together to win games,” said Sandoval, who signed for five years and $95 million. “It makes everything easy for all of us to play the game.”Sandoval ended last season near the third-base dugout in Kansas City, his arms triumphantly outstretched, with the final out of the World Series secure in his glove. It was his third championship with the San Francisco Giants, and he said he still had the ball.Now, Sandoval said, he is excited to play home games at Fenway Park, though he had never set foot there before his introductory news conference. Sandoval said he had not asked teammates about the rivalry with the Yankees, which was more subdued last year, when both teams missed the postseason.In Sandoval and Ramirez, the Red Sox bring some of the star power the Yankees seem to lack. Ramirez, a former shortstop who is bulkier now as a left fielder, homered twice here on opening day.“Hanley’s one of the best hitters I’ve seen,” first baseman Mike Napoli said. “I always tell him he’s 5A — he’s above the big leagues. His swing, the way he backspins balls, it’s just different than how other people hit. Some people just got it. And he’s got it.”The Red Sox are betting $88 million over four years on that belief. They originally signed Ramirez from the Dominican Republic in 2000, six years before they drafted Masterson. Both were traded for impact players — Ramirez for Josh Beckett and Mike Lowell, Masterson for Victor Martinez. Neither won a title with Boston, but Masterson remembers sluggers like Manny Ramirez and Kevin Youkilis, and said this lineup was similar.“We had Manny being Manny, doing his thing out there, and Youk was doing great things,” he said. “That Red Sox lineup in general was crazy, and this is kind of the epitome of it. We were sitting there on the bench just watching the other day, going through this lineup like, ‘Oh, man, you get this guy out, now you’ve got to deal with this guy and then this guy and this guy, who all have done tremendous things.’ It could be pretty crazy.”The Red Sox slammed five homers in their opener, an 8-0 victory here over Cole Hamels and the Phillies. Ramirez hit two of them, including a grand slam, and nearly hit another slam in the eighth inning Wednesday. It carried through the icy air, but the wind knocked it down at the warning track and the Red Sox lost, 4-2.Their lineup does look strong, without a soft spot, especially in American League ballparks. It includes some of the same players — Napoli, David Ortiz, Dustin Pedroia — who helped Boston lead the majors in runs in 2013.That team had an ace in Jon Lester, but the Red Sox essentially turned Lester into five years of Porcello. They traded Lester to Oakland last July for Yoenis Cespedes, then flipped Cespedes to Detroit in December for Porcello. On Monday they signed Porcello to a four-year, $82.5 million contract through 2019, attracted by his talent and his age — just 26 years old.All of the starters, except Masterson, are under club control through at least 2017. None has ever finished in the top five in Cy Young Award balloting, but Manager John Farrell said all had solid track records and had been “well above average” recently.Unlike so many pitchers today, the Boston starters do not have high strikeout rates. But their stuff lends itself to ground balls, and the infield defense is strong. The Red Sox use more shifts than most teams — 11th most in the majors last season, according to Baseball Info Solutions — and Buchholz said he trusted the infield coach Brian Butterfield.“Butter prepares more than any coach I’ve seen in my life, as far as positioning infielders,” Buchholz said. “He talks to us, like if we don’t want to do it, we don’t have to do it. But he spends so much time watching video, I’d be out of place to tell him where to put somebody. I tell him, ‘Do whatever you’ve got to do, bro.’ If the numbers are leaning one way, stack ’em that side and see what happens. More often than not, it works.”Other teams, like Pittsburgh and Baltimore, have used frequent shifting to help elevate staffs without an obvious ace into the postseason. Boston’s lack of an obvious No. 1 starter was such a well-worn topic by early March that Buchholz made up T-shirts for the starters, reinforcing the idea that they all can be the ace.“I don’t buy into the notion of what the comments are externally,” Farrell said. “All we care about is what we have internally. There’s not a lot of variation or drop-off, one through five. We’re going to send a quality starter to the mound every night. I think, in combination with the offense, this team has an opportunity to do something special.”OpinionSteve KettmannAdvertisement