By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 9, 2015
AUGUSTA, Ga. —  Cancer did not prevent Carl Jackson from keeping his annual appointment with Ben Crenshaw on Thursday at the 79th Masters. That was the good news.Jackson’s lung cancer is in remission, but in cutting out a piece of his diseased lung, surgeons had to break two of his ribs, which have been slow to heal. After caddying for Crenshaw in the par-3 contest Wednesday, Jackson had a difficult night.On Thursday morning, a few hours before Crenshaw was scheduled to tee off in his 44th and final Masters, he sent word through Crenshaw’s agent that he did not think he could manage 18 holes. Jackson’s brother Bud, who has worked for Crenshaw before, was enlisted to take his place.Jackson’s brother is a full-time caddie at Augusta National, but his wealth of knowledge was not of much help to Crenshaw, who said he hit “the worst drives I’ve ever hit” on the way to a 19-over 91.Advertisement“I just played horrendous golf today,” said Crenshaw, whose drives averaged 237 yards, 55 yards less than top-ranked Rory McIlroy, who opened with a 71.Advertisement“The course has outgrown me by leaps and bounds,” said Crenshaw, whose round Friday will be his Masters swan song.Carl Jackson, 68, an Augusta native who has caddied in a record 53 Masters, watched Crenshaw warm up and hit his opening drive, then retired to the caddie house for a while before leaving the grounds. Crenshaw, 63, said that he and Jackson had had several conversations in recent months about Jackson’s health and that they agreed he should not push it by trying to caddie for Crenshaw one last time if he was not feeling up to it.“He’s been through quite a lot with his health,” Crenshaw said, adding, “That’s the last thing I wanted to do is push my friend.”RESPECTING THEIR ELDERS Much has been said and written about how Rory McIlroy, Jordan Spieth and Rickie Fowler, all in their 20s, could one day become golf’s Big 3. But until Spieth and Fowler win a few Masters, they cannot compare with their grandfathers’ Big 3: Arnold Palmer, Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player, who combined for 13 Masters titles.Fowler, who tied for fifth at last year’s Masters, showed up at the first tee Thursday to watch Palmer, Nicklaus and Player make their ceremonial tee shots at 7:40 a.m., even though he was in the last group to start, at 1:59 p.m. The defending champion, Bubba Watson, who teed off at 9:24 a.m., and Keegan Bradley, whose tee time was 9:02, also were present.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As a competitor that’s played in it a lot of times, I appreciated it very much,” said Player, a three-time Masters winner. “It shows that they have respect for the game.”Nicklaus, who has won six green jackets, took a different view.“I never got up that early,” he said with a laugh.He added: “I think that’s a nice gesture to do what they did and come out, but I think the important thing for them today is play well, and that should be their focus. It shouldn’t be us, but I think it’s a nice gesture on their part.”AdvertisementThis year is the 50th anniversary of the Masters in which Palmer, Nicklaus and Player entered the weekend with a share of the lead. Nicklaus posted rounds of 64 and 69 to win his second Masters. Palmer and Player tied for second, nine strokes back.Asked for their recollections of that week, Nicklaus smiled and said, “I remember what the third round was.”Player joked, “The wrong man won.”They turned to Palmer, who said, “I don’t remember anything.” And then he winked at the moderator.STRONG START FOR WATSON Tom Watson opened his 42nd Masters with a one-under 71, his best first-round score here since a 67 in 2010, the last time he survived the cut.“Perfect conditions,” said Watson, who hit 12 fairways and 11 greens and had 28 putts.He added: “I struggled the last few years hitting it, trying to hit shots like I used to, when I know that I had to hit my best shot, and the ego gets involved. My ego got involved too much the last few years. And today I just kind of played within myself.”A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Crenshaw Tees Off Without a Friend.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.