By ZACH SCHONBRUNOCT. 15, 2015
When Ted Gill arrived at Middletown High School North in New Jersey, he could not find his prize recruit. He looked everywhere. Gill, who was the defensive line coach at Michigan State at the time, was expecting Shilique Calhoun to be the next elite pass-rusher to join the cornfed tankers in the trenches of the Big Ten. Calhoun should have been easy to spot, and Gill finally found him, warming up as a wide receiver.Tall and slim, Calhoun reminded Gill of another prospect he saw while coaching in North Carolina more than a decade earlier: Julius Peppers.“Same type mold, same type athlete, same type ability,” Gill said.But Peppers weighed 280 pounds when he arrived at North Carolina in 1999; as a high school senior, Calhoun had only about 215 pounds spread over his 6-foot-5 frame. In the first five games of his junior season, he played safety. So versatile was his athleticism that, on a recruiting visit, his father, John, pulled Gill aside and asked him what position he thought suited Calhoun best.“He said, ‘Coach, I think he’s going to be something one day,’ ” Gill said. “ ‘I just don’t know if it’s going to be offense or defense.’ ”AdvertisementFive years later, Calhoun has indeed become something: one of the nation’s top pass rushers for No. 7 Michigan State, which visits No. 12 Michigan on Saturday afternoon in one of the most anticipated matchups in their rivalry of more than a century.Calhoun will be lining up against a vulnerable Wolverines offensive line, and N.F.L. scouts will be watching, but that is nothing new. Calhoun was projected to be a first-round draft pick last year, before opting to return for his final season. He cited a desire to improve his understanding of the position. He has not been playing it for long.AdvertisementWhen Calhoun arrived in East Lansing, Mich., the coaching staff jostled over whether to use him on offense or defense. He wanted to play both. Coach Mark Dantonio made the final determination, envisioning Calhoun as an archetypal “flash” end for his 4-3 system — a third-down rusher who could also drop back into zone coverage and defend the pass.There was one problem: Calhoun was woefully skinny and did not yet know the intricacies of the position, typically a recipe for disaster in the Big Ten. In practices, he kept attempting to bust through the middle of the line, only to wind up on his backside. Gill had to steer him outside.That Calhoun was playing for a program like Michigan State was not entirely a surprise. But he always figured it would be in basketball. As a boy, raised in Lakewood, N.J., Calhoun followed in the footsteps of his cousin Qa’rraan Calhoun, who wound up playing basketball for St. John’s and the University of Houston. Shilique Calhoun saw himself the same way. He never played anything else. His football coach at Middletown North, Joe Trezza, took to staking out his eighth grade basketball games to try to persuade him to go out for a second sport.“When I heard that he was coming up, I’d go down and watch him play basketball and get in his ear, like, ‘Why don’t you come play?’ ” Trezza said. “He’d smile and wouldn’t say yes or no. It wasn’t something he really was looking to do.”Trezza eventually convinced Calhoun to try football for a week. At 6-2, Calhoun towered over every other freshman. But he knew next to nothing about how to play the game.“He was a blank canvas,” Trezza said. “We had to teach him everything. It was like starting from scratch.”AdvertisementThe process took several years. Calhoun showed up for football every fall, played a variety of positions — wideout, tight end, safety and, eventually, defensive end — then returned to his regularly scheduled basketball career. He barely touched weights. He was not a student of football. Not yet.When a Big Ten coach on a recruiting visit asked him what other programs in the conference had shown interest, Calhoun gave him a blank stare.“I started laughing,” Trezza said. “He doesn’t know Big Ten teams. He didn’t know anything about football.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But football teams wanted to know about him. As a three-star prospect, according to most scouting websites, Calhoun managed to fly under the radar nationally. But colleges in the Northeast, including Boston College, Pittsburgh, Syracuse and Rutgers, showed strong interest before Pat Narduzzi, then the Spartans’ defensive coordinator, spotted Calhoun as a high school junior.“First thing that pops out at you is character,” Narduzzi said. “Just a fun-loving kid that you love to coach.”Dantonio said Calhoun had the height and “size potential” to make him worth the risk.“We’ve recruited a lot of guys here that are around 200 pounds — that power-forward type of player that eventually grows to 255 or 260,” Dantonio said. “And that’s the case with him.”Working with Gill and Narduzzi, Calhoun learned his position, built his confidence and, most important, gained weight (he is now listed at 260 pounds). Last Saturday, he returned to New Jersey to play for the first time when Michigan State traveled to Rutgers.“Mainly I was trying to focus on the game,” Calhoun said of the large contingent of family and friends that turned out. “I tried not to get too caught up in my family’s presence. I just tried to focus on winning the game and saving the day.”Indeed, Calhoun’s astounding athleticism came to the rescue. After recording a sack in the first quarter, he was quiet. But with Rutgers trailing by 7 points and facing a third-and-10 from Michigan State’s 40 with 21 seconds remaining, Calhoun burned past right tackle J. J. Denman and chased quarterback Chris Laviano out of the pocket, where he was sacked by Malik McDowell.AdvertisementThis time, Calhoun was easy to spot.Marc Tracy contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: With Fits and Starts, a Michigan State Player Finds His Niche.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.