AdvertisementSupported byRed Sox 6, Yankees 5, 19 inningsBy Billy WitzWhen it was over, when the Boston Red Sox had deftly turned a double play to end a game that had begun more than seven hours earlier, Yankee Stadium was empty enough to hear their celebratory shouts as players and coaches emptied out of the dugout.On the other side, quietly and quickly, the Yankees turned and headed toward their clubhouse.The Red Sox beat the Yankees, 6-5, in 19 innings, but this baseball game that began just after 7 on Friday night and finished Saturday at 2:13 a.m. felt instead like a test of endurance.Three times the Yankees scored in their last at-bats to keep the game alive, beginning with Chase Headley’s two-out home run in the bottom of the ninth, but they could not do it a fourth time when Red Sox shortstop Xander Bogaerts scooped up Garrett Jones’s smash up the middle and started a game-ending double play.The game dragged on so long that Mark Teixeira, who was 34 when it began, had turned 35 by the time it was over. By the end, there were only several thousand hearty souls in the stadium, which was so quiet that when a few fans broke out “Let’s go, Yankees” chants, they carried far enough for the players to hear.As if the game were not already long enough, it was delayed in the 12th inning when nine banks of lights went out at the stadium, leaving the field dimly lit. It took 16 minutes for the lights to regenerate and for play to resume. The Yankees said the outage had been caused by a power surge through the stadium.Even without the stoppage, it was the longest game in Red Sox history and the second-longest the Yankees had played, exceeded only by a seven-hour, 22-inning win at Detroit in 1962. The teams used a total of seventeen pitchers, and if the the game had continued, the Yankees would have sent Jones, a first baseman and outfielder by trade, to the mound. The teams were scheduled to play again at 1 p.m. Saturday, less than 11 hours after this one ended.“Game 3 starts in about an hour,” Red Sox Manager John Farrell said.That sort of humor was missing on the Yankees’ side.“It’s never fun to lose — especially like that,” Yankees outfielder Brett Gardner said. “It feels worse than one loss, but it’s only one.”The Red Sox pushed the winning run across when Mookie Betts’s fly ball to center went deep enough to bring home Bogaerts. Bogaerts had reached third base on a passed ball by catcher John Ryan Murphy, who called for an off-speed pitch and was handcuffed by Esmil Rogers’s tailing fastball.Murphy was the last player to enter the game, coming in as a pinch runner for Brian McCann, who had doubled to lead off the 18th after Pablo Sandoval’s run-scoring single had given the Red Sox a 5-4 lead. Murphy scored on Carlos Beltran’s RBI double.Earlier, in the 16th inning, the Red Sox had taken a lead on David Ortiz’s solo home run before Teixeira tied it with a solo blast of his own, off Steven Wright, a knuckleball pitcher. The home run, down the left-field line, conjured up memories of a famous Yankee home run off another Red Sox knuckleballer: Aaron Boone’s pennant-winning blast off Tim Wakefield in 2003.“Once you come back and tie it, you feel like you’ll push through and win it, especially as the home team — you feel like you’ve got an advantage,” Gardner said. “But we were never able to come up with the big hit to win it. We had some big moments to come back and tie it. Chase and Tex — I don’t remember the rest.”Headley had a difficult night, getting picked off first base and popping up in the seventh inning with the tying run at third. It had been a difficult start to the season for Headley, who signed a four-year, $52 million contract to remain with the Yankees. When he came to the plate in the ninth, Headley had just two hits in 14 at-bats to start the season.He drove a 2-1 pitch from Red Sox closer Edward Mujica over the right-field wall.“It’s such a rush of emotion when it happens, and then five innings later I was searching for some more, and it was tough,” said Headley, whose home run was his only hit in seven at-bats. “You’re just wanting somebody to get it done, even when you’re up there you want to get it done. You’re pulling for your guys. We just couldn’t get that extra one. We’d get that one but, we couldn’t get the other one.”Headley, who was acquired from San Diego last season, is a relative newcomer to the rivalry, as are many players on both rosters. But Ortiz was not the only central figure in the rivalry to play a central role. There was also Alex Rodriguez.When Rodriguez reported to spring training, there were questions about whether he could even make the team. On opening day, Rodriguez batted seventh — a position reserved for those with modest expectations at the plate. But Friday, he batted third and delivered a sixth-inning single to cut Boston’s lead to 3-1, then doubled in the 11th before being lifted for a pinch runner.With the entire bullpen having been used, Girardi said the Yankees would probably make a move before Saturday afternoon’s game, most likely bringing a pitcher up. There are others, such as McCann and perhaps Teixeira, who will be in need of a day off.As the Yankees showered, dressed and departed, they did so with the understanding that they would be back in the clubhouse in a matter of hours.“I’ve felt better,” said Headley, who was carpooling with Gardner. “But I’ll be fine. This is part of the gig. We understand that. Get some rest, get in the cold tub, the hot tub in the morning and fire it back up.”Advertisement