AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressMarcus Smart scored 19 points, and the visiting Boston Celtics maintained their grip on a playoff spot by holding off the short-handed Cleveland Cavaliers, 99-90, on Friday night.Five Celtics players scored in double figures. Isaiah Thomas had 17 points, Avery Bradley scored 15, Tyler Zeller had 13, and Brandon Bass added 12.The Celtics and the Nets are tied, at 37-42, but the Celtics hold the tiebreaker after winning three of the four meetings between them. Boston is 21-12 since Feb. 21, when it was a season-high 14 games below .500.The Cavaliers played without the injured All-Star Kyrie Irving and used their reserves extensively after having clinched the No. 2 seed in the East on Wednesday. Cleveland entered the game having won 18 consecutive home games.Kevin Love led Cleveland with 19 points. THUNDER 116, KINGS 103 Russell Westbrook scored 27 points and had 10 assists as Oklahoma City held off visiting Sacramento and remained even with New Orleans for the final playoff spot in the Western Conference.Oklahoma City scored the last 6 points of the first half, then the Kings fought back again in the third quarter. The Thunder closed the quarter strong, outscoring Sacramento by 10-4 with Westbrook leading the way. He hit a 3-pointer and a driving layup to put the Thunder back in front for good.PELICANS 90, SUNS 75 Anthony Davis had 19 points and 9 rebounds, leading host New Orleans past Phoenix.Eric Gordon scored 15 points, Tyreke Evans had 14, and Dante Cunningham and Norris Cole each added 12 to help the Pelicans keep pace with Oklahoma City. Omer Asik had a season-high 18 rebounds.PACERS 107, PISTONS 103 Rodney Stuckey scored 24 points, including three straight jumpers down the stretch, and Indiana kept up its playoff push with a win at Detroit.Indiana (36-43) has won four in a row and is one game behind the Nets and the Boston Celtics for the last two Eastern Conference playoff spots. All three teams won on Friday.RAPTORS 101, MAGIC 99 Lou Williams made a 3-pointer with 9.9 seconds left to lift Toronto to a win at Orlando, the Raptors’ 11th straight victory over the Magic.DeMar DeRozan led Toronto with 29 points. Tyler Hansbrough added 16 points, and Williams finished with 13.BUCKS 99, KNICKS 91 Giannis Antetokounmpo returned to the lineup, scoring 23 points, and helped move Milwaukee to the verge of a playoff spot with victory at the Knicks.The Bucks would have secured a place in the postseason with losses by either Boston, the Nets or Indiana, but all three won.Langston Galloway scored 20 points, and Lance Thomas added 16 for the Knicks.HAWKS 104, HORNETS 80 Mike Muscala scored 17 points, and host Atlanta beat Charlotte, reaching 60 wins for the first time in franchise history.Kyle Korver had 16 points for Atlanta (60-19), and Al Horford finished with 15 points and 8 rebounds. TWO HAWKS DENY BEING WITH COPELAND Pero Antic said he and his Atlanta Hawks teammate Thabo Sefolosha were not with Indiana Pacers forward Chris Copeland when Copeland was stabbed outside a Manhattan nightclub this week.Antic and Sefolosha were at the scene early Wednesday. They were charged with obstructing the authorities and disorderly conduct and were released without bail.On Friday, Antic, speaking for the first time about the scene at the arrest, said he and Sefolosha had not been part of Copeland’s group.“We don’t have nothing to do with what happened with that,” Antic said. “We weren’t together. We didn’t even see the guy, and whatever happened, happened way before.”The National Basketball Players Association said in a statement that it was investigating the arrests.Advertisement