AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinAlthough Alex Rodriguez’s return to baseball has been peaceful to date, an unresolved matter could threaten the delicate détente between him and the Yankees. Rodriguez hit his first home run of the season on Thursday, and so begins the countdown to what could soon become a contentious milestone. Thursday’s home run was the 655th of Rodriguez’s career and left him just five away from tying Willie Mays for fourth on the career list. For the last eight years, Rodriguez has been expecting a $6 million payment when he hit that 660th home run, based on a marketing deal arranged at the end of 2007, when he signed a 10-year, $275 million contract with the team. If Rodriguez’s career had evolved free of controversy, he might already have received the bonus without any fuss, with still more bonuses expected to follow. But in the post-suspension life of Rodriguez, the Yankees say they do not owe him the money and do not intend to pay it. They gave that message to Rodriguez and his lawyer, James Sharp, in a Feb. 10 meeting at Yankee Stadium. According to two baseball officials with knowledge of the matter, who asked not to be identified because they were not authorized to speak publicly about it, the team’s stance has not changed. Therefore, barring some kind of a negotiated deal, which is possible in the amicable climate that now exists between Rodriguez and the Yankees, the matter could be headed for an arbitration hearing. But the last hearing that Rodriguez was involved in was an embarrassment for baseball, and both sides may want to avoid a repeat. Yankees officials declined to comment on the current situation. Rodriguez, speaking after he took extra fielding practice at third base before Friday’s game against Boston, said the issue was not on his mind. “It’s family business,” he said. “It will take care of itself. My only focus is what goes on between the lines.”Before spring training began, there was no certainty that Rodriguez would hit any home runs this season after his long absence from the game. But he played well in Florida, and after his home run on Thursday, Yankees Manager Joe Girardi batted him third in Friday’s game, a sign of Girardi’s current confidence in him. It would now seem to be just a matter of time before Rodriguez reaches 660.Theoretically, when he does and the Yankees decline to pay him, Rodriguez could file a grievance with the players’ union. The matter would then go before an arbitrator in a hearing either during the season or after it. The union would pursue Rodriguez’s case, and Major League Baseball would be obliged to defend the Yankees. But Major League Baseball could also seek a middle ground to satisfy all parties. It presumably has no interest in reliving the contentious hearing in 2013 in which Rodriguez appealed an initial 211-game drug suspension, which was later reduced to one season. One of those 2013 participants was Rob Manfred, who was then at war with Rodriguez as the deputy commissioner in charge of ridding the sport of performance-enhancing drugs. But Manfred, in his new role as commissioner, has welcomed Rodriguez back to baseball, and he could push for a settlement. A deal might even include a substantial donation to charity, which would be hard for either side to reject.Rodriguez’s bonus options were dreamed up in what feels like a different lifetime. Rodriguez had put together a standout 2007 season that would lead to his second Most Valuable Player Award as a Yankee, and it seemed plausible that he might end up becoming the sport’s career home run king. At that point, he had not been linked to the use of performance enhancers.He had also, at the conclusion of the 2007 World Series, opted out of his existing deal with the Yankees. After some hesitation, the team gave him his new one, which included a separate agreement in which Rodriguez could receive up to $30 million in additional bonuses. The $30 million would be broken down into five $6 million awards for landmark home runs — first for tying Mays, then for tying Babe Ruth (714) and Hank Aaron (755) and, finally, for tying and surpassing Barry Bonds (762). The Yankees would also have to pay 100 percent luxury tax on the payments, meaning the bonus for 660 would actually cost them $12 million.Because performance bonuses are not permitted under baseball’s contract rules, they were made into a marketing deal, a novel approach. The Yankees would market the milestone homers as historic landmarks, selling T-shirts, videos and other mementos. But in the wake of Rodriguez’s repeated drug troubles, the Yankees feel it would be a farce to try that approach after whatever milestones he does reach. “A-Rod is pretty unmarketable,” said Bob Dorfman, a sports marketing expert at Baker Street Advertising. “He’s been getting a pretty decent reception at Yankee Stadium, which kind of surprises me. But I don’t see any opportunity to market him based on any kind of home run history.”Rodriguez could argue that the bonus payments were for the milestones themselves, regardless of whether the Yankees chose to market them. There is no telling how an arbitrator might rule, but if the sides agree to settle, it would not get that far.Advertisement