By TOM PEDULLAAPRIL 10, 2015
Randy Wittman, the coach of the Washington Wizards, tried to warn his players before Friday’s game against the Nets that they were about to face a far different opponent from the one they drubbed by 37 points at home on Feb. 7.His message went unheeded.The Nets, playing with more togetherness, energy and urgency than Washington had seen before, blew past the Wizards, 117-80, to continue their playoff push with their 10th victory in the last 13 games.The most lopsided victory by the Nets (37-42) since they started to play at Barclays Center in 2012 enabled them to remain in the eighth, and final, playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.The Boston Celtics have an identical record but hold the tiebreaker and are in seventh place.With the Nets soaring — they amassed 29 assists with only six turnovers — Coach Lionel Hollins is focused on sweeping the final three games of a regular season that once seemed lost.Advertisement“If we win out, we’re in,” Hollins said. “That’s the beauty of it. We’re not worried about anybody.”AdvertisementThe Nets visit the Milwaukee Bucks and Jason Kidd, their former coach, on Sunday before playing at home against the Chicago Bulls on Monday and the Orlando Magic on Wednesday.The Nets’ confidence has risen along with their position in the standings.“With this team, the sky is the limit,” forward Thaddeus Young said. “We think we can play with anybody as long as we execute and do the things we do.”Although Wittman praised the Nets beforehand by saying, “They are playing as well as anyone right now,” that did not keep him from resting John Wall, his stellar fourth-year point guard, for the second consecutive game.Wall also sat out when Washington pounded the lowly Philadelphia 76ers, 119-90, on the road Wednesday.Wittman’s decision did not reflect any disrespect of the Nets; it merely had to do with his team’s strong position in the Eastern Conference standings. The issue is not whether Washington (45-34) will advance to the playoffs, but where the Wizards will be seeded and whether they will do enough to earn home-court advantage.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Apparently, that was not sufficient motivation. An exasperated Wittman said afterward that his team was a “no-show.”He added: “This was, basically: Come out and play the game, it’s on the schedule, and we’re in New York. We had no rhyme or reason to what we were doing out there from the start.”The Nets were blazing early and their benched poured it on late, outscoring the dispirited Wizards by 42-18 in the fourth quarter. In a sign of how badly Hollins wanted a fast start — not to mention the game — center Brook Lopez and point guard Deron Williams played all 12 minutes of a first quarter in which the Nets sprinted to a 31-14 margin. Lopez poured in 14 points with 5 rebounds in the quarter. Williams piled up seven assists.AdvertisementLopez became the sixth member of the Nets to snare 3,000 for his career. He joined Buck Williams and Kidd as the only players in club history to score 7,000 points with 3,000 rebounds.With Lopez reaching 20 points, the Nets built a 54-38 halftime lead. Their 17 assists with three turnovers reflected how selflessly and efficiently they operated on offense, connecting on 51.1 percent of their field-goal attempts (24 of 47).Defensively, they often had the Wizards scrambling to beat the shot clock. The Wizards hit just 38.1 percent (16 of 42) from the field in an opening half that proved decisive.Lopez led four Nets scorers in double figures with 26 points, the ninth time in the last 13 games he had tallied 25 or more. He reached that mark just five times through the first 56 games. Bojan Bogdanovic (22 points) and Jarrett Jack (14) led a strong effort by the bench. Young contributed 10 points.Bogdanovic, playing despite a sore throat, made all six of his 3-point attempts.“Brook is killing everything, so they have to trap him,” he said. “So there are many open looks for the guards.”A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: This Time, Nets Pound Wizards And Bolster Push for Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.