AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy Karen CrouseAUGUSTA, Ga. — The lead-up to the Masters was interminable for Rory McIlroy, who had been answering questions about winning the tournament to complete a career Grand Slam. For a while Friday, it looked as if McIlroy’s Masters week would be painfully short. McIlroy, the world No. 1, played the first nine holes in 40 strokes and was three over par for the tournament. He birdied No. 10 to jump-start a 31 on the back nine to match his opening score of one-under 71. At two-under 142, McIlroy is tied with seven other players, including the defending champion, Bubba Watson, and the 14-time major winner Tiger Woods. At the turn, McIlroy said: “I was just trying to get myself back to even par for the tournament. And then I did that pretty quickly on the back nine.”He added, “So even though it was an up-and-down round, I finished on a high note and at least make myself feel a little bit better going into the weekend.” McIlroy, 25, is 12 strokes behind the 36-hole leader, Jordan Spieth, who is four years his junior. “I would need to shoot a 14-under-par weekend, and Jordan would have to play a couple average rounds, and neither of those two things look like they’re going to happen, so it’s going to be tough,” McIlroy said. “I’ll go out and try and play the best I can, and we’ll see where that leaves me. But a few more nine holes like the one I just had there, you never know.” If anybody appreciates how hard it is to hold a Masters lead on Sunday, it is McIlroy, who finished 10 strokes behind the winner, Charl Schwartzel, in 2011 after holding at least a share of the lead in the first three rounds. He led by four going into Sunday’s final 18. “I know better than most people what can happen with the lead around here,” McIlroy said. “But Jordan’s had the experience. He had the experience last year. He had a couple-shot lead and couldn’t quite hold on to it. But he’ll have learned from that, and he’ll definitely handle it better this time around.” A DUCK-TURNED-CADDIE A trip to Augusta National Golf Club was on Teemu Selanne’s to-do list before his fellow Finn Mikko Ilonen earned his second trip to the Masters by finishing 2014 inside the world top 50. One of the retirement gifts Selanne received from the Anaheim Ducks last season at the end of his 23-year career was a round with a member. “I’m so excited,” said Selanne, 44, the Ducks’ career leader in goals, points and games played. Selanne, who said his handicap index was 3.9, caddied for Ilonen, a European Tour regular, during the par-3 contest Wednesday and walked both his rounds. Selanne made a rookie mistake Thursday and was caught running toward the first hole to watch Ilonen’s opening drive. He was reprimanded by a Masters marshal, who made his day, Selanne said, by calling him “young man” before scolding him for running on the course. Selanne, who said his handicap index is 3.9, said he had always wanted to attend the Masters, but was never able to because the end of the N.H.L. regular season coincides with the tournament. “I had high expectations for what the course would be like,” Selanne said. “A lot of times people get disappointed because the reality can’t live up to the expectations, but it’s as beautiful as I thought it would be.” As he walked the first 36 holes, Selanne, imagined himself hitting shots. The hole that worries him the most, he said, is No. 7, a 450-yard par 4 that was playing to a 4.37 stroke average Friday. “That second shot scares me,” he said, referring to the approach to an elevated bunkered green. Selanne was waiting for Ilonen when a man approached and asked for his autograph. He said he was from California and was a big fan. When Selanne obliged, the man thanked him profusely and said, “This is bigger to me than even golf.” CHEERS FOR CRENSHAW Ben Crenshaw made his 50th birdie on No. 13 Friday, a highlight of his 138th and final round at Augusta National. After putting out on No. 18 for an 85, Crenshaw doffed his cap and saluted the crowd that was standing and applauding him. The defending champion, Bubba Watson, stayed for 30 minutes after he finished his round to honor Crenshaw, who was making his 44th start. Earlier in the day, Ernie Els, who was grouped with Crenshaw when Els made his Masters debut in 1994, saluted him. Els, 45, described him as “a great asset” to the game and said: “Gentle Ben, the name says it all. He’s the most influential man I’ve ever known.”Crenshaw’s wife, Julie, said she wore waterproof mascara in anticipation of the tears she expected would flow during and after the round. The tears did come, and shortly after Crenshaw was through, it started sprinkling.  “I have to tell you one thing that happened today that just kind of really was neat,” said Crenshaw, who was grouped with Bill Haas and Jason Dufner. “We were playing the 12th hole, we were going across the Hogan Bridge, and there is a red-tailed hawk on the ground right next to the green. And I have a decent putt at a birdie, and Jason Dufner said: ‘Ben Hogan’s watching. You better make that putt.’  And of course I choked, choked on it and missed it.” Crenshaw, who missed the cut for the eighth consecutive year, said the tournament “has been a great part of my life” but “I should have stopped a long time ago.” He added: “It’s a joy to play the course. It’s a gorgeous place.Advertisement