By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 10, 2015
Jose Bautista broke out of an early-season slump Friday by going 3 for 3 and scoring four runs as the Toronto Blue Jays ruined the Baltimore Orioles’ home opener with a 12-5 victory.Josh Donaldson and Dioner Navarro each drove in three runs for the Blue Jays, who took control with a four-run first inning and led by 10-1 in the fourth.Mark Buehrle (1-0) earned his 200th career win, allowing one run and eight hits in six innings.Bautista went 0 for 12 with eight strikeouts during Toronto’s opening three-game series at Yankee Stadium. Against the Orioles, he got a hit in each of his first three at-bats and added a walk before being replaced. He drove in two runs and tied his career high in runs scored.“Slow start individually doesn’t matter when your team is winning games,” Bautista said. “If we sustain that I’ll be happy.”AdvertisementTIGERS 8, INDIANS 4 Alfredo Simon took a shutout into the sixth in his debut for Detroit, and Nick Castellanos hit a two-run homer as the visiting Tigers won their fourth straight to spoil the Indians’ home opener in their remodeled ballpark.AdvertisementSimon (1-0) allowed three runs and seven hits in five and one-third innings. Castellanos homered in the fifth off Zach McAllister (0-1), who allowed a career-high 13 hits.Carlos Santana drove in two runs for Cleveland.The Tigers have outscored their opponents, 30-5, to open the season.PHILLIES 4, NATIONALS 1 Cesar Hernandez had a go-ahead, two-run single in a wild four-run seventh, and Freddy Galvis had three hits and an R.B.I., leading host Philadelphia to a victory over Washington.Michael Taylor homered for the Nationals, the preseason favorites in the N.L. East who have lost three of four to open the year while scoring just seven runs.Chase Utley added an R.B.I. for the Phillies, who were helped by two walks and two hit batters in their rally.REDS 5, CARDINALS 4 Joey Votto hit two two-run homers — the strongest indication yet that he is fully back in form — and Todd Frazier had a tiebreaking sacrifice fly, keeping host Cincinnati unbeaten with a victory over St. Louis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Reds are 4-0 for the first time since 2011, when they won their first five. They have won each game in their final at-bat.ROCKIES 5, CUBS 1 Colorado tied its best start in franchise history, beating visiting Chicago behind Troy Tulowitzki’s two-run double and Justin Morneau’s solo homer.AdvertisementThe Rockies, off to their first 4-0 start since 1995, benefited from another stellar performance from their bullpen in relief of a shaky Tyler Matzek.Christian Bergman (1-0) picked up the win with a perfect fifth inning, and five Colorado relievers combined to allow just one hit — a bunt single by Anthony Rizzo with the shift on — in five innings.ASTROS 5, RANGERS 1 Jed Lowrie and Colby Rasmus homered for visiting Houston, who beat the injury-plagued Rangers to spoil the home debut of Texas Manager Jeff Banister.Rangers starter Derek Holland (0-1) left after one inning because of tightness in left shoulder, and outfielders Shin-Soo Choo and Ryan Rua also made early exits because of injuries.The Astros’ Collin McHugh (1-0) struck out four and allowed one run over six innings.TWINS 6, WHITE SOX 0 Tommy Milone pitched two-hit ball into the eighth inning, and Minnesota won its first game under Manager Paul Molitor, spoiling Chicago’s home opener.Joe Mauer reached base four times, with an R.B.I. single and three walks. Eduardo Escobar doubled and scored twice and Brian Dozier homered.The White Sox (0-4) matched their worst start since 1995.MARLINS 10, RAYS 9 Christian Yelich drove in three runs, including a game-ending R.B.I. single in the bottom of the 10th inning as host Miami beat Tampa Bay for its first win.Giancarlo Stanton also had three R.B.I., and Michael Morse drove in two for the Marlins, who led by 8-1 before the Rays scored seven runs in the seventh to tie it.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Bautista Ends Slump As Blue Jays Beat Orioles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.