By TIM ROHANAPRIL 10, 2015
ATLANTA —  During batting practice, the common approach is to bat that day’s starters, the top hitters, in the first few groups. On Friday, the Mets’ second group included David Wright, Daniel Murphy, Curtis Granderson, and — John Mayberry Jr.?The Mets were facing a left-handed pitcher — Atlanta’s Eric Stults — for the first time in this young season, and Manager Terry Collins had unveiled his right-handed lineup with Mayberry batting third, the spot where Lucas Duda usually bats.Seeing Mayberry there may have looked odd. Before Friday, he had started a game batting third only twice. The Mets signed him to a one-year, $1.45 million deal this off-season, but they did so for a specific purpose. They need him to hit left-handed pitching.Mayberry does that well — well enough that the Mets will often use him in place of Duda or Granderson, their two lefties who struggle against left-handers.AdvertisementMayberry, technically, did his job Friday; he homered off Stults. But he struck out late, against a right-hander, with the go-ahead run on second base. The Braves capitalized on two Wilmer Flores errors and a fielding gaffe by Wright, to win, 5-3.Advertisement“We gave them some extra outs, two or three of them tonight,” Collins said. “As I told you, at this level, you’re going to get beat if you do that.”The addition of Mayberry and, more important, Michael Cuddyer to go along with David Wright has made the Mets’ right-handed lineup look more formidable, though it was not all that powerful against the Braves. Collins had the three of them batting in order: second, third and fourth.Standing at 6 feet 6 inches tall and weighing 235 pounds, Mayberry rivals Duda’s size and is an imposing figure at the plate. His father, John Mayberry, played in the majors for more than a decade, made two All-Star teams and finished second in the voting for the 1975 American League Most Valuable Player Award.The younger Mayberry was a first-round pick in the 2005 draft but never played like a first-round pick. He has lasted this long mostly because he can hit left-handers.Over his career, he has batted .269 against them, compiling 68 extra-base hits and 78 R.B.I. in fewer at-bats than one full season’s worth. He made a good first impression with the Mets this spring, hitting .415 with four home runs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Collins said he chose to bat Mayberry third partly because he did not want to disturb the rest of the order.Friday seemed to be an opportune time for Mayberry to make his debut. The Mets were scheduled to face three left-handers in their next six games, and Stults was not all that intimidating, a 35-year-old journeyman signed to on a minor-league deal.In the fourth inning, ahead 1-2 on Wright, Stults tried fooling him with a looping curveball, and Wright golfed it over the outfield wall. On the next pitch, Stults floated an 87-mile-per-hour fastball over the plate, and Mayberry crushed it.AdvertisementIn the dugout, Jon Niese, the starter, patted Wilmer Flores on the chest, as if to reassure him. The game was tied at 3-3 then, mostly because Flores had made two throwing errors in the first three innings that allowed the Braves to add two runs.“I’m not going to make excuses,” Flores said. “I just made two bad throws.”Another fielding gaffe ultimately did the Mets in.In the eighth, the score still tied, with one out and a runner on second, Wright fielded a ground ball from Andrelton Simmons. Instead of throwing to first, he tried to tag the runner coming from second, Jace Peterson, who scooted around him safely. By the time Wright turned around, Simmons was scampering to second base, which had been left uncovered. Rafael Montero, the Mets’ pitcher at the time, then intentionally walked the bases loaded to create a double play opportunity.Montero struck out Cameron Maybin. Then he fell into a 3-2 count with Phil Gosselin and fired a 95 m.p.h. fastball that Gosselin roped into the outfield, scoring two runs.“You have a split second to make a decision,” Wright said. “I made a decision, and it turned out to be the incorrect one.”The Mets had had their opportunity to take the lead in the top half of the inning, but it was against a right-hander, the Braves’ Jim Johnson. With Wright, the go-ahead run, on second base, Mayberry and Cuddyer had struck out to end the inning.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Role Player Homers, but He Can’t Save Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.