By PETER MAYAPRIL 10, 2015
BOSTON —  Providence College was the runaway coaches’ choice to win the 2015 Hockey East title in a preseason poll. Another poll had the Friars ranked third in N.C.A.A. Division I.They had the experienced goalie, Jon Gillies, and a group of seasoned, savvy upperclassmen, and all seemed in perfect working order. Then the games got in the way — and Providence experienced what Coach Nate Leaman called “a near miss.”The Friars, who won 22 regular-season games and finished second to Boston University in Hockey East, needed help on the day before Selection Sunday to make the 16-team tournament field. But now that they are in the Frozen Four championship game on Saturday, things have changed.“This is the Providence team we all thought we’d see at the beginning of the season,” Hockey East Commissioner Joe Bertagna said.AdvertisementB.U., the Friars’ opponent Saturday night, helped Providence by beating UMass-Lowell in the finals of the Hockey East tournament. Minnesota then denied Michigan the automatic berth awarded to the Big Ten champion, and Leaman was finally able to exhale.Advertisement“I texted Don Lucia and told him, ‘Thank you,’ ” Leaman said Friday, referring to the Minnesota coach.“We felt like we had a second life,” Leaman said. “We had a near miss. I think it was probably a good thing for us. It increased our level of desperation. It brought us together as a group. And we’ve been playing our best hockey.”The Friars (25-13-2), the final at-large selection in the field, also benefited from what Leaman called “a few bounces” along the way. The N.C.A.A. placed them in the East Regional, contested down the street at the Dunkin’ Donuts Center. Their first-round opponent, Miami of Ohio, was missing two of its best players. Providence disposed of Miami, upset Denver in the regional final and dominated Nebraska-Omaha, 4-1, on Thursday to advance to the championship game.The Friars have a chance to become the second No. 4 regional seed to win the title since Yale, which also needed help to make the tournament, in 2013.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Providence’s 13 losses are the most for an N.C.A.A. finalist since 2008, when Notre Dame had 15. A victory over B.U. would tie Providence for second place with Michigan State (1996, 2007) and Minnesota (1976) for most losses for an N.C.A.A. champion. The 1981 champion, Wisconsin, had 14 defeats.While B.U. (28-7-5) is chasing its sixth title and appearing in its 11th championship game, Providence is seeking its first title in just its second championship game appearance.The 1985 Friars, led by goalie Chris Terreri, lost, 2-1, to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in the title game. Terreri, who played for the Devils, was named the most outstanding player.“I know it’s been a long time coming for Providence,” said B.U. Coach David Quinn, a native of Cranston, R.I. “It’s been a great program for a long time. Nate’s done a phenomenal job. I’m happy for the team, I’m happy for the school, but I will be more happy to beat them.”AdvertisementThe two teams split games on Oct. 31 and Nov. 1, with each team winning on the road.The matchup guarantees that the N.C.A.A. champion will come out of the East for a record fourth straight year and the seventh time in the last eight years.If Providence prevails, this would be the third straight year in which the Frozen Four has produced a first-time champion. That has not happened since the first three years of the tournament (1948-1950.)SLAP SHOTSBoston University’s Jack Eichel won the Hobey Baker Award, presented to the top college player. He is the first freshman to win the award since Maine’s Paul Kariya in 1993. Eichel is expected to be the No. 2 pick in the N.H.L. draft. ... North Dakota’s Zane McIntyre was named the winner of Mike Richter Award, which honors the most outstanding goalie. Richter played college hockey at Wisconsin and 14 seasons for the Rangers. McIntyre, who did not play well in North Dakota’s 5-3 loss to B.U. on Thursday night, was also a finalist for the Hobey Baker Award. The third Hobey Baker finalist was Harvard’s Jimmy Vesey.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: With a Few Bounces on the Way, Providence Rights Itself in Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.