By GEORGE VECSEYAPRIL 10, 2015
As the regular season winds down in the N.H.L., Islanders fans are preparing for the team’s move to Barclays Center next season after 43 years at Nassau Coliseum.I am working up a rush of nostalgia during the Islanders’ final spring at Nassau Coliseum. The Isles, who clinched a postseason berth Thursday, play their last regular-season game at the Coliseum on Saturday against the Columbus Blue Jackets.There were so many great times in that squat, prosaic arena near the bright lights of Hempstead Turnpike.I say the Islanders were the best team I ever covered because they had more so many stars who delivered with Canadian-Swedish-suburban modesty. And they won four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 through 1983. Somehow I narrowed my favorite moments to five.MAY 24, 1980 Bob Nystrom’s overtime goal to win Game 6 of the 1980 Stanley Cup finals made the Islanders champions within a decade of their being born in 1972 as an expansion team out in the suburbs. It was not a lovely goal but was typical of the hard-working Nystrom, from western Canada, who secured his reputation by winning the Cup.AdvertisementBobby Ny married a Long Island woman and stayed on the Island to become perhaps the player who remained closest to the team over the decades — and the father of an N.H.L. player. This was the start, by a guy who became a storied figure. Without his goal, we would not be having this discussion.APRIL 13, 1982 John Tonelli saved a dynasty. His goal at 6 minutes 19 seconds of overtime secured a 4-3 victory in the fifth and deciding game of the Patrick Division semifinals against the Pittsburgh Penguins. The Islanders trailed by 3-1 in the third period before Mike McEwen scored at 14:33 and Tonelli netted the tying goal at 17:39. The Islanders had won two straight Cups, but a number of teams had done that. Edmonton was the coming power out west. A dynasty was on the line as the Islanders had six minutes left in regulation time. The transfer of power from the Islanders to Edmonton did not happen until two years later.AdvertisementTonelli was a great guy — almost everybody on that team was — and has become a successful businessman in New York, but somehow he has not been honored the way many of the Islanders’ greats have been.MAY 8, 1982 Mike Bossy intercepted a bad pass and scored late in overtime to take the first game of the Stanley Cup finals against the Vancouver Canucks. I was there, and as I remember, it was cold outside for May. I can still see Harold Snepsts making the bad pass, and Bossy swooping in and shooting while Snepsts was already breaking his stick.About eight years later, my son David was a young reporter in Peoria, Ill. Snepsts was coaching the Peoria Rivermen. As David tells it, he introduced himself and said, “Mr. Snepsts, I am from Long Island — and in 1982 I was the happiest kid ...” And Snepsts said, “You’re talking about the Bossy goal!”I caught up with Snepsts at an All-Star Game in Vancouver in 1998. He still wanted that pass back.APRIL 20, 1983 The Islanders crushed the Rangers, 7-2, in Game 5 of the Patrick Division finals, and Bob Bourne made the most beautiful, athletic goal I will ever see. He picked up the puck behind his own net, with Billy Smith watching, and flitted his way right, then left, split two defenders and scored at an angle.True, the Rangers were already behind, 4-1, and going down. But as I wrote back then, this was straight off the pond. Bourne was a great athlete and played minor league baseball, splitting first base with Clark Gillies in the Houston Astros’ chain. To watch him was to watch an athlete at the peak of his career — impromptu beauty.NOV. 4, 2007 When Al Arbour was 75 and had long since retired after coaching 1,499 games for the Islanders, the team signed him to coach one more game and round off the numbers. I watched the team’s head coach at the time, Ted Nolan, go along with it, with great professional respect.AdvertisementArbour, who led the Isles to those four Stanley Cups in his 19 seasons with the team, had come into a news conference the day before and spotted me and two other oldies from New York papers. He gave a mock groan, and we said he couldn’t escape us.The next night, the Isles fell behind the Penguins by 2-0 but won, 3-2, for Arbour’s 740th victory.I love hockey because of the respect for history and for the game itself. This was a perfect example.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Memories Sweeter Than the Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.