AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Dan BarryYoung women in revealing outfits use slingshots to fire cheap novelties into crowds of beckoning spectators. Two fans have a dance-off at center court for the cruise vacation awarded for the less humiliating performance. A D.J. in an orange blazer blasts a pulsing, party-time beat that causes involuntary nods of the head.This is a New York Knicks game at Madison Square Garden, a spectacle so rich in bread-and-circuses distraction that the jowls of Roman emperors would jiggle in approval, all to that incessant beat. But as the worst season in franchise history approaches a merciful end, one aspect has been lost amid all the forced gaiety and front-office gaffes.A few men just a half-notch above N.B.A. anonymity have been stepping onto the floor of a world-renowned sports arena and taking one — and then another, and then another — for the team that rents them. They did it Wednesday night, losing to the Indiana Pacers in a lopsided game squeezed between the timeouts for carnival acts and video-screen waves from a section pompously called Celebrity Row. And they did it again on Friday night at the Garden, losing by 99-91 to the Milwaukee Bucks. But for all the basketball horror conveyed in a 15-64 record, there is also honor in the Knicks of 2014-15. Honor not necessarily among its executives, who own this season-long abomination, but among its players, who play in hope of prolonging their flickering New York minute.These are the hungry temp workers of the league, the undrafted strivers, the sacrificial lambs offered up to complete a season that was cooked by Christmas. Many of them have managed to stay on because they are giving their all, which is rarely enough to muster a victory, and because the Knicks are obligated to provide warm bodies in blue-and-orange uniforms until the team’s 82nd and final game next week.As Derek Fisher, the Knicks’ coach and resident diplomat, put it after Wednesday’s loss: “Every team we play against, you know, they have guys that are more notable.”Before Wednesday’s failed attempt to claim what would have been only the team’s 16th win, a few Knicks players loped about a locker room where impossibly large sneakers lay on the floor, and where motivation to achieve the elusive goal of effective defense was scrawled on a grease board. “Tight shell,” it encouraged. “Control paint.”The absence of any “notable” filled the circular room; there was no Carmelo Anthony, who is injured in body and possibly in ego, and is out for the season. Instead, there were Langston Galloway, and Ricky Ledo, and Lou Amundson, and Lance Thomas, all initially signed as 10-day-contract players — temps, really — and now finishing out the year.Galloway, all of 23, sat shoeless on the floor, a red headset looped over his furrowed brow as he watched a tape of a recent Pacers-Knicks game on a huge television screen. Undrafted after starring at St. Joseph’s, he wound up with the Westchester Knicks in the Development League before joining the parent club. He has been good enough to start at guard on this depleted team, and recently signed a partially guaranteed contract for next year.Now he was studying tape, searching for an edge.Nearby sat Ledo, even younger at 22, talking with a team assistant about game tickets for family members. His convoluted back story has been lost in this season’s-end slop time. He comes from the West End of Providence, R.I., where people close to him have been shot and jailed and killed, and where he emerged as the best basketball player from Rhode Island in two generations.He went to Providence College for a year but never played, then bounced for a while between the Dallas Mavericks and its D-League affiliate, the Texas Legends. Having scored 21 points in a loss against the Washington Wizards last week, his talent as a shooting guard is not in question, but his maturity is. Still, he is wise enough to know that now is his chance.“I’ve just been waiting to play,” Ledo said, his tattooed arms providing one narrative of his young life. “Coming from the D-League, I’m getting my shot here.”He then gave a pro’s blowoff — “I gotta go get taped” — as Amundson, 32, who keeps his long brown hair in a bun, lumbered past. A veteran of 10 teams, he has earned admiration in part by throwing his large body into oncoming traffic: a lunch-pail forward.Perspective was found at the locker of Thomas, 26, a forward who, after starring at Duke University, banged around New Orleans and Oklahoma City, Austin and even China, before making it, barely, here. He plays hard and has learned the triangle offense, that Rubik’s Cube of basketball being imposed by the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson.Asked to name a highlight, Thomas had the good grace not to mention the career-high 24 points he scored in a loss last month to the Toronto Raptors. Instead, he said the highlight was this: playing for the team he rooted for while growing up in Brooklyn and New Jersey.“I don’t take any of it for granted,” Thomas said. “It’s still a blessing to wear a Knicks uniform and to play in the Garden.”An hour later, the spectacle featuring a sideshow of basketball began with both centers missing the jump ball.By the end of the first quarter, the Knicks had scored only 14 points and were down by 12 against the motivated Pacers, who were fighting for a playoff spot. Missed switches on defense, an air ball or two, and a rare play in which Cole Aldrich of the Knicks tipped the ball in for Indiana. But: “Let’s hear it for the Knicks City Dancers.”The rest of the game on Wednesday followed the same inevitable course, a humbling lesson in good but not good enough, as the Knicks made slightly more than a third of their shots. Still, with just four minutes to play and the game out of hand, Galloway could be seen clapping his hands in frustration — the gesture of a man who thinks he and his team still have a shot.An actor from “Game of Thrones” waved from Celebrity Row. A fan from Long Island missed a $10,000 half-court shot. A Gatling-gun-like contraption fired off more cheap novelties. The D.J. played that last-hour-of-a-wedding-reception beat.But in the snatched moments of quiet, you could still hear the sneaker squeaks of a basketball game, desperately played.Advertisement