By BRAD SPURGEONAPRIL 10, 2015
Before the race, it had seemed that the Chinese Grand Prix of 2007 was set to make history no matter what the outcome.The British driver Lewis Hamilton, a rookie at McLaren Mercedes who had been a protégé of the team since childhood, led the series by 12 points and could win the drivers’ title in this, the penultimate race of the season.His teammate, Fernando Alonso, a two-time world champion who was in his first year at McLaren, was the second-placed driver, 12 points behind Hamilton, while Kimi Raikkonen, in his first year at Ferrari, was 5 more points adrift of the British driver. To win the championship in his first season and become the first mixed-race world drivers’ champion, Hamilton had only to finish within 1 point of his teammate or within 6 points of the Ferrari driver.It had been a spectacular season for the rookie. But it had also been littered with disputes within the team over its dueling drivers, and with the biggest cheating scandal in the series’ history: McLaren was disqualified from the constructors’ championship and required to pay a $100 million fine after a spying scandal in which it had obtained secrets of Ferrari’s car design.AdvertisementIn Shanghai, Hamilton scored the pole position, with Raikkonen second on the grid, Felipe Massa, the other Ferrari driver, in third, and Alonso fourth. It seemed almost a formality that Hamilton would win the title there.AdvertisementBut it rained shortly before the race, so the drivers used intermediate wet-weather tires — which are lightly treaded — on the wet track. At the start, the four leading drivers on the grid maintained their positions, with Hamilton quickly building a huge lead.But it looked as if he was on a light fuel tank, and when he made his first pit stop after only 14 laps, that was confirmed. Still, he comfortably controlled the race. But then it began to rain again. The downpour created complicated choices for the teams about precisely when to stop and which tires to use.Hamilton was kept on the track as his team weighed options and his tires began to wear. By Lap 28, he lost the lead to Raikkonen. This was not a problem, however: He only needed to finish second and keep Alonso — who was in third — behind him to win the title, even if the Ferrari driver won the race.But the longer he stayed on the track, the more his tires began to wear out and become ineffective. His right rear tire in particular was in bad shape, running down to the canvas and beginning to delaminate.“The tires were finished, ” Hamilton later said. “It was like driving on ice.”He finally turned in to make his pit stop after Lap 31. It should have been a formality. He should have quickly rejoined the track and maintained a position to win the title. But as he headed into the pit lane, he slid off the entry road and into a gravel trap, where the car became stuck.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hamilton could not move the car. A crane had to be used to remove it from the gravel. Not only had Hamilton lost the race; worse, Alonso finished second and Raikkonen won, gaining 10 points and setting up a three-way showdown for the title in the final race, in Brazil.In São Paulo, the seemingly impossible happened: Raikkonen won the race, and Hamilton and Alonso finished seventh and third, respectively. With that, Raikkonen won the title, 1 point ahead of both of the McLaren drivers, who finished the series level on points.Hamilton’s remarkable debut season ended in sadness and even controversy.His team director, Ron Dennis, had said after the China race that the team had not been thinking about Raikkonen, but had been trying to make sure that Alonso finished behind Hamilton.Advertisement“We weren’t racing Kimi, we were basically racing Fernando,” Dennis said. “Kimi winning and Lewis coming second was adequate. It just didn’t quite work out that way.”That led Alonso to request that the race stewards keep an eye on the McLaren management at the final race to make sure that the team treated him and Hamilton equally.For his part, Hamilton said of his mistake in China: “When I got out of the car I was just gutted. Because I haven’t made a mistake all year and to do it on the way into the pit, is not something I usually do. But you can’t go through life without making mistakes.”Few people blamed Hamilton entirely for the error. Many in the British public and news media chose to blame McLaren for keeping him out on the track too long.“Job vacancy: McLaren race engineer. Must be able to spot when tires are falling to bits,” David Croft said while doing commentary on the race for BBC radio.In any case, Alonso left McLaren after the season, returning to Renault, the team where he had won his world titles. And Hamilton went on to win the title the next year — clinching it by 1 point over Massa in the last race, in Brazil.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.