By ANDREW KEHAPRIL 9, 2015
SAN ANTONIO —  With a little over two minutes remaining in the game here on Wednesday night, two fans were ushered onto the court for a contest. They would be racing to make a layup, the catch being that they first had to rest their foreheads on traffic cones and spin around 10 times.“I think they’re getting dizzy,” the stadium host said, before a man named Josh staggered to the rim for the $500 prize.This amusement was a fitting coda to a game in which the Houston Rockets had been mercilessly strapped to the San Antonio Spurs’ Tilt-a-Whirl of passing and running and throttling defense. As the final seconds ticked off the clock, the Rockets looked a bit woozy, too.It is nearly mid-April, which means the Spurs are performing their yearly ritual of terrifying the rest of the league. At Houston on Friday, led by Tim Duncan’s game-high 29 points, they won a 10th consecutive game, 104-103. During this streak, the Spurs’ average margin of victory has been 18 points. They have won 20 of their past 23, and with two regular-season games to play, they are rounding into form to defend their title.AdvertisementIt has felt familiar, except for one thing: For years upon years, the men known as the Big Three — Tim Duncan, 38; Manu Ginobili, 37; and Tony Parker, 32 — have set the tone. But in the last couple of months, the three veterans have been trying in earnest to cede the spotlight to Kawhi Leonard, the team’s quiet small forward, a herculean athlete.“He’s playing great right now, and I think his confidence is building. He understands what his role is, and we’re riding him right now,” said Duncan, who seemed perfectly content having scored only 6 points on Wednesday. “He’s been playing unbelievably, and he’s been the driving force behind us these last 10 or 15 games. Hopefully he can do what he does over these last few games, and we’ll continue to support him.”Leonard, 23, had a relatively quiet night Wednesday by his recent standards: 20 points, 4 steals and 3 rebounds. But he shot 9 for 15 from the field and was unneeded for much of the fourth quarter, as the Spurs ran away with a 110-98 win.AdvertisementAfter that game, Parker, who led all scorers with 27 points while playing on a sore right ankle, rhetorically passed the torch to his young teammate.“It’s going to be Kawhi’s team, anyway,” Parker said. “Timmy transitioned to Manu, Manu transitioned to me, and now it’s going to be transitioned to Kawhi. I’ll try my best to stay aggressive and be involved, but Kawhi is going to be the man.”Leonard always seemed poised to break out — but that he would be “the man” was never guaranteed. He was named the most valuable player of the N.B.A. finals last season and, in his brief time as a professional, has distinguished himself as one of the league’s strongest and savviest defenders.Leonard, whose long arms and big hands dangle down almost to the hem of his baggy shorts and untucked jersey, notched seven steals in a recent victory over the Golden State Warriors, the top team in the Western Conference.Kevin McHale, the coach of the Rockets, said it was obvious that Leonard had achieved a new level of lucidity on defense.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You get to a point where your mind and body and everything kind of melds together, and the game actually becomes pretty easy,” McHale said. “You just feel that you know what guys are going to do. You’ve played them a lot of times. You make them take shots you want them to take. You take away stuff you want to take away. You dictate to them when they have the ball. Normally, guys are dictating to you.”But it has been Leonard’s performance on offense that has pushed him into the spotlight.Going into Friday’s rematch against Houston, he was averaging 16.5 points a game, and four times this season he has matched his high regular-season point total, 26. His scoring averages have reflected his improvement and his developing role: He averaged 7.9 points as a rookie, 11.9 in his second year and 12.8 in his third.Since the beginning of March and before Friday’s game, he was averaging 19.6 points (with a 55.5 shooting percentage), 6.5 rebounds, 2.9 steals and 2.7 assists a game.Over the past few weeks, the Spurs have been running more isolation plays for Leonard, who missed time this season with a torn ligament in his right hand. His muscular body has posed a challenge for defenders. He has found a sweet spot along the baseline, where he comfortably sinks hook shots and jump shots.Advertisement“He’s just becoming more confident in what he does,” Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich said. “It’s just feeling a little bit more natural and not forced. He understands that I trust him. We go to him a little bit more.”Leonard’s prodigious strength and athleticism have always been obvious, and they were on display again in the second half of the game on Wednesday night.About three minutes after halftime, Leonard finished a breakaway dunk with the nonchalance of someone lifting an arm to drop a letter into a mail slot. Later in the quarter, corralling a Rockets miss, he bounded the length of the court, slashed through the defense and propelled himself to the rim for a layup that gave the Spurs a 13-point lead.Midway through the fourth, with the Spurs looking for a knockout punch, Leonard simply dropped a hefty shoulder and rumbled to the basket to delight the crowd again with a swooping layup. Seconds later, the Rockets’ starters were on the bench.“The game does slow down each year as you keep playing,” said Leonard, who will be a restricted free agent this summer. He deflected a question about his recent personal brilliance: “Once you have a whole group on the same page, each individual tends to play better.”Popovich has pointed out that Leonard almost seems bored when he plays, so muted are his emotions on the court. This is something that Popovich loves: “He’s gotten over himself, and he understands that it’s just basketball, and he didn’t invent the wheel or anything.”It is just basketball, Spurs basketball, with the perennially dizzying results.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Spurs’ Big 3 Pass Baton to Leonard.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.