By BRAD SPURGEONAPRIL 10, 2015
If Formula One started a technical revolution last season with quieter, more efficient hybrid engines, this season the series appears to be revolutionizing the notion of what it takes to be a driver.The early history of Grand Prix racing was about macho men in their 30s and 40s mastering hulking, high-horsepower machines and living a glamorous life between races. Juan Manuel Fangio, one of the greatest drivers, won the last of his five world titles in 1957 at the age of 46.But the professionalization of the series and the technological evolution of the racing cars into less-brutal, aerodynamics- and electronics-driven cars has seen the rise of younger drivers and a different style behind the wheel.Lewis Hamilton, 30, may be the reigning world champion and leader of the series again this year, but there is a clear trend — one that may be threatening for Hamilton and others of his generation — toward teenage drivers at the pinnacle of motor racing.AdvertisementOnly six of the 20 drivers this season are over 30. Two drivers are 20, and one is 22. And the Toro Rosso driver Max Verstappen, who will be lining up for his third race at the Chinese Grand Prix in Shanghai this weekend, is 17.AdvertisementWhen Verstappen finished the Malaysian Grand Prix two weeks ago in seventh place — after qualifying sixth — he was not only the youngest driver to race in the series, but also the youngest to score points. He is more than two years younger than the Russian driver Daniil Kvyat was when he scored points last year at 19. It has been noted that Verstappen, whose parents are Belgian and Dutch, is too young to obtain a drivers’ license in either of his home countries.Kvyat, now 20 and driving for Red Bull, finished the Malaysian Grand Prix right behind Verstappen, while Verstappen’s teammate, Carlos Sainz Jr., also 20, finished ninth and Felipe Nasr, a 22-year-old driver for the Sauber team, finished 12th. In Australia, Nasr had finished fifth, the best result ever for a Brazilian driver in his debut Formula One race.Before Verstappen, only nine teenagers had raced in Formula One, all at the age of 19. Sebastian Vettel, now a four-time world champion, was one of them. Vettel is the only other driver to have scored points as a teenager in Formula One: He finished eighth, at 19, in his debut at the 2007 U.S. Grand Prix.Today, the physical burdens of heavy steering, brutal gearshifts and low engine driveability are a thing of the past; driving the modern cars is almost like playing a video game. What remains, though, is the need for mental strength to perform at the highest level, with the pressures of driving against the world’s best drivers, in the best cars, before hundreds of millions television viewers.But Felipe Massa, who started in the series in 2002 at age 20, praised his compatriot Nasr. “For his first race in Formula One he did everything like a mature driver,” Massa said. “He was really consistent, the way he was pushing throughout the whole race.”Massa compared it to his own first race, in which he said he had been knocked out by his teammate at the first corner. But in his day, debuts at such a young age were often deemed to be too early. Massa made many mistakes, so became a test driver in his second season, learning his craft and maturing.But Jos Verstappen, Max’s father and a former Formula One driver, disagreed with that approach.“A driver has to be strong in his mind anyway to survive in this sport,” said Verstappen, who was involved in a spectacular accident in his first race in the series at age 22 in 1994. “And if he is mentally not ready at 17, then he is also not ready at 20.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some critics have suggested that by having teenagers race rather than mature men, Formula One is making the cars and the racing seem less challenging. But the performance of the young drivers so far this year has spiced up a show that many expect might again be dominated by one team, Mercedes.AdvertisementThe youthful excitement factor is exactly what the series’ promoters want. That image is crucial for the Red Bull energy drink company, whose two teams, Red Bull and Toro Rosso, are home to all three of the youngest drivers.“Red Bull is aware that teenagers and young people look at their parents drinking Red Bull, and so they associate the drink with their parents’ generation,” said Nav Sidhu, a founding director of Sidhu & Simon Communications, a public relations and sponsorship activation agency with extensive experience in Formula One. “Having a teenager in the series and associated with the drink can change that perception.”Formula One has also noted that its fan base is aging, with younger people more occupied with distractions like video games than with racing cars. But the objective for team directors and engineers is still to win races, so seeking the best drivers — whatever their age — is paramount. It is too early in the season to know whether the current crop of young drivers will meet that goal now or require further experience.Despite their fine results, each driver made errors in Malaysia. Kvyat, who moved to Red Bull this year after a year at Red Bull’s junior Toro Rosso team, has appeared less sure of himself than he was last year, when he faced less pressure. In Malaysia, as Kvyat’s teammate, Daniel Ricciardo, 25, was told by the team to let him pass, since the Russian was faster, Kvyat made an error that bore a hint of impatience, and he spun out before regaining control and finishing the race.Verstappen, meanwhile, nearly ended his race when he drove over the grass heading into the pit lane. Nasr ruined both his and Kimi Raikkonen’s race early on when he came into contact with the Ferrari driver.“These boys have got the speed,” said Martin Brundle, a former Formula One driver and now commentator on British television. “They’ve just got to get some experience.”At Toro Rosso, while Sainz is still an unproven young rookie, his résumé looks like a veteran’s compared to that of Verstappen. While Verstappen spent one season racing cars, and did not even win his championship, Sainz has spent five seasons in car racing and won two championships.That is typical of today’s young drivers, who start top-level go-karting competitions at age 10 or younger, then do several years of car racing before starting in Formula One. Which means that they often have as much pure racing experience as their predecessors in the early years of Grand Prix racing had in their 30s.It remains to be seen whether Formula One will lose some of its appeal because the young age of drivers gives the impression that elite racing is easy. In response to alarm from teams, fans and others when Toro Rosso hired Verstappen, the International Automobile Federation, the series’ governing body, set a minimum age requirement of 18 for drivers to obtain the obligatory license to drive in the series starting next year.AdvertisementBut now that the young drivers have begun to show their skill and maturity, Helmut Marko, who hires the drivers for Red Bull, said the new minimum age requirement was pointless. “It is sad that now a regulation is coming in that would have deprived both Max and Carlos of the license they need,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.