
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 11, 2015
Part of baseball’s enduring charm, or so it is said, is the theoretical chance that a game could last forever. Nobody dribbles out the clock or takes a knee as time expires.But when the innings keep rolling by, and the lights go out, and a knuckleball hits you in the last place a man wants to be hit — well, baseball loses a bit of its romance. Marty Foster, who called all 628 pitches at Yankee Stadium as Friday night stretched into Saturday, said he had pondered an unsettling question as the game wore on.“What if it becomes 8 in the morning?” Foster said. “Are we still going to be out there? Eventually somebody’s going to run out of pitching, you would think.”The Yankees came close, with Garrett Jones, an outfielder and first baseman, loosening up his arm in the batting tunnel. But they stuck with actual pitchers through the very end, in the 19th inning. So did the Boston Red Sox, who prevailed, 6-5, in the longest game by time in the history of their franchise.AdvertisementAfter 6 hours 49 minutes — plus a 16-minute delay to fix lights that went out in a 12th-inning power surge — the teams finally finished at 2:13 a.m. It was the Yankees’ longest game by time since 1962, the year before Foster was born. The teams closed up shop in Major League Baseball for the night, despite having started well before their West Coast peers.Advertisement“You get all these texts from other guys — their games are finished,” Foster said, referring to fellow umpires. “In San Diego, their game’s 1-0 — they’re done. They said, ‘We watched you when we got to our game, we watched you after our game, and we watched you at the bar after that.’ ”For Foster and the rest of the umpires at Yankee Stadium — Mike Muchlinski, Mark Wegner and the crew chief, Mike Winters — there was no time for a nightcap. They shuffled back to their hotel around 3:15, said Foster, who tossed and turned for an hour as he shook off his adrenaline and the effects of a late-game energy bar, supplied by a bat boy.Foster slept for five hours, until a trainer called to check on his condition. He was fine, he said, and he reported to the stadium around noon for his day at third base — a spot some umpires call the rocking chair for its generally slower pace.And Saturday, thankfully, was uneventful for Foster — no memorably close calls at third, and Chris Young’s homer down the left-field line was well inside the foul pole. But Foster was focused, he said, just as he had been in the marathon that preceded it.“You want to make sure you’re as good as you can be for both these teams,” he said. “That’s all that was going through my mind. Don’t make it a travesty, don’t go outside the zone, don’t try and hurry things up. Just let them win it. Let the teams win it.”Steven Wright, the pitcher who won Friday’s game for Boston, is a knuckleballer. He came on for the 15th and worked the final five innings, and his flurry of flutterballs seemed perfectly absurd.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You’re like, ‘What else can happen?’ ” Foster said. “The first one he threw, I said, I hope that was a knuckleball and not my mind starting to go.”Wright was the 17th pitcher of the night between the two teams, and he was working with Ryan Hanigan, one of four catchers. The steady procession of arms was a challenge for Foster, who had never seen some of them and found it hard to get into a rhythm.AdvertisementOne knuckleball, naturally, went astray, striking Foster between his legs.“He took it like a champ, man,” Hanigan said. “I’ve been there. But he gets it. A knuckleball’s tough. It just nicked off the glove, one of those dancers. I feel much worse when it’s 94” miles per hour.Mercifully, Wright throws more slowly, and Foster recovered after a moment or two. He had already had his longest rest of the game, during the power failure, when he ducked into the bathroom at the bottom of the stairs off the Yankees’ dugout. He said he knows where the nearest toilet is in every ballpark, a bit of veteran savvy for an umpire with 20 years in the majors.“They say to hydrate, hydrate, hydrate — last night before the game and the day before — so you do all those things,” Foster said. “And your body functions like a normal person when you’re out there.”Normal people, though, get to sit down now and then during a span of roughly seven hours. Not umpires.Foster, 51, said that his legs felt fine after a lot of activity in spring training but that his back had tightened up a bit from all the crouching. He took a ball off his face mask, too.“I had a headache,” he said, “but I think it’s because we were going so long.”The game was a personal record for Foster — the longest he had previously worked behind the plate, he said, was 17 innings at Wrigley Field. Two years ago in Philadelphia, he manned first base for 18 innings. The Phillies lost when an outfielder, Casper Wells, took the mound and gave up five runs.The Yankees and the Red Sox, at least, settled things with real pitchers on the mound. It was a ballgame until the end.“Even when something weird like last night happens, it’s nice to see everybody still playing the game, still umpiring the game, still managing and coaching,” Foster said. “It’s just a longer version of it.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: For the Closest Observers, 19 Innings Is Just as Long.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »