AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Bill PenningtonAUGUSTA, Ga. — Rory McIlroy made the first charge up the leaderboard Saturday afternoon, and the Masters gallery, eager for a familiar name to challenge the wunderkind Jordan Spieth, stirred and cheered. But it was a muted endorsement for McIlroy, who is respected but not beloved.Then came Tiger Woods, whose three birdies in the first four holes electrified the crowd. The fans screamed for Woods, calling his name and crowding every green, fairway or tee box he occupied.The 2015 reaction to Woods at Augusta National Golf Club is different from ever before. It is not the unrestrained adulation accorded him as a young man, but it is not the awkwardly distant response that greeted his return from a marital scandal either.This spring, the Augusta fans want the slumping, blemished Woods to succeed anew because it seems so unlikely. It is as if they never expected to be able to cheer him in the same way again.When Woods made birdie at the 13th hole Saturday to fall to seven under par, it did not matter that he was seven strokes behind Spieth. Fans in the grandstand overlooking the 13th green stood and stomped their feet, their cheers swelling with each of Woods’s three fist pumps.But Woods faltered on the next hole, and at roughly the same time, a crowd’s roar drifted across the grounds from the ninth hole downhill to where Woods tapped in for bogey on the 14th green.It was an ovation different from any other on Saturday.At that moment, the last of the household golf names on the leaderboard was making his rush toward the leaders. Just before 5 p.m., Phil Mickelson had birdied the ninth and was 10 under par, just four strokes behind Spieth.Mickelson’s popularity at the Masters is unmatched, and the reaction to his suddenly improved play was amplified by the fact that he, like Woods, had done so little leading up to this year’s tournament.On Tuesday, asked to describe his recent results, Mickelson had paused and said, “Well, terrible.”But now Mickelson, a three-time Masters champion, was chasing another green jacket. The theme of the day took on a different tenor with the drop of a putt on the ninth green, and the fans deserted Woods and rushed in the direction of the Mickelson applause.The omnipresent scoreboards soon flashed the details: Woods was moving down, and Mickelson was moving up. The news was like a clarion rallying Phil’s faithful. And they responded by running to him.McIlroy is admired. Woods is newly appreciated. Mickelson is adored.There will be more of the same during Sunday’s final round, even though Mickelson stumbled with a bogey on the 17th hole and fell to third place, missing his chance to be paired with Spieth in an eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation. With a five-under-par 67, Mickelson was 11 under for the tournament but still only five strokes behind Spieth.Justin Rose, who also shot a 67, was in second place at 12 under par and was to be in the final group with Spieth.But Mickelson’s best chance to win might be playing in front of the leaders. It suits his impish and needling nature. Mickelson loves to play the role of provocateur, and what better way to do so than to incite the crowd and unnerve his competitors with an early string of birdies?If he plays well, it is a given that the bulk of the crowd will be with Mickelson, sending high-decibel messages — ovations that cascade in and around the hills of the majestic golf course — that Spieth and Rose will have no choice but to hear and register.After his round Saturday, which included seven birdies, Mickelson already had his game face on for a final round where emotions ebb and flow and experience and learned familiarity seem to matter more than the strength, elasticity and agility of youth.Mickelson, with a devilish grin, was playing some mind games. This time, it was about the hue of his shirt.On Saturday, Mickelson wore a bright, colorful shirt in honor of Arnold Palmer.“It’s not my color; it doesn’t look good on me,” Mickelson said. “I don’t wear it well, but I had a premonition after spending time with Arnold Palmer. He likes to wear this color. I just had a feeling that I needed to make a move, and I had it in the bag and pulled it out.”Asked what color he would wear for Sunday’s final showdown, Mickelson, who had plotted his answer, did not hesitate.“I’ve won three times here wearing black shirts, so I’ll wear a black shirt tomorrow,” he said. “It also helps me get more aggressive. Studies have shown, like N.F.L. teams, when they wear black, they have more penalties. It makes them more aggressive. What I need to do tomorrow is play more aggressive.”The commendable and likable Spieth may be the future darling of the Masters galleries, and the seeds of that kinship could be sown Sunday, should he retain his third-round lead.But across Augusta National on Saturday, a happy, welcoming excitement that started with McIlroy’s improved play became inspired glee once Woods charged. And when Mickelson put himself in the middle of the championship picture, there was sheer delirium all around.The roars for Mickelson will begin anew as soon as he steps up to the first tee Sunday.Advertisement