By PETER MAYAPRIL 11, 2015
BOSTON —  It was the final team into the field of 16. And it was the last team standing when the horn at TD Garden signaled the end of the 2015 Frozen Four.Providence College rallied for two third-period goals — one of them on a spectacular misplay by the opposing goalie — to stun Boston University, 4-3, on Saturday and win its first N.C.A.A. Division I hockey championship. The victory concluded a remarkable run by the Friars, who almost did not make the tournament. They replicated the route that Yale, as the final at-large entrant, took in 2013, when it won the tournament.“We kind of hung in there and saved our best for last,” Providence Coach Nate Leaman said of the game. “It’s kind of like our season. We started off slow and then found ourselves and got better and better.”Brandon Tanev, a junior, scored the winning goal from a face-off with 6 minutes 19 seconds left to play, but the game had turned irrevocably in Providence’s favor two minutes earlier. A long flip from center ice by Tom Parisi — credited at first to Kyle McKenzie — fooled B.U. goalie Matt O’Connor, who caught the puck and then dropped it. Unable to see it, O’Connor dropped to his knees as the puck slid between his pads into the goal.Advertisement“That was a real momentum turner,” O’Connor said. “I lost sight of it after it hit my glove. I tried to drop, but it was too late.”AdvertisementO’Connor, who patiently answered questions about the play, added: “Sometimes you lose the puck in the lights at the Garden. You get a weird bounce and things happen.”The game was the third straight in which O’Connor had bungled a play and allowed an opponent to score. B.U. was able to overcome the previous misplays, against Minnesota-Duluth and North Dakota. But this one changed the complexion of the game.David Quinn, the B.U. coach, said of O’Connor: “We wouldn’t have been here without him. That was a 60-minute game. There are a lot of reasons we lost, and the biggest one was the way Providence College played.”Providence was energized by the unexpected goal, and Tanev provided the decisive edge when he picked up the puck and beat O’Connor to the glove side. With help from a great block by left wing Steve McParland, Tanev had a clear shot on O’Connor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The shot hit O’Connor in the left shoulder and deflected into the net.“It was amazing,” Tanev said. “I couldn’t even register what was going on.”B.U. pulled O’Connor in the final minute but could not mount a serious threat. The Friars got 49 saves from goalie Jon Gillies, who was honored as the tournament’s most outstanding player. Gillies had a big play in the final minute, blocking a rebound and clearing the puck at the same time.“He was the difference maker,” Leaman, the coach, said of Gillies.B.U. was 19-0 this season when leading after two periods, and it seemed to be in control in the first period Saturday as the Terriers set an N.C.A.A. tournament record with two goals in four seconds to erase a 1-0 deficit. The record had been held by Michigan, which had two goals in a five-second span against Dartmouth in 1948, the first N.C.A.A. championship game.After Providence tied the score at 2-2, the Terriers’ Cason Hohmann, one of only two seniors on the team, made it 3-2 with a nifty move off a pass from Ahti Oksanen, who had scored the first B.U. goal.AdvertisementDanny O’Regan scored B.U.’s other goal on an assist from Jack Eichel, the winner of the Hobey Baker Award as the N.C.A.A. player of the year. Providence’s other goals came from Mark Jankowski, who had also scored in the Friars’ semifinal victory over Nebraska-Omaha, and Anthony Florentino.The two teams combined for 95 shots on goal, the highest total in a regulation N.C.A.A. championship game. Bowling Green and Minnesota-Duluth had 96 shots on goal in 1984, but that game had four overtimes.This is also the first time since the tournament’s first three years that three consecutive champions — Union, Yale and Providence — have been first-time winners. Providence and Yale are the only No. 4 seeds to have won the tournament.B.U., making its 11th championship game appearance, was seeking its sixth N.C.A.A. title. Providence had been in only one final, in 1985, a game it lost despite spectacular goaltending from Chris Terreri, who went on to play for the Devils.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Providence, the Last Team in, Beats Boston University for the Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.