By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 11, 2015
UNIONDALE, N.Y. — Saturday night at Nassau Coliseum was about fans like Michael Patti, an Islanders season-ticket holder since 1972.Part of a sellout crowd of 16,170 chanting, cheering and surely emotional supporters present for the final regular-season game at Nassau Coliseum, Patti was in the fifth row near the home team’s runway as he had been since the earliest days of the franchise. The Islanders will move to Brooklyn next season.“I’ve been here for all the great times and the bad times,” said Patti, 78, who was in an aisle seat with his wife, Susan; sister-in-law Ellen; and daughter Mara to his left. “It’s bittersweet, but I’m very happy for the last 43 years. I always believe in the Islanders.”Patti certainly witnessed the bittersweet yet again, as a promising evening ultimately proved frustrating when the Islanders fell to the Columbus Blue Jackets, 5-4, in a shootout.AdvertisementAfter the Islanders’ John Tavares scored to open the shootout, the Blue Jackets came back with goals from Alexander Wennberg and Cam Atkinson for the victory.AdvertisementThe loss cost the Islanders second place in the Metropolitan Division, which would have meant home-ice advantage against the Washington Capitals in the first round of the playoffs, the first time the Islanders would have had that advantage since 1988.“Obviously, playing for our fans this year has been fantastic,” said Tavares, who finished the season with 86 points, 1 point behind Jamie Benn of Dallas for the league scoring title. “Now we’re going to have to win games on the road in the playoffs.”Clad in their usual blue and orange, many of them carrying carefully handwritten signs, Islanders fans arrived eager for one more win.They yelled, “Let’s go, Islanders,” at every opportunity, bellowed in unison when Eric Boulton fought the Blue Jackets’ Dalton Prout late in the first period, and chanted, “We want home ice” after the Islanders took a two-goal lead in the third.It was not enough.The stands were not the only place emotions were running high. The first period was feisty on both sides, marked by a group skirmish behind the Columbus net in the early minutes and numerous penalty minutes, 26 in all.Matt Smith, a longtime fan from Shoreham, N.Y., who paid four times the face value for a seat in the last row, summed up the sentiments of many fans amid a jammed and windswept pregame tailgating scene outside the Coliseum.“We all know our fans and how loud we will be in the playoffs, and that is worth at least an extra win each round,” he said.AdvertisementNow Smith will have to be satisfied with a maximum of three home games against the Capitals and Alex Ovechkin, who scored a league-best 53 goals this season.“Our fans were amped tonight, and they were great for us all year,” said Kyle Okposo, who narrowly missed scoring in the shootout following Tavares. “We are excited and happy to have their support. We just have to learn from tonight and get ready for a tough series.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Islanders, who reached the 100-point mark for the first time since 1983-84 with their win at Pittsburgh on Friday, wore throwback uniforms with numbers in bright orange to honor the inaugural season of the franchise in 1972-73.The Islanders struggled in the first period. Brock Nelson hit the post on a breakaway, and the Blue Jackets’ backup goaltender, Curtis McElhinney, stopped 20 shots in the opening period and 48 over all.Atkinson scored for the Blue Jackets with 10 seconds left in the opening period, and tension built for the Islanders until Okposo tied the score at 11 minutes 2 seconds of the second.The Islanders appeared to have all the momentum they needed after the little-used Boulton scored his second goal of the season at 2:52 of the third and Tavares netted his career-best 38th just 55 seconds later.But Columbus fought back with goals by Brandon Dubinsky at 9:37 and Wennberg at 11:11, tying the game at 3-3.Nikolay Kulemin then put the Islanders ahead again with a tap-in at 15:36, but the Blue Jackets refused to quit. And when Scott Hartnell rifled home his 28th of the season at 18:25 to send the game to overtime, the home fans were silent and stunned.The Islanders finished 47-28-7, the most wins for the team since 1983-84, when it had 50 victories and 104 points.“We finished with 101 points. I’m not going to fault our effort,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said.AdvertisementSLAP SHOTSClaire Arbour, the wife of the ailing former Islanders coach Al Arbour, dropped the ceremonial puck before the game. ... Jack Capuano has 165 wins, second in franchise history to Arbour’s 740. ... The Islanders scratched defenseman Travis Hamonic after he was injured against Pittsburgh on Friday.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Emotions High as the Islanders Drop Their Final Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.