AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressRyan Getzlaf and Jakob Silfverberg scored to lead the Anaheim Ducks to a 2-1 victory at the Arizona Coyotes in their regular-season finale on Saturday night.Frederik Anderson made 23 saves for the Ducks, who secured the top seed in the Western Conference and will face Winnipeg in the first round of the playoffs.The Ducks set an N.H.L. record with their 33rd one-goal victory, surpassing the mark of 32 set by the Devils in 2006-7.Arizona finished with the worst record in the Western Conference.BLUES 4, WILD 2 Vladimir Tarasenko and Alexander Steen returned from injuries to record two points apiece, helping St. Louis finish the regular season with a victory over Minnesota.Jori Lehtera scored twice, and Brian Elliott was solid in net for the Blues, the Central Division champions, who thwarted Minnesota’s bid for an N.H.L.-record 13th consecutive road victory.Minnesota, which has the first wild-card spot in the Western Conference, will face St. Louis in the first round of the playoffs. The Blues had a chance to take the top seed in the West if Anaheim lost or won in a shootout.JETS 5, FLAMES 1 Lee Stempniak had a goal and assist, and host Winnipeg set a franchise record for points (99) with a rout of Calgary. The Jets also tied the franchise record for wins (46). The Jets have the second wild-card spot in the Western Conference.SENATORS 3, FLYERS 1 Needing just a point from its finale, Ottawa finished its sizzling rally over the second half of the season with a win at Philadelphia and clinched a spot in the Eastern Conference playoffs.The Senators went 23-4-4 over their final 31 games to storm into a postseason matchup with Montreal. The Flyers missed the playoffs for the second time in three years. CANADIENS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 3 Alex Galchenyuk and David Desharnais scored in the shootout, and Montreal beat host Toronto to clinch the Atlantic Division title and the second seed in the Eastern Conference.Desharnais, Tomas Plekanec and Jacob De La Rose scored for the Canadiens, who got 19 saves from Carey Price, the Vezina Trophy favorite.PENGUINS 2, SABRES 0 Brandon Sutter scored twice, and Marc-Andre Fleury made 28 saves as Pittsburgh clinched a playoff berth with a win at Buffalo. The Penguins snapped a 0-4-1 skid to secure the Eastern Conference’s remaining wild-card spot, eliminating the Boston Bruins, who had made seven consecutive postseason appearances. Pittsburgh has made the playoffs for nine consecutive seasons and will face the Rangers in the first round.The Sabres (23-51-8) matched the franchise’s worst loss total, a mark they set last season. LIGHTNING 3, BRUINS 2 Victor Hedman scored the lone goal of a shootout, and host Tampa Bay beat Boston.Jonathan Marchessault had a goal and an assist for the Lightning, who finished in second in the Atlantic Division, behind Montreal. Tampa Bay reached 50 wins for the first time.RED WINGS 2, HURRICANES 0 Petr Mrazek made 35 saves for his third shutout of the season, leading Detroit past host Carolina.The Red Wings clinched the Atlantic Division’s No. 3 seed and will play Tampa Bay in the first round.STARS 4, PREDATORS 1 Jamie Benn had three goals and an assist, and host Dallas beat Nashville. Benn edged the Islanders’ John Tavares by one point for the Art Ross Trophy, given to the N.H.L.’s leader in points. Nashville will face Chicago in the first round of the playoffs.AVALANCHE 3, BLACKHAWKS 2 Jarome Iginla’s second power-play goal, with 32.9 seconds left, lifted Colorado to a home victory over Chicago.Semyon Varlamov had 28 saves for Colorado.KINGS 4, SHARKS 1 Brayden McNabb and Marian Gaborik scored third-period goals, and host Los Angeles won its finale with a victory over San Jose. The Kings, who won the Stanley Cup last year, are the first champions to miss the following postseason since Carolina in 2007.PANTHERS 3, DEVILS 2 Jaromir Jagr had a goal and an assist, and host Florida beat the Devils in the finale for each team.Advertisement