By KAREN CROUSEAPRIL 11, 2015
AUGUSTA, Ga. —  As much as he enjoyed his first Masters last year, Jordan Spieth left Augusta National Golf Club with one regret. Not the chunky chip he hit on the eighth hole of the final round, which opened a crack at the top of the leaderboard that the eventual champion, Bubba Watson, blazed through.Spieth lamented that his runner-up finish in his Masters debut came against a field that did not include the four-time champion Tiger Woods, who missed the tournament after having back surgery.“I wish that Tiger was there,” Spieth said then, adding, “In order to feel like I can reach a goal one day of becoming No. 1 in the world, I feel like I’d like to see him come back stronger than ever, and I think that he will.”As is becoming customary, Spieth was right on the mark, and on Sunday his wish will be granted — sort of. Woods, coming off a two-month break to work on his game, carded a 68 Saturday that included a four-under front nine for his first back-to-back sub-70 scores here since 2005, the last time he donned the green jacket.Woods, 39, was paired with his longtime adversary Sergio García, who seems to bring out his best. When they play together, Woods is 15-3-4 against García, who had a 71.AdvertisementWoods is tied for fifth, but the climb to the summit will be treacherous. He is 10 strokes behind Spieth, who posted a 70 to maintain the lead he has held since his opening 64. At 16-under 200, Spieth is four strokes ahead of the 2013 United States Open champion, Justin Rose of England, who carded a 67. Spieth’s 54-hole total is one stroke better than the old tournament record, held by Raymond Floyd (1976) and Woods (1997). He broke the 36-hole record Friday.AdvertisementWith a birdie at the par-3 16th, Spieth became the second player in Masters history, after Woods in 1997, to reach 18 under. He proceeded to give two strokes back on the next hole with his second three-putt of the day, and the week.In a two-for-one hero special, Spieth, 21, will enjoy the added benefit of facing a rejuvenated Phil Mickelson, a three-time champion, who moved into third at 11-under 205.Looking ahead to Sunday, Spieth said patience would be the key.“There’s going to be a lot of roars,” he said. “Phil is going to have a lot of roars in front. Tiger and Rory, you’re going to hear something there.”Spieth added: “It’s just about throwing those out of my mind. Not worrying about it, not caring, setting a goal and being patient with the opportunities that are going to come my way. I feel comfortable with the way I’m striking the ball. My putting stroke feels good.”Mickelson played in a pink shirt as a tribute to the four-time Masters champion Arnold Palmer, whose aggressiveness Mickelson wished to channel.“It’s not my color; it doesn’t look good on me,” he said, adding: “I don’t wear it well, but I had a premonition after spending time with Arnold Palmer. I just had a feeling that I needed to make a move, and I had it in the bag and pulled it out.”Mickelson’s only top-5 finish on the PGA Tour since his 2013 victory at the British Open is a second at last August’s P.G.A. Championship. His yesterday-once-more round included a 41-foot putt at the par-3 16th, which curled in for his third birdie in a four-hole stretch. Phil being Phil, he bogeyed the next hole.AdvertisementTop-ranked Rory McIlroy, who can feel Spieth’s breath on his neck, chased his closing-nine 31 Friday with an opening-nine 32 Saturday to make the turn at six under. He improved to eight under with birdies on the two par-5s, Nos. 13 and 15, but made bogeys on two of the final three holes for a 68.McIlroy is tied with Woods, Kevin Streelman (70), Kevin Na (70) and Dustin Johnson (73) at six-under 210.“A disappointing finish, but over all felt like I played pretty well,” said McIlroy, who will be paired with Woods in the final round.The week began with talk of the 25-year-old McIlroy’s becoming the second-youngest player, after Woods, to complete a career Grand Slam with a victory. Spieth is 18 holes from becoming the second-youngest player — after Woods — to triumph at the Masters.He will move to second, behind McIlroy, in the rankings next week.“He’s playing very well,” McIlroy said. “But I know I have the capability to do the same.”Since late November, Spieth has won the Australian Open; Woods’s event, the Hero World Challenge; and the Valspar Championship.“He was playing some of the best golf coming into this tournament, and he’s playing the best golf in the tournament,” Mickelson said.Spieth’s caddie, Michael Greller, called the first two days “pretty special” but said Saturday was “more of a grind.”AdvertisementAs hard as he had to concentrate, Spieth was still able to appreciate the all-star charge that he was leading.“We heard some roars on 5, and you knew Tiger, Phil, Rory, they’re all making moves,” Greller said. “And you appreciate that, and you want the cream of the crop to play well and you want to beat the best while they’re playing their best.”Billy Horschel, the reigning FedEx Cup champion, had a ringside seat for Spieth’s first two rounds because they were grouped together. After missing the cut with a 36-hole score that was 18 strokes higher than Spieth’s, Horschel had a ringside seat in front of the television for the third round.“Happy I bought stock in him with my FedEx winnings,” Horschel wrote on Twitter.Who would not be bullish on Spieth, who has one victory and two runner-up finishes in his past three starts and has been atop the leaderboard after four of his seven rounds at Augusta National?“I think that if he were to come out on top, it would be great to have him in the Champions Dinner every year,” Mickelson said, adding, “He’s just a classy guy. He represents the game very well and at a very young age, and he’s just got a lot of game. So if he were to come out on top, it would be wonderful for the tournament, wonderful for the game.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Ready for a Roaring Good Time.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.