AdvertisementSupported byBraves 5, Mets 3By Tim RohanATLANTA — On Monday, baseball’s new commissioner, Rob Manfred, stood with reporters before the Mets played the Nationals in Washington and ruminated on a sudden run of positive drug tests in his sport, all of them surprisingly involving stanozolol, an old, easily detectable steroid.Manfred said the fact that the same drug had shown up in positive tests for Atlanta Braves pitcher Arodys Vizcaino, Seattle Mariners pitcher David Rollins and Minnesota Twins pitcher Ervin Santana had made him suspicious. He wondered whether the players had obtained the substance from the same source.Manfred added that he had already assigned investigators to look for links in the three positive tests but that, so far, none had been found.Baseball is sure to keep looking because a fourth positive test for stanozolol was announced Saturday, this one involving the Mets’ ailing closer, Jenrry Mejia.The often-injured Mejia, 25, was placed on the disabled list Tuesday with what was described as inflammation in his right elbow. That condition had been expected to keep him sidelined for several weeks; now, Mejia will be suspended for 80 games and cannot return until July.It is a body blow to the Mets, who are hoping that 2015 will be a turnaround year but whose pitching staff has already been decimated by injuries.The news of Mejia’s suspension broke Saturday evening while the Mets were taking batting practice before their 5-3 loss to the Braves.“I know the rules are the rules, and I will accept my punishment, but I can honestly say I have no idea how a banned substance ended up in my system,” Mejia said in a statement issued through the players’ union.Collins met with the news media with a glum face and his arms crossed.“It happens in the business, but it’s a little damper,” Collins said. “I’m going to be honest. I love this kid. We challenged this guy last year; he stepped up and did a great job for us. Certainly this is a disappointment. I always look at it as — I understand everything about it; I really do. But you know what? There’s 24 other guys in that locker room who need him, too. That’s why it’s really disappointing.”That was the general reaction in the clubhouse: disappointment.“Not only do you cost yourself 80 games and don’t get paid, but you’re hurting everybody in here,” David Wright said. “You’re letting down your teammates.”He added: “We’ve all discussed the drug policy at length. The players’ association, the commissioner’s office, everybody in baseball has done their best to try to clean up this game as much as possible. As much as it hurts, as much as we love Jenrry as a teammate, when you make a mistake, you’re going to be punished.”The Mets had opened spring training talking brashly, about finishing with a winning record and making the playoffs, partly because of the strength of their bullpen.But Josh Edgin, their top left-handed reliever, ended up needing Tommy John surgery, sidelining him for the season. Bobby Parnell, their former closer, is still working his way back from the same operation. Vic Black, a valued right-handed reliever, developed shoulder weakness and remained out of action, although he could return soon.Injuries and inconsistency marred the early part of Mejia’s career. He has had two elbow operations, including Tommy John surgery, while the Mets shuffled him between the rotation and the bullpen. At one point, he feared that being a reliever would result in a new injury.Last season, though, when Parnell was injured, Mejia settled in as the closer, saving 28 games in 31 chances, and he became a fan favorite for his elaborate celebrations.Jeurys Familia, who emerged as Mejia’s setup man last year, will serve as the Mets’ closer for the foreseeable future. He was not needed Saturday as the Braves bludgeoned Dillon Gee for five runs and eight hits in five innings and held the Mets to three hits.Apparently overcome with emotion, Familia refused to speak with reporters Saturday.He will get his chance, at least until Black and Parnell return. Black could return within a few weeks, but Parnell is not expected back until May. The Mets are trying to be cautious with their Tommy John patients, but with Mejia suspended, Parnell will presumably resume his role as closer.“We aren’t going to rush him back,” Collins said of Parnell. “I just think it’s unfair for Bobby to do that. We certainly haven’t done it with anybody else. Yes, we’re in a situation where we could certainly use Bobby Parnell and Vic Black. But there’s a process they’ve got to go through to get ready, and we’ll abide by that.”Collins refused to call Mejia selfish. Then he was asked how, in this day and age when players are so meticulous in their training, they could not know what substances entered their bodies.“I know what goes in mine,” he said, laughing. “I can’t answer for everybody.”Advertisement