By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 11, 2015
Aaron Ramsey helped extend Arsenal’s late-season charge by scoring in a 1-0 win at lowly Burnley on Saturday, an eighth consecutive victory that kept the team’s faint Premier League title hopes alive.No other team has put together such a winning run in the league this season, but earlier inconsistency has proved costly for Arsenal. The Gunners are in second, just 4 points behind Chelsea, although the Blues have played two fewer games. Chelsea was to face Queens Park Rangers on Sunday.Burnley is in the relegation zone, 2 points from safety, but has beaten Manchester City and tied Tottenham in the last month.CITY F.C. COMES UP SHORT New York City F.C. fell to 1-2-2 in M.L.S. as a Vincent Nogueira goal in stoppage time lifted the Philadelphia Union to a 2-1 victory in Chester, Pa.AdvertisementN.Y.C.F.C. goalkeeper Josh Saunders collided with Conor Casey inside the 6-yard box defending a cross, and Nogueira toe-punched the ball home in the 92nd minute.AdvertisementZach Pfeffer started the scoring in the 27th minute for Philadelphia (1-3-2). David Villa tied the score in the 55th minute for N.Y.C.F.C.The Union ended a three-game losing streak.RED BULLS RALLY TO TIE A Lloyd Sam goal in the 90th minute lifted the undefeated Red Bulls to a 2-2 tie with D.C. United in Washington. D.C. United (3-1-1) took a 2-0 lead on goals by Perry Kitchen in the 26th and 67th minutes. A minute after Kitchen’s second goal, the Red Bulls (2-0-2) began their comeback as Damien Perrinelle headed in a corner kick for his first M.L.S. goal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BARCELONA STUMBLES Barcelona, the Spanish league leader, squandered a two-goal lead supplied by Lionel Messi and Neymar in a 2-2 draw at Sevilla that let Real Madrid cut its deficit in the standings to 2 points. Cristiano Ronaldo scored his league-leading 38th goal for Real Madrid in a 3-0 win at home over Eibar.Third-place Atlético Madrid, the defending champion, also missed an opportunity in a 2-2 draw at Málaga, three days before the team was to host Real Madrid in the Champions League quarterfinals.A TROPHY FOR P.S.G. Zlatan Ibrahimovic and the substitute Edinson Cavani each scored twice as Paris St.-Germain won its first trophy of the season by retaining the League Cup with a 4-0 home victory over 10-man Bastia.LEWANDOWSKI LIFTS BAYERN Robert Lewandowski scored twice as Bayern Munich moved a step closer to the Bundesliga title, and Lewandowski’s former club Borussia Dortmund slumped to a 3-1 defeat at Borussia Mönchengladbach.Lewandowski scored in both halves, and Thomas Müller added a goal in the 82nd minute to give Bayern a 3-0 win at home over Eintracht Frankfurt.PARMA SHOCKS JUVENTUS Parma pulled off the biggest surprise of the Italian season, handing the runaway leader, Juventus, its second loss in Serie A with a 1-0 home win.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Arsenal Maintains Hope With Eighth Straight Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.