AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonAUGUSTA, Ga. — Bubba Watson, the defending Masters champion, shot a 73 on Saturday and fell back to one under par for the tournament. He was asked whether he thought he was out of contention.“You can say it — I’m out of it,” Watson replied.But then, referring to his two Masters victories, he added: “But I got two of them, so I’ll be able to sleep O.K. tonight. Right now, it’s about preparation for next time, you know, whenever that is. It’s about preparing for that next major, maybe preparing for next year here.”Watson had a seesaw round and closed with bogeys on the final two holes.“Just didn’t finish strong and made some mistakes,” he said. “I have different emotions than last year at this time, but you keep at it. I have tomorrow, and I’ll have other chances at the Masters again.”FAVORABLE CONDITIONS Zach Johnson, who shot a 68, and Ian Poulter, who shot a 67, had two of the better rounds Saturday. Johnson said various things had contributed to the lower scores, chief among them a lack of wind.“Around here, when there’s minimal wind, as there is today, that makes it a little easier,” Johnson said. “It’s still brutal, and you have to constantly be careful. But the minimal wind and a little bit of humidity, that allows you to hold several greens.6 PhotosView Slide Show ›Phil Noble/Reuters“And the temperatures were up, which helps. Then I think we had a couple tenths of an inch of rain last night, too. It’s just all of that added together. But it allowed guys to be more aggressive in certain situations.”Poulter said he woke up Saturday morning and heard the rain. That brought a smile to his face.“It definitely softened the course, and then there were a few more accessible pin locations today,” he said. “You had chances to go at some pin locations, and I’m sure a lot of the guys did just that.”Poulter hit the first 17 greens in regulation.“I played exceptionally well,” he said.FOWLER SEEKS RALLY Rickie Fowler was at his best in the major tournaments a year ago, which made him a favorite to win heading into this Masters. But Fowler started the tournament with a 73 and was only one stroke better the next day. His round of 70 on Saturday was an improvement, but he was still not likely to contend.Fowler finished in the top five at all four major championships last year. He will have to rally to keep that streak alive.“I didn’t take advantage of the par 5s, and if you don’t do that at Augusta National, you won’t see your name on the leaderboard,” Fowler said. “Now I’m going to need to put a good round together tomorrow to have a chance to finish in the top 10, and it’s going to have to be a really good one to get to the top five.”NO EAGLES FOR JOHNSON Dustin Johnson, who had three eagles in Round 2, was hoping to tie his record of four eagles in one Masters tournament, a mark he shares with Tiger Woods and Bruce Crampton. But Johnson had to settle for three birdies and a par on par-5 holes.Johnson is 12 under par on the par 5s this week.Advertisement