AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack KerrMELBOURNE, Australia — With so little to cheer in their nation’s brief soccer history, fans of East Timor’s national team would be correct to consider this the squad’s golden era. East Timor, which did not play a World Cup qualifying match until 2007 and did not win one until this year, has advanced to the second round of World Cup qualifying for the first time.Under normal circumstances, the team would be warmly received when it assembles in Dili, the capital, next week for its next two matches. But instead of cheering, infuriated fans in East Timor, a former Portuguese colony off Australia’s north coast, are raising questions about how the team was put together: Apparently the national federation went on a shopping spree for players in the world’s richest marketplace — Brazil — and came back with more than enough to reshape its team.While clubs like Manchester United and Real Madrid can use players from around the world, national teams — those that compete in the World Cup — are limited to native players, or players who qualify as citizens because of a direct link to the country. East Timor has seemingly ignored this distinction.Over the past several years, East Timor has naturalized more than a dozen Brazilian-born players, to the dismay of those who note that few, if any, have ties to the island nation. The new players have unquestionably improved East Timor’s soccer fortunes; seven started a recent match for the national team, which sat near the bottom of the FIFA world rankings in 2012 but had climbed 60 places by June.The problem is that no one seems willing or able to explain what, exactly, makes the new players Timorese.“The Brazilian players, they just come and spend one day and they get a Timorese passport and play in the national team,” said Jose Luis de Oliveira, the organizer of the local soccer activist group Amantes Bola. De Oliveira said his group submitted its demands for an investigation to both East Timor’s prosecutor general and the minister of justice early last year — Amantes Bola has even pleaded for the country’s prime minister to intervene — but says there has been “no significant progress.”To be sure, the makeup of East Timor’s roster is among the least of FIFA’s problems at the moment. The team is unlikely to qualify for the 2018 World Cup, and it lost its most recent match by 7-0. But the brazen nature of its recruitment of so many Brazilian-born players, as well as FIFA’s apparent unwillingness to enforce or even address violations of the organization’s citizenship rules, has raised basic questions about fairness on soccer’s fringes.“We’d rather lose games with our own talents than win games with foreign players,” said one East Timor supporter, Alex Tilman. “It’s particularly worse when we even lose with these foreign players.”In a World Cup qualifier against the United Arab Emirates in June, East Timor fielded seven naturalized Brazilians. An eighth sat on the bench, clad in his new national colors: red and black.Asked to explain how so many Brazilians had ended up playing for the country, one of them, the São Paulo-born striker Patrick Fabiano, said matter-of-factly, “My friend, there is different stories.”Some players, he said, had been drawn through a relationship with a coach, or a team official, or after being spotted playing professionally in Asia. Midfielder Rodrigo Silva joined the lucrative leagues in the Persian Gulf around the turn of the decade, playing in Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, and made his debut for East Timor last year.Other players joined East Timor’s team around the time they moved to Asia. Murilo de Almeida, a forward from southern Brazil, began playing for his adopted country’s under-23 team in 2011, around the time he left his club in Brazil for one in Indonesia. Another under-23 player, striker Jairo Neto, recently made his senior debut only days after turning 21.“About myself,” said Fabiano, a well-traveled pro who  is sometimes known as Patrick Alves, “I received an invitation from them and they say: ‘We give the passport, you play for us. We appreciate your style of football, we need one striker like you.’ ”FIFA rules on nationality are actually quite accommodating to players wishing to change allegiances, and such moves are not out of the ordinary. That is especially true for Brazilian-born players, who in recent years have lined up for Spain, Italy, Croatia and Japan, among others. But in 2008, after Togo and Qatar arranged to bring in Brazilians of their own, FIFA changed the rules.Under the new regulations, FIFA member states were barred from naturalizing players unless they had lived continuously in their new country for five years after their 18th birthday. A player could also elect to represent a country his parents or grandparents are from — the United States national team has taken full advantage of these rules — but Timorese-Brazilian migration is minuscule.Fabiano, 28, said he had made the switch to East Timor “two or three years ago,” which if true would be a clear violation of FIFA citizenship rules since he had not lived in the country for five years. Asked if he or any of his Brazilian teammates qualified because they had Timorese heritage, Fabiano said: “I didn’t check. So I don’t know about that.”East Timor’s soccer federation did not respond to repeated requests for comment about its new Brazilian flavor. But a spokesman for the Asian Football Confederation, of which East Timor is a member, said “all players registered have been verified” by its legal department.East Timor’s top competitors in World Cup qualifying — Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates — have yet to complain, perhaps because they also stand to benefit from the naturalizations. Leagues across Asia generally cap the number of foreign players allowed per team, though many keep an additional spot aside for an Asian player. Two of East Timor’s Brazilians currently play in the Emirates, and reports from Dubai suggest that another, striker Caio Canedo, was delayed from joining his club team there until his East Timorese passport came through. Now that Canedo is considered an Asian player, not a Brazilian, his Dubai club, Al Wasl, has room for one more import.For now, the only thing that may prevent a complete Brazilian takeover of East Timor’s national team is the backlash from its fans. Several of the Brazilian-born players were omitted from the team’s most recent match, a World Cup qualifier at Saudi Arabia, as a means of appeasing local supporters, Fabiano said. He blamed the omissions for East Timor’s 7-0 defeat.Others see a larger problem in pursuing short-term success. Fernando da Encarnação, the chairman of Sport Dili e Benfica, a soccer club from the Timorese capital, said the federation’s player choices were denying local players access to the national team.“Those Brazilians are not playing at the local competitions,” he said, and “therefore are not really enhancing and contributing to improve Timor-Leste standards and level of playing.”Da Encarnação said that it was widely suspected the Brazilian imports were being paid to play for the national team, but the local journalist Jose Belo said there was no evidence to substantiate those charges. Nonetheless, Belo said, he is certain of one thing.“These people are playing for money,” he said. “They are not playing for East Timor.”Advertisement