By BILLY WITZAPRIL 11, 2015
The Yankees’ clubhouse, like its inhabitants, was rather somnambulant Saturday morning. Garrett Jones had a severe case of bed head. Chase Headley wore a couple of bags under his eyes. The handful of players who occupied their locker stalls had paper cups full of coffee as crutches.The morning after for the Yankees was not any kinder than the night before, when their three late comebacks could not prevent a 6-5, 19-inning loss to the Boston Red Sox that took 6 hours 49 minutes to complete.It was the longest home game by time that the Yankees had ever played, and its length did not include a 16-minute delay in the 12th inning that occurred when light banks went blank after a power surge.The game ended at 2:13 a.m., when the Red Sox turned a slick double play, which put a sublime finish on a game that for the previous few hours had been a test of endurance and will. And in less than 11 hours, the teams had to be back on the field for a 1:05 p.m. game on Saturday, which the Yankees lost, 8-4.AdvertisementEarly Saturday, Chris Martin was one of a handful of players who were sent home early after the lights went out, taking a subway ride with Chasen Shreve and Andrew Miller. He listened to the last few innings on the radio. Others were required to stay until the end, like Jones, who went home with his family — his 3-year-old son, Jaxon, falling asleep on his shoulder as they walked to the car.AdvertisementFor many players, that meant getting home about 3 a.m., waking up by 9:30 and, for the early birds, arriving at the ballpark around 10:30, an hour before they were required to report.John Ryan Murphy and his teammate Gregorio Petit rode the subway together to their Midtown hotel. Murphy opted to take an Uber car back to the ballpark, a young player making a veteran move.“I got to sleep in a few minutes longer,” he said.As Justin Wilson was telling a reporter that he would be ready to pitch despite having thrown one and two-thirds scoreless innings the night before — “It’s part of being in the bullpen; you’re ready when the phone rings” — he dropped the cup of coffee he had been sipping, spilling it all over the swivel chair at his locker.He grabbed a warm-up shirt out of his locker to clean up.Jones, who started in right field, said: “It’s going to be a grind for everybody. Everybody’s going to be tired, including umpires. Everybody’s going to be a little lethargic.”Yankees Manager Joe Girardi did his best to give the afternoon off to players who had had a particularly taxing night. Among them were Brian McCann, who caught the first 17 innings, and Mark Teixeira, who played all 19 innings at first base. For Teixeira, it was a just reward on his 35th birthday, which began with a game-tying, 16th-inning home run just after midnight. Jacoby Ellsbury, who missed two weeks of spring training with a strained oblique, was also out of the lineup.But with only so many roster spots available, not everyone could rest, so Alex Rodriguez, three months shy of his 40th birthday, started his first game in the field — at first base, a position he is trying to learn.“The one thing about the game is you get used to being tired,” Girardi said. “I mean, that’s the bottom line because of the schedule that we keep. We get in from cities at 4 o’clock in the morning and play the next day. It’s just part of the game.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another harsh reality of the game was delivered to Shreve, who was sent to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. Shreve had pitched well enough in spring training after being acquired from Atlanta to nab one of the final spots in the bullpen, a decision he had been anxious about as spring training wound down to its final days.AdvertisementShreve, a left-hander, pitched three and one-third scoreless innings to keep the Yankees in the game. But because he has an option and probably would not have pitched this weekend, he was demoted so the Yankees could recall a fresh arm, Matt Tracy.Before learning of the move, Shreve recalled sitting in the bullpen in the 11th inning and realizing that he and Esmil Rogers, who had pitched the night before, were the only ones left.“We looked at each other, and I knew he pitched two and a third the day before, so he was like, ‘You got it,’ ” Shreve said. “And I said, ‘I know I do.’ I never thought he would go in after that. It was unreal.”The Yankees, who used Rogers for four and two-thirds innings, were so short of pitching that if they had extended the game, they would have turned to Jones, who had not pitched since high school in 1999. He had warmed up on the mound in the batting cages underneath the stands.His first batter would have been David Ortiz, the notorious Yankee killer who had given the Red Sox one of their extra-inning leads with a 16th-inning homer.“Facing Big Papi would have been memorable,” Jones said. “I was interested to see how I would have felt out there, but it’s probably better I didn’t get out there. I probably have three fastballs, all slow and straight, and I threw a couple of curveballs that weren’t bad. I’ve got a slide step and different leg kicks to mess up their timing. Sometimes, you throw under the hit speed and you can get guys out.”If the Yankees were somewhat bleary-eyed, a few hours of sleep had at least softened the disappointment of the loss. There seemed to be a greater appreciation that they had not just lost, but had participated in a game that is sure to be a memorable one in a series rich with history.“When you step back, what an amazing game,” Headley said. “Just the back and forth. It’s the best game I’ve ever been a part of. I just wish we’d won. It’s easier to handle if I step back because in the moment, you’re really disappointed.”And with that, Headley excused himself. Another cup of coffee awaited, and so did a game.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Drowsy Team Trudges Through the Day After a Night of Endurance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.