By COLIN A. STEPHENSONAPRIL 11, 2015
Paul Rabil is the biggest star in Major League Lacrosse, and with 57,000 Twitter followers and a flashy website, he is also among his sport’s most visible players. So when he decided that he was looking to move from Boston, where he had played for the last seven seasons, the potential trade had broad implications for the league.Rabil expressed an interest in moving closer to his home in Maryland for personal and commercial reasons. When the New York Lizards found out that he was available, they moved aggressively to acquire him. On Jan. 5, they succeeded, landing Rabil for a rich package of players and draft picks.It is unclear what consequences the trade will have on the field; the Lizards gave up two important players from a team that made the playoffs last season and surprised their young star, Rob Pannell, who was not told of the deal in advance. But that the trade happened at all laid bare a theme common in emerging pro sports leagues, especially young ones eager to establish market share: Sometimes the motivations of a star player or a franchise may not align with those of the league.For Rabil and the Lizards, the deal was a no-brainer.“I think that having the top face and name in lacrosse in the biggest market in the world will be tremendous for us,” said the Lizards’ chief executive, Jeff Rudnick. “New York is the media capital in the world, so if something big is happening in New York, that’s good for everybody.”AdvertisementDavid Gross, the M.L.L.’s commissioner, is not so sure. He disputed the notion that Rabil’s presence in New York would raise the league’s profile significantly, saying that while lacrosse was a fast-growing sport at the youth level, it had a long way to go before it became a player in the mainstream sports marketplace.Advertisement“The league is bringing in more partners, we’re on TV more and more, but I still think we’re a few years away from a breakout,” Gross said.With the league’s season set to begin this weekend, the effects of this winter’s biggest front-office decision will soon play out on the field and at the ticket booth.Rudnick said the Lizards’ advance ticket sales and jersey sales were up since the Rabil trade, and the team plans to market him heavily. Rabil-centered giveaways at Lizards home games at Hofstra University are in the works, and he will be the featured attraction at team-sponsored camps and clinics this summer.“I don’t think many people can move the needle in terms of pro lacrosse, in terms of fans,” Rudnick said. “But I think Paul and Rob are probably the two guys that can.”Rabil, 29, has embraced the change, which he acknowledged would dovetail with his plans to increase his off-field business interests. Thanks to a portfolio of corporate sponsorships, he is widely regarded as lacrosse’s first $1 million player — a milestone in a sport where salaries in both the indoor and outdoor leagues typically range from $7,500 to $30,000 a year.Despite spending seven seasons with the Boston Cannons, Rabil never moved to Massachusetts, choosing instead to live in Maryland and fly in on the weekends for practices and games, as many M.L.L. players do. But he and his wife, Kelly, decided to relocate to New York for this season. They moved to Brooklyn in March.“I think right now, in our infancy stages of lacrosse, the more guys that are willing to invest their time and effort into growing the game and trying to build substantial business and meaningful content, they should get to New York,” Rabil said. “Because that’s a place that can help expedite that growth for you.”AdvertisementRabil, whose off-field interests include a Web-based video series tied to his off-season switch, added: “In New York, I’m a little bit closer to home, but also at that point in my career where I have been doubling down on content creation, on the business, on the communication side. And I want to take on that new opportunity.”On the field, the partnership between Rabil, a midfielder, and Pannell, an attackman, seems a natural fit — in theory. Pannell, a 25-year-old Long Island native who set the N.C.A.A. career scoring record at Cornell, was second in scoring in the league last year, while Rabil was tied for third. Given that Pannell generally sets up behind the net in most offensive sets, while Rabil typically plays at the top of midfield, their pairing should cause headaches for opposing defenses.But there is only one ball, and both Rabil and Pannell like to have possession of it. Another potential issue is that part of the price for acquiring Rabil was sending Pannell’s best friend, midfielder Max Seibald, to Boston.“At first, it was a little difficult, with Max getting traded,” Pannell said in February, “and it still is.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Pannell said he welcomed Rabil to New York via text message after the trade — they have played together before for the United States national team at the world championships — and they have had several weeks of training camp to get to know each other even better. Pannell said that he was looking forward to playing again with Rabil, but that he was also hoping to learn a few things from Rabil about the business end of their sport.Like Rabil, Pannell, perhaps the second-biggest name in professional lacrosse, is hard at work building his own corporate brand. But where Rabil is the main spokesman for the lacrosse equipment company Warrior, Pannell represents a rival company, Brine. They also are sponsored by rival energy-drink makers.Rudnick, the Lizards’ chief executive, said he did not see that — or anything else — as a potential for conflict. Quite the opposite, in fact.“Being in the media capital of the world in New York, as many big names as you have here will just bring that much more attention to the sport and the league,” he said. “So I think the more we can have here, the better.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: New York Team and New Star Embrace Move, Even if League Is Unsure.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.