By JEFF SEIDELAPRIL 11, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Rangers had already clinched the Presidents’ Trophy and earned home-ice advantage throughout the playoffs, so their regular-season finale with the Capitals on Saturday meant little. The only real suspense remaining was whether the Rangers could gain a victory and the corresponding 2 points to set franchise records in both categories.While they were again without some key players, the Rangers played solid hockey and earned a 4-2 victory that helps them go into the postseason on a hot streak: They won six of their final seven regular-season games, finishing with a record of 53-22-7 and 113 points.Saturday’s game held much more meaning for the Capitals, who finished at 45-26-11. They knew they would face the Islanders in the first round of the playoffs regardless of the outcome, but a victory could have clinched home-ice advantage for Washington in that series. The Capitals eventually received that advantage when the Islanders lost to Columbus later Saturday.The Rangers did not play well in a 3-0 loss to the Ottawa Senators on Thursday and “wanted to play the right way” on Saturday, Coach Alain Vigneault said.Advertisement“It was a hard game,” he added, “but we were able to get it done.”Vigneault said the focus would now shift to the playoffs, and that was the main theme in the team’s locker room after the game. The Rangers will face the Penguins in the first round, starting this week. Forward Derick Brassard, one of four Rangers who scored, said life changed for the Rangers the moment the final buzzer sounded.Advertisement“Everything we’ve done, the Presidents’ Trophy and everything, that’s gone,” Brassard said. “Everything’s gone now. We have to look forward to the playoffs, and we’re a No. 1 seed, and everyone’s going to try to come really hard at us and try to beat us.”Defenseman Ryan McDonagh said the Rangers understood what the playoffs were about and did not need to make any major changes.“Obviously, we understand now that it’s a little bit of a different animal,” McDonagh said. “We understand that you’ve got to raise your level. We don’t need to flip the switch on the style that we play.”The Rangers will need postseason help from goalie Henrik Lundqvist, who reached a personal goal of 30 victories with Saturday’s win despite having missed nearly two months with a neck injury. He finished the regular season 30-13-3.Lundqvist is 5-2-0 in seven games since returning and likes how the Rangers look as postseason play begins this week.“Personally, I feel like you kind of start over,” Lundqvist said. “You need to believe in what you have in this room.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We definitely believe in our system and in the players we have here.”The Rangers’ leading scorer, Rick Nash, and defenseman Marc Staal sat out the game, their second straight, with undisclosed injuries. Mats Zuccarello, who had missed two games with soreness, returned to the lineup.Still, the Rangers found plenty of offense as Brassard, Kevin Hayes, Dominic Moore and Jesper Fast scored. Martin St. Louis had two assists, and Moore had one for the Rangers, who never trailed.AdvertisementNeither team created much offense until Hayes and Brassard scored 3 minutes 14 seconds apart in the first period, giving the Rangers a 2-0 lead.Hayes scored his goal, his second in three games, by swatting a puck out of the air with a backhand motion, knocking it past Capitals goalie Braden Holtby 12:36 into the period.Brassard added a power-play goal at 15:50, ripping a slap shot past Holtby from just inside the blue line. The goal, the 100th of Brassard’s career, set off the Rangers fans in the upper part of Verizon Center.Moore stretched the lead to 3-0 in the second period with some help from St. Louis, who poked the puck loose near the blue line, sliding it toward the right circle. Moore then grabbed it and beat Holtby with a backhand shot from a tight angle 2:30 into the period.Alex Ovechkin scored a power-play goal at 6:31, firing a one-timer past Lundqvist from the left circle.The goal extended Ovechkin’s N.H.L.-leading total to 53 — putting him 10 ahead of Steven Stamkos, who was to play later Saturday — and Nicklas Backstrom took the lead in assists on the play, with his 60th.Fast added an empty-net goal late in the third period for some insurance for the Rangers. Stanislav Galiev scored the Capitals’ final goal about a minute and a half later, but the Rangers still ended the regular season with a good victory.“We are confident,” Brassard said. “We know how good of a team we have, and we know what we have to do to be successful in the playoffs.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: After Winning Finale, Rangers Shift Focus to Playoffs and Penguins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.