By KEN BELSONAPRIL 11, 2015
The developers of a new drug aimed at diagnosing chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head trauma, are under scrutiny by the Food and Drug Administration.In February, the F.D.A.’s Office of Prescription Drug Promotion sent a letter to two researchers at U.C.L.A. warning them that they had improperly marketed their drug on the Internet and had made overstated claims about the drug’s potential efficacy.The researchers at U.C.L.A. have been developing a biomarker called FDDNP, which aims to identify tau protein deposits in the brain (a signature of C.T.E.) when patients are given a PET scan.To date, researchers have been able to detect C.T.E. only in brain tissue obtained posthumously. The demand for a technique that can diagnose the disease in living patients is potentially large, given growing concerns about the impact of head trauma in athletes, soldiers and others.AdvertisementIn its letter, the F.D.A. warned that the researchers, who are partners with the company Taumark, were not allowed to market the drug and make claims about its safety or effectiveness.Advertisement“Thus, these claims and presentations suggest in a promotional context that FDDNP, an investigational new drug, is safe or effective for such uses, when F.D.A. has not approved FDDNP for any use,” the letter said.The Los Angeles Times first reported the details of the F.D.A.’s letter to the researchers, Dr. Gary Small and Dr. Jorge Barrio. The researchers were told to adjust the language on Taumark’s website, which is now disabled.In 2013, Dr. Small gave five former N.F.L. players PET scans at U.C.L.A. The players, including Tony Dorsett, Mark Duper and Leonard Marshall, were told that they had tau deposits consistent with C.T.E. found in brain tissue diagnosed in autopsies but that the results were not definitive.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nevertheless, the players said publicly that they had C.T.E., leading some neuroscientists to suggest that Dr. Small and Taumark were prematurely trumpeting their drug.Last year, nine more former N.F.L. players were given the same PET scan, which costs about $10,000 per person to administer. On Monday, Dr. Small and several other researchers published a study in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that compared the results of the 14 players with those of 24 patients with Alzheimer’s disease and 28 patients in a control group with no significant cognitive problems.The scans showed that the tau deposits in the 14 players were “distinctly different” from those in the patients with Alzheimer’s disease, said Dr. Julian Bailes, an author of the study and the chairman of neurosurgery at NorthShore Neurological Institute in Evanston, Ill.Dr. Bailes said that far more research was needed to determine the effectiveness of FDDNP but that the findings published Monday were “another step in trying to detect C.T.E. in living patients.”In its letter, the F.D.A. said that the researchers were not prohibited from exchanging scientific information about their drug, including with the news media.U.C.L.A. said that Dr. Small had a financial interest in Taumark but that he did not control its website. U.C.L.A. also told Taumark to refrain from “impermissible commercialization” of the drug, which is licensed from the university.AdvertisementDr. Bailes said that he had no financial relationship and no organizational role with Taumark and that he had learned of the F.D.A. letter only in the news report.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Researchers Seeking to Find a Brain Disease in Living Patients Are Under F.D.A. Scrutiny.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.