By BILLY WITZAPRIL 11, 2015
The play could not have been more routine. Shortstop Didi Gregorius gathered a ground ball and, with plenty of time, made an accurate, knee-high throw to first base, where Alex Rodriguez turned his glove over as he stretched. Then he dropped the ball.The Yankee Stadium crowd groaned. But the play, which occurred in the second inning of the Yankees’ 8-4 loss to the Boston Red Sox, was representative of their problems early in the season.The Yankees have lost four of their first five games this season, and their fielding — extolled as a virtue in spring training — has repeatedly let them down. They committed three errors, pushing their total to eight, the most in the majors as of Saturday afternoon.Rodriguez, playing his first major league game at first base, was involved in two of the miscues; he also could not keep his foot on the bag when stretching for an errant throw by Chase Headley in the eighth, which opened the door to three unearned runs. But other Yankees had problems in the field as well.AdvertisementJohn Ryan Murphy threw a ball into center field on an attempted steal and had a passed ball. Outfielders Brett Gardner and Garrett Jones had extra-base hits tick off their gloves.Advertisement“I still believe that defense is going to be a strength of ours,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “We just haven’t shown it yet.”The Yankees have been fundamentally deficient in many areas. They have had three runners picked off base, and Gregorius was thrown out trying to steal third on opening day with the Yankees trailing by five runs. On Saturday, Mike Napoli caught the Yankees napping on a delayed steal, Xander Bogaerts beat a throw home on a bouncer to Headley, and Gregorius chose not to throw home when he might have had a play on Boston catcher Ryan Hanigan.“I still believe that we’re going to be a very good defensive team and a very good base-running team,” outfielder Chris Young said. “Both of those areas have been a rough first few days, for sure. There’s no denying that. We have to do better collectively, but we definitely have the guys who are capable of doing that.”Young’s three-run homer in the eighth put a cosmetic touch on the final score, but the Yankees were otherwise shut down by the Boston right-hander Joe Kelly, who has won all three starts against them since he was acquired from St. Louis last season. The only hit Kelly allowed in seven innings was a second-inning single by Rodriguez.Rodriguez, who turns 40 in July and is returning from a one-year suspension, might have been awarded Saturday off, but Friday night’s game — a 6-5, 19-inning loss to the Red Sox — dragged on for seven hours. Mark Teixeira played the entire game, so Rodriguez, the Yankees’ regular designated hitter, was tapped to fill in for him.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rodriguez had never played first and appeared reluctant to do so at the start of training camp, taking a while to use his new first baseman’s glove.But in two spring training games, Rodriguez looked mostly comfortable at first, though he was adjusting to the intricacies of the position — such as which balls he should leave for the second baseman. He did not look so at ease Saturday, especially with such a heavy workload. He had 16 putouts in addition to his error and Headley’s.“Not that I needed any more evidence to tell you how great Mark Teixeira is and has been for years, but I had so much action my head is spinning,” Rodriguez said.The ball he dropped, which led to an unearned run, was a play Rodriguez said he should make 10 times out of 10. After that, he began to use both hands to catch, a sign that he was not comfortable. He pledged to spend more time working at the position.Advertisement“You have to know your infielders, just like a catcher knows his 12 pitchers,” Rodriguez said. “Every guy has a different arm strength, a different touch — the ball moves differently, and that’s going to have to be my job early, to realize the patterns for each guy.”An article in some editions last Sunday about the Yankees’ 8-4 loss to the Boston Red Sox misstated the given name of one of the Yankees outfielders who had an extra-base hit tick off his glove. He is Garrett Jones, not Brett.An article in some editions on April 12 about the Yankees’ errant fielding in an 8-4 loss to the Boston Red Sox misidentified the infielder who made an accurate throw to first base that was dropped by Alex Rodriguez for an error. The throw was by shortstop Didi Gregorius, not by third baseman Chase Headley.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees Undone by Array of Flubs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.