AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressSHANGHAI — For the Chinese Super League club Shanghai Shenhua, a new season has brought fresh optimism.After several years of turmoil during which the team was stripped of its 2003 C.S.L. title in a match-fixing investigation and the foreign stars Didier Drogba and Nicolas Anelka departed midway through their contracts amid a shareholder dispute, Shenhua is rediscovering success, with three wins to start the season. The players have an obvious chemistry, too — even if they cannot always understand one another.At a recent practice in Shanghai’s sprawling suburbs, Shenhua’s latest marquee signing, the Australian national team player Tim Cahill, bantered with the captain Giovanni Moreno of Colombia and several Chinese teammates in a mix of English, Chinese and Spanish. The team’s interpreters were kept busy as the goalkeepers’ coach, Juan Mesquida Garcia, barked rapid-fire instructions in Spanish, and the new manager, Francis Gillot, gave interviews to the news media in French.Shenhua is emblematic of the new and improved Chinese Super League: It is increasingly globalized, brimming with newfound professionalism and flush with cash, thanks to its deep-pocketed owner, Greenland Group, one of China’s largest real estate developers. The product on the field is becoming more watchable, too.“People aren’t familiar with the Chinese league — they judge it without knowing anything about it,” said Gillot, a former manager of Bordeaux. “But when they watch the matches, they realize they are good quality.“I see Chinese players who are at a very, very high level, and they could play today in the French Ligue 1,” he said, referring to France’s elite division.What a difference a few years makes. Chinese soccer used to be difficult for fans to enjoy — the C.S.L. was mired in corruption scandals and uninspired play, prompting Chinese state television to stop broadcasting games, sponsors to pull out and attendance to flag.The league’s mismanagement had an effect with the national team as well. China suffered a number of humiliating defeats, including a 5-1 loss in 2013 to a Thai team composed mainly of junior players that prompted spectators to riot outside the stadium, shouting, “Disband the national team!”Just when it seemed Chinese soccer could not sink any lower, the government decided it had seen enough. A corruption crackdown shook up the C.S.L., resulting in the arrests of dozens of top-level officials, national players and referees on match-fixing charges.And the suddenly, with credibility at least partly restored, sponsors and investment returned in a big way, along with the sport’s disillusioned fans.Guangzhou’s club experienced perhaps the biggest turnaround: Relegated to China’s second division in 2010 as punishment after allegations of match fixing, the team was bought by a big-spending real estate group, Evergrande, and it signed Italy’s World Cup-winning coach, Marcello Lippi, and the high-priced foreign players like Argentine Dario Conca. Three years later, it became the first Chinese team to win the Asian Champions League trophy.Last year, the team got another boost when the Chinese online sales behemoth Alibaba purchased a 50 percent stake for $192 million. It also announced it would set up soccer academies for young Chinese players in Spain and the Netherlands.Now every team in the league wants to replicate the Evergrande model. According to FIFA, during the recent winter transfer window, Chinese Super League clubs spent a record $85.5 million on foreign players — the third-highest total in the world and more than five times what they spent in 2013.Evergrande was again the biggest spender, paying a C.S.L.-record $16.2 million for the Brazilian Ricardo Goulart, but other clubs also made flashy deals, most notably Shanghai SIPG, which signed Conca for a reported $10.8 million per year and hired the former England manager Sven-Goran Eriksson as coach.Conca’s salary has not been confirmed by his club, but if it is accurate, it would be similar to the salaries received by Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi.“Suddenly, everyone buys top foreigners,” said Mads Davidsen, a Danish assistant coach at Shanghai SIPG who has been in China since 2013. “When I came here, the foreigners on C.S.L. teams didn’t have that good a level. Now it’s extremely difficult to come here as a foreigner. You have to have a high level. All of this has helped lift the league.”The league’s top three scorers this season are Brazilians, with Paulo Henrique of Shanghai Shenhua leading the league with four goals in four games. None of the top eight scorers are Chinese.Teams are paying attention to physical training, analytics and scouting — things that were formerly afterthoughts, Davidsen said. And the pace of play is much faster.“One of problems was the tempo — the Chinese players played too slow,” Davidsen said. “They got a shock how fast the game is when they played at the international level.”After a surprise run to the quarterfinals of the Asian Cup in January, China looked strong in draws with Tunisia and Haiti last month as it prepared for the Asian qualifiers for the 2018 World Cup, starting in June. China has qualified for the World Cup only once, in 2002, and failed to score a goal in three losses.With backing from the country’s most powerful football fan, President Xi Jinping of China, the government is also investing in the long-term development of the sport, recently unveiling a reform plan to expand soccer programs at schools across the country.Advertisement