AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenThis time of year is particularly poignant for Scotty Thurman. Now 40, he was a 20-year-old junior in the spring of 1995 when he made what he felt was a well-thought-out decision to leave college early. As a sophomore, Thurman hit the shot that propelled Arkansas to the national title. The next year, he and Corliss Williamson again led Arkansas to the championship game, though this time the Razorbacks lost to U.C.L.A. After doing his due diligence, Thurman, a 6-foot-6 shooting guard with 43.2 percent accuracy on 3-point attempts, was prepared — or so he thought — to enter the brave new world of professional basketball. Williamson, also a junior, did, too.Thurman said he had been told by his college coach, and some general managers, that he would be a first-round pick. Turns out that Williamson was a lottery pick. Thurman was not drafted. He was devastated. Like so many others, Thurman began chasing the dream: an unsuccessful tryout with the Nets, a stretch in the Continental Basketball Association with the Shreveport Storm and with the Sioux Falls Skyforce. The chase took him to Cyprus, Greece, Lebanon and Macedonia, and back to Arkansas, where he played for the Arkansas RimRockers, then in the American Basketball Association. Things have worked out for Thurman. He eventually earned his undergraduate degree and later a master’s. He is now the director of student-athlete development at Arkansas, teaches a course on the history of African-American athletes and does the color commentary on Arkansas basketball game broadcasts. But the experience of leaving early has made him critical of a system that he believes too often hangs athletes out to dry. One of the players Thurman mentors at Arkansas is Bobby Portis, a 6-foot-11 sophomore power forward who is considering throwing his name in the hat. “He’s a great kid with a unique skill set,” Thurman said. “He’s a good student and a hard worker. I’ve just told him to do the best thing for him and his family.” Among other things, Thurman favors rule changes that would give athletes greater flexibility to make decisions on their basketball future. For one, he doesn’t think a player should be penalized for exploring his professional options, though such measures often conflict with the head coach’s agenda, which is to keep a fresh supply of recruits coming in to replace departed talent or to simply upgrade. “That’s one of the reasons why I’m so adamant about making sure that people have the right information,” Thurman said. “Guys forget that some of the people that you’re talking to help you make that decision may not be motivated by the same things that you’re motivated by.”At Kentucky, John Calipari has become a master of the trade. His most important day is not at the Final Four but N.B.A. draft day, when Kentucky players walk across the stage and shake hands with the N.B.A. commissioner. No doubt he already has replacements for most of the players who have declared for the draft. The joke is that the worst thing Calipari can hear is a freshman or sophomore saying, “I’m returning.”You can’t blame a player for throwing his hat into the ring.Seven players from the Kentucky men’s basketball team — three of them freshmen — held a joint news conference on Thursday to announce they were declaring for the draft. The freshmen are the versatile 6-11 Karl-Anthony Towns; Devin Booker, an athletic 6-6 guard who can shoot the 3-pointer; and Trey Lyles, a tough 6-10 defender and versatile scorer. They were joined by Willie Cauley-Stein, a 7-foot junior who can defend three positions; the twins Aaron and Andrew Harrison, both guards, who are sophomores; and Dakari Johnson, a sophomore center. “Even though they had a joint press conference, there’s going to be a different battle for each one of them in terms of when you compare the guys who are going to be first-round picks compared to those who aren’t,” Thurman said. Cauley-Stein, Towns, Booker and Lyles are projected to be top-20 picks. The biggest question marks are the Harrisons and Johnson, an unathletic big man who was knocked out of the starting lineup this season. “I’m more concerned with the borderline players,” Thurman said. “What’s going to happen to them?”A significant problem is that under the current guidelines, players do not have enough time to make informed decisions about whether to stay or go.Last month, a group of high-profile coaches discussed a number of measures that would help players make informed decisions. Among other things, the coaches’ proposals would move the N.C.A.A.’s deadline for underclassmen to withdraw from the N.B.A. draft from mid-April, where it is now, to late May. The proposal would keep the N.B.A. early-application entry deadline at 60 days before the draft. The new proposal would compel the N.B.A. to send limited invitations to qualified prospects by early May to participate in the N.B.A.’s mid-May draft combine. Teams would provide feedback to players about their draft potential and projected draft spots after the combines and before the N.C.A.A. early-entry withdrawal deadline. While these proposals are all well and good, they are designed to help keep talented players in school. More beneficial to athletes is to devise a way to allow young players — freshmen and sophomores — to return to school after a year if they discover they have made a mistake in opting to enter the draft and turn pro. Now the door is slammed shut. The rule must be liberalized to give players more time to make a decision, and to remove the punishment for making a bad decision. If a player goes to the N.B.A. or to any professional league and decides after one year that the decision was a mistake, and that college is a better fit, allow the player to return to school, provided he left in good academic standing. He would also lose a year of eligibility. This will put pressure on coaches and programs to make sure their athletes in the revenue-producing sports of football and basketball are on solid footing academically even if they leave after one or two seasons. “I think there should be some discussions about what could or would allow an athlete to come back,” Thurman said. No one can take the guesswork out of the drafting process, but the N.C.A.A., which derives so much profit from talented young athletes, can give them a stronger, wider safety net. Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement