By DAVID WALDSTEINAPRIL 11, 2015
The last thing Steven Wright did before he left the bullpen to pitch in the bottom of the 15th inning was look behind him and see nothing and no one. Wright was the last pitcher left for the Boston Red Sox in what was turning into a historically long game against the Yankees, and he knew that he might have to pitch for a long time.Wright, a 30-year-old knuckleballer with only 11 previous major league appearances, was thrust into action because there was no other choice, and it worked out well for Boston. Even though Wright blew leads in the 16th and 18th innings, he still earned the win by pitching the last five innings of a 19-inning, 6-5 win early Saturday by the Red Sox over the Yankees, the longest game by time in Red Sox history.“I looked around in the bullpen, and I was the only one left,” Wright said. “But that’s my role, and I like that role. I can come in and throw five or six innings, 100 pitches if I’m needed, and today I was able to do that.”Wright was on the roster only because Joe Kelly, a starting pitcher, began the season on the disabled list, and Wright was prepared to start this weekend. He had built up his stamina to 100 pitches during spring training, and on Wednesday the Red Sox said he would start on Saturday against the Yankees. But the Red Sox changed their minds, decided Kelly was ready to go and optioned Wright to the minor leagues on Saturday morning instead of having him make his third major league start.AdvertisementBut on Friday Wright was still at Boston’s disposal in case of an emergency, and a 19-inning game was just that. If there was one thing the Red Sox needed, it was an expendable knuckleballer who was headed to Class AAA Pawtucket in the morning, regardless of the outcome.Advertisement“It fell kind of into our lap with him being available tonight,” Boston Manager John Farrell said.Knowing it was up to him to finish the game, Wright ended up throwing 78 pitches, though he said he could have gone over 100. But Farrell had different limits in mind when asked how long Wright could have gone.“As long as it took,” Farrell said. “There was nobody left.”The Red Sox took a 4-3 lead in the top of the 16th on David Ortiz’s home run on an 0-2 pitch. But Mark Teixeira bashed a home run of his own to left field in the bottom of the inning off Wright, and the game was tied again.Considering that it went to left field and was hit off a Red Sox knuckleball pitcher throwing deep in extra innings, Teixeira’s shot evoked memories of Aaron Boone’s series-winning home run in Game 7 of the American League Championship Series in 2003 at the old Yankee Stadium.But this home run, instead of ending Boston’s season, only sent the game further into the long night (or later into the morning).Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Red Sox regained the lead in the top of the 18th, but the Yankees again fought back again as Brian McCann and Carlos Beltran hit doubles off Wright in the bottom half of the inning. It was growing very difficult for the Red Sox, who still acutely remember the pain of losing a 19-inning game against the Los Angeles Angels on Aug. 9.Wright was making mistakes, but not enough to lose the game.“I try not to get too caught up into it as far as blowing the lead twice,” Wright said. “I definitely was frustrated. But in the end you’ve still got to go out there and compete. The guys have been out there grinding it out, they’ve been out there a lot longer than me. I just wanted to gather myself and keep going back to the knuckleball, and keep firing it in there and hoping for the best.”The best finally came for Wright in the 19th. Once again, the Red Sox took a one-run lead, and once again the Yankees threatened. Jacoby Ellsbury singled on a ground ball to lead off the inning.AdvertisementWright — who admitted to thinking, “Here we go again” — knew Ellsbury wanted to steal second, but he had already picked off Brett Gardner earlier in the game and now was equally focused on preventing Ellsbury from advancing. Gardner hit a fly ball to left field for the first out, and Ellsbury held.That brought Garrett Jones to the plate, and he ripped a ground ball up the middle. Red Sox shortstop Xander Bogaerts moved quickly to his left, grabbed the ball and flipped to Dustin Pedroia at second base. Pedroia made a quick pivot and a hard, true throw to get Jones for the double play.“That’s a heck of a play,” Wright said, “to be able to pull that off at 2:30 in the morning. It’s spectacular.”After six hours and 49 minutes, and another 16 minutes for a delay when the lights went out in the 12th inning, the game was finally over. Boston had won this time, and Wright had the third win of his career, all well after midnight.As it turned out, he got to pitch on Saturday after all.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Quick Passage From Savior to Castoff .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.