

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
APRIL 11, 2015
If the early returns are any indication, the much-debated solution to baseball’s ever-increasing game lengths may have come in the form of a digital clock in the outfield counting down until the start of the next inning. It is a solution that is simple in concept and execution, and so far, it is working.The average length of a major league game crossed the three-hour barrier in 2012, and people have been trying to figure out how to move things in the other direction ever since. Baseball experimented with a number of potential solutions in the Arizona Fall League and ended up enacting a series of measures, including the countdown clock between innings, managers being required to stay in the dugout during challenges, batters being forced to keep one foot in the batter’s box during at-bats, and pitching changes being timed.In the 46 games played through Thursday, the changes have rolled the clock all the way back to the average length of a game in 2010, with a time of 2 hours 55 minutes, a 16-minute reduction from the first 46 games of 2014 and 13 minutes faster than the average game length for all 2014. While it may not be the two-and-a-half-hour ideal that many speak of, it is a noticeable change even in light of the fact that the low-scoring games — there were 12 shutouts compared with eight the season before, and the average number of runs per game dropped from 7.95 to 7 — helped move the pace along.“There is a feeling that the games are being played crisper,” said Pat Courtney, Major League Baseball’s chief communications officer. “We understand we’ve asked players to change habits, and we’re really pleased with the cooperation.” AdvertisementWhile M.L.B. confirmed to The Associated Press on Wednesday that around 10 warning letters were issued to players violating the new rules, Courtney indicated that the league is happy with the new system so far.AdvertisementHelping things run smoothly is the sense from the players that not much has changed.“I haven’t paid much attention to it,” Yankees catcher Brian McCann said. “We’re out there trying to win a game.”Chase Headley, also of the Yankees, said that the changes would affect only a small number of players — the ones used to walking around during their at-bats — and that the minimal impact of the changes would help maintain the support of the players as further solutions are sought.“Players don’t want it to be something that’s a huge burden,” he said.One of the players who found himself on the wrong end of the new rules was Devon Travis, a rookie infielder for Toronto, who was quickly reminded by an umpire of the changes regarding staying in the batter’s box.“You try to remind yourself,” Travis said. “It’s a little different. I never step too far out of the box, but even three inches is too much now, I guess.”The plan is for players to receive warnings for violations, with flagrant violators being subject to a series of fines that could be as high as $500.The fines may seem paltry in a league where the average salary is more than $4 million, but Headley said they would act as a deterrent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We had a meeting to go over what the rules were,” he said. “I think that will probably be the last time we talk about it. Once the fines start going out, that will be the enforcement of it.”As for the clocks that count down the time between innings — probably the biggest visual change for fans — players seemed to view them in a positive light.Advertisement“It’s actually really nice to know when I need to be ready,” Mark Teixeira of the Yankees said. “In that regard, I really like the clock.”McCann said the clock had the largest influence on him of any of the changes because letting it run down too much could limit the number of warm-ups for his pitcher.“I try to get out there quicker,” McCann said. “I want my pitchers to get all their pitches. That part of it I have sped up, putting my gear on and running out there.”The clock is actually timed differently depending on how the game is being televised, with 2:25 on local broadcasts and 2:45 for national games. Batters are expected to be in the batter’s box with no less than 20 seconds remaining on the clock.Of course, any change will need time to truly sink in. Justin Smoak, a first baseman for Toronto, said the clock had not affected him because he would not know where to find it.“No, never,” Smoak responded when asked if he had noticed the clock. “I couldn’t even tell you where it was last night. I have no clue.”But even if some players require occasional reminders, the first week of the season seemed to indicate that the clocks may move things along. Now the league will just have to wait to see if they will continue to work over a six-month season.Seth Berkman contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Effort to Speed Up Games Makes Progress Quickly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »