By GERALD ESKENAZIAPRIL 11, 2015
Brooklyn, the Islanders’ next home, isn’t quite their first home: Peterborough, Ontario.That was where that hockey team came together in 1972.The Islanders had a chaotic birth, one that took them years to recover from. In a way, I was present at their creation, covering the team for The New York Times.The team first met in September at its training camp in Peterborough, about 80 miles northeast of Toronto. Their rookie coach was the former Rangers star Phil Goyette, and he had so many little-known players on the expansion Isles that he safety-pinned numbers to their uniforms.In less than a month, the Islanders were expected to open their first N.H.L. season at the new Nassau Coliseum.AdvertisementIt was a strange notion. The current Islanders, who were to play their final regular-season game at the Coliseum on Saturday night, will have had almost three years to plot their relocation to Brooklyn. But the 1972 team was created in June, and its first game was on Oct. 7.AdvertisementWhy the hurry? The N.H.L. wanted to halt the onrushing World Hockey Association, which was scheduled to begin play that September and was going to put a team on Long Island.So the N.H.L. held a June draft to stock two new teams — one for Long Island and one for Atlanta. But the Islanders did not even have a coach until July, six weeks before the season started. Bill Torrey, the general manager who had become prominent while working for the unpredictable Charles O. Finley, told me his theory of making an expansion team competitive: “You’ve got to get rid of the players you drafted as soon as possible.”In other words, he knew he would not get much from the other clubs.The N.H.L.’s haste in expanding to 16 teams brought lawsuits from aggrieved W.H.A. interests. They were especially incensed that the league never mentioned plans to expand to Long Island until the rival league came along.When I asked the N.H.L.’s president, Clarence Campbell, a lawyer, about the charges, he had a perfectly simple explanation: “Does Macy’s tell Gimbels?”Anyway, the Islanders came together in Peterborough, and Goyette had a month to prepare for the likes of the Big, Bad Bruins, the Rangers and the Canadiens.“I want gentlemanly personnel,” he said, alternately sipping a crème de menthe and smoking a cigarette.He did not mean goody-goodies, but the kind of player who wouldn’t get into trouble off the ice.Of course, the players, all of them Canadian, had little idea of Long Island or where it was. As one of the drafted players, Terry Crisp, explained, when he learned he was taken by the “New York” Islanders, “I thought of the muggings and the skyscrapers.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They tried to be cutting edge. Goyette said that the player of 1972 had to understand what he was doing, not merely ordered to do it.AdvertisementThe team’s trainer used techniques practiced by Jack LaLanne, the television fitness guru and power-juicer pitchman. The players did calisthenics and ran at the nearby Kawartha Downs harness racing track. But one of them, grunting and jumping, got too close to a trotter in training, and the driver shouted at the player to get off the track.The team also included a rather large player for hockey (at that time) named Bobby Nystrom. He was 6 feet 1 inch and weighed 205 pounds, and Torrey, the general manager, relished his size but not his skating ability. So Torrey got Nystrom three weeks of lessons from a female figure skating instructor before camp began. (Nystrom, of course, went on to score the most important goal in Islanders history, winning their first Stanley Cup in 1980.)Few of the players knew how things would go. Expansion was still a relatively new word in hockey.“Maybe we can be like the Mets,” goalie Denis DeJordy said. “If the fans can take to us like they did with the Mets, that would be something.”Their wide-eyed No. 1 draft pick was Billy Harris, a right wing who shot left-handed. He was the highest-salaried rookie in hockey history at the time, earning $100,000 for his first year. That was five times what Bobby Orr had garnered from the Bruins just six years earlier.Although born in a big city (Toronto), Harris acknowledged that he did not know what New York was like. He said he had asked a veteran N.H.L. player. And what did Harris learn?“That New York has a lot of people,” he said.I hovered near him as he took his first turn on the ice. I wanted to be in on history (which I was, as the team went on to produce the worst record the league had seen at the time: 12 victories in 78 games). I was going to watch his every move.He trundled out on his skates from the locker room. But just as he got to the bench, he looked for the trainer.“Here,” he said, “I almost forgot.” And Harris handed him his false teeth. Then he skated onto the ice. The Islanders were born.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Witnessing New York Islanders’ Chaotic Birth (in Ontario) .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.