AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherYou would not wear one like it to your daughter’s wedding. Or to a job interview. Or probably not even to a backyard barbecue. But the Masters green jacket is one of the most coveted prizes in sports.Unusual? Yes, but it does not even make the top 10 when it comes to weird sports prizes.10. THE RED TARTAN JACKET You think the green jacket is less than fashionable? Take a look at the little number that the winner of the PGA Tour’s Colonial tournament has been forced to wear since 1952. The tournament says the jacket honors the history of golf and its Scottish roots. It is hard to see Old or Young Tom Morris in one of these.9. VARIOUS COLLEGE FOOTBALL TROPHIES Four hours of hard-hitting football against a fierce rival, and you win — an ax (California-Stanford)? A wagon wheel (Brigham Young-Utah State)? A wooden bucket (Indiana-Purdue)? A spittoon (Indiana-Michigan State)?8. COWBOY HATS Formula One drivers are the jet-setters of the sports world, racing in exotic locations like Kuala Lumpur, Abu Dhabi, Sochi and Singapore. These drivers are sophisticated: Their most important race takes place in Monte Carlo, for goodness’ sake. So when the circuit visited Austin, Tex., for the first time, in 2012, the top three finishers were of course forced to wear cowboy hats. They could not remove them fast enough.7. A STONE Paris-Roubaix is an exceedingly difficult bicycle race, with long sections ridden over bone-jarring cobblestones. So after six hours in the saddle, why not be rewarded with a stone?6. THE WEIGHT OF ONE’S WIFE IN BEER Wife-carrying is an actual sport, with a world championship in Finland and competitions around the world. Men race carrying women over a 250-yard course, including obstacles. (Despite the event’s name, the woman does not have to be married to the man.) At many events, the top prize is the weight of the wife in beer.5. A BOTTLE OF MILK It is such a familiar sight on Memorial Day weekend that it is easy to overlook how peculiar it is. Indianapolis 500 winners are handed a bottle of milk and then drink it with gusto. Louis Meyer, a three-time winner, started the tradition in 1933 when he requested milk after his victory. Before the race, each entrant lets organizers know a milk preference: whole, 2 percent (the most popular) or fat free.4. CHEESE At the Cooper’s Hill Cheese-Rolling and Wake in England, participants race down a steep hill in pursuit of a nine-pound wheel of Double Gloucester cheese.Spectacular falls, and sometimes injuries, result. To the one who is fast, daring or foolish enough to get to the bottom of the hill first, the prize is ... the cheese.3. A GRANDFATHER CLOCK Winners of the two annual Nascar races at Martinsville in Virginia get out of their cars; accept the congratulations of their crew members, competitors and fans; and, in tribute to the region’s furniture-making industry, are then presented with a grandfather clock. Good luck getting that home.2. LIVESTOCK Alpine ski races often award animals to winners: a goat, a hawk, a reindeer. But the prize is mostly symbolic. When Lindsey Vonn won a calf at Val d’Isère, France, in 2005, she was offered $5,000 as an alternative. To organizers’ surprise, she took the calf.“I picked her over the $5,000 pot because she was really cute,” Vonn told the United States ski team. “At the prize-giving ceremony, they told me to give the cow back and they’d give me a check. I freaked out at them: ‘No! You can’t take her away. You said she was my cow!’ ”Vonn named her Olympe and found a barn for her in Austria. Vonn said Olympe had given birth to two calves, Sunny and Karin (who was named for Vonn’s sister).1. THE POLKA-DOT JERSEY Winning the Tour de France is one of the most difficult feats in sports. But one could make the case that winning the King of the Mountains competition at that race is even harder.Ever try taking your three-speed up a hill? Well, how about riding it up the Alps? And doing it at the front of the pack, day after day?A rider good enough to do this better than anyone else in the world should get a medal. Instead he must wear a jersey that might be too loud for Bozo.Advertisement