AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanPatriots (4-0) at Colts (3-2)8:30 p.m. Line: Patriots by 8N.F.L. Week 6 scores and highlightsIn a news conference this week, Tom Brady had on his predictable knit cap and was giving predictable answers to predictable questions involving his motivations, or lack thereof, when facing the team that was at the center of last season’s deflated-ball saga. Finally, one reporter interrupted the monotony, asking Brady: “Isn’t there any heart in there? Any human that wants a little extra?”“I’m a human, there’s no doubt,” Brady replied. “I’m definitely a human.”But consider the facts. Brady is 38, an age when most quarterbacks have already retired. His skills have not seemed to diminish at any point in his Hall of Fame-caliber career and he is off to an undefeated start with 11 touchdown passes and no interceptions. In Week 5, he was sacked five times, all in the first half, and then coolly led his team to a blowout victory, looking no worse for the wear after taking all the punishment the Dallas defense could muster.It all begins to make sense when you read that researchers from Georgia Tech announced this week that they had identified a way to teach robots to fall with grace and without serious damage.“From previous work, we knew a robot had the computational know-how to achieve a softer landing, but it didn’t have the hardware to move quickly enough like a cat,” Prof. Karen Liu said when announcing the study Tuesday. “Our new planning algorithm takes into account the hardware constraints and the capabilities of the robot, and suggests a sequence of contacts so the robot gradually can slow itself down.”It makes a lot more sense to think of Brady as a robot slowly being perfected by its creators than a sixth-round pick who could barely hold on to a starting job in college and went on to win four Super Bowls and throw more than 400 touchdown passes.It is unclear if Andrew Luck or Matt Hasselbeck will start at quarterback for the Colts, but it hardly seems to matter. Brady is motivated, or at least programmed, for extra effort, and the Colts are in trouble.PICK: PATRIOTSAdvertisement