AdvertisementSupported byBy Huw RichardsThe path from the cricket field to the commentary box is well trod, but never with greater distinction than by Richie Benaud, known to many as the voice of cricket, who died in Sydney, Australia, on Friday. He was 84.Cricket has numerous halls of fame, but none with the singular authority of the American institutions in Canton, Ohio, for football; Cooperstown, N.Y., for baseball; and Springfield, Mass., for basketball. If it did, Mr. Benaud would have been sure of enshrinement as a player if he had done nothing else in the game, or as a broadcaster had he never played.His achievements led Gideon Haigh, one of cricket’s most authoritative chroniclers, to call him “perhaps the most influential cricketer and cricket personality since the Second World War.”Mr. Benaud died on Friday morning, said Katie Hale, assistant chief of staff at Channel 9, the Australian broadcaster he worked for. His family said that he died in his sleep.To anyone who became aware of the sport in the last 50 years, Mr. Benaud was probably best known as a uniquely authoritative television voice, his smooth Australian tones explaining the action with dry wit, perception and economy.That authority rested on his credibility as a player, during a career in which he became a shrewd and successful captain of Australia. He also displayed an acute, questing intelligence. But unlike many who have followed in his footsteps, he also worked at acquiring the essential skills of journalism. Fame eased the transition, but he had done a BBC training course and worked as a newspaper reporter, covering a crime beat, while still a player.Richard Benaud was born on Oct. 6, 1930, in Penrith, Australia, into a cricketing family. His father, Louis, a schoolmaster of French descent, once achieved the rare feat of taking all 20 wickets in a minor-league match. Richie’s younger brother, John, followed him into the New South Wales state and Australian national teams.His talent as a hard-hitting batsman, wrist-spin bowler and fielder was evident early. He played for New South Wales at 18 and for Australia at 21. Yet for years he tantalized Australia’s selectors by being too good to leave out but unable to perform consistently at the top level. The England captain Len Hutton called him a “festival cricketer,” meaning he was entertaining but lacked real substance.That critique was rebutted in the late 1950s. With his wrist-spin bowling, the most difficult and elusive of cricketing arts, Mr. Benaud dominated consecutive series in India in 1956 and South Africa in 1958, followed by an Ashes series at home to England in the Australian summer of 1958-59.He was also captain in the England series, getting the job ahead of the long-established Neil Harvey.Mr. Benaud’s intelligence and energy revived not only Australia’s team but also cricket itself, after an era of dull, defensive play. In the Australian summer of 1960-61 he found an ideal adversary in Frank Worrell, the first black captain of the West Indies. The five-match series, which started with the first-ever tied test match and was won 2-1 by Australia, drew huge crowds with attacking play by both sides.Mr. Benaud was fresh and different in other ways. He showed emotion on the field, embracing teammates after wicket-taking plays, and was a willingly fluent communicator with the news media.That he quit at only 33 without losing a series as captain reflects an age before cricket was a full-time profession in Australia. His 248 wickets in 63 tests were then an Australian record and third on the all-country list, while scoring 2,201 runs made him the first player from any country to achieve both 2,000 runs and 200 wickets in tests.As a writer and broadcaster, he became cricket’s great seasonal migrant, moving between Australia and England.“If you speak to any broadcaster from any sport, they will point to Richie as the standard-bearer,” Jonathan Agnew, the BBC cricket correspondent and former England player, said on Friday. “His incredible knack was knowing what to say and when to say it — usually as briefly as possible. Richie’s basic premise was not to speak unless he could add something to the television pictures.”His unique authority was evident on two occasions. In 1977, his support was essential to the credibility of the rebel “Super Test” series promoted by the Australian TV magnate Kerry Packer, a revolt that transformed pay and conditions for top players, enabling fully professional careers that could last longer than Mr. Benaud’s own as a player.When Channel 4 in 1998 won the rights to televise test cricket in England, beating out the BBC, it quickly recognized the single biggest act that would establish its credibility: hiring Mr. Benaud.Mr. Benaud quit British television in 2005 when the rights were secured by Sky. He had no quarrel with private enterprise — he had backed Mr. Packer — or with Sky’s owner, Rupert Murdoch. His main British print outlet was Mr. Murdoch’s News of the World. But he said he feared for the game if it was confined to subscription television channels.He broadcast in Australia until a serious car crash in 2013. Even then, his bosses at Channel 9 said they were willing, if he wished, for him to work from his home.Mr. Benaud guarded his privacy. When Rob Steen, a British writer, was commissioned to write a biography, Mr. Benaud refused to cooperate and asked friends and contacts to do the same. The book was never written. Mr. Benaud did pay frequent tribute to his wife of 48 years, Daphne.In a sign of his national standing, the Australian government has offered to hold a state funeral.Advertisement