
Extra Bases By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 11, 2015
New general managers can be fascinating to watch, partly because of the absence of sentiment in their decisions.The San Diego Padres’ A. J. Preller traded five first-round draft picks in the off-season and dealt another top prospect, pitcher Matt Wisler, to Atlanta last Sunday for the star closer Craig Kimbrel. The Braves’ general manager, John Hart, has shed established players he inherited — Kimbrel, Jason Heyward, Evan Gattis and Justin and Melvin Upton — to restock a weak farm system.In Arizona, the Diamondbacks’ Dave Stewart is trying to build with the commodity he knows best: pitching. Stewart, a four-time 20-game winner, begins his first season as a general manager with several new options on the mound.“Everything depends on pitching,” Stewart said in a recent telephone interview. “Every team I’ve ever been on that was a good team, their pitching was good. So as quickly as our young pitchers can mature is going to determine whether we contend or don’t. I know we’re going to hit and catch the ball. Those things are givens.”AdvertisementStewart was the Game 1 starter for Oakland in three World Series under Tony La Russa, the Diamondbacks’ chief baseball officer, who gave Stewart his first G.M. job last September. Stewart had been an agent, an assistant general manager and a pitching coach after retiring as a player in 1995. All of those experiences help now, he said, but a fresh outlook might matter most.AdvertisementThe Diamondbacks led the majors in losses last season, with 98, and opened this season by shedding or demoting highly paid veterans. They released outfielder Cody Ross, traded starter Trevor Cahill to Atlanta and bumped Aaron Hill from his everyday role at second base.Arizona will pay more than $16 million combined to Cahill and Ross this season, and Hill is their highest-paid player, at $12 million. The team also sent Yasmany Tomas, who signed from Cuba in December for six years and $68.5 million, to Class AAA. He will play outfield there after struggling at third base in spring training.If nothing else, the moves show that the Diamondbacks are not letting contracts, new or old, determine the makeup of the roster.“I don’t expect to lose 98 games again,” Stewart said. “To put a number on it would be difficult to do, because I don’t know how quickly our guys are going to do what they have to do to get us where we want to be. But we do have the talent and the ability. It’s definitely there.”If it is, it will emerge from pitchers like Archie Bradley, Rubby De La Rosa and Jeremy Hellickson, the former Tampa Bay Rays right-hander, who are new to the rotation. Young position players like infielders Nick Ahmed, Jake Lamb and Chris Owings and outfielders Ender Inciarte and David Peralta will get a chance to prove their value.Stewart traded for other arms who will start at Class AAA, including Robbie Ray — obtained from Detroit in the three-way deal that sent Didi Gregorius to the Yankees — and Allen Webster, who came over from Boston with De La Rosa for the former All-Star Wade Miley. The backdrop for everything, Stewart said, will be adherence to fundamentals and a heady style of play.“We want to play the game right, and we want to be aggressive,” he said. “Those are things I’d like other teams to say about the Arizona Diamondbacks.”Advertisement Rios Hoping This Is the Year After the Kansas City Royals’ sprint to the World Series last fall, they lost three familiar players to free agency: designated hitter Billy Butler, outfielder Nori Aoki and starter James Shields. They replaced them with three new free agents: designated hitter Kendrys Morales, outfielder Alex Rios and starter Edinson Volquez. Each of those players helped the Royals sweep their opening series against the Chicago White Sox.Morales doubled twice and drove in two runs in the series, while Volquez allowed one run in eight innings Thursday for a victory. Rios slugged a three-run homer on opening day as he tries to take his name off a dubious list.Rios entered the season with 1,586 career games played, by far the most of any active player who has never appeared in the postseason. The next closest is the Blue Jays’ Jose Bautista, who trails Rios by more than 300 games.Rios, 34, has played for Toronto, the White Sox and the Texas Rangers, earning more than $86 million but never a check for a postseason share. He said he watched the playoffs every year even though he had never qualified.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Every single one of us, our ultimate goal is to play in the postseason and win a world championship,” Rios said this spring after signing a one-year, $11 million contract. “It’s something that I’m still looking forward to, trying to find it, and hopefully I can make it happen here. This team is pretty good; it has what it takes and it showed last year with what they did.”Rios had a miserable season last year, hitting just four home runs for Texas while dealing with injuries to an ankle and a thumb. Healthy now, Rios hit three homers in spring training and enjoyed the company of his new teammates.“I’ve played them for many years and seen how they have developed,” Rios said. “The way they’ve played, it’s exciting. Who doesn’t want to play for a team like that?”If Rios required any more incentive, he need only look at the prize his teammates received on Monday: their 10-karat, white-gold American League championship rings, with 34 diamonds creating a “KC” logo over a custom blue stone. Promoting Cancer Awareness Jerome Williams went more than four years between major league appearances, from mid-2007 to mid-2011. When he returned, the story of his journey — through independent ball, the minors and Taiwan — brought him plenty of attention.AdvertisementWilliams, who will start for the Philadelphia Phillies against the Mets at Citi Field on Wednesday, had another source of intrigue in his locker then: a pink glove in honor of his mother, Deborah, who died of breast cancer in 2001. But he did not use it until he was nudged by a former teammate, Nomar Garciaparra, who was broadcasting a game Williams would pitch for the Angels in September 2011.“People were already paying attention to how long I’d been out of the game, so I didn’t want more attention on the glove,” Williams said. “When Nomar found out and asked me about it, I told him I didn’t want to use it. He said, ‘No, go ahead,’ and I used it and went eight innings gave up one hit and one run. I was like, I’m going to use it every day.”Williams fully embraced the idea, joining Twitter that month — his name is @pinkpuma36 — and taking cancer awareness a step further this off-season. He had his glove manufacturer, a Taiwan-based company called Woodz, make gloves for him in light blue, green, purple and gold.Each represents something different: light blue for prostate cancer, green for liver cancer, purple for pancreatic cancer and gold for childhood cancers. Major League Baseball allows players to use pink bats on Mother’s Day and light blue wristbands on Father’s Day, but Williams wants to do more. He said he had gotten positive feedback on social media.“A lot of people went out of their way and said thank you for raising awareness,” he said. “Then I had other people giving me other ideas, like an autism glove. There’s a lot of things in the works.”Williams, though, is not just a crusader — he is a ballplayer first, which means he is naturally superstitious. Because he pitched poorly in spring training, Williams said, the pink glove he used then is now out of use. He hopes to use all five colors in games, but if he gets good results with one glove, he may wait awhile before switching.“But they’re all broken in,” Williams said. “It’s just a matter of time.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Diamondbacks’ Overhaul Starts on Mound.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »