AdvertisementSupported byTop contenders for the 141st running of the Kentucky Derby are listed in order of preference, with comments provided by Joe Drape and Melissa Hoppert of The New York Times. Churchill Downs recently adopted a point system to determine the Derby field, with points being earned by the top four finishers in designated prep races. The odds are from the Churchill Downs futures pool, and the records are starts-win-place-show. 1. Dortmund Trainer: Bob Baffert Jockey: Martin GarciaRecord: 6-6-0-0 Points: 170 Odds: 6-1J.D.: This colt gets the edge over American Pharoah for faring better in California. He has gotten better in each outing, and only illness, injury or a bad post position could slow him down.M.H.: He crushed a talented Santa Anita Derby field, winning by four and a quarter lengths. Like his father, Big Brown, he will enter the Derby with a perfect record, making him my top choice. 2. American Pharoah Trainer: Bob Baffert Jockey: Victor EspinozaRecord: 5-4-0-0 Points: 160 Odds: 5-1J.D.: He validated the buzz coming from the backside with a sensational Arkansas Derby victory. Who’d he beat? That’s up for debate. Either way, the Baffert barn is loaded.M.H.: A son of Pioneerof the Nile, the colt followed his Rebel Stakes win with an absolutely dominating eight-length victory in the Arkansas Derby. He and Dortmund have established themselves as the ones to beat, but I think Dortmund has faced tougher competition. 3. Firing Line Trainer: Simon Callaghan Jockey: Gary StevensRecord: 5-2-3-0 Points: 58 Odds: 13-1J.D.: He twice finished a head behind my top choice, Dortmund, before winning the Sunland Derby in New Mexico. I’m hoping he is overlooked on Derby Day.M.H.: This speedy and improving colt showed in the Sunland that he could win with ease once free of his shadow. Of course, that will not be the case in the Derby. 4. Carpe Diem Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: John VelazquezRecord: 5-4-1-0 Points: 164 Odds: 10-1J.D.: Seemingly the only real threat from the East, this colt has won races without working up much of a sweat. He is going to like the Derby’s mile-and-a-quarter distance.M.H.: He has shown that he deserves to be in the conversation with Baffert’s big guns. Still, he did not pull away from the Blue Grass Stakes field as much as I expected; Dortmund looked more dominant that day in Santa Anita. 5. Materiality Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: John VelazquezRecord: 3-3-0-0 Points: 100 Odds: 12-1J.D.: Materiality, the Florida Derby champion, is trying to do an awful lot in little time. I’m betting against his winning the Run for the Roses on such a small foundation.M.H.: A son of Afleet Alex, he looked impressive in staying perfect at the Florida Derby. But long odds remain: Since 1882, no horse has won the Derby without racing at 2. 6. Upstart Trainer: Rick Violette Jockey: Jose OrtizRecord: 7-3-3-1 Points: 76 Odds: 18-1J.D.: Melissa likes this horse better than I do. He spiked a fever over the weekend and missed a workout, which is not an ideal way to head into the Derby.M.H.: This New York-bred colt could be a solid pick to round out a trifecta. He posted a career-best 108 Beyer speed figure in finishing second in the Florida Derby and has never really run a bad race. 7. International Star Trainer: Mike Maker Jockey: Miguel MenaRecord: 9-5-2-0 Points: 171 Odds: 17-1J.D.: The colt has a sterling résumé but is not all that respected. Overlook at your own risk.M.H.: A plucky son of Fusaichi Pegasus, he swept the Fair Grounds prep races (the Lecomte, the Risen Star and the Louisiana Derby), giving him the most points. He also progressed in all three. 8. Frosted Trainer: Kiaran McLaughlin Jockey: Joel RosarioRecord: 7-2-4-0 Points: 113 Odds: 40-1J.D.: Frosted ran himself back into the conversation with an impressive score in the Wood Memorial. I still think he is more pretender than contender.M.H.: After flopping in the Fountain of Youth, the colt had a throat procedure and rebounded in a big way, winning the Wood by two lengths while earning a 103 Beyer. He is still a bit of a question mark. 9. Mubtaahij Trainer: Mike de Kock Jockey: Christophe SoumillonRecord: 7-4-1-0 Points: 100 Odds: 8-1J.D.: I’ve watched the U.A.E. Derby over and over, and he looks like the real deal. A desert horse is going to win this race one day. He has got a lot to beat here.M.H.: He won the U.A.E. Derby by an impressive eight lengths, but will he be able to bounce back in five weeks and after he is shipped overseas? The North American contingent looks too good right now. 10. El Kabeir Trainer: John Terranova Jockey: C. C. LopezRecord: 9-4-2-2 Points: 95 Odds: 28-1J.D.: Meet your Indiana Derby winner.M.H.: He rallied to finish third in the Wood, suggesting that he still has some fight. Lopez, though, most likely lost the mount. If Calvin Borel takes over, the colt could be a nice long shot to hit the board.Advertisement