By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 12, 2015
Miguel Cabrera homered twice and drove in four runs Sunday as Detroit improved to 6-0 for the first time in 30 years with an 8-5 win over the Indians in Cleveland.Cabrera hit a two-run homer in the first off T. J. House, and J. D. Martinez added a bases-empty shot in the ninth as the Tigers finished a three-game sweep.Cabrera went 4 for 4 with his first two homers of the season, a double and a single. With Cabrera needing a triple for the cycle, Indians Manager Terry Francona intentionally walked him in the eighth even though there was a runner on first.PIRATES 10, BREWERS 2 Andrew McCutchen homered and drove in four runs in his return to Pittsburgh’s lineup at Milwaukee. Kyle Lohse allowed four runs and eight hits in six and a third innings and took the loss for the Brewers. Casey Sadler earned his first major league win, going five innings in his first career start.AdvertisementRAYS 8, MARLINS 5 Nathan Karns allowed two runs — one earned — and two hits in seven innings for his second career victory. David DeJesus had a three-run homer off Marlins starter Henderson Alvarez that helped the Rays build a 7-2 lead in Miami.AdvertisementCARDINALS 7, REDS 5 Matt Carpenter hit a two-run homer off Kevin Gregg in the 11th inning to give St. Louis a victory in Cincinnati. Carlos Villanueva earned the win after pitching two innings, working out of a bases-loaded jam in the 10th by striking out Todd Frazier.BLUE JAYS 10, ORIOLES 7 Jose Bautista hit the last of Toronto’s three home runs in Baltimore, a two-run drive in the eighth off Darren O’Day. Starter Chris Tillman allowed seven runs — three earned — for the Orioles in two and two-thirds innings.NATIONALS 4, PHILLIES 3 Wilson Ramos drove in the decisive run in the 10th for Washington in Philadelphia. Bryce Harper homered, and Clint Robinson had three hits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.WHITE SOX 6, TWINS 2 Chicago starter Chris Sale struck out eight over six innings at home during his return from a broken bone in his right foot, allowing one run and five hits. Adam LaRoche homered for the second straight day and had a run-scoring single.ROYALS 9, ANGELS 2 Alcides Escobar and Alex Rios hit two-run doubles for Kansas City as the visiting Royals extended their season-opening win streak to six games. Los Angeles’s Albert Pujols hit his 522nd home run, moving past Ted Williams, Willie McCovey and Frank Thomas for sole possession of 18th on the career list.PADRES 6, GIANTS 4 San Diego’s backup catcher, Wil Nieves, hit his first career grand slam, a drive off the former Padres star Jake Peavy. Host San Diego won its third game of a four-game series against San Francisco, the defending World Series champion. Peavy, whose first start of the season was delayed because of a back injury, took the loss while allowing four runs and four hits in four innings.CUBS 6, ROCKIES 5 Dexter Fowler hit a two-run homer off Colorado pitcher LaTroy Hawkins with two outs in the ninth inning, helping Chicago rally for a win on a blustery day in Denver. Neil Ramirez earned the win for the Cubs by getting two outs in the eighth. Hector Rondon got his second save of the season as the Cubs won for the second time in the three-game series.MARINERS 8, ATHLETICS 7 Nelson Cruz homered for the second straight day, hitting a solo drive in the 10th inning that sent Seattle to a win in Oakland. The Mariners’ ace, Felix Hernandez, left after five innings as a precaution because of tightness in his right quadriceps.ASTROS 6, RANGERS 4 After Evan Gattis reached base for the first time this season, Hank Conger hit a two-run homer in the 14th inning to give visiting Houston a win over Texas. George Springer made a game-saving catch for the Astros in the 10th inning.AdvertisementDODGERS 7, DIAMONDBACKS 4 Alex Guerrero had his first major league home run and four R.B.I. at Arizona, and Zack Greinke pitched seven strong innings to earn his first win of the season for Los Angeles, which avoided a three-game sweep. Yasiel Puig hit his first homer of 2015 off Josh Collmenter.Because of an editing error, an Associated Press report in the baseball roundup on Monday about the Padres’ 6-4 victory over the Giants misidentified the location of the game. It was in San Diego, not in San Francisco.A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Cabrera’s Bat Helps Keep Tigers Unbeaten.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.