AdvertisementSupported byYankees 14, Red Sox 4By Billy WitzThe radar gun, once a relatively mysterious device that a scout might haul around in a suitcase, first gained notoriety in baseball around 1980 because of the man holding it: Mike Brito, a mustachioed scout who wore a distinctive white Panama hat and was a fixture at Dodger Stadium.Brito, also known for signing Fernando Valenzuela, was for many years part of the background on television broadcasts from Los Angeles, standing in the dugout-level seats behind home plate with a cigar in his mouth and a radar gun pointed toward the pitcher.Now, pitch-tracking devices are so sophisticated that there is no longer a need for a character like Brito — and the radar gun itself no longer resembles a gun. Pitch velocity was once guessed at — Bob Feller threw beside a speeding motorcycle to provide a visual comparison — but it is such a regular part of the scenery, on stadium scoreboards and television broadcasts, that the term is often shortened in everyday baseball jargon to “vee-low.”In the case of the Yankees’ Masahiro Tanaka, the focus on his fastball’s velocity has become something of a sideshow of late, with his numbers parsed to see if they might explain whether his right elbow — which was found last July to have a small ligament tear — is making it painful for him to pitch. That was the suggestion made recently by Pedro Martinez, the newly elected Hall of Fame pitcher.In the days since Tanaka’s start in the season opener, in which he was chased by Toronto after four innings, Tanaka’s velocity has been a daily topic for Manager Joe Girardi.Tanaka, with a hand from an awakening offense, tempered the issue somewhat Sunday night when the Yankees walloped the Red Sox, 14-4, to salvage the finale of a three-game series at Yankee Stadium.The Yankees, with a bases-loaded double by Alex Rodriguez and back-to-back home runs by Chase Headley and Stephen Drew, scored seven runs in the first inning against the Red Sox ace Clay Buchholz — more than they had scored in any of the previous five games this season. Tanaka was better than he was against the Blue Jays, but in two games against American League East rivals, he is still searching for the form that made him a dominant pitcher before the ligament tear was found last season. His fastball was better against the Red Sox than it was against the Blue Jays, but his slider and split-fingered pitch were not.The difference Sunday night was that when Tanaka ran into trouble, he escaped before the inning became catastrophic. In the fourth, after the Red Sox had scored three times and had two runners on base, Tanaka struck out Ryan Hanigan and Mookie Betts on sliders.If he had given up a hit to either, “he was pretty close to the end,” Girardi said.Tanaka’s 97th and final pitch of the night, a 92-mile-per-hour fastball at the knees, froze Pablo Sandoval for a third strike to end the fifth.It was recorded by the latest pitch-tracking technology, called Pitchf/x, which is installed in all 30 major league stadiums. It uses cameras to track the speed and location of each pitch. It can identify not only the velocity of a pitch but also the type, even distinguishing between two-seam and four-seam fastballs, the latter of which are generally thrown harder. “We get it down to the tenth,” Girardi said, referring to fractions of a mile per hour.The pitch information is used on Major League Baseball’s online accounts of games and on websites like FanGraphs, which offers detailed statistical analysis on baseball and catalogs pitch velocity. The speed readings on the Yankee Stadium scoreboard are the same ones YES uses on its television broadcasts.Girardi has at times bristled over the news media’s focus on Tanaka’s velocity during spring training and in the days after his performance on opening day. He has pointed out that the average velocity of Tanaka’s fastball Monday, 90.9 miles per hour, was 0.2 of a mile per hour slower than last season’s average. “I’m not going to tell him to go out there and throw as hard as you can,” Girardi said Saturday, the second straight day he reacted testily to questions about Tanaka’s velocity. “What you need to do — and what all pitchers need to do — is you need to locate a little better.”Girardi was asked whether he had told Tanaka that. “I wouldn’t tell you anyway,” he answered. When Girardi was questioned further, he said: “Meetings with my players are meetings for us. They’re not for the media. That’s the way I’ve always handled it.”Girardi’s reaction to the topic led some to wonder if it was an accident when the radar reading was not functioning in Tanaka’s first inning on opening day. On Sunday, Girardi was asked if pitch-tracking technology was worth the trouble.“I probably have to answer a lot more questions about all of our pitchers, but it doesn’t hurt us,” Girardi said. “There are times I think pitchers get too caught up in the radar gun, and that is troublesome for me. But I think it’s what the fans want. I think the fans want to see it, and it’s good for the game.” Girardi said the information was useful to him because a sudden drop-off in velocity might signal that a pitcher is laboring. Catcher Brian McCann said the velocity on the scoreboard was more useful to him as a hitter than it was when he was managing the game from behind the plate. “If a fastball is low 90s, you have time to react,” McCann said. “If it’s around 95, you’ve got to be quicker. It just helps to know how aggressive you need to be. “When I’m catching, I don’t look at it. I’m looking at the stuff coming in. I’m using my eyes as the test.”Several Yankees pitchers acknowledge that they sneak peeks at the scoreboard to see how hard they are throwing. One of them is Tanaka, who through an interpreter said he did so in Japan, too. “I’m not particularly competing with the speed gun, but just to get a feel for how my pitches are,” said Tanaka, who in that way is not so different from the ones keeping an eye on him.Advertisement