AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated Press and Agence France-PresseManchester City’s sharp decline was magnified in a one-sided 4-2 loss to host Manchester United on Sunday. City, the Premier League’s defending champion, dropped to 12 points behind first-place Chelsea after the Blues’ latest scrappy win inched them closer to the title.United finally had reason to celebrate on derby day, ending a run of four straight losses to City. Third-place United moved to 4 points ahead of City, whose manager, Manuel Pellegrini, is facing mounting scrutiny. City has lost four straight road games. “We are not in a good moment,” Pellegrini said.After United’s sixth straight victory, Manager Louis van Gaal said his club’s fans could “go on the streets with their hats up and say, ‘This year, we are the better team.’ ” United fell behind in the eighth minute on Sergio Agüero’s goal, but Ashley Young and Marouane Fellaini responded with two goals in 13 minutes. Juan Mata made the score 3-1 in the 67th, and an unmarked Chris Smalling headed home a free kick seven minutes later. Agüero scored in the 88th minute for City.City’s hold on the league trophy was further loosened by Chelsea’s 1-0 win at Queens Park Rangers. Cesc Fàbregas scored an 88th-minute winner.SERIOUS INJURY IN SPAIN Villarreal defender Mateo Musacchio’s gruesome leg injury near the end of a 1-1 draw at Getafe overshadowed play in the top Spanish league. Musacchio dislocated his left ankle when his leg buckled as he was running in the 76th minute, the team said. He had an operation at a Madrid hospital.MARSEILLE STUMBLES Marseille’s hopes of winning a record-equaling 10th French league title took a serious hit when it lost, 1-0, at Bordeaux and fell to 5 points behind Paris St.-Germain, the leader, which is 1 point ahead of second-place Lyon.TEAM CUTS PLAYER AFTER FIGHT Bayer Leverkusen released Emir Spahic from his contract because of his fight with security workers Wednesday after a German Cup loss to Bayern Munich. With Cologne’s public prosecutor involved, Leverkusen said it was cooperating with the investigation.MEETING AFTER TURKEY ATTACK Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, met with all 18 captains from the country’s top teams a week after gunshots were fired at a team bus. The Super Lig was suspended after the attack. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Advertisement