By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 12, 2015
Rangers forward J. T. Miller was not shy about eavesdropping as the resident sage Martin St. Louis was asked about the team’s youth infusion this season.Miller, 22, leaned over from his adjoining stall at Madison Square Garden to glean words of wisdom from the 39-year-old St. Louis, a veteran of more than 1,100 N.H.L. games.“Guys like Millsy had lots of experience of hockey at the highest level in the playoffs last year,” said St. Louis, who has 21 goals in his first full season as a Ranger after spending most of his career with the Tampa Bay Lightning. “You carry that to the following season and you get better. He’s been a big part of our success. There’s no doubt about that.”Miller played only four playoff games last spring, when the Rangers reached the Stanley Cup finals with a charmed run that ended in a five-game loss to the Los Angeles Kings. But Miller and other new regulars, like the rookies Kevin Hayes and Jesper Fast, have been integral parts of this season’s Presidents’ Trophy-winning team that soared to a franchise-record 53 victories.AdvertisementThey have been able to glance across the room and see the intense goaltender Henrik Lundqvist. Or lean over for a snippet of advice from St. Louis. Or seek counsel from Rick Nash, who led the Rangers with a career-high 42 goals, or the hardworking fourth-line center Dominic Moore.AdvertisementBut when the Rangers open the playoffs on Thursday at home against the Pittsburgh Penguins, those players who were major contributors on last year’s team will put their knowledge of the Rangers’ winning formula to the test.“I’ve learned a lot this year,” said Miller, a first-round draft pick who has 10 goals and 13 assists and has been skating on right wing on a line centered by Derek Stepan, with Chris Kreider on the left. “Obviously, sitting next to Marty has been a huge help. I talk to him every chance I get.”The mentoring atmosphere St. Louis works to create also has benefited Hayes, who signed with the Rangers as a free agent after finishing his career at Boston College.Hayes, 22, has 17 goals and 28 assists, primarily centering the team’s third line with the speedy Carl Hagelin on left wing and an array of skaters on the right, including Miller and St. Louis.“It’s been awesome, a fun six months for sure,” said the 6-foot-5 Hayes, whose size and speed in the middle have been a revelation. “Playing with Hags makes it a lot easier. We have great chemistry.”The plethora of experienced talent surrounding younger Rangers augments their growing confidence.“These guys know what everything is like,” Hayes said. “They give tips here and there, making the game a lot easier for me.”For defenseman Keith Yandle, who arrived from the Arizona Coyotes at the trade deadline, the Rangers’ collective demeanor connotes winning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There’s a certain calmness about this team feeding off every guy,” said Yandle, 28, who had played his entire career with the Coyotes before the trade. “There’s no panic. You can tell guys have been through it and know how to play in every type of situation. There’s a feeling we can win every night.”AdvertisementRangers coaches certainly have to be grateful that every puzzle piece melded with synchronicity heading into the playoffs.The Rangers survived a shoulder injury to their captain, Ryan McDonagh, early in the season, missed Lundqvist for 25 games with a vascular injury in his neck, and have been without defenseman Kevin Klein for the past month with a broken left arm.That did not halt their surge to the league’s top record, meaning the Rangers will have home ice in every playoff round ahead.Coach Alain Vigneault said the team’s mind-set was no different than a year ago.“Our goal is to come ready and start by winning the first round of the playoffs,” he said.St. Louis was a major reason the Rangers excelled last spring, with eight goals and 15 points over all in the playoffs. He provided the emotional catalyst after the death of his mother during the second-round series against the Penguins. He said motivation was easy to summon.“We went to the end last year, we just didn’t win,” he said. “That experience makes you hungry to get back there. I was proud of how we played.”If Miller continues to absorb wise counsel from the next cubicle, his game should improve.“Every game you have to build it up again, it doesn’t matter how well you’ve played the game before,” St. Louis said. “Next game, you have to go out there and earn it again.”Most Rangers speak cautiously about playoff expectations after winning the Presidents’ Trophy for the first time since 1994, when they last won the Stanley Cup. Only two of the previous 11 regular-season champions (Detroit in 2008 and Chicago in 2013) went on to win the Stanley Cup. The Rangers were the top seed in the East in 2012, when they lost to the Devils in the conference finals.But St. Louis is willing accept that high expectations exist after a superior season.“Winning the Presidents’ Trophy does matter,” he said, “because it puts the team in position for something really special.”A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Are Potent Mixture of New Faces and Old.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.