AdvertisementSupported byMets 4, Braves 3By Tim RohanATLANTA — When the final out was recorded Sunday, and the Mets had beaten the Atlanta Braves, 4-3, Jeurys Familia had earned his first save of the season. But he did not celebrate. He did not scream, or stomp his feet, or pound his chest. Maybe he felt it would have been disrespectful or inappropriate. The Mets’ first road trip of the season had been marred by plenty of discouraging news. Manager Terry Collins had faced questions about whether the front office dictated his lineup. Wilmer Flores had a few shaky games at shortstop, attracting more criticism of his defense. And Jenrry Mejia, the Mets’ closer and Familia’s close friend, had been suspended for testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs. Mejia is known for his elaborate celebrations. The Mets’ win Sunday, then, offered them some relief. Bartolo Colon pitched seven strong innings, Familia earned the save, and the Mets returned to New York for their home opener Monday, having gone 3-3 against two rivals, the Braves and the Washington Nationals. “It’s nice to go home on a good note,” Collins said, sounding weary. When the Mejia news broke on Saturday, the Mets looked shocked and dazed, as if they had taken a right hook during a prizefight. They also sounded disappointed, bitter, as if betrayed by a teammate who had left them hanging. Before Collins spoke to the entire team, he had made a point to of pulling Familia aside. Not only is Familia one of Mejia’s closest friends on the team, but with Mejia out, he would be the team’s regular closer. Collins wanted to break the news to him gently. “Oh no,” Familia said, clearly upset.“I mean, they’re best friends,” Collins said. “You’re talking about two guys that at 7 in the morning, for six weeks, come out and jog together, work out together, come to the ballpark together. When you lose one of your best friends, to a situation like this, he should be — I mean, I would be emotional too. I don’t blame him.”Collins also pulled aside Colon, who was something of a mentor to Mejia. The Latin American players generally adore Colon. In the clubhouse, they flock to him. He understood the situation well. He was also suspended, in 2012, for using performance enhancers. He seemed to take it upon himself to lighten the mood Sunday.He pitched seven innings, on just 77 pitches, holding the Braves to three runs and earning his second win of the season. But seeing a man of his size at the plate has also become one long running gag. He stands there, barely bending his knees, wagging his bat halfheartedly. Then, when he finally swings, he contorts his body so much that he nearly topples over. During spring training, Colon told Kevin Long, the new hitting coach, that he had only had two hits last season. “How about four hits this year?” Long asked.“How about three?” Colon replied.In the fourth inning Sunday, then, when Colon came to bat with a runner on second, something truly rare happened. On the first pitch, a fastball high and outside, Colon stuck out his bat. As he made contact, his helmet popped off, and he smiled and watched as the ball plopped down into right field, beyond the second baseman.A run scored, and Colon was still smiling wide as he reached first base, shaking his right hand because it stung. In the dugout, his teammates were giddy. Colon had not driven in a run since 2005, and he had gone hitless in his last 37 at-bats. Colon later said the hit had reminded him of Luis Gonzalez’s blooper over the infield, off Mariano Rivera, to win the 2001 World Series for the Arizona Diamondbacks. Colon appeared to be serious. Sort of. “I don’t know if he broke his bat or not,” Michael Cuddyer said. “If he did, it died a hero.”This one win meant as much as any win could, perhaps, six games into the season. Flores had made a total of three errors Thursday and Friday, along with a number of imprecise throws that required the Mets’ first baseman to adjust on the fly. He was clearly rushing his throws, and he admitted that the mistakes were getting to him “a little bit.” But Sunday he played his second consecutive error-free game. “We have to be behind this guy,” Collins said. “We have to show him support.”Collins also looked smart, bringing on Curtis Granderson as a pinch-hitter in the eighth. Granderson has only one hit in his first 16 at-bats, but he drew a leadoff walk and later scored the winning run on a sacrifice fly by Daniel Murphy. Familia faced two batters in the ninth and retired them on six pitches. Afterward, after he had said he felt sorry for Mejia, he was asked whether he wanted to become the Mets’ permanent closer. In other words, did he want his friend’s old job?He fidgeted and pursed his lips. “I mean, like I say always, whatever position they put me in the game, I’m just going out there and trying to do my job,” he said.Advertisement