AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan BarrySYRACUSE — Three players for the Syracuse Nationals basketball team huddle before another game, in a back room of the concrete coliseum known as the War Memorial. They hunch in a half-circle as an official scribbles the strategy on an erasable white board.The official turns to the lanky power forward, Jim Tucker, 82, and says you go in next. After Turner, the sharpshooting guard Billy Kenville, 84, who listens through hearing aids. And, finally, the star forward, Dolph Schayes, 86, who wears size-15 black Rockports instead of the white canvas Cons once de rigueur.The official urges caution. Yes, the Nats will be stepping onto a floor so familiar it used to creak and squeak in their dreams. But it is covered with ice tonight for a game of hockey — not hoops — between the Bridgeport Sound Tigers and the Syracuse Crunch.Carpets will be laid out, the official says with reassurance. But still: “Take your shuffle steps.”Ice is nothing for a Nat; runs in the veins. Kenville jokes about coming out dribbling a basketball. Schayes offers to dance the Charleston. The huddle breaks.Sixty years ago on this day, April 10, and in this building, into which are chiseled the names of seminal battles (Salerno, Iwo Jima, Guadalcanal), a different kind of battle took place: the seventh and deciding game of the 1955 N.B.A. championship series between the Fort Wayne Pistons and the Syracuse Nationals.Repress the urge to think how quaint. Film footage of early professional basketball may show players, most of them alabaster white, engaged in what looks like a parquet square dance, their passes and hook shots and passes and set shots and passes almost genteel. But in truth, their below-the-hoop game was skillful, physical, sometimes brutal, and always tribal, especially here in Syracuse’s memorial to war.No opponent wanted to come to Syracuse, Schayes recalls earlier this day, his huge hands making small a glass of cabernet at a modest reception for the Nats at the Crowne Plaza hotel. The winter weather was unwelcoming, he says, but gracious when compared with the fans, whose pride in their blue-collar, shot-and-a-beer city — pride in not being Boston or New York — was expressed in roars and taunts and thrown fists.“Rabid,” Schayes says fondly. “Possessive.”And the Nats embodied their gritty city. They were determined to win, to be remembered.No drawn-up plays, no overthinking things. Just playing impassioned defense, passing the ball, setting picks, looking for the open man. Looking, often, for Schayes, whose long-range set shots and muscular drives to the basket would — let’s just say he has earned that cabernet:Twelve-time N.B.A. All-Star. Member of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Selected in 1996 as one of the 50 greatest N.B.A. players ever. He once played a season with a soft cast on his fractured right wrist, which only improved his left-handed shooting.Men with gray hair interrupt his sips of a drink he will never finish, asking for a little time. Schayes, who wears his nobility lightly, obliges, and black-and-white memories return to living color.It could be argued that the 1954-55 season saved the N.B.A. from itself, after it instituted the 24-second clock at the behest of Danny Biasone, the Nats’ owner. The change injected urgency, ending the hold-the-ball strategy that turned the stands into coma wards.At the end of that pivotal season, it was Syracuse and Fort Wayne — also of the working-class, the-hell-with-Boston variety — vying for the championship and the tidy check that came with it, along with a silver ice bucket. No ring, though.Syracuse won the first two close games at home, then lost the next three in Indianapolis, where one fan threw a chair at the Syracuse bench, and another fan attacked the hard-nosed Syracuse coach, Al Cervi. He responded by ripping the man’s shirt off.Returning to the protective embrace of the War Memorial, the Nats won the raucous sixth game to tie the series. A fistfight emptied the benches and part of the stands, and one of the referees took a fan’s punch in the mouth. But these were incidental matters to the 28 points by Schayes, and the clutch hook shot by Syracuse’s rookie center, Johnny Kerr.Game 7, on Easter Sunday afternoon, began poorly for the Nats. Schayes was overanxious, he recalls, struggling to get into the game’s flow. It didn’t help that he was being guarded by Mel Hutchins, now 86, the toughest defender he ever faced.Schayes had what he calls his “bread-and-butter” play. Whenever he’d hear an opposing coach shout, “Get up on him” — to play nose-to-nose defense — he would feign his great set shot and drive hard to the basket. But on this night, he says, “Mel Hutchins knew me too well,” and the Nats were quickly down by 17 points.“I wasn’t doing much,” Schayes says. “But the other guys picked up the slack.”Among them was Kenville, resting on a bar stool nearby. As the game began to get out of hand, he recalls, the acerbic coach, Cervi, sent him in with words that are all but engraved on the Kenville family crest: “O.K., rookie, go in there and win this for me.”Kenville obliged, his hot shooting rousing the crowd to cheer for another kind of resurrection. “I made a few shots,” he says, enough for a team-high 15 points.By halftime, the Nats were down by only 7. At the end of the third quarter, the game was tied at 74. Then came some Cervi-style defense, a few vital foul shots, including two by Schayes, and a final-seconds stolen ball by guard George King.The Nats won, 92-91. Make that: Syracuse won, 92-91.The time clock kept ticking. The Syracuse Nats became the Philadelphia 76ers. The Fort Wayne Pistons moved to Detroit. Their coach and most of their teammates died: Cervi, King and Kerr, among them. Schayes misplaced his championship ice bucket. People forgot.But on this night it’s game time again in the War Memorial. Howard Dolgon, the president of the Syracuse Crunch, has arranged for a pre-game ceremony to honor the last of the championship Nats — a “mitzvah,” Schayes calls it, inspired by the stories of Sean Kirst, a columnist for The Syracuse Post-Standard.“This is it,” Dolgon says. “This is the last time these guys get together.”Maybe. These are also the guys who were down 17 points.Schayes, Kenville and Tucker are led past a full-court press of fans wearing oversize hockey jerseys in the corridor. Schayes is slightly hunched, perhaps from the courtesy ride he received to the arena from the hotel in a 2005 Hyundai Elantra, in which he shared the front seat with a hockey stick.They make their way through the concrete bowels beneath the seats, sidestepping wet spots and weaving around a team of elementary-school children about to sing “The Star-Spangled Banner.” They wait in a line, concealed from the view of the 5,700 fans, as strips of blue carpet are unrolled out to center ice.The stentorian-voiced announcer directs everyone’s attention to the scoreboard, which flashes black-and-white images of men passing and taking hook shots and passing and taking set shots and passing. He then introduces the honored guests, who emerge onto the carpeted ice with hockey players on skates as escorts.First, the relatives of a few Nats not present. Of Billy Gabor, the Mercury-quick point guard, 92 and living in Florida. Of Paul Seymour, the in-your-face clutch forward, who died at 70 in 1998. Of Earl Lloyd, the tenacious forward and the first African-American to play in the N.B.A., who died two months ago at 86.Then, gingerly, comes the lanky forward, Jim Tucker, of Duquesne University. The shooting guard, Billy Kenville, of St. Bonaventure University. And finally, the star forward, Dolph Schayes, of New York University, his Rockports navigating the slippery ground his sweat-stained Cons once owned.These Nats, these strivers, stand frozen in the moment, shoulder to shoulder. Then championship rings of icy silver are presented to them, because Syracuse, at least, has not forgotten.Advertisement