AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A. Memphis at Golden State, Monday, 10:30 p.m. Eastern, NBA TVThe 2014-2015 N.B.A. season will be remembered as the year of the Golden State Warriors.The postseason matters, of course, but unless Golden State fails spectacularly in the playoffs, its legacy is secure. The Warriors have already won 65 games this season, a feat previously accomplished by 16 teams, 13 of which went on to win the championship. Their point differential — the amount by which, on average, they beat opponents — would also place them as one of the most dominant teams in history. The Warriors field a strong candidate for the Defensive Player of the Year Award in Draymond Green and the front-runner for the Most Valuable Player Award in Stephen Curry. Of the nine teams that have won at least 67 games — a total the Warriors can reach by winning their two remaining games — seven included that season’s M.V.P. And even if Golden State fails to win out, Curry is likely to come away with the award.But enough with statistics. These Warriors are also one of history’s most fun teams to watch, combining the up-tempo joy of the mid-2000s Phoenix Suns with the charisma of the Michael Jordan-era Chicago Bulls and the pesky defense of the early-1990s Knicks. And yes, the Warriors are that good on defense — they are likely to end the season with the best defensive rating in the league and a better mark than many of the standout teams of that vaunted era had. The Warriors’ roster is impressive. Curry is as nimble as any player in recent memory, and Klay Thompson and Green are able running mates. But the team’s lack of weaknesses is largely due to Steve Kerr, who has won more games than any other first-year head coach.The Warriors are largely playing for history’s sake at this point in the season, but the immediate futures of the five teams directly below them in the Western Conference standings are murkier. The Memphis Grizzlies, the Warriors’ opponents on Monday, are desperately clinging to the second seed in the West: They lost to the Los Angeles Clippers on Saturday night, giving the teams matching 54-26 records, but the Grizzlies, as a division leader, have the tiebreaker. Still, the Clippers’ next two games, against Denver and Phoenix, should be relatively easy, and the San Antonio Spurs, who were also 54-26 going into Sunday’s game against the Suns, will also have a chance at the second seed if they can finish with a better record than Memphis.On Saturday, the Grizzlies were missing both Mike Conley and Tony Allen, and they lost Marc Gasol to an ankle sprain in the first quarter. There is a good chance that neither Conley, their star point guard, nor Allen, one of the league’s best defenders, will play in the team’s final two regular-season games, either. The injuries are only the Grizzlies’ latest bit of bad luck. Memphis, which had a stellar start to the season, has struggled since the All-Star break, with its defense, once able to withstand even the toughest teams, looking sloppy. Mentioned as a leading M.V.P. candidate early in the season, Gasol has looked tired and ineffective, shooting poorly and turning the ball over too frequently.The disarray is not all Gasol’s fault; many of his recent struggles may stem from the team’s overreliance on him as the Grizzlies, once thought to be a contender that could compete with, or even dismantle, the Warriors, have been revealed to be much thinner than some of their Western Conference peers. In a quirk of the schedule, the Grizzlies and the Warriors have played each other only twice this season. In the first game, in December, Memphis prevailed, 105-98, ending a 16-game Golden State winning streak. But the second game, in March, was no contest: The Warriors pulled away in the third quarter on the way to a 107-84 victory.If they are to secure home-court advantage in the early rounds of the playoffs, the Grizzlies must avoid a similar fate on Monday. But given the way that both teams are playing — and the fact that Golden State has lost only two home games this season — the Warriors appear likely to continue their sprint toward the playoffs while locking up their status as one of the best regular-season teams in history.Advertisement