By ROB HUGHESAPRIL 12, 2015
The pendulum has swung between United red and City blue in England’s northern commercial capital of Manchester ever since club soccer was invented more than a hundred years ago.On Sunday, smarting from the fact that City had been the dominant team since the fortune sunk into the blue half of Manchester by the Abu Dhabi sovereign fund, United came from a goal down to swamp its neighbor, 4-2, at Old Trafford stadium.If you couldn’t be there in the driving rain among the full house of 76,000, then the next best thing was a seat by the TV just about anywhere else on the planet. A Sunday of Formula One in China, and the last round of the Masters golf at Augusta, Ga., did not prevent broadcasters from paying what it takes to beam live pictures around more than 100 countries of this supposedly parochial Mancunian affair.It wasn’t even top of the Premier League because Chelsea, grinding out a workmanlike 1-0 victory in London against struggling Queens Park Rangers, is virtually home and dry in the championship position. Typical of Chelsea, typical of its coach José Mourinho, it went tackle for tackle through 89 minutes before Cesc Fàbregas scored with the team’s only shot on target.AdvertisementAnd typical of the Manchester derby, the game in the north pulsated from start to finish. City and United are full these days of foreign talents, but come derby day they, like everyone else, get drawn into a contest that moves faster than the minds can control it.AdvertisementCity, the league champion last season, was the better team — for eight minutes. In those opening minutes, the light blues tore United’s defenses to shreds. Jesús Navas, the flying winger from Spain, had a clear opening but shot straight at the legs of the United goalkeeper, David de Gea.A chance and a miss. Two minutes later, however, United’s defenders were again chasing shadows as James Milner, David Silva and Sergio Agüero moved and passed between them. Silva had the presence of mind to lift his head up, to wait, and then to release the ball low into the goalmouth for Agüero to score from point-blank range.The fans who were there in October 2011, when City hammered United, 6-1, at this same stadium, will have feared for the worse. But the hallmark of the Premier League is defensive insecurity — the reason why its clubs cannot compete of late in the Champions League, but also the attraction to audiences on a global scale.Out of uncertainty comes goalmouth thrills. At 14 minutes, the home side was level. De Gea hoofed the ball 70 yards, Ander Herrera reached it on the left wing, and from his low cross Ashley Young scored after the ball rebounded off the leg of defender Gaël Clichy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The rain kept coming, the lush green turf got slicker, and the belief in United that it could extend a run of five league victories over the past two months overwhelmed City.By the 27th minute another error by Clichy, failing to look over his shoulder as the tallest man on the field, Marouane Fellaini, lurked behind him, let in the Belgian giant to head United’s second goal at the far post. On the stroke of halftime, the City captain, Vincent Kompany, was lucky to stay on the field after a reckless foul on the leg of Daley Blind.City removed Kompany anyway at halftime, perhaps sensing that he was in trouble with a leg strain, and that his next foul might have turned the yellow card he received for that lunge to red.But the Red Devils sensed that the game was theirs. Juan Mata confirmed the impression on 67 minutes when he exchanged passes with Wayne Rooney, dashed up the left, cut inside and poked the ball through the legs of City’s sprawling keeper, Joe Hart.AdvertisementThe United crowd began to mercilessly bait the City coach, Manuel Pellegrini. “Sacked in the morning,” they shouted, “you’re getting sacked in the morning!”United’s supremacy was confirmed on 71 minutes when Young floated a free kick into the goal area and Chris Smalling leaped, unmarked, to head goal No. 4.There was a consolation, but only that for City. Agüero popped up a minute from the end to score his 100th goal, in his 158th game, for the blues. By then, the pendulum was firmly red.A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.