AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — There is a fallacy abroad that the reason the Spanish giants achieve so many titles in Europe is that Barcelona and Real Madrid have so much wealth that they can afford to treat their domestic rivals as mere steppingstones toward the Champions League.It might have looked that way at the Bernabéu on Saturday, when Real Madrid rested half its team and still outclassed Eibar, 3-0, in a game that turned out to be shooting practice for Cristiano Ronaldo and two of the reserves, Javier Hernández and Jesé.But then Eibar would be a fairy tale pretender in any league. It is the team of a small Basque town whose entire population would barely fill a third of the Santiago Bernabéu’s 80,000 seats. Eibar is no joke: It took 74 years to reach La Liga, lived the dream with tremendous gusto through the first six months of this season, and even if it goes right back down again when this term ends, the club will leave indelible memories of daring to take on Goliath.That fall is far from assured; Eibar does not have to meet the Barcelonas or Madrids of this world every week.However, as Barça found down in Andalusia on Saturday, the home league is made up of sterner stuff than outsiders imagine. Barcelona played its full lineup at the Sánchez Pizjuán, the stadium of Sevilla. And for 30 minutes, Barcelona was majestic, leading at that stage through another wonderful left-footed shot from Lionel Messi curled on the run around the two defenders into the goal, and by a right-footed free kick bent into the top corner by Neymar.Indeed, had Luis Suárez not missed two apparently simple chances, and Andrés Iniesta also not miscued, Barcelona could in that opening half have equaled the 4-1 score that it inflicted upon Sevilla the last time it played in that stadium.There’s the rub. Sevilla is a proud team with a fanatical core of 45,000 supporters. The club has its own anthem, and aside from Barcelona, the combination of players, people and passion means that it has remained unbeaten in this cauldron for 14 months — in fact, since Barça’s previous visit there in February 2014.The movement and passing of Messi and Co. was too good for Sevilla, but those squandered chances came back to haunt the Catalan team. Sevilla is one of those provincial clubs (Valencia is another) that will not lie down and leave the league to the big boys of Madrid and Barcelona.There is a connection. Unai Emery once managed Valencia and now coaches Sevilla. He has a judicious eye for players who, though below the radar of the top-paying English, Spanish or German teams, nevertheless possess qualities that with Emery’s emphasis on physical conditioning and intense high tempo can compete against the best.At Valencia, where he coached between 2008 and 2012, Emery put a great deal of faith in Éver Banega. Banega is a rambunctious Argentine midfield player, born in the same town, Rosario, as Messi, but of a markedly different temperament.The problem with Banega is that he occasionally gets himself suspended, and had returned from another ban this weekend. But Emery understands him and, after persuading Banega to renew their acquaintance in Seville, is working on the temperament of the player while hoping to extract the goodness. It is not unlike the dynamics that another Argentine, Diego Simeone, puts into resurrecting Atlético Madrid as the third force in Spanish soccer. And while Atlético’s hold on the La Liga title it won last summer is slipping, it will still be a formidable hurdle for Real to try to get over in the Champions League this week.Atlético was held, 2-2, by Málaga on Saturday, and that turned out to be the final score between Sevilla and Barcelona.Banega led the comeback with a low shot driven from outside the penalty area that trickled through the fingers of Barcelona’s goalkeeper, Claudio Bravo. But if Bravo fell below the standards he has set since his arrival at Barcelona last summer, he could do nothing to prevent the second Sevilla goal that came six minutes from the end.That stemmed from a careless pass that gave away possession by Gerard Piqué. He had curbed some of his own tendency to be overly adventurous this season, and Piqué has, like Bravo, been at the heart of a defense that was becoming the most reliable in the league.Alas, when Piqué was caught out of position, attempting a short pass that fell short, Sevilla pounced. In three moves, José Antonio Reyes intercepted the ball, Aleix Vidal ran with it down the right and Kévin Gameiro sped into the penalty box to sweep the ball over the line. It was a counterattack of breakneck speed and precision, preying on an old habit, a lack of concentration, that Barça’s new coach Luis Enrique had tried to eradicate this season.The players spoke afterward of going back to the video room and studying what went wrong and how they came to let a comfortable lead slip in what would have been a 10th straight win in all competitions. They know the answers: A team growing super confident, subconsciously relaxing on a two-goal lead, and no doubt allowing their minds to think ahead to Paris on Wednesday, when it meets Paris Saint-Germain in the Champions League, and after that a home game against Valencia in La Liga.P.S.G. finished off its own job in more emphatic style on Saturday, beating Bastia, 4-0, in the French League Cup final. In doing so, the Parisian team showed the ruthlessness that Barcelona lacked, scoring twice through Zlatan Ibrahimovic and twice through Edison Cavani.The victory was simplified by a red card and a penalty kick against Bastia in the 20th minute, reducing the resistance to P.S.G. Maybe it isn’t Spain, but France that lacks competition. And maybe things are no different in England, where Chelsea has a grip on the league, or in Germany where Bayern Munich looks uncatchable, or in Italy where Juventus will romp through the league.Advertisement