AdvertisementSupported byFormula OneBy Brad SpurgeonSHANGHAI — The track action of the Chinese Grand Prix may have ended two laps from the end of the race in a calm, slow procession behind the safety car, but driver emotions burst behind the scenes afterward as the championship battle heated up after only the third race of the Formula One season.That Lewis Hamilton drove to such an easy victory on Sunday answered the question after the previous race, won by Sebastian Vettel of Ferrari in Malaysia two weeks ago, as to whether or not the Italian team had finally put an end to the Mercedes team’s dominance. It was Hamilton’s 35th Formula One victory, his fourth in China, and his second of the season. Hamilton leads the series with 68 points, while Vettel, who finished third, lies second in the series, with 55 points. Nico Rosberg, Hamilton’s teammate at Mercedes, finished second in China, but is in third place in the series with 51 points. “Going into the race we thought the Ferraris would be closer,” said Hamilton. “But ultimately it was a much smoother weekend than we had in the last race.”Although the Mercedes cars have clearly still been faster than the Ferraris all season, it was tire-wear management by the Italian team’s car that mainly won them the race in Malaysia, and tire-wear management was the clearest threat again in China. But it never happened, as Hamilton focused on caring for his tires.“We tried everything we could today, and I think it was very close,” said Vettel. “If we keep getting closer there will be a point where we really put the challenge to these guys.”But Hamilton’s victory also answered another question, the one about the tense relationship between him and Rosberg, who appears still to be trying to deal with failing to beat Hamilton to the 2014 drivers’ title in only the last race of the season, in Abu Dhabi.Throughout the weekend in China, Rosberg was clearly on edge. On Saturday, he failed to take the pole position behind Hamilton by only four hundredths of a second. “Oh, come on guys!” he said in frustration to his engineers over the team radio after learning of that gap. Later, in Saturday’s news conference, when he commented that the time difference represented just a blink of an eye, Hamilton made a comment that caused Rosberg to tap his fingers in nervous tension, as Hamilton smiled on.The confrontation continued during the race when Rosberg, following closely behind Hamilton, complained to the team that Hamilton was driving too slowly. The team asked Hamilton to speed up, but he did not. After the race Hamilton said that he was not thinking of Rosberg at all, but just managing his tires and trying to control his own race.“It’s now interesting to hear from you, Lewis, that you were just thinking about yourself with your pace in front,” Rosberg said in response. “That was compromising my race, because driving slower than was maybe necessary at the beginning of stints meant that Sebastian was very close to me,” Rosberg added. “It was unnecessarily close with Sebastian as a result, and it cost me a lot of race time as I had to try to cover him,” he said. “And my tires died at the end of the race because my stint was so much longer. So I’m unhappy about that.” Hamilton defended himself.“It’s not my job to look after Nico here,” he said. “I didn’t do anything intentionally to slow any of the cars up. I just focused on myself. If Nico wanted to get by, he could have tried. But he didn’t.”“I’m trying to manage the tires,” Hamilton added, “and it is like you have a hundred pounds and you spend it wisely over your stint, and I was trying to make my stint go as long as possible, and I was still hopefully wealthy at the end of it.”The Ferraris were the only cars close to the Mercedes. Just before the safety car suspended the race, the third fastest team, Williams, with its driver Felipe Massa, was more than a minute behind Hamilton, and more than half a minute from Kimi Raikkonen in fourth in the other Ferrari. Another big question before the race was whether or not the new generation of young drivers would continue to race like old hands. All of them did so, but three of the four youngest drivers were betrayed by their cars’ technical fragility. Daniil Kvyat, 20, of the Red Bull team, dropped out on Lap 10, with his engine in flames. Carlos Sainz Jr., 20, of the Toro Rosso team, had his race compromised by a problem with his gearbox on Lap 16 and finished 14th as a result. Max Verstappen, 17, of Toro Rosso, was set to finish in eighth position, when with three laps left in the race his engine blew out, too, and he stopped the car on the main straight. The safety car was called in for the final two laps as the race marshals struggled to remove Verstappen’s car from the track. But they took so long that the race ended virtually behind the safety car.Felipe Nasr, 22, started from ninth position in his Sauber, and finished the race in eighth position, again scoring points. “I extracted everything I could from the car and also the strategy, so we can be satisfied with this result,” said Nasr.Advertisement