AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressGerrit Cole shut down baseball’s top-hitting team, allowing just one run in six-plus innings on Monday, as the host Pittsburgh Pirates handed the Detroit Tigers their first loss of the season, 5-4.The Tigers were trying to match the 7-0 start by the 1984 club that went on to win the World Series.Cole struck out eight and walked two while giving up three hits, helping the Pirates win their second straight home opener.Josh Harrison, Pedro Alvarez and Corey Hart each homered for Pittsburgh. The Pirates have won three of four after being swept by Cincinnati to open the season.J. D. Martinez hit a two-run homer off Pittsburgh closer Mark Melancon in the ninth, but a late Detroit rally came up short.Anibal Sanchez of the Tigers surrendered five runs in six and a third innings. Miguel Cabrera went 2 for 4 with an R.B.I.ROYALS 12, TWINS 3 Kansas City became the only unbeaten team in the major leagues as Danny Duffy pitched into the seventh inning and Kendrys Morales homered in a romp over Minnesota, spoiling the Twins’ home opener.The Royals, the defending American League champions, improved to 7-0. It was the second-best start in team history, behind the 2003 club that won nine in a row to begin the season.Duffy lasted six and a third innings, giving up three runs.RED SOX 9, NATIONALS 4 Mookie Betts hit a three-run homer, took a potential two-run shot away from Bryce Harper with a flashy catch and stole two bases on the same pitch, leading Boston past Washington in the Red Sox’ home opener.Boston’s Rick Porcello allowed four hits in eight innings.BRAVES 3, MARLINS 2 Alberto Callaspo hit a tiebreaking single in Atlanta’s two-run fifth inning, and the host Braves held off Miami in the ninth in a game slowed by two rain delays.ROCKIES 2, GIANTS 0 Eddie Butler outpitched his fellow rookie Chris Heston to shut down San Francisco, and visiting Colorado spoiled the Giants’ latest World Series championship celebration during their home opener.Troy Tulowitzki had the only R.B.I. of the game with a single in the fourth.ANGELS 6, RANGERS 3 Collin Cowgill and David Freese each hit two-run homers in the fifth inning for visiting Los Angeles, which rallied from an early deficit to top Texas. RAYS 2, BLUE JAYS 1 Jake Odorizzi pitched eight innings, and visiting Tampa Bay edged Toronto in the Blue Jays’ home opener.Odorizzi, a right-hander, allowed one run and two hits.CUBS 7, REDS 6 Jorge Soler homered twice, and Arismendy Alcantara had a game-ending run-scoring single in the 10th inning to propel host Chicago past Cincinnati. BREWERS 5, CARDINALS 4 Matt Garza overcame five walks to earn his first career win in St. Louis, and Carlos Gomez had two hits and an R.B.I. for Milwaukee in the Cardinals’ home opener.ATHLETICS 8, ASTROS 1 Billy Butler hit a three-run homer and Marcus Semien and Brett Lawrie connected to back a solid start by Scott Kazmir as visiting Oakland pounded Houston.Advertisement