AdvertisementSupported byYankees 6, Orioles 5By Billy WitzBALTIMORE — Easygoing and soft-spoken, with a smooth Georgia drawl, Stephen Drew does not play with any more of an edge than he speaks with. His is not the sort of demeanor that can endear players to fans at Yankee Stadium when their performances do not.And so it was during the off-season that a punching bag was set up in the Bronx when the Yankees re-signed Drew to a one-year, $5 million contract after he had done so little to earn it last season, his .162 batting average with the Red Sox and then the Yankees being the third-worst mark over the last century for players with 300 plate appearances.If there is to be a change of heart in how Yankees fans view Drew, the shift no doubt began here Monday night when he came off the bench to deliver a pinch-hit grand slam that lifted the Yankees to a 6-5 victory over Baltimore. It was an invigorating victory after a disappointing start to the season at home, and not a bad way for the team to embark on a stretch in which it will play 25 of 35 games on the road. The Yankees got a sterling defensive performance from catcher John Ryan Murphy and a five-out save from Andrew Miller and continued their recent home-run binge with three more. But nobody provided a larger lift than Drew.With two out and the bases loaded in the seventh, he was called on to hit for Brett Gardner, who was having difficulty swinging the bat after being hit on the wrist by a pitch earlier in the game. Drew took a first-pitch strike, then worked the count to 3-1 before crushing a fastball from the right-hander Tommy Hunter over the fence in right-center field. “It’s one of those things where I feel a little more comfortable trying not to do too much, trying not to put too much pressure on myself,” Drew said. “I know what kind of player I am and I’ve done it for a long time.”It was the first pinch-hit grand slam for the Yankees since Jorge Posada hit one against the Orioles 14 years ago.Manager Joe Girardi had a number of options on his bench, including two hitters with more power: Brian McCann and Chase Headley. Girardi had spoken earlier with Gardner, who was hit in the first inning and bunted in his next two trips to the plate. “I knew from swinging on deck that it didn’t feel great,” said Gardner, who was hit on the wrist for the second time this season. X-rays taken after he was removed showed no serious injuries. “I came to Joe before the seventh inning and I just let him know if my spot came up with guys on base, I might not be the best guy to go up there and swing the bat and try to drive them in. It turns out Stephen Drew was the man for the job.”If Drew’s home run Monday was a bolt from nowhere, the rally was constructed on innocuous building blocks: a bloop single from Chris Young, a walk by Murphy and a two-out dribbler that Jacoby Ellsbury beat out to load the bases.At the time, the Yankees were trailing by 4-2 after Orioles center fielder Adam Jones snapped a tie with a two-run homer to center field off Michael Pineda with two outs in the sixth. After Drew’s homer, the Orioles closed the gap to 6-5 in the seventh when the Yankees could not turn a challenging 4-6-3 double play, allowing Manny Machado to score. A walk to Steve Pearce loaded the bases, but Dellin Betances struck out Chris Davis with a slider, allowing the Yankees to escape with their lead intact. Shortly after Murphy threw out Jones trying to steal second, Miller entered with one out in the eighth and closed out the victory. The last out came, fittingly enough, when Pearce bounced out to Drew at second. Drew had other options after last season but wanted to return to the Yankees, despite having to switch to second base after having played shortstop before his arrival in a trade. He missed the first two months of last season after declining a one-year, $14 million qualifying offer from the Red Sox, eventually signing with them in May. Even though he was in good shape physically, he did not see live pitching for so long that he was far behind. His timing never recovered and neither did his confidence.“It’s never easy,” Girardi said of playing at Yankee Stadium. “You have to be pretty resilient to play here; we know that. The fans expect a lot, and I understand why. We’ve all been through it.”One reason he chose to return was a desire to prove that he was still the hitter he was in 2013, when he delivered 29 doubles, 13 home runs and 67 runs batted in for the Red Sox, who won the World Series. “I wanted to be here,” Drew said. “I know what kind of team this is. I’m just glad to be back. This team puts a team together to want to win, and in ’13, being able to go over there in Boston and winning, and seeing that — it’s later in my career now. I want to be able to have a team to be able to win.”Advertisement