
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 13, 2015
The Mets announced in the ninth inning Monday that the crowd at their home opener — 43,947 — had set a regular-season record for Citi Field. It sounded like a joke because the ballpark, now in its seventh season, has never hosted a postseason game. It was an All-Star Game, two years ago, that holds the record.The way the Mets are talking, they might be printing tickets soon for the 2015 playoffs. They are not as brazen as Bryce Harper, the young Washington Nationals slugger, who said this spring that when the team signed pitcher Max Scherzer, his reaction was, “Where’s my ring?” But the Mets will clearly be shocked if they do not end their streak of six losing seasons.“We have huge expectations, and we’re not afraid of it,” Manager Terry Collins said Monday morning. “We’re not afraid to talk about it, talk about winning, because I think the more you talk about it, the more you feel good about the execution side.”Then Jacob deGrom, who at this time last season had never pitched in the majors, coolly collected the first 19 outs of a 2-0 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies. Nobody reached third base against deGrom, and nobody got a hit off the bullpen.AdvertisementPart of that, naturally, is because of the Phillies’ weak lineup. But the Mets really can pitch, they are capitalizing on opponents’ mistakes, and their balanced offense might do just enough to keep things interesting all season.AdvertisementSandy Alderson, the general manager, said he liked the mix of young players who had earned a longer look and veterans who seemed likely to improve from last season. He loves the rotation.“And I like our chemistry,” Alderson said. “The team has a whole different attitude about itself and what it’s capable of doing.”Chemistry and attitude are hopeful buzzwords this time of year, impossible to quantify but, for all we know, important to winning. They sound good, anyway, and they can shape the narrative the Mets want to promote: They are a team on the rise.This act can wear thin, but it is fun for a while. Collins, in the final year of his contract, seems comfortable channeling Rex Ryan and proclaiming the Mets as winners before they actually win. The players understand what he means.“You’ve got to believe,” said the new left fielder, Michael Cuddyer, who seemed not to notice that he was quoting Tug McGraw. “You’ve got to believe you’re a good team. And if that means outwardly showing it, I don’t know. I think you have to go out there with the intent that you’re going to win the game and the belief that you’re going to win the game. You have to walk that way and play that way.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his first home game as a Met, Cuddyer said the crowd gave him chills. It happened on a double play in the ninth inning, when Jeurys Familia covered first on the back end of a 3-6-1 double play. Cuddyer looked into the stands and saw fans slapping hands, like they were part of the team. When he signed here last fall, this is what Cuddyer wanted.“The crowd was electric,” second baseman Daniel Murphy said. “There was buzz in the stands. Nice to see the 7-Line Army in right-center field.”Those were the fans who commandeered three outfield sections between the home-run apple and the bullpens, a patch of orange T-shirts that helped make the park come alive. The Mets keep searching for the right dimensions on the field, but we see, now and then, that this place has a soul. October will be crazy here, if the Mets make it happen.AdvertisementJust one of them has experienced the feeling of reaching the playoffs with the Mets — David Wright, the captain, who was here in 2006. Wright said he liked this team’s personality, its unselfish attitude and upbeat clubhouse vibe. But those attributes only go so far.“We’ve all done it, and I’ve been guilty of it also — talking about how good we should be or how good we think we are,” Wright said. “But when push comes to shove, the only way to become truly confident is to become good at winning — and that takes wins, especially the first month. Playing as many games as we are in our division, it’s a good chance for us to gain true confidence, not the confidence of talking about it or thinking that you’re good — actually going out there and being good.”The Mets were good last April, too. They entered May with a 15-11 record, then went 64-72 the rest of the way. They added Cuddyer early in the off-season, then did little else. They have lost some players to injury but welcomed others back, like Matt Harvey, the most electrifying baseball player in New York. He starts on Tuesday.Maybe this all adds up to a playoff berth, maybe not. The Mets just need an entertaining summer, especially with the cloud of gloom that shaded the Yankees’ side of town in their opening homestand. Wright has seen enough to be skeptical of brash talk, but Collins will not back down.“The more you talk about good things, the more you work at them and the more you focus,” Collins said, “because nobody likes to be embarrassed.”The Mets have been embarrassed, repeatedly, since opening a ballpark that deserves a better product. They believe they finally have one. Their efforts will be fascinating to watch.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Long a Glass Half Empty, Citi Field Brims With Confidence .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »