AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanLast year, Dani Rylan wanted to bring a New York expansion team into the Canadian Women’s Hockey League, the home for women’s pro hockey in North America since 2007.But by March, her aspirations had grown. Rylan, a former player at Northeastern, announced the formation of the National Women’s Hockey League, which says it will be the first North American hockey league to pay female players a salary.Over the last month, the landscape of women’s professional hockey has changed significantly. The two leagues, once potential partners, will now battle to sign the top talent, as players choose between earning money in the N.W.H.L. or continuing to increase awareness of the sport without pay through the more established C.W.H.L.“I think that there are people who are skeptical, and I would just say that’s part of human nature,” Rylan, 27, said. “Change is difficult.”The N.W.H.L. will have four teams: the Buffalo Beauts; the Boston Pride, based in Everett, Mass.; the Connecticut Whale, based in Stamford; and the New York Riveters, based in East Meadow. The C.W.H.L. has five teams: the Montreal Stars, the Boston Blades, the Toronto Furies, the Brampton Fury and the Calgary Inferno. Several members of the United States national team that won the world championship on April 4 played for the Blades.The C.W.H.L. is a nonprofit, centrally funded league, meaning that all the teams receive equal access to funding, while the N.W.H.L. will have team owners who will be subject to a $270,000 salary cap.The N.W.H.L.’s free-agency period will begin in May with a draft in June. The next C.W.H.L. draft will be Aug. 23, and players will have to pay $150 to enter.Brant Feldman, an agent who represents about a dozen current and former players, was encouraged at the development of another pro option. But he is seeking more specifics about the N.W.H.L.’s finances and coaching and front office staffs, which will help him determine whether to recommend the new league.Rylan, who will be the general manager of the Riveters, said the N.W.H.L. had raised “well beyond” 20 percent of its financial goal, but she would not disclose exact figures. She added that there were verbal commitments from more than 40 players.“I think that the focus is on the players, and it will be a player-centered league and something they will be happy to promote,” said Rylan, who added that the N.W.H.L. would include a players’ union and some form of health insurance.Mary Jo Kane, director of the Tucker Center for Research on Girls and Women in Sport at the University of Minnesota, said it was too early to know whether competing leagues would hurt the growth of women’s hockey.She noted that the salaries, which average out to $15,000 per player, were not enough to live on.“If nothing else, it’s a symbolic statement that these women should be acknowledged financially, because that’s how we basically acknowledge everything,” Kane said. “This could be a pivotal moment in women’s hockey.”The C.W.H.L. commissioner, Brenda Andress, did not respond to phone calls or email requests for an interview about the N.W.H.L. The league said in a statement on March 26 that the C.W.H.L. was “taking all necessary steps and measures to protect its interests” and that its primary goal was to expand women’s hockey in North America.The Blades won the Clarkson Cup, the C.W.H.L.’s equivalent of the Stanley Cup, in March, and it was the first final televised on the Canadian channel Sportsnet. And the Montreal Canadiens announced recently that they were entering a partnership with the C.W.H.L.’s Montreal Stars. The Dairy Farmers of Canada also agreed to provide financial and promotional support to the league.The C.W.H.L. would like to pay players in the future and has estimated that each team would need about $2.5 million per year to provide livable wages and cover team operating costs.But the current promise of money, no matter how small the amount, and the N.W.H.L.’s compact Northeastern scope could be a deciding factor for many free agents. The season will run from October to March, and teams will have two practices and one game per week.Travel was occasionally difficult for the Blades; late Sunday flights from Calgary were a burden on players who also worked full-time jobs.To broaden its appeal, the N.W.H.L. will be open to international players, who face limitations in the United States. Someone like the Austrian star Janine Weber would probably have to obtain a P-1 visa for athletes, which can take one to three months to process and prevents players from taking side jobs. European leagues offer salaries, but there are fewer roster spots available for North American players.Blades forward Rachel Llanes said that she was undecided about which league to join but that she planned to attend the N.W.H.L. tryouts in May.Shortly after winning the C.W.H.L. championship in March, Llanes received an email about the formation of the N.W.H.L. Her teammate Blake Bolden received a similar email.Bolden said that C.W.H.L. players were intrigued about the N.W.H.L. but that many were awaiting more details.“This bomb just drops on you,” Bolden said. “When we got the word from the N.W.H.L., we were like, ‘Did you get that email?’ We kind of discussed what we would want to do. Obviously, we want to get paid, but we have to make sure that the money is there.”Although Rylan would not disclose who had made verbal agreements, some Blades players said they had seen lists of projected rosters for each N.W.H.L. team, which included Olympians from the United States and Canada.“I feel like leaving the Canadian Women’s Hockey League for the American league — pretty much, it kind of says something,” Llanes said of Canadian players willing to move. “But, I mean, girls want to get paid. If there’s another option, why not?”While some players might have made up their minds, Bolden had yet to decide where she would play next season.Asked in February how long she would play professional hockey, Bolden said, “Until I decide that it’s not making me happy.”Dozens of other top-level female hockey players now have options on how to prolong their careers after years of being unpaid pioneers for the sport.“We haven’t really heard too much, but it’s exciting news,” Bolden said. “Obviously, that means people care, the game is growing, and people think it’s important enough for women to get paid while playing hockey. So this is all great. I can’t wait to see what happens in the future.”Advertisement