By BENJAMIN HOFFMANOCT. 18, 2015
Travis d’Arnaud set up in front of home plate and Miguel Montero set up behind it. The decisions of two catchers on plays at the plate quite likely led to a two-run swing in what proved to be a two-run game Saturday night as the Mets beat the Chicago Cubs, 4-2, in Game 1 of the National League Championship Series.The first play at the plate came in the top of the fifth inning. Matt Harvey, who had been perfect through four innings, was running into trouble and had given up a run-scoring double to Starlin Castro to tie the score, 1-1. Javier Baez hit a fast grounder through the infield that looked as if it would give Chicago a lead, but the Cubs may have been unaware of just how dangerous Yoenis Cespedes can be in that situation.Cespedes, who attracts most of his headlines with his bat, has also made a number of highlight-reel throws in his career, and given the circumstances, this may have been one of his biggest. He unleashed a rocket toward home, and d’Arnaud was set up to receive it in the batter’s box, forcing Castro to try to leap around him. Once d’Arnaud caught it, he reached up and tagged the flailing Castro, preserving the tie.The throw was so well executed that Cubs Manager Joe Maddon seemed unfazed by it, allowing that sometimes you simply get beaten by a great play.Advertisement“That’s just a good throw on their part,” Maddon said. “You could say we possibly shouldn’t have sent the runner, but we did, and it was just a good baseball play.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The one-hop throw from Cespedes was slightly to the runner’s left, but it arrived so quickly that it was an easy play for d’Arnaud, who said the decision-making and positioning were also fairly easy calls for him.Advertisement“I just have to catch the ball and tag the guy,” d’Arnaud said.Two innings later, the Cubs faced a similar play at the plate with different results. The Mets were up, 3-1, when Juan Lagares stole third. Lagares and the Mets rarely steal bases, but the play was executed fairly easily because Cubs starter Jon Lester struggles to hold runners and because no fielder was close to the base to receive a throw, as the Cubs were using an infield shift against the batter, Curtis Granderson.“I said ‘I got to go for it,’ ” said Lagares, who according to Baseball Reference had never stolen third in a major league game. “Grandy does a very good job against Lester, and I just wanted to make it easy for him, and you see what happened — a little fly ball and I had the opportunity to score.”On Granderson’s shallow fly ball, Lagares was able to score largely as a result of Cubs catcher Montero’s positioning. He set up for the play well behind home plate.Kyle Schwarber caught the ball in shallow left field and made what appeared to be a clean throw home, but with Montero on the far side of the plate, he was unable to block Lagares, who slid in feet first despite the throw appearing to have him beaten by a step.“He felt like he had to be there because of the throw and how it was going to bounce,” Maddon said of Montero’s positioning. “I’m all for the catcher getting on the front corner of the plate and taking it away from the base runner, but I just think the throw took him there.”While one play killed a rally and the other provided an insurance run, the lasting impact may be felt over the next several games when the Cubs have to decide if they want to test Cespedes again. As many teams in the American League learned in the last few seasons, it is a risk generally not worth taking.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.