AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrouseAUGUSTA, Ga. — The caddie Jim Mackay took the golf bag and moved it out of the path of the foot traffic in the scoring area. He picked up the pin from the 18th hole at Augusta National Golf Club and placed it against the bag.Mackay’s golfer, the three-time Masters winner Phil Mickelson, had cobbled together a 14-under-par 274, which would have tied or bettered the winning number in the four Masters after his last title run here, in 2010. But on Sunday, the score left Mickelson tied for second with Justin Rose, four strokes behind the winner, Jordan Spieth.Over dinner the previous night with Spieth’s caddie, Michael Greller, Mackay discovered their paths had first crossed here in 2012, two years before Spieth had shared second place in his Masters debut. The story Greller told was so sweet, Mackay was happy to help Greller in any way he could. And after acing the big test, Greller needed a hand with the extraneous stuff, like where to drop the bag so it was not in the way and when to double back to the 18th green for the green jacket presentation.“Michael’s a wonderful, wonderful person,” Mackay said of Greller, who was teaching sixth grade math outside Seattle in 2012 when he won the Masters online ticket lottery, which enabled him to buy two tickets to the Tuesday practice rounds.He arrived with his brother, and they made their way to the 16th green, where Mickelson and Mackay, whose nickname is Bones, happened to be standing. From outside the ropes, Greller posed so that Mickelson and Mackay were in the background, and his brother snapped a photograph.“I need to find that picture,” Greller said, adding: “Obviously I was a huge Phil and Bones fan. I still am.”Mackay and Mickelson, who have worked together since Mickelson turned pro in 1992, have been together for 42 Tour victories, including five major championships. Their union, like those of Ben Crenshaw and Carl Jackson, is considered the game’s gold standard.Could Greller and Spieth, who have worked together since 2011, be a partnership for the ages? “I don’t see any reason why not,” said Bubba Watson’s caddie, Ted Scott, who saw how the pair interacted up close last year when Watson and Spieth were paired in the final group on Sunday.Mickelson hired Mackay in part because of his manners. Before Mickelson turned pro, his college coach, Steve Loy, sought the advice of Mackay, who mentioned a few candidates and described their strengths before Mackay’s player showed up, cutting short the conversation. Mackay wrote Loy a note apologizing for having had to hurry off, and included his phone number in case Loy had any more questions.Mickelson saw the note, appreciated Mackay’s gesture and so began their lasting alliance. The story of how Greller came to work for Spieth also is one of a player trusting his intuition. In 2006, Greller attended the United States Amateur Public Links near his home in Gig Harbor, Wash. He volunteered to caddie for a player, who later introduced Greller to his friend Justin Thomas, who steered his friend Spieth to Greller when Spieth needed someone to carry his bag at the 2011 Junior Amateur in Washington.Spieth won the tournament and asked Greller to work for him again at the 2012 United States Open. A few months later, after he dropped out of the University of Texas early in his sophomore year to turn pro, Spieth hired Greller full time.“I’m sure there’s tons of guys that are better caddies,” Greller said, “but I have a rapport with Jordan.”Greller taught elementary school math and science for 10 years, and he still considers himself a teacher, first and foremost. Only now his classroom is outdoors and he has one pupil. On the course or in the classroom, the skill set is pretty much the same, Greller said.“Being an encourager, I think that’s huge for the young kid out here because you’re going to have ups and downs, and you’re figuring out how to deal with that,” Greller said. “So I’m always trying to encourage him. If he needs to let things go, I’m the person he’s going to bounce it off of. And just being able to adapt to situations, that’s something you have to do out here that I’m comfortable with from teaching school for so long.”And, of course, he is still teaching math, with an emphasis on multiplication, percentages and rounding whole numbers.“Yeah,” he said, laughing. “It’s kind of eerie how much of it translates.”Since Greller began caddying full time for the 21-year-old Spieth, the teacher has become a student. On the weekend he walked the course in the morning, before Spieth’s afternoon tee times, and watched how the balls were rolling on the greens. Every day he met with Crenshaw’s longtime caddie, Jackson, who spent many years as a full-time caddie at Augusta National, to soak up his knowledge.“It’s like sitting down with Michael Jordan before the N.B.A. finals,” Greller said. “He’s arguably one of the greatest caddies, and certainly out here there’s nobody I’d rather talk to than Carl Jackson from a caddie’s point of view.”Greller was patiently answering every question shouted at him when John Wood, the caddie for Hunter Mahan, patted him on both shoulders and steered him away from the media pack. He told him he needed to make his way to the 18th green because the green jacket ceremony had begun. Greller arrived in time to hear Spieth thank him for his contribution to the victory. Later, Spieth said Greller helped him maintain his concentration after he made bogeys on Nos. 5 and 7, cracking open the door for his playing competitor, Rose.“He’s very positive, he’s very patient and he doesn’t really react too much,” Spieth said. “He’s one of the most competitive people that I know, but he doesn’t show it on the course, which is very helpful. He’s not living or dying on putts.”Spieth added, “He brings a nice voice to me when I need it, especially in the heat of the moment.”Greller was asked if he was the new Mackay to Mickelson’s Spieth. “I don’t think so,” he said, adding, “There’s similarities, but he’s got about 50-something wins and way more majors than us. He’s somebody I’d emulate, but no, I still call myself a rookie.”Advertisement