By ANDREW KEHAPRIL 13, 2015
HOUSTON —  The Houston Rockets had just finished practice, and as James Harden sensed that his conversation with a visitor was pivoting to the subject of his supposed ability to coax fouls from defenders, he felt the need to clear something up.“You know what? I don’t look to get fouled, as people might think I do,” Harden said, darting his eyes left and right to caricature the notion. “I’m not like: ‘Where’s the foul? Where’s the foul?’ as I’m driving.”His only aim is to score the basket, Harden said, and if any defenders want to swipe at the ball to stop him, they can. But, he added, when he makes a move to the basket, he drives hard, and fouls are sometimes a byproduct.Still, he was asked, what about the way he flattens out his arms to make them susceptible to being smacked, or how he changes pace on his dribble at counterintuitive times to create collisions, or his tendency to cling to defenders’ bodies even when freer paths to the rim seem to exist?
            James Harden has taken, and converted, far more free throws than any other player in the N.B.A. this season. The 6-foot-5 Harden will become just the fifth player of that height or shorter to lead the N.B.A. in foul shots since the N.B.A. and the A.B.A. merged in 1976. Statistics through Sunday’s games.        FREE-THROW ATTEMPTS1.James Harden, Houston8002.Russell Westbrook, Oklahoma City6293.DeMarcus Cousins, Sacramento5414.LeBron James, Cleveland5225.Gordon Hayward, Utah46225.Stephen Curry, Golden State337FREE THROWS MADE1.James Harden, Houston6932.Russell Westbrook, Oklahoma City5253.DeMarcus Cousins, Sacramento4234.Jimmy Butler, Chicago3785.Gordon Hayward, Utah3756.LeBron James, Cleveland37116.Stephen Curry, Golden State308APRIL 14, 2015
Harden smiled. “That’s just being crafty,” he said.Drawing fouls has long been acknowledged as an art and an advantageous skill in the N.B.A., and Harden — if the eye-popping numbers and the testimony from teammates, coaches, analysts and even begrudging opponents are to be believed — has mastered it to an extreme.AdvertisementAt 25, Harden has distinguished himself as one of the league’s great scorers, averaging 27.5 points per game this season, and when the regular season ends Wednesday, he could win his first scoring title, although he is in a neck-and-neck battle with his former Oklahoma City Thunder teammate Russell Westbrook. The next day, voting for the league’s most valuable player will close, and it is widely thought that the award will go to Harden or Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors.AdvertisementA crucial factor in Harden’s remarkable season has been his production at the free-throw line, where his shooting percentage is .866. Through Monday — when Houston beat Charlotte, 100-90, and Harden scored 29 points while making 14 of 16 foul shots — Harden has registered a league-high 816 free throws and has made 707. Second, far behind, was Westbrook, who had taken 629 through Sunday and made 525. Through 81 games — only one of which he had missed — Harden was averaging 10.2 free-throw attempts, with 8.8 of them successful. Both figures were also league highs.He is just the 11th player in N.B.A. history to sink more than 700 free throws in a season.“Getting fouled is definitely an art, and he’s very good at it,” Rockets Coach Kevin McHale said, adding that Harden’s body awareness allowed him to initiate contact that works in his favor.“You either know how to draw fouls or don’t, and I’m not sure you can teach it,” McHale added. “It may be innate.”Whether Harden seeks to get fouled, then, may not be much of a debate at all, and the discord around the subject may simply stem from semantics and questions over the level of intent he brings to such plays. Foul calls are forever a touchy subject among basketball professionals, and Harden’s initial impulse to push back against the notion may come from a hesitance to be viewed as someone who seeks to deceive referees.Daryl Morey, the Rockets’ general manager, disputed the premise that Harden did anything special to draw fouls.On the other hand, Harden had no problem with characterizations of his foul-drawing abilities as crafty or instinctive.Steve Javie, a former N.B.A. referee who analyzes officiating for ESPN, explained that Harden had an uncanny knack for sensing when a defender had entered into an illegal guarding position and initiating contact at that very moment, creating a defensive foul that might not have materialized otherwise.AdvertisementHow does he do it, then? To start, Harden’s tactics would not work if he did not already possess a devastatingly varied offensive skill set. For casual viewers, he may not inspire the same delight as Curry, who fires shots from absurd ranges and swaggers back down the court before they land, like an action-movie star strolling away from an explosion. But Harden’s intelligence and technical sophistication have won him widespread admiration.Harden’s most famous moves are the Euro step drive — “He’s the best doing it,” Manu Ginobili, a progenitor of the move, said Friday — and his step-back jump shot, which he can use to create open 3-point attempts. Having perfected those two moves, Harden said, he wanted to learn two more.He is an elite dribbler and shooter. He starts and stops, speeds forward and back and side to side, a remote-control car with a rocket launcher. That he is left-handed adds a complicating wrinkle for defenders.“It’s difficult to ever figure out what he’s going to do because he scores in such a variety of ways,” said Terry Stotts, the coach of the Portland Trail Blazers, who knocked the Rockets out of the playoffs last season.Harden’s array of weapons instills in defenders high levels of respect, fear and uncertainty and a basic desire to stop whatever Harden might be doing at a given moment. In turn, he plays off these impulses. It helps that he has strong hands and an equally strong grasp of league rules.Harden’s most idiosyncratic maneuver involves holding the ball away from his body, like a waiter balancing a tray of tempting hors d’oeuvres — or as Harden refers to it, “the cookie jar.”“Just when you think you can reach and get a steal, he takes his arm up into your arms, and that’s an automatic foul,” said Markel Brown of the Nets, who helped hold Harden to 15 points in a Feb. 27 game. “You’re fouling him, but he pretty much made you foul him.”Such a loss of self-determination is common among those who guard Harden. He isolates defenders, stares them down, flinches, twitches, and moves his eyeballs. If the opponent loses his equilibrium, Harden accelerates, clipping a piece of hip or shoulder or leg on the way.Advertisement“He’ll lull you to sleep,” said Cory Joseph of the Spurs. “He gets you on your heels, almost moves you where he wants you, and then he works his angles to get contact and a foul call and also get his shot off.”Thus Harden punishes defenders for even a split second of laziness. “As a defender, you better be doing everything right,” Harden said. “I’m talking about hands out of the cookie jar, sliding your feet, straight up.”Even after he has passed a player, Harden has an innate sense of how to change pace and position his body to outwit the defender. As Clyde Drexler, a former Rockets player who now does television commentary for the team, said: “When he gets by you, he doesn’t let you get back into the play. He keeps a hand or a body on you, so you’re always behind him.”That technique was on display last Wednesday in a game against the Spurs. In the first quarter, isolated near the baseline, Harden performed an arrhythmic hopscotch to get around Tony Parker. At that point, Harden could have surged ahead, but instead he slowed down and let his free left arm hang behind him. Parker, who had spun to give chase, knocked into it, and a whistle blew.Parker pirouetted, palms out, flabbergasted. He pleaded his innocence to Brian Forte, the referee who had made the call. “You know what he does,” Parker said to Forte, shaking his head.It seems to have dawned on some opposing coaches that the best way to stop Harden from scoring could be to stop playing basketball altogether. Two nights later, the teams met again, and the Spurs employed a strategy of intentionally fouling forward Josh Smith, who is shooting below 50 percent from the foul line this season.At one point in the second half of Friday’s game against San Antonio, after yet another intentional foul, Harden started yapping good-naturedly at Gregg Popovich, the Spurs’ coach, and the two proceeded to have a sportsmanly conversation.“I said, ‘Come on, Pop, you’ve got to stop doing this now,’ ” Harden recalled the next day. “And he was like: ‘I’m not going to give you the ball in the fourth quarter so you can get it going. This is me slowing you down, stopping you, so you can’t get a rhythm.’ The strategy worked.”AdvertisementFew other attempts to stop Harden — or keep him off the line — have worked. Harden scored 50 points on March 19, with 22 coming on free throws. Four days later, he scored 44 points, including 21 from the foul line. No other player this season has had even one game in which he made 20 foul shots.Harden, who is 6 feet 5 inches, will become just the fifth player of that height or shorter to lead the league in made free throws since the N.B.A. and the American Basketball Association merged in 1976, according to ESPN statistics.Trevor Ariza, Harden’s teammate, said Harden’s aggressiveness had broad benefits.“It works for all of us because he gets us to the bonus really, really fast, just because of his strength and craftiness,” Ariza said. “He’s figured stuff out that nobody else could, and he’s making it work for him.”When Harden began to figure things out, it was partly to get hamburgers. At Artesia High School in Lakewood, Calif., he had a relatively passive disposition on the court, and his coach, Scott Pera, wanted to change that. On top of various other drills and motivational tactics, Pera challenged Harden to get at least six free-throw attempts every game. If Harden fell short, he did extra running. But if he got six, Pera had to buy him pizza or a burger or some other treat.By the time Harden graduated from high school, he had procured quite a few burgers.“To be a great scorer, you need to get to the foul line,” said Pera, now an assistant coach at Rice.Since then, Harden’s mind-set has remained the same, but the potential rewards — a scoring title, an M.V.P. Award, a championship trophy — are rather different.Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about Houston Rockets guard James Harden’s production at the free-throw line this season misidentified, in some copies, the team that beat the Charlotte Hornets on Monday. It was the Houston Rockets, Harden’s current team — not the Oklahoma City Thunder, his former team.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: He Works Hard for His Free Throws.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.