AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken Belson and Victor MatherAaron Hernandez, a former tight end with the New England Patriots, was convicted of first-degree murder and several weapons and ammunitions charges Wednesday, ending the stunning downfall of a player who was once one of the N.F.L.’s most promising young stars.Mr. Hernandez, 25, will spend the rest of his life in prison without the possibility of parole for the murder of Odin Lloyd, who was dating the sister of Mr. Hernandez’s fiancée, Shayanna Jenkins. The body of Mr. Lloyd, a 27-year-old semiprofessional football player, was found, shot six times, in June 2013 in a pit at an industrial park near Mr. Hernandez’s home in North Attleboro, Mass.Mr. Hernandez’s motive, prosecutors said, was that Mr. Lloyd spoke with people Mr. Hernandez did not like at a bar in Boston. Their case, which was largely circumstantial, took more than two months to present; more than 100 witnesses were called. No murder weapon was found, and no independent witness to the shooting came forward.The defense’s case lasted only a day and included three witnesses. Mr. Hernandez’s lawyer, James Sultan, acknowledged that his client was at the scene of the killing and claimed that two other men, who are charged separately for the crime, committed it while high on PCP.After the jury deliberated for more than six days, Mr. Hernandez stood as the verdict was read in Bristol County Superior Court in Fall River, Mass., which is less than an hour’s drive from Gillette Stadium, where the Patriots play. After the foreman said that Mr. Hernandez was guilty of first-degree murder, he was shackled by guards and sat down. His mother and fiancée cried on a bench nearby, not far from where Mr. Lloyd’s family was also in tears.“I felt like I wanted to go in the hole with my son, Odin,” Lloyd’s mother, Ursula Ward, said in court after the verdict was read.Mr. Hernandez, clad in a gray suit, white shirt and dark tie, did not speak after his sentencing. His eyes were partly bloodshot, and he licked his lips frequently. He still faces a trial on charges of fatally shooting two men outside a nightclub in 2012.His conviction is unwelcome news for the N.F.L., which has long had to contend with current and former players getting into trouble, including those arrested on weapons and assault charges. Last year, the league was accused of not grasping the seriousness of domestic violence after a video was released showing the former Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice knocking out his fiancée.The league has tried to portray itself as having no tolerance for players involved in violence off the field, but N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell, like other commissioners, has put more emphasis on punishing players for poor behavior than giving them incentives to change their behavior, according to Robert A. Boland, who teaches sports law at New York University.“I don’t think it’s a blot on the N.F.L.’s reputation, but you certainly don’t want to have members of your organization involved in murders,” he said. “The players are sometimes not the people that the owners and the sponsors think they are. It shows a particular blind spot that all pro sports have.”The N.F.L. and the Patriots had no statement on the verdict.Mr. Hernandez is the latest former N.F.L. player involved in a murder case. Rae Carruth, a wide receiver with the Carolina Panthers, was found guilty in 2001 for conspiring to murder a woman who was pregnant with his child. The year before, Ray Lewis, a linebacker on the Baltimore Ravens, was indicted on murder charges after a fight broke out at a Super Bowl party. He later pleaded guilty to a lesser charge and served no time in prison. Lawrence Phillips, a running back selected sixth in the 1996 draft by the St. Louis Rams, is suspected of killing his cellmate on April 11 in a California prison where he is serving a 31-year sentence for choking his girlfriend in 2005 and for driving his car into three teenagers later that year.Mr. Hernandez’s conviction is a stark reversal for a player who was portrayed as a feel-good story after he was taken by the Patriots in the 2010 draft. A star at the University of Florida, he signed a $40 million contract extension in 2012 to continue playing for the Patriots not far from where he was raised in Bristol, Conn. In his second season, the best of his three in the N.F.L., he caught 79 passes and helped the Patriots reach the Super Bowl.But as his trial revealed, he never fully separated himself from the troubled streets where he grew up. His conviction, which may be appealed, is a reminder of a sporting culture in which teams and leagues often turn a blind eye toward a player’s troubled past.“It’s possible for someone to go through every step like Hernandez without having to sever ties to the place where he grew up,” said Eric Hipple, a former N.F.L. quarterback who is an outreach specialist at After the Impact, a traumatic brain injury center in Michigan. “The interest is putting the ball on the field. We’ll surround them with money, but we won’t look very deeply.”Mr. Hipple said that athletes who suddenly were showered with large paydays often had trouble fending off family and friends who sought their money and steered them into trouble. “The culture of football, you suck it up, you play with pain, and if you’re not comfortable with where you came from, you suck it up and deal with it,” he said.Mr. Hernandez played on a Florida team that had numerous encounters with the police. Between 2005 and 2010, players were arrested at least 31 times on charges as varied as underage drinking, disorderly conduct, stalking and assault. Hernandez was questioned with three teammates after a shooting in 2007.During the trial, the prosecution called Robert K. Kraft, the owner of the Patriots. He was questioned about a conversation he had with Mr. Hernandez shortly after the killing. He recounted that Mr. Hernandez had looked him in the eye and said he was innocent. Hernandez was released by the Patriots after he was arrested in 2013.Current and former N.F.L. players said on Twitter that the verdict was shocking but also a reminder to stay out of trouble.“Sad to see someone like Hernandez throw his talent away like this but the sad truth is there are a lot of talented people who get caught up,” Chris Baker, a defensive end for the Washington Redskins, wrote on Twitter.Defense lawyers did not portray Mr. Hernandez as a saint, but they argued that because he had signed a big contract extension, he had little motive to be involved in a murder. They also accused the police of conducting a sloppy investigation.A key witness for the prosecution was Ms. Jenkins, Mr. Hernandez’s fiancée, who received immunity in exchange for her testimony.She said that on the night that Mr. Lloyd’s body was found, but before she knew he was dead, Mr. Hernandez called her from the police station and asked her to give some money to Ernest Wallace, one of the other men eventually charged in the killing.She also spoke of a box that she said Mr. Hernandez instructed her to remove from their house and discard the day after Mr. Lloyd’s body was found.On March 30, she said that she disposed of the box after driving to a Dumpster, but did not recall where that was. She also said that Mr. Hernandez did not tell her what was in the box, nor did she look inside.Some jurors who spoke to reporters after they were dismissed said that they were surprised that the defense admitted in its closing argument that Mr. Hernandez had been at the scene of the crime.Advertisement