AdvertisementSupported byMets 6, Phillies 5By Tyler KepnerThe start was so sublime, with a swinging strikeout as the crowd stood and chanted for the return of a phenomenon. By the end, the events in the Mets’ 6-5 win over the Philadelphia Phillies on Tuesday were so scrambled that Matt Harvey best summed it up this way:“That might have been the weirdest game I’ve been a part of,” Harvey said. “Maybe ever.”There were six innings from Harvey — some electrifying, some erratic. There were four hit batters, including Michael Cuddyer, who left with a contusion on his right hand. There were two replay delays and a catcher’s interference call. Manager Terry Collins was ejected, Jeff Francoeur hit a home run and Anthony Recker played third base for the first time in his life.Most significant, there was this: David Wright hurt his hamstring again, and Collins called it “a major problem.” Wright, the Mets’ third baseman and captain, will almost certainly head to the disabled list.Wright tweaked his hamstring in 2013 but tried to keep playing and suffered a major setback in early August. He did not return for almost seven weeks and said he would not make the same mistake now.“For me, worst-case scenario, you miss two weeks rather than do something stupid and play through it and have to miss two months,” Wright said. “As upset and as frustrated as I am right now, that’s probably the smartest thing to do and it’s hopefully the right thing to do.”Wright said he felt his hamstring grab just before sliding into second base on a steal in the eighth inning.“I thought it just might be something that I could stretch out a little bit,” he said. “Then I took a couple of secondary leads and just realized that if the ball is put in play, I wouldn’t have been able to do anything positive, that’s for sure. Took a couple of pitches and it didn’t get any better.”Wright took himself out of the game, replaced by the last player on the Mets’ four-man bench. It was Recker, the backup catcher, an 11-year professional who had never played third base, even as an amateur. Recker borrowed the glove of a former minor league teammate — he uses it for infield practice, because he can maneuver his hands better with it than he can his first baseman’s glove — and played the ninth inning at third.“We don’t want to go without David, ever,” Recker said. “But we have all the confidence in the world in all the people in here. Obviously, it’s not going to be me tomorrow.”Recker smiled as he spoke, and so did Cuddyer, who said his hand felt better as the game went on. Wright was not downcast, either, given what had happened. The Mets are 5-3, and from his experience with hamstring injuries, he believes he has reason for hope.“The last time I did it, I could barely walk,” Wright said. “I can walk around. As far as how it feels, not nearly as bad as that one did.”As injuries go, it was nothing like Harvey’s ulnar collateral ligament tear, in August 2013, the month after he started the All-Star Game at Citi Field. He missed last season after Tommy John surgery and the Mets, predictably, endured their sixth losing year in a row. They expect much better now, and Harvey’s scintillating debut last week in Washington — six shutout innings — helped fuel the good feelings.The second start, Collins warned, would be more of a challenge, and he was right. After two strikeouts to start the game, Harvey allowed a homer to Chase Utley, who also singled home a run in the third.Utley came up again with two outs and one on in the fifth. Following Utley would be Ryan Howard, who had looked overmatched by Harvey’s fastballs.Harvey had not really answered David Buchanan’s earlier transgression of drilling Wilmer Flores and Cuddyer in the second inning. This, perhaps, was an opportunity for payback, against an elite hitter who had already done damage.Harvey fired his first pitch, a 95 mile-an-hour fastball, between the numbers on Utley’s back. Utley took his base, but not before flipping his bat over the head of catcher Travis d’Arnaud. Harvey got away with a warning.“The situation in the game, I think I got a little over-amped,” Harvey said. “That one got away.”Howard then reached base on catcher’s interference, prompting an animated argument from Collins, who was ejected as fans chanted his first name. It was a fun night for the crowd, just as the Mets orchestrated.The Mets lined up Harvey third in their rotation so he could pitch the second home game, which ordinarily would not draw many fans. The Mets were figuratively beaming the Batman symbol out of Flushing, and it worked.The weather cooperated — 65 degrees at game time — and the team sold 39,489 tickets to this midweek April game. Some fans wore blue and orange Batman masks, saluting Harvey for his nickname, the Dark Knight of Gotham.They cheered eight strikeouts, without a walk, and groaned as Utley and Cody Asche hit the first two homers off Harvey in more than 60 innings. The Phillies had five hits off Harvey and scored three runs in his six innings, an uneven pitching line for an ace.“Everybody in this room has had an adrenaline rush of some type, somewhere, and it beats you down,” Collins said at his postgame news conference. “Once your system is beat up, from all the hype and all the stuff he’s been through, there’s going to be a letdown someplace. There has to, and as exciting as it was in the first inning, with all the fans screaming and hollering, he couldn’t get through it all. As great as he is, he still went out and did the best he could without his best stuff.”It was enough to produce the second victory of Harvey’s comeback, a highlight of a winning night in which the Mets still took a loss.INSIDE PITCHThe right-handers Bobby Parnell and Vic Black began rehabilitation assignments by pitching one inning apiece for Class A St. Lucie on Tuesday. Terry Collins said that Parnell, recovering from Tommy John surgery, and Black, who had shoulder tendinitis in spring training, would need to work consecutive games — and perhaps do so twice — before joining the Mets.Advertisement