By THE NEW YORK TIMESAPRIL 15, 2015
Both the Nets and the Knicks will have plenty at stake when they play their final games of the regular season on Wednesday night. One team is hoping to squeeze into the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference, while the other would benefit from finishing with a record almost unmatched in its misery.The Nets, who are 37-44 and displayed little resolve in wipeout losses on Sunday and Monday, can qualify for the postseason if they beat the Orlando Magic at home on Wednesday and the Indiana Pacers lose to the Memphis Grizzlies. The Pacers (38-43) defeated the Washington Wizards, 99-95, in double overtime on Tuesday for their sixth victory in a row, but the Nets own the playoff tiebreaker.The Knicks made life more difficult for themselves by beating the Hawks in Atlanta on Monday after beating the Magic on the road on Saturday. That left the Knicks with a 17-64 record going into Wednesday’s game at home against Detroit. While that record is abysmal, it is no longer the worst in the league.That distinction now belongs to the Minnesota Timberwolves, who are 16-65 and will finish at 16-66 if they lose at home on Wednesday to Oklahoma City. If Minnesota finishes with the worst record, it is assured a 25 percent chance of landing the No. 1 pick in the draft and can pick no lower than fourth. If the Knicks finish with the second-worst record, which they can guarantee by losing to the Detroit Pistons, they would have a 19 percent chance of landing the No. 1 pick and could draft as low as fifth.If the Knicks win on Wednesday, they could end up tied with the Philadelphia 76ers for the second-worst record rather than owning it outright, shaving even more percentage points off the Knicks’ chances of drafting first.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Suspense Goes Down to Wire for New York Teams.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.