By PAT PICKENSAPRIL 14, 2015
Fans of the Yankees, the Mets, the Giants, the Jets, the Knicks and the Nets have not had much to celebrate the past few years. But there are winners in New York. You just have to look on the ice.The Rangers (53-22-7) finished the regular season with the best record in the N.H.L., setting franchise records for wins and points this season. They open the playoffs Thursday at Madison Square Garden against the Pittsburgh Penguins. The Islanders (47-28-7), who are moving from Uniondale on Long Island to Brooklyn next season, had their best record since 1983-84, holding first place in the Metropolitan Division for much of the season. They travel to Washington to face the Capitals on Wednesday.Which bandwagon should a winning-deprived fan join in the city vs. suburb rivalry? Here’s a guide to help choose a side.NYR: Founded in 1926 as one of the N.H.L’s original six teams.NYI: Joined the league in 1972, part of a hasty expansion to thwart the rival World Hockey Association.AdvertisementNYR: Four Stanley Cups, the last in 1994. The Rangers have made the playoffs in nine of the last 10 seasons, reaching the conference finals in 2012 and the Cup finals last year.AdvertisementNYI: Four Stanley Cups in a row from 1980 to 1983. The Isles have made the playoffs twice in the last 10 seasons but have not won a playoff series since 1993.NYR: Alain Vigneault. A 53-year-old from Quebec, Vigneault has won the Presidents’ Trophy three times and has been to the Stanley Cup finals twice. The Rangers have mastered his system of speed and puck management in his second year, averaging more than three goals a game for the first time since 2006.NYI: Jack Capuano. One of the youngest coaches in the postseason field, Capuano, who is 48 and from Rhode Island, has reached the postseason twice in his five years as Islanders coach. Built in Capuano’s image, these Islanders are scrappy hard workers. Capuano spent more than a decade as a coach and a general manager in the minor leagues before getting the Islanders job.NYR: Ryan McDonagh. A 25-year-old from Minnesota, McDonagh is as skilled a two-way defender as they come. He was a United States Olympian in Sochi last year and the team’s most valuable player. He was a prospect thrown into the Scott Gomez trade in 2009, perhaps the best deal Glen Sather has made as general manager.NYI: John Tavares. The No. 1 pick in the 2009 draft, Tavares, a 24-year-old from Ontario, is arguably the Metropolitan Division’s top center. Returning from a torn anterior cruciate ligament sustained at the Olympics, Tavares finished second in the N.H.L. in points, with 86 (38 goals, 48 assists).NYR: Henrik Lundqvist, who has spent his whole career with the Rangers, is one of the best goalies of his generation. Lundqvist, 33, won an Olympic gold medal with Sweden and a Vezina Trophy as the N.H.L.’s best goaltender. The only major honor missing from his résumé is a Stanley Cup. Also, he is very handsome.NYI: Jaroslav Halak. The Islanders are Halak’s fifth team — and fourth in the past two years. A 29-year-old from Slovakia, he took the Canadiens as far as the Eastern Conference finals in 2010 and set the Islanders’ single-season record with 38 wins this season.AdvertisementNYR: Chris Kreider. Arguably the team’s fastest player, Kreider is disliked for his penchant for crease crashing. He injured Montreal goalie Carey Price during the Eastern Conference finals last year.NYI: Cal Clutterbuck. He plays close to the proverbial line and has spent his career irritating opponents.NYR: Mark Messier. The captain of the 1994 team, Messier guaranteed victory in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals and delivered a hat trick. The Rangers went on to win the Stanley Cup as he recorded 30 points in 23 playoff games.NYI: Denis Potvin. In the Islanders’ four straight Stanley Cup runs, the Isles’ captain posted 19-, 25-, 21- and 20-point postseasons.NYR: The Statue of Liberty logo.NYI: The fisherman logo.NYR: Rail-gating.NYI: Tailgating.NYR: No mascot or cheerleaders for the tradition-bound Rangers.NYI: The Isles have Sparky the Dragon, who was inherited from a defunct Arena Football League team, and cheerleaders who also scrape the ice.NYR: Robert De Niro, Tom Hanks.NYI: Kevin Connolly, Ralph Macchio.NYR: Dancing Larry. The baldheaded superfan dances to “Strike it Up” by Black Box during the last media timeout of every home game. He is so well known that he appears in local commercials.NYI: The Blue and Orange Army. The “Yes, Yes, Yes!” chants at Nassau Coliseum often begin with the scarf-waving fans in Section 329.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers or Islanders? Take Your Pick.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.