AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressTwo errors by pitcher Blake Treinen allowed the Boston Red Sox to erase a seventh-inning deficit, and they won, 8-7, on Tuesday night as the visiting Washington Nationals struggled in the field for the second straight game.Boston went ahead with three unearned runs without a hit in the inning, which included three errors.Hanley Ramirez reached first base on a fielding error by shortstop Ian Desmond before Shane Victorino was hit by a pitch from the left-hander Matt Thornton. After Mike Napoli’s flyout sent Ramirez to third, Treinen replaced Thornton and hit Allen Craig with a pitch, loading the bases.Treinen fielded Ryan Hanigan’s bouncer in front of the plate, dropped the ball as Ramirez scored, then threw it past catcher Wilson Ramos as Victorino came home with the tying run. Craig scored the go-ahead run on Brock Holt’s groundout.RAYS 3, BLUE JAYS 2 Desmond Jennings hit a tiebreaking sacrifice fly in the eighth inning, and visiting Tampa Bay edged Toronto for its fourth straight win.Steven Souza homered in the first inning and, with the score tied at 2, reached on a bunt single off Miguel Castro leading off the eighth. One out later, Souza stole second, then advanced to third on catcher Russell Martin’s throwing error. Evan Longoria was intentionally walked, and Jennings drove an 0-2 pitch to center, scoring Souza.REDS 3, CUBS 2 Anthony DeSclafani threw seven scoreless innings, Joey Votto had two hits and drove in a run, and Cincinnati held on to top host Chicago.DeSclafani gave up two hits while striking out five for the Reds. Acquired in the off-season as part of the trade that sent the former ace Mat Latos to the Marlins, DeSclafani earned his first victory with Cincinnati.ATHLETICS 4, ASTROS 0 The rookie Kendall Graveman pitched into the sixth inning, and four relievers combined to finish it, as visiting Oakland blanked Houston.Graveman yielded four hits in five and a third innings for his first major league win. Eric O’Flaherty allowed one hit in one and two-thirds innings, Dan Otero gave up two hits in two-thirds of an inning and Fernando Abad retired one batter before Tyler Clippard finished it off in the ninth.RANGERS 8, ANGELS 2 Robinson Chirinos had a career-high five R.B.I. with a home run and double, backing Nick Martinez and leading host Texas in a rout of Los Angeles.Chirinos hit a two-run double in the second. He then made it 4-0 when he scored on a double by Rougned Odor on a liner to center.TIGERS 2, PIRATES 0 Shane Greene pitched eight strong innings, and visiting Detroit bounced back from its first loss of the season by defeating Pittsburgh.Greene, a 26-year-old right-hander, allowed just three singles, and two of them never left the infield. He had three strikeouts and no walks after the Tigers’ six-game winning streak ended Monday with a 5-4 loss.WHITE SOX 4, INDIANS 1 Cleveland pitcher Carlos Carrasco was struck in the face by a line drive in the first inning, and Chicago’s Jose Quintana pitched six strong innings to help the visiting White Sox to a win.Carrasco was taken off the field on a cart after Melky Cabrera — the second batter — hit a shot up the middle that struck the right side of Carrasco’s face. The Indians said X-rays of Carrasco, the club’s No. 2 starter, showed no serious injury, and he was treated at a hospital for a bruised jaw.MARLINS 8, BRAVES 2 Giancarlo Stanton broke out of a slump with three hits and four R.B.I., Dee Gordon and Ichiro Suzuki each scored two runs, and visiting Miami trounced Atlanta.Stanton, who signed a record 13-year, $325 million contract in November, began the game hitting just .130 with three R.B.I. in 23 at-bats. But he was dialed in against the Braves.ROYAL BREAKS HAND Kansas City right fielder Alex Rios is out indefinitely after breaking a bone in his left hand when he was hit by a pitch in Minnesota.Advertisement