By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 18, 2015
Novak Djokovic reached his 13th consecutive ATP Tour final with a 6-1, 6-3 win over Andy Murray at the Shanghai Masters on Saturday, one of his most lopsided victories over Murray. Djokovic will play Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in Sunday’s final after Tsonga beat Rafael Nadal, 6-4, 0-6, 7-5, in the other semifinal.The top-seeded Djokovic broke Murray five times and committed just seven unforced errors to Murray’s 30. Djokovic has won nine of his last 10 matches against Murray over the past two years and 20 of 29 over all.Nadal played tentatively at the start against Tsonga, fending off four break points in the first set before Tsonga converted on his fifth. After Nadal easily won the second set, Tsonga broke him again to go up, 6-5, in the third and got to match point with a diving volley that clipped the baseline. He closed out the match when Nadal dumped a backhand into the net.“I was there until the end,” Nadal said. “Was not the day to win.”■ Venus Williams lost to Jelena Jankovic, 6-4, 7-5, in the semifinals of the Hong Kong Open. Williams, who was defeated in a tense encounter that lasted a little more than two hours, needed to reach Sunday’s final to give a boost to her chances of playing in the lucrative WTA Finals, starting Oct. 25 in Singapore.In the final, Jankovic will meet Angelique Kerber, a 6-2, 6-2 winner over Samantha Stosur. Kerber will clinch a place in the WTA Finals with a victory on Sunday.■ Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova defeated Kirsten Flipkens, 6-3, 3-6, 6-2, to set up a final against Anna-Lena Friedsam at the Generali Ladies in Linz, Austria. Pavlyuchenkova is seeking her eighth WTA title and her first of the season; Friedsam, who will be appearing in her first final, beat Johanna Larsson, 6-3, 4-6, 7-5, in the first semifinal.A version of this brief appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic in Shanghai Final.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.