AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzBALTIMORE — Kyle Davies was elated late Sunday afternoon when he arrived at Yankee Stadium. It had been four years since Davies, 31, had pitched in the major leagues, but getting called up made all the long bus rides and fast-food meals he endured in the minor leagues worth it. Davies then pitched two and a third shutout innings in the Yankees’ 14-4 win over the Boston Red Sox. The next afternoon, as his teammates arrived at Camden Yards, Davies stood in the lobby of the ballpark with his blue Yankees equipment bag at his feet, waiting for a ride to his next destination. He had been designated for assignment. The genesis of Davies’s 24-hour whirlwind can be traced to Friday night, when the Yankees lost a 19-inning, 6-hour-45-minute marathon, 6-5.With the injury concerns surrounding several starting pitchers preventing them from going deep into games, Friday’s endurance contest so depleted the bullpen that relievers have been cycled through the roster on a near daily basis since, however well they might have pitched. “It’s been a Catch-22 with just about everything,” the pitching coach Larry Rothschild said. “With a 19-inning game, if you win it, it’s great. If you lose it, there’s a lot of reasons it’s not good. It’s not a position you like to be in.”Esmil Rogers, who threw the final 81 pitches — one day after throwing 35 — has not pitched since. Chasen Shreve, who was superb in hurling three and a third scoreless innings and 56 pitches — both career highs — was sent down to Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, and his spot on the roster became a turnstile.First up was Matt Tracy, who pitched two innings Saturday in his major league debut. Davies followed, and then it was time for Joel De La Cruz, who arrived shortly after Davies departed Monday, but did not pitch that night or on Tuesday night.“When you’re a guy with options and you get in some bad situations, it’s going to happen,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “It’s frustrating, and it’s happened to a lot of them in there during the course of the career, but it’s part of the game. Sometimes you can do everything right and because they have options, they get sent down.” Girardi added: “There’s probably part of them that hopes they don’t pitch in those first couple days when you’re dealing with something like this.”The need for fresh arms so early in the season has forced the Yankees to engage in procedural gymnastics. Any player on the 40-man roster who has been optioned has to be in the minor leagues for 10 days, except in the case of an injury. So, for the first 10 days of the season — a window that expired Tuesday night — the Yankees had to clear a spot on the 40-man roster (they moved Ivan Nova to the 60-day disabled list) and then call up a player who was not on it and who had not pitched recently in a minor league game.That was why they summoned Tracy and De La Cruz, who were not invited to the major league camp during spring training, and the veteran Davies. De La Cruz was elated to be in Baltimore. He was with his teammates at Class AA Trenton on Monday when Manager Al Pedrique told him to pack. It took De La Cruz 20 minutes to do so. “I’m very surprised,” De La Cruz said through an interpreter. “I didn’t expect to be here so soon. I have to thank God for what happened.”De La Cruz was issued the same uniform number, 40, as Tracy and Davies.“We’re trying to make that number stick,” the equipment manager Rob Cucuzza said. “As long as they’re all wearing the same size.”Adam Warren knows how the relievers felt. He was called up to the Yankees to make his major league debut in 2012 when C. C. Sabathia was hurt. Warren was sent down afterward. In 2013, Warren pitched six shutout innings in an 18-inning loss at Oakland. His reward was getting sent to the minor leagues, though he was recalled several days later when another Yankee was injured.“After the game, I started thinking, ‘Wow, we need somebody to pitch for us.’ ” Warren said. “And then you start thinking: I just threw six innings, I might not be able to pitch for a few days and I have options. It’s hard to swallow even though you understand the situation.”Warren said it was also difficult walking into a major league clubhouse for the first time, especially in the middle of the season. Everyone was welcoming, he said, but he was terrified of asking a silly question or not knowing where to go or what to do. “You don’t want to step on anyone’s toes,” he said. To that end, De La Cruz had some help. He was welcomed by several Spanish-speaking players, including Michael Pineda, Carlos Beltran and Alex Rodriguez. De La Cruz played with Rodriguez in 2013 during his minor-league rehabilitation stint. But the most welcoming was another Dominican pitcher, Rogers. He took De La Cruz out to lunch Tuesday and then for some shopping. Rogers bought him a suit, which he could wear on the road. It was a gesture Rogers was paying forward; when he was called up by Colorado in 2009, Ubaldo Jimenez and Yorvit Torrealba bought him a tailored suit that he still wears. De La Cruz was appreciative. He called Rogers “Mi papi,” my dad. The suit, he said, was nice, and he planned to wear it on the plane Wednesday night when the Yankees leave for their next road series, against the Tampa Bay Rays. Of course, it’s still not clear if De La Cruz will be on that plane.Advertisement