By BILLY WITZAPRIL 14, 2015
BALTIMORE —  The Yankees had suddenly been living up to their Bombers pedigree, driving balls out of the park or taking ambitious cuts that chased outfielders to the warning track.It looked to be more of the same Tuesday when Chase Headley ripped a ball to deep center field that was chased down by Adam Jones, who put his Gold Glove form on display. The next batter, Carlos Beltran, rifled a ball off the right-field wall for a double.But those at-bats, along with the Yankees’ 11 home runs in the previous five games, did not prove to be a harbinger of their evening at Camden Yards.Like the intermittent drizzle, the Orioles right-hander Miguel Gonzalez cooled off the Yankees — striking out 10 and, in one stretch, retiring 10 in a row — as Baltimore beat the Yankees, 4-3.Advertisement“It was one of those days,” shortstop Didi Gregorius said. “He was hitting the corners with all of his pitches, then he got us to chase the splitter out of the zone.”AdvertisementFirst baseman Mark Teixeira added, “He wasn’t making any mistakes.”It was a command performance that C. C. Sabathia was not able to match, but he did work seven innings — the longest by a Yankees starter this season — allowing four runs and seven hits while striking out seven and walking one.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sabathia has struck out 17 and walked one in his two starts, but when hitters have made contact against his diminished fastball, it has often been hard. He has allowed 15 hits and nine runs.“I was commanding the ball pretty good,” Sabathia said. “I just need to tighten up a few things, especially late in the game.”Jones, who is off to a red-hot start for the Orioles, ripped an 89-mile-per-hour fastball over the welcoming wall in left field for a solo home run in the first inning. He pushed across another run in the third when his fly ball to right scored Everth Cabrera, who reached on Sabathia’s lone walk. Caleb Joseph hit a run-scoring single in the fourth, and his triple, out of the reach of a diving Jacoby Ellsbury in center field, led to the final run.The only run the Yankees managed against Gonzalez came in the sixth when Ellsbury scored on Mark Teixeira’s two-out double. The Yankees narrowed the gap to 4-3 in the eighth after Gonzalez departed, with Gregorius scoring on Beltran’s groundout. Headley scored when left fielder Alejandro De Aza dropped Teixeira’s two-out fly ball.But Zach Britton came on to retire Brian McCann on a grounder, then finished off the Yankees neatly in the ninth.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Yanks’ Burst of Power Fades Away in Baltimore.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.