By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 14, 2015
Jim Mutscheller, the Baltimore Colts tight end who caught a 6-yard pass from Johnny Unitas to set up the overtime touchdown that won one of the most storied games in N.F.L. history, the 1958 championship contest against the Giants, died on Friday in Towson, Md. He was 85.The cause was kidney failure, Ruck Funeral Home said.Mutscheller, a 6-foot-1, 198-pound receiver, played at Notre Dame under Frank Leahy on the 1949 national championship team and set a university record in 1950 with 35 receptions. He played for the Colts from 1954 to 1961 and made the Pro Bowl in 1957.His most memorable play was the second-down sideline catch to the 1-yard line against the Giants in sudden death in the title game at a chilly Yankee Stadium on Dec. 28, 1958.“Weren’t you taking a chance on an interception?” Unitas was asked later.“When you know what you’re doing,” he replied, “you don’t get intercepted.”AdvertisementMutscheller’s block on the next snap helped clear the way for Alan Ameche to barrel into the end zone for the 23-17 victory and the championship. A Sports Illustrated headline called it “The Best Football Game Ever Played.”AdvertisementA national television audience of 45 million people watched the game, which sports historians have called a turning point in the history of pro football, leading to its huge popularity and commercial success.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A year later, Mutscheller caught five passes in the N.F.L. title game as the Colts again beat the Giants to repeat as champions.Mutscheller was born on March 31, 1930, in Beaver Falls, Pa. Survivors include his wife, Joan, and four sons.After making his pivotal catch in the 1958 title game, Mutscheller slid out of bounds on ice, and for years Unitas chided him for failing to carry the ball into the end zone.“John would say, ‘Geez, Mutscheller, I tried to make a hero out of you, and you screwed it up,’ ” he told The Baltimore Sun. “But it turned out O.K.”Ameche, he said, could handle the fame much better than he.“He was on ‘The Ed Sullivan Show’ that night,” Mutscheller said. “I would have been scared to death to do that.”A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Jim Mutscheller, 85; Made Pivotal Catch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.