AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehSAN ANTONIO — For nearly three decades, becoming the first-choice goalkeeper of the United States has been a bit like being appointed to the Supreme Court, so permanent is the tenure.While the United States labors to earn a place among the world’s top national squads, producing quality keepers has never been a problem. But those keepers who are not No. 1 face a different challenge. They log the same hours on the practice field, but when a competitive match comes along, there rarely exists any doubt who will be picked to start between the posts.“Some of it is just the nature of it; there’s only one,” said Kasey Keller, who had a long spell as the team’s No. 1 keeper during his 22-year career. “That can be a difficult aspect of it. It has nothing to do necessarily with your ability. It has to do with the person in front of you. If he continues to play well, why would a coach change it?”Since 2007, that automatic selection has been Tim Howard, 36, who played every minute of the previous two World Cups and in almost every other important competitive game, save for brief instances in which he has been injured. Howard, who has played 104 official international games, only extended the tradition of stability on the goal line. Before him, there was Keller (101 international games), Brad Friedel (82) and Tony Meola (100), each one keeping a horde of talented countrymen on the sideline.Even now, with Howard halfway through a yearlong sabbatical from international play — which has raised quiet questions about his future on the team — there has been little intrigue about the long-term availability of the job.Brad Guzan, 30, is the long-accepted successor. He, too, has been on a short national team break, coinciding with the recent birth of his first child.The past month, when the team has been playing mostly meaningless exhibitions, has been an important time for the backup keepers. The three in San Antonio, where the United States will play Mexico on Wednesday, are Nick Rimando, 35, a trusted veteran; Bill Hamid, 24, who has two national team appearances; and William Yarbrough, 26, who made his first appearance last month.“They’re all eager,” Coach Jurgen Klinsmann said about his team. “They all want to prove a point.”The game at the Alamodome represents a rare chance for one or more to gain the thrill of international competition and make an impression on the coaching staff.“I’m just biding my time, learning as much as possible,” Hamid said before a recent practice. “When I’m in this environment, I want to play. But it’s understandable because you’ve got all these guys ahead of you.”The normal ways that players break into the lineup are less frequent within the goalkeeping ranks.Debilitating injuries are less common among keepers. Keepers are rarely substituted during games. Tactical shifts, formation changes and coaching philosophies do not alter the position or how a player is used. Keepers rarely serve suspensions for red cards or yellow-card accumulation.To make matters worse for the impatient upstarts, goalkeepers are believed to get better as they age.“You don’t even get the opportunity, and that can be the frustrating part,” said Keller, a television analyst for the Seattle Sounders. “They think, ‘If I could just get the chance.’ Well, that person is not giving you the chance.”Keller, 45, played his first game for the national team in 1990, but Meola was the No. 1 keeper through the 1994 World Cup. Keller won the job for the 1998 World Cup, but sat during the 2002 tournament when Friedel took over. Keller and Friedel had the closest thing to a typical sports positional battle — but even then it was never quite a game-by-game decision.After Friedel retired from international soccer in 2005, Keller held the position until 2007, even as Howard made a name for himself at Manchester United. Despite club-level success, Howard, like everyone else, had to wait his turn.“You want stability in the back, and that starts with the goalkeeper,” said Marcus Hahnemann, 42, a former goalkeeper who also does television analysis during Sounders games.Hahnemann played his first three national team games in 1994 and then had to wait almost a decade to play his fourth. He remained a fixture on the squad until 2011, being named to two World Cups. But when his career ended, he had played in a total of nine international games. Hahnemann said representing his country was an honor, and he had no regrets about his limited playing time. But he still wishes he had just one more appearance, so he could have reached double digits.Similarly, Guzan has been waiting almost a decade to ascend to the top spot. He made his national team debut Feb. 19, 2006, and his skills and stature have grown every year. Still, he has made only 28 international appearances.“We always joked about it, that if we could have two keepers on the field, we’d be really good,” Hahnemann said.But there can be only one.Advertisement