By THE NEW YORK TIMESOCT. 18, 2015
The Day’s BestDAK PRESCOTT Mississippi State’s senior quarterback threw for 347 yards and three touchdowns, and ran for a score, leading host Mississippi State to a 45-20 victory over Louisiana Tech.Prescott finished 30 of 43 without an interception.Prescott is just the third Southeastern Conference quarterback to total 50 career passing touchdowns and 30 career rushing touchdowns, joining Florida’s Tim Tebow and Texas A&M’s Johnny Manziel. Prescott has thrown 274 passes without an interception, the longest active streak in the nation and the third-longest in SEC history.T. J. EDWARDS Wisconsin’s redshirt freshman inside linebacker heeded the request of his defensive coordinator, Dave Aranda, for more production.Any more games like the one Edwards had against visiting Purdue, and the Badgers will have another reliable playmaker on an already dangerous defense.AdvertisementEdwards had a career-high 16 tackles and a forced fumble in Wisconsin’s 24-7 victory over the Boilermakers.Advertisement“I’m glad he did,” Edwards said of Aranda’s challenge. “It’s that Coach Aranda love that we need.”MATT JOHNSON Bowling Green’s senior quarterback threw five touchdown passes for the second straight game, and the Falcons remained undefeated in the Mid-American Conference with a 59-10 victory over visiting Akron. Johnson, coming into the game as the nation’s leading passer in total yards and yards per game, completed 25 of 30 passes for 357 yards.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.LUKE FALK Washington State’s sophomore quarterback tied a team record with six touchdown passes, all in the first half, as the Cougars knocked off visiting Oregon State, 52-31.PHAROH COOPER South Carolina’s junior wide receiver caught seven passes for 160 yards, including the Gamecocks’ only touchdown, as they won the first game for their interim coach, Shawn Elliott, over visiting Vanderbilt, 19-10, after Steve Spurrier’s sudden retirement.News and NotesHOLD THAT TIGER Louisiana State’s live mascot, Mike VI, will not make any more appearances at Tiger Stadium this season, the university said.Mike will remain in his 15,000-square-foot habitat on game days, said Ginger Guttner, a spokeswoman for the L.S.U. School of Veterinary Medicine.Fans can see the tiger in his home, which is next door to the stadium.Mike, 10, is in good health but has not wanted to enter his trailer, Guttner said.Advertisement“He’s fine,” Guttner said.At 450 pounds, Mike makes his own decision about staying or going.Tigers are not motivated by food, so getting him into the trailer is not as simple as tossing in a steak and hoping the tiger will follow it, Guttner said.“Mike’s safety and well-being is the most important thing,” Guttner said.Mike is the only tiger who lives on a college campus in the United States, according to Guttner. He attended the first L.S.U. game this year but did not go to any games in 2014.Information from The Associated PressA version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Day’s Best.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.