AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Harvey AratonIt was no small wonder that a healthy portion of the Barclays Center crowd showered the visiting team with hometown adoration Monday night, cheering Chicago’s Bulls as if they were straight out of Brooklyn. With the exception of being an N.B.A. champion, Derrick Rose and company are precisely what the Nets promised (and failed) to become while assembling the league’s richest roster.If healthy, the Bulls would appear to be legitimate Eastern Conference contenders, with talent, depth and work ethic that are worthy of any developing fan base. In contrast, in a must-win game, the Nets turned off potential new supporters by characteristically losing heart and falling, 113-86.The Bulls were built over time through the draft with shrewd patience, and the team shored up a front-line scoring weakness this season by signing Pau Gasol as a free agent. The Nets tried to microwave a title by squandering precious draft assets for, among others, the now-departed Paul Pierce and Kevin Garnett.Both teams have mega-salaried point guards whose bodies have betrayed them in recent years, but Rose evokes sympathy and hope while Deron Williams elicits groans and countdowns to a contract expiration in what promises to be two very long years.In his fourth game back after an absence of nearly six weeks because of a meniscus tear in his right knee, Rose played effectively and fearlessly. Desperately needing to win for the sake of playoff calculus, Williams shot 3 for 13 in 33 minutes in a sequel to his 1-for-11 disappearing act in Milwaukee on Sunday.Against Chicago, he was not even close to being the game’s best bearded player, falling far short of the lumberjack-looking N.B.A. rookie Nikola Mirotic and the whiskered Taj Gibson, forwards who punished the Nets from outside and in, combining for 41 points.In control of their playoff destiny, the Nets managed to lose both games by a combined 50 points. They now must beat 25-56 Orlando on Wednesday night at home and hope that Indiana, a 99-95 double-overtime winner over Washington on Tuesday night, falls at Memphis to close out the regular season. Let’s assume the Nets do claim the eighth playoff position. They would probably need to win two series and reach the conference finals to stoke fan passions. More likely, their stated intention of capitalizing on the Knicks’ calamitous two-year decline and taking ownership of New York will be further exposed for the wishful publicity campaign it was.As soon as the Nets are eliminated, the Knicks will retake the stage with their roughly $30 million in salary cap space for potential free agents and a high first-round draft pick that has, suddenly and comically, been imperiled by the prideful résumé padding of next season’s possible end-of-bench players.While the Knicks invent fascinating new ways to infuriate their fans, the Nets continue providing few reasons to consider them as a viable alternative.New York’s N.B.A. market has not had a championship celebration since 1973. The Bulls have not won a title since the basketball Beatles — headlined by Michael Jordan and Phil Jackson — disbanded in 1998. But how much would the people holding those budget-busting season tickets at Barclays and Madison Square Garden be willing to claim what Chicago has, a team that seldom leaves its followers clamoring for order and effort?Remember how the Bulls came into Barclays for Game 7 of their first-round series against the Nets two years ago with Rose out, Luol Deng in a hospital and Joakim Noah limping around on a bad foot, as if he had been walking barefoot on glass? Williams, Brook Lopez and Joe Johnson have never shaken the residue of that defeat, the justifiable belief that they are much less than the sum of their salaries and parts.The Bulls are not without problems and ultimately may never be more of a threat to LeBron James in Cleveland than Patrick Ewing’s Knicks were to Jordan.Their bulldog of a coach, Tom Thibodeau, has reportedly been feuding with management, and there is speculation that he may not return next season. The versatile Noah continues to grapple with an assortment of ailments. Assuming Rose’s knees hold up, he must dial back a proclivity for quick shots from the perimeter to make the most of increased scoring capacity with the additions of Gasol and Mirotic and the emergence of the shooting guard Jimmy Butler.But as much as he has been in and out, a challenge for his teammates not only as the resident star but as the point guard charged with keeping the offense humming, Rose has seldom seemed the doubt-ridden and dour presence Williams has been in New Jersey and Brooklyn. His teammates appear genuinely invested in his return, believing that Rose near his past form puts them in the N.B.A. finals conversation.“Such a talented guy, explosive guy to watch — he always brings a joy to the game,” Gasol said. “You want to see a guy like that be healthy, to be out there. People have great love and appreciation for what he does.”And not just in Chicago, he meant.Rose is not an effusive personality; he is stoic and soft-spoken. He wore a black hoodie late Monday night with white lettering that read, “Just a kid from Chicago.” That is part of a corporate marketing campaign, but the slogan suits him.Asked about his recent performances, Rose said: “My biggest challenge is just conditioning. Missing shots is just part of the game. I’m not worried about that. I’ve got to get my legs under me a little bit more, but I’m loving the way I’m playing. It’s basketball. I’m just happy to be playing.”It shows, and after what he has been through, who can’t be happy for him, and root for him, especially when the alternative is a team like the Nets.Advertisement