AdvertisementSupported byMets 4, Cubs 2By Tim RohanThe moment Matt Harvey had been dreaming about all season came in the seventh inning Saturday. The Mets were clinging to a two-run lead, and the Chicago Cubs were threatening, and the Citi Field crowd was on its feet chanting his name. Harvey struck out Tommy La Stella swinging through a changeup and skipped off the mound, pumping his fist and letting out a tribal roar. The crowd erupted. Down the right-field line, Mr. Met gave out high-fives.This season had been a trying one for Harvey as he worked his way back from Tommy John surgery. He struggled with his command, fought general fatigue, dealt with his innings limit and then dealt with a controversy over it. At one point, he was villainized by the New York tabloids. His performance in Game 1 of the National League Championship Series, then, against the Chicago Cubs, seemingly validated the trouble he had gone through. Harvey outpitched the postseason veteran Jon Lester and set a tone for the start of the series, throwing seven and two-thirds strong innings, holding the Cubs’ young offense to two runs, and leading the Mets to 4-2 victory.“I wanted this game bad,” Harvey said.Before the game, his teammates noticed that Harvey was relaxed and loose, goofing around in the clubhouse. Through four innings, Harvey had a perfect game and was throwing better perhaps than he had all season. He retired the first 12 batters on 44 pitches, striking out six of them. He had command of all four pitches. His curveball and slider had their usual bite. His changeup kept the Cubs off balance. His fastball even touched 97 miles per hour.The crowd chanted “Har-vey! Har-vey!” They seemed to have forgiven Harvey for the controversy that engulfed him in September, when Scott Boras, his agent, raised questions about how much Harvey should pitch down the stretch, in his first year back from serious elbow surgery. Harvey tried not picking sides, but some fans interpreted that as a sign that he put his health ahead of the team.Boras had a point, though. Once the postseason started, Harvey was entering uncharted territory. He had thrown 1941/3 innings entering this game, a career high, and he had looked gassed in his first playoff start, during five grueling innings against the Los Angeles Dodgers. As Harvey’s pitch count rose Saturday, he plunked Anthony Rizzo with an 0-2 fastball, spoiling his perfect game. Starlin Castro punched the next pitch to center field, and Juan Lagares misplayed it, allowing it to sail over his head and letting Rizzo score. The Cubs might have added another run, too, but Yoenis Cespedes threw out Castro, who tried to score from second on a single by Javier Baez. Harvey smacked his glove in anger as he walked off. If that weren’t enough, the leadoff batter in the sixth, Dexter Fowler, struck Harvey’s right triceps with a line drive. Harvey shrugged it off and retired the side in order, on just 10 pitches. He allowed two runners in the seventh, but he struck out Baez and La Stella to end the inning. In the dugout, Manager Terry Collins asked Harvey how he felt, and Harvey insisted that his arm and triceps felt fine and that he should pitch the eighth. “I talk to this guy every day,” Collins said. “I know exactly what he’s made of. I know exactly what he’s about, and he wants the baseball. He wants it.” Amid the raucous clubhouse celebration after they beat the Dodgers on Thursday, Harvey was doing a TV interview in the corner, saying that the work he had put in after the operation had been worth it to be in this moment, when he heard a commotion from across the room. Harvey craned his neck and looked over as a group of his teammates huddled around a man in a dress shirt who doused him with Champagne. “Sandy,” Harvey said with a grin, turning back to the camera.All season, Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson had led the Mets’ handling of Harvey, directing when he needed rest, making sure he was within his innings limit, making peace with Boras. In short, Alderson had seen to it that Harvey would be pitching now.“Anybody that had any doubts about his toughness or his desire to go out there and pitch should take notice tonight,” Michael Cuddyer said of Harvey. “The guy’s a beast; he’s an animal. Tonight he proved it. He wanted to be out there, he wanted to compete.”Harvey ended with nine strikeouts. He might have finished the eighth inning, too, but Kyle Schwarber hit a solo home run, his fourth of the postseason. In their first six postseason games, the Mets’ four young starters have compiled a 2.92 E.R.A. and 49 strikeouts in 37 innings.With the way the starters are pitching, the Mets’ offense simply has to keep up, which it did Saturday, working Lester for eight hits and four runs. Daniel Murphy homered in the first inning, the Mets strung together three singles to score another run in the fifth, and Travis d’Arnaud crushed a solo home run off the Mets’ red Home Run apple in the sixth.“I’ve never seen that before,” said Murphy, who was first called up by the Mets in 2008.When Murphy had come to bat for the first time, the crowd gave him a standing ovation. Then Murphy promptly drove a Lester cutter off the facing of the second deck, sending the crowd into a frenzy. It was his fourth home run of the postseason. It also made him the first Met to hit home runs in three consecutive playoff games since 1969, when Donn Clendenon did that and was named the most valuable player of the World Series. Murphy paused and pumped his fists before he entered the dugout. He has never been known as a power hitter, which made his star turn all the more remarkable. He hit 14 home runs during the regular season, a career high. And his four postseason home runs had come off Clayton Kershaw, Zack Greinke and Lester — three elite starters. That Murphy was terrorizing the Cubs seemed almost eerie. The billy goat that was said to have contributed to the Cubs’ ongoing curse happened to be named Murphy.“A unique coincidence,” Murphy said.Fittingly, though, Murphy accounted for the final out Saturday, too, making a diving stop on a hard hit ground ball from La Stella. Murphy let out another roar and pumped his fists again as the Mets celebrated, a scene that has started to become familiar this October. Seth Berkman contributed reporting.Advertisement