By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 17, 2015
The Islanders overcame another slow start and came through again with a big win on Saturday night in their new Brooklyn home.Kyle Okposo scored the tiebreaking goal early in the third period and added two assists as the Islanders scored the last four goals of the game to beat San Jose, 6-3, handing the Sharks their first loss of the season.“The first 10 minutes, for whatever reason, we haven’t played our style or brand of hockey,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “I think they’re getting adjusted to it. It’s a little bit different; it’s a little bit more travel for them, but as we go, we’ll monitor.”Johnny Boychuk, Anders Lee, Josh Bailey, Brock Nelson and Frans Nielsen also scored to help the Islanders win their third straight — all at home.AdvertisementThe Islanders have trailed by 1-0 after the first period in four of their first five games, and they were down by 2-0 early in the second period against Nashville on Thursday night before pulling out a 4-3 win.AdvertisementGoaltender Jaroslav Halak made his season debut on Saturday after missing the first four games because of an upper-body injury, and he finished with 22 saves.Joe Pavelski, Nikolay Goldobin and Joel Ward scored for San Jose. Alex Stalock stopped 28 shots in his first start of the season in place of Martin Jones.Justin Braun and Joe Thornton each had two assists for the Sharks.Mikhail Grabovski had a penalty shot for the Islanders late in the first period, but his attempt was stopped by Stalock.On the go-ahead goal, Okposo picked up the rebound of his own shot behind the net, skated around Sharks defender Brenden Dillon and beat Stalock for his second goal of the season at 4 minutes 18 seconds in the third period.Nelson snapped in an insurance goal with 8:50 left, and Nielsen added an empty-netter — his 100th goal and 300th point of his career — with just under three minutes to go.“To get 100 goals is definitely special,” Nielsen said. “You play a long time, it’s meaningful.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pavelski scored with just under seven minutes remaining in the opening period to give the Sharks a 1-0 lead with their fifth first-period goal in five games this season.The Islanders challenged the play for goalie interference, as Pavelski made incidental contact with Halak, but the goal stood after a video review.Advertisement“We thought we got a bump,” Capuano said. “But he wasn’t interfered with.”The teams then combined for five goals in the second period, with the Islanders tying it and the Sharks going ahead until Bailey’s tip-in evened the score for the final time with 6:02 to go.Boychuk’s shot off the right post tied the score at 1-1 just 21 seconds into the second period, but Goldobin struck for his first N.H.L. goal just 20 seconds later to put the Sharks back ahead.The Islanders answered on the power play 1:46 later when Lee scored his second goal of the season. Stalock was initially struck in the mask by a slap shot by Ryan Strome and appeared to attempt to take his headgear off to get a stoppage in play. The puck fell behind the net, and Lee scooped up the rebound, banking it off the goalie.After a short delay, the officials upheld the ruling on the ice.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Hand Sharks First Loss of the Season.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.