AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesWith one night to go in the N.B.A. season, the playoff situation is still uncertain, especially in the West. But there is almost as much focus on the bottom of the standings, where the league’s weakest teams are jockeying for the best chance at a top draft pick.The division winners Atlanta and Cleveland will be seeded first and second. Chicago can clinch the third seed if it beats Atlanta. If it loses, Toronto, the other division winner, will get that spot with a win against Charlotte.Washington, Milwaukee and Boston are set at 5, 6 and 7.Indiana controls its own destiny and will get the last playoff spot if it wins its last game at Memphis.The Nets must win their final game, against Orlando, and hope Indiana loses.Golden State has locked up the top seed and home court throughout the playoffs. Then it gets quite complicated.The Clippers have finished their season with 56 wins, but San Antonio and Houston are right behind with 55 and a game to play. The Spurs are at New Orleans and Houston is at home to Utah on Wednesday. Should both win, San Antonio would win the Southwest Division on head-to-head tie breaker. Whichever team does win the division would hold a tie breaker over the Clippers as well.Portland, as the Northwest Division winner, is locked into the fourth seed. Five and six, in some order, will be Memphis and one of the teams falling out of the two-seed chase. Dallas will be the seventh seed.New Orleans will take the eighth and final spot if it wins against San Antonio. Oklahoma City grabs that place if it wins at Minnesota and New Orleans loses.Whichever team ends up with the worst record will have the best chance to draw the top pick in the N.B.A. draft. Until Monday night, it seemed as if the Knicks could be that team. But Langston Galloway scored a career-high 26 points in Atlanta to stun the Hawks, much to the displeasure of some Knicks fans.As it stands now, the Timberwolves have 16 wins, the Knicks 17 and the 76ers 18, each with one game to go. Assuming Minnesota loses to Oklahoma City, it will have the league’s worst record and a 25 percent chance to land pick No. 1. The Wolves also could fall no lower than No. 4 in the draft.Should the Knicks end up with the second worst record, their chance at No. 1 would be 20 percent. A Minnesota upset of Oklahoma City and a Knicks loss against Detroit would mean both teams get about a 22.5 percent chance at No. 1.The Lakers are in an unusual situation. They are certain to have the fourth worst record, giving them a 12 percent chance at No. 1. But there is about a 17 percent chance that the lottery could drop them as far as sixth or seventh.When the Lakers acquired Steve Nash in 2012, they traded away their 2015 top pick, which is now owned by the 76ers. However, the pick is top-five protected. Should it stay in the top five, the Lakers get to keep it. But if it does fall to six or seven, it will go to the Sixers, giving them two top-seven picks.Advertisement