APRIL 14, 2015
It’s another good week to find an excuse to be in front of a TV and not behind a desk on Tuesday and Wednesday. Andrew Das, soccer editor and shameless Ajax supporter, tells you what to watch.The Champions League quarterfinals kick off Tuesday (2:45 p.m. Eastern, Fox Sports 1) with a Madrid Derby: Atletico vs. Real in a rematch of last season’s final in Lisbon. Real Madrid won that day but has not been able to repeat it: The teams have played six times in Spain this season, and Atletico has yet to lose (4-0-2). Tuesday’s other game — Juventus versus Monaco (2:45 p.m., FS2) — would be worthy of headliner status on most other days, but Tuesday is not most days.Wednesday is just as spicy, with Paris St.-Germain hosting Barcelona in Qatar’s game of the day (2:45 p.m., FS1) and Porto tied up on the tracks in front of the freight train that is Bayern Munich (2:45 p.m. FS2).The United States will play Mexico in San Antonio on Wednesday (8:30 p.m. Eastern, FS1), but since the friendly falls outside an official FIFA window, and because Clint Dempsey is hurt and Jozy Altidore is suspended, it will most likely pit an American B team against Mexico’s C roster. If you are only interested in seeing Mexico score, may I suggest you tune in about 10:20 or so. Just a hunch, given the United States’ recent performances.If you watch one league game this week, make it Juventus-Lazio on Saturday (2:45 p.m. Eastern, beIN), since it offers the last chance for second-place Lazio, which trails Juve by 12 points in the Serie A table, to make things interesting. ... If you watch two games, make the second one Chelsea-Manchester United (Saturday, 12:30 p.m. Eastern, NBC), for reasons that should not need explanation. ... Ajax, the greatest club in the world and one you should consider supporting, hosts NAC Breda in the Dutch league on Sunday morning (8:30 a.m.) and — hosanna! — the game is at last available for viewing in the United States through a streaming service called NGSN. This development is surely unrelated to my griping in this forum, but I will claim full credit for it anyway.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.