By BEN SHPIGELAPRIL 14, 2015
MONTREAL —  At Bell Centre, there is a team that cannot wait for the N.H.L. playoffs to begin.After tinkering for months and striving for the proper balance of style and substance, this team feels confident about entertaining the home crowd deep into June. The evidence, the team knows, will be found along the ice and on the scoreboard. But this is the time of year when its members anticipate proving — to themselves, to fans, to observers around the league — that they can handle these heightened expectations.Because there is pressure in being a part of the Montreal Canadiens’ game presentation staff.Like the hockey team beginning its Stanley Cup chase Wednesday against the Ottawa Senators at Bell Centre, the employees on the third and fifth floors are trying to produce the best show of the playoffs. And it is a show: an 11-minute extravaganza that elevates the genre of pregame performances beyond faux decibel meters, make-some-noise graphics and blaring rock music.In last year’s mesmerizing installment, a spotlight flashed on every Stanley Cup banner hanging from the rafters, all 24 of them, for one second each. The ice, through the artifice of three-dimensional rendering, appeared to undulate and swell. A projection system transmitted footage of past Canadiens greats onto its surface.The team’s signature tradition of a torch-wielding boy pretending to light the center face-off dot — seizing on the lines from the poem “In Flanders Fields” found in Montreal’s dressing room: “To you from failing hands we throw the torch. Be yours to hold it high!” — spread animated flames so vivid around the rink that if you closed your eyes, you could almost feel the heat.Before home games, the Montreal Canadiens use lights and video projection as part of their pregame introduction.It was good, the Canadiens thought, and the teams who called and visited Montreal — to tour their studios, survey their equipment and procure insight as to how they did all this — thought so, too.AdvertisementBut still, it was not good enough.The mission, as mandated by Kevin Gilmore, the team’s chief operating officer, is not to reinvent the performance every year but to evolve, to innovate, to determine what resonates most and then set about to improve on it. The Canadiens do not compete with other clubs so much as themselves.Advertisement“We always raise the bar on ourselves because there’s an expectation that comes with doing what we do here,” Gilmore said.In an era of clichéd pregame shows and in the city that is home to Cirque du Soleil, the Canadiens value originality above all. They dismissed potential song selections this year for being too mainstream, scaled back on 3-D elements because too many teams started using them and changed the order of the program to elicit maximum awe. It is pageantry with mise-en-scène, less bombast than pure theatrics.“They want to do things a little different from teams around the league, and that’s what they are known for,” said Yves Aucoin, the artistic director and president of 4U2C, a visual and production design firm based in Montreal that counts the Canadiens, the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Toronto Raptors, among other teams, as its clients. “They are really more about the emotion and the fan experience than the flash and trash, which pleases me a lot. They really like to find a way to bring goose bumps to the fan base instead of the slap in the face.”Goose bumps are mentioned frequently in conversations with those on the Canadiens’ game presentation staff. In the regular season, the goal is to get fans excited. In the playoffs, fans are already excited. The goal then is to reinforce a deep emotional connection to the team, so that by the time the star goalie Carey Price leads his teammates onto the ice, the din is earsplitting from chants of “Go, Habs, go!”To achieve this, the Canadiens’ staff mines diverse sources for inspiration. They watched an opening montage for the Cleveland Cavaliers but also for the Halifax Mooseheads, a junior hockey team in Nova Scotia. They seek input from Evenko, Bell Centre’s production arm, which promotes music festivals and concerts. When the Canadiens travel, their digital crew returns with observations and suggestions from different arenas.The planning process started in mid-January, when representatives from different sectors of the Canadiens’ marketing and creative services departments — video editing, motion graphics, stage managing and others — assembled to start brainstorming concepts, discussing themes and researching songs.At that preliminary meeting, the staff realized it had been using technology for technology’s sake. The arena’s dynamic new projection system, powered by 12 lamps emitting 20,000 lumens each, allowed for crisper images and sharper detail on the ice, but it also fostered a sense of obligation to see just what kind of effects it could generate.AdvertisementMaking the ice ripple might look dazzling on YouTube or on television, but it does not register the same impact for fans seated low, or off to the side, who can hardly see it. One of this year’s guiding principles was to create a more democratic viewing experience.That will begin with an opening sequence, set to “Don’t Stop Me Now” by Queen, which fulfills dual functions. Besides establishing a sense of time and place by recapping the Canadiens’ season through an animated calendar on the scoreboard and highlights projected onto the ice, it also signals to fans milling around the concourses that the more scintillating segments are about to begin.If last year’s show reflected the organization’s postseason success and rich history, the focus now, with one exception, is on these Canadiens — how close they came to playing for the Stanley Cup last season, losing to the Rangers in the conference finals, and what they learned from that experience.Sensing that fans wanted to hear from the players, the Canadiens last month recorded testimonials, shot in dramatic lighting, that revealed a consideration unique to their market: Even though most of their fans speak French, most of their players do not. Out of respect for the audience, the staff was mindful not to make the interviews a substantial portion, and subtitles are used.An even greater challenge is settling on the music, and finding a consensus took months. For every song chosen, about 20 others were rejected, a batch that this year included “Maybe I’m Amazed” by Paul McCartney (too slow), “Safe and Sound” by Capital Cities (too poppy) and “Centuries” by Fall Out Boy (overused in arenas).Whenever Jon Trzcienski, the Canadiens’ executive director of marketing, hears songs with potential, he mentally files them away. He first heard Mischa Chillak’s cover of the Fugees’ “Ready or Not,” which will be featured during the testimonials and a subsequent highlight medley, while watching a preview for the spy film “The November Man.” Trzcienski said he imagined pairing it with a sprawling Price save or a P.K. Subban goal.Each song must contain relevant lyrics, a catchy beat and some ebbs and flows — swooping arc and punchy points and a bit of bass — to give video editors variety when compiling packages. And it must have broad appeal, edgy enough to interest the younger demographic but not so inaccessible that it alienates corporate clients and alumni.“We used to hear, ‘You have guys like Jean Béliveau and Henri Richard in the crowd — what will they think if they’re hearing Pantera?’” Trzcienski, referencing two Canadiens legends, said last month.Béliveau died Dec. 2, and since then, the Canadiens have honored him, illuminating his retired number and regular seat, draped in his No. 4 jersey, for the entire game. Trzcienski would not say how the Canadiens intended to pay tribute to Béliveau during the playoffs, only that it was going to be “pretty, pretty cool.”AdvertisementIt figures to be a somber moment that pivots directly into the climax: the lighting of the torch. The group learned from last year’s show that staging it toward the middle, before the pump-up video, diminished the energy of the crowd. Fans who were standing up sat down. This time, they saved it for the end, reworked the premise and added what Aucoin called “a wow factor.”Or so he hopes.For the past two months, this project has lived on computer screens, been tested in phases on the scoreboard and been shared via email links. The video elements, music and synchronization mechanisms were not even scheduled to be transferred onto high-definition videocassette tapes (“We’ll hit 2015 someday,” said Carl Abran, the coordinator of game presentation) until Tuesday.Unlike theaters, which refine productions over weeks of dry runs, the Canadiens do not have that luxury. The first rehearsal was Saturday, and the final run-through was scheduled for Tuesday, a day before the playoff opener. By then, at least one team at Bell Centre will know whether it accomplished what it set out to do.“That by the time the guys step on the ice,” Gilmore said, “they know that they’re playing in Montreal.”A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Raising the Pregame Bar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.