By VICTOR MATHERAPRIL 14, 2015
Saturday, Oct. 23, 1993. SkyDome, Toronto. Bottom of the ninth, two men on, one out. Mitch Williams of the Philadelphia Phillies is on the mound, facing Joe Carter of the Toronto Blue Jays.On a 2-2 count, Carter drives the ball over the left-field wall, and with the game-winning home run, Toronto wins its second consecutive World Series.The Blue Jays have not been back in the playoffs since.At 21 years and counting, Toronto is riding the longest playoff drought in the major North American leagues, a dubious title it claimed after the Kansas City Royals ended a 28-year absence by making the 2014 playoffs.The Jays’ playoff wait is eight years longer than that of the runners-up, the Seattle Mariners, who have had 13 years without a postseason since losing to the Yankees in the 2001 American League Championship Series.AdvertisementThings turned sour for the Jays immediately after Carter’s magical moment. They put up four straight losing seasons before a mini-revival that peaked with an 88-74 record in 1998, led by a Cy Young Award performance from Roger Clemens, who was 36. They have not hit 88 wins since.There is hope. Last year’s team was a respectable 83-79 after a very fast start. This year’s team has started 4-3 and is expected to be a contender in a potentially wide-open American League East. Jose Bautista and Edwin Encarnacion provide power, and the newcomers Josh Donaldson and Russell Martin and a crop of promising rookies may finally end the playoff wait.The Buffalo Bills’ last taste of the N.F.L. playoffs ended on a play perhaps more memorable than Carter’s famous blast. In January 2000, the Bills led their wild-card playoff game against the Tennessee Titans by a point with 16 seconds left.After a kickoff, Frank Wycheck tossed the ball to Kevin Dyson. It was ruled a lateral pass, though that is disputed to this day. Dyson broke clear and ran for a touchdown. They call it the Music City Miracle.A brutal loss for the Bills. But they had been in the playoffs in 10 of the previous 12 years. Surely another chance would come soon?AdvertisementNope. Since then, Buffalo has had two 9-7 seasons, including last year, but no playoff appearances, a run of 15 seasons.Not far behind are the Raiders and the Browns (12-year waits) and the Rams (a 10-year wait).The Minnesota Timberwolves were in the N.B.A. playoffs for the eighth straight year when they faced off against the Los Angeles Lakers in the Western Conference finals in 2004. Despite home-court advantage and strong performances from Kevin Garnett and Latrell Sprewell, they lost that series, four games to two.A bright future did not await. The next season, a record of 44-38 was not good enough to sneak into the playoffs. They have not had a winning record since, and currently have the worst record in the league at 16-65. That is 11 seasons without a playoff trip.Depending on the results of the lottery, the Wolves could get a top draft pick. Since their last playoff trip, the Wolves have had eight top-10 picks. Three were traded away; the other five were used on Corey Brewer, Ricky Rubio, Jonny Flynn, Wesley Johnson and Derrick Williams (at No. 2 over all). On the plus side, one of those picks was used to acquire Kevin Love, who provided many bright moments before being traded to the Cleveland Cavaliers.It has been a good year for Canadian teams in the N.H.L., with five of the seven making the playoffs, the most since 2004.But not the Edmonton Oilers, whose playoff drought now extends to nine years. No other team has waited more than six.Like several of these franchises, Edmonton’s last playoff appearance was a successful one. The Oilers made the 2006 Stanley Cup final, only to lose a hard-fought seven-game series to the Carolina Hurricanes. Defenseman Chris Pronger, who had 16 assists in that playoff run, requested a trade in the off-season, and though Shawn Horcoff, Fernando Pisani and others hung around for a few seasons, the team could never recapture the magic.As for the fifth major North American league, the booby prize again goes to Toronto. Despite a big fan base that put it second in attendance last year, Toronto F.C. has never made the Major League Soccer playoffs in its eight years of existence. The team has never even had a winning record. Despite the acquisition of striker Jozy Altidore, this year could be another long season. Toronto is 1-3.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Blue Jays Inherit Lead for Postseason Dry Spell.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.