By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 17, 2015
Ben Bishop set a team record for career wins, Alex Killorn scored a go-ahead goal late in the third period, and the Tampa Bay Lightning beat the visiting Buffalo Sabres, 2-1, on Saturday night.Vladislav Namestnikov also scored for Tampa Bay.Sam Reinhart scored his first N.H.L. goal for the Sabres, who have scored once in three of their five games this season.Tampa Bay defenseman Victor Hedman, who was hurt on Thursday when he was checked into the boards by Dallas’ Jamie Benn in a 5-3 loss to the Stars, did not play. The team said Hedman, who underwent concussion protocols, was day-to-day with an unspecified injury.Bishop, who made 31 saves, won his 84th game with the Lightning, breaking a tie with Nikolai Khabibulin.AdvertisementChad Johnson made 20 saves for Buffalo.CANADIENS 4, RED WINGS 1 Jeff Petry scored the go-ahead goal 6 minutes 32 seconds into the third period, and Montreal moved to 6-0-0 for the first time in franchise history with a home victory over Detroit.AdvertisementBrendan Gallagher scored in the second, Tomas Plekanec made it 3-1, and then Brian Flynn scored an empty-netter for Montreal, which last went unbeaten in its first six games in 1977-78 (5-0-1).PENGUINS 2, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Evgeni Malkin and Olli Maatta scored first-period goals, and Pittsburgh held on for a home victory over Toronto.Malkin scored his second goal in two games, and Maatta collected his first of the season for Pittsburgh.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Marc-Andre Fleury, playing in his 600th career game, made 26 saves as Pittsburgh won its sixth straight against Toronto.PREDATORS 4, SENATORS 3 James Neal scored twice in regulation and added the shootout winner as Nashville won at Ottawa.Neal had two power-play goals, while Craig Smith also scored for Nashville. Carter Hutton, making his first start of the season, stopped 38 shots.Mike Hoffman had two goals for the Senators, while Mark Stone picked up the other. Craig Anderson made 22 saves.AdvertisementBLACKHAWKS 4, BLUE JACKETS 1 Artem Anisimov and Teuvo Teravainen scored 1:05 apart late in the second period to break a scoreless tie, and Chicago beat visiting Columbus, extending the Blue Jackets’ worst start in franchise history with their sixth straight loss.Chicago’s Marian Hossa added a power-play goal in the third and had an assist. Patrick Kane completed the scoring with his fourth goal, shot into an empty net with 1:27 left.CAPITALS 4, HURRICANES 1 Nicklas Backstrom had a goal and two assists in his season debut to lead Washington to a home victory over Carolina.Backstrom scored in the third and assisted on power-play goals from T. J. Oshie (one goal, one assist) and John Carlson.Washington scored three goals in the third period, the last coming from Alex Ovechkin. STARS 4, PANTHERS 2 Tyler Seguin and Jamie Benn scored two goals each to rally Dallas to a victory at Florida.Benn tied the score, 2-2, with a power-play goal 50 seconds into the third period. Seguin gave Dallas its first lead with 3:02 remaining, backhanding a rebound of a pass from John Klingberg. Benn capped the scoring with an empty-net goal with 19 seconds to go, completing the Stars’ comeback from a 2-0 deficit.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Goalie Sets Lightning Record With Victory Over the Sabres.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.