By ANDREW KEHAPRIL 16, 2015
Late Wednesday night, Bojan Bogdanovic stood in the Nets’ locker room in a white dress shirt with a purple sweater tied around his collar and small beads of sweat forming on his forehead.Bogdanovic, a 25-year-old rookie guard, had just scored a career-high 28 points at Barclays Center to help carry the Nets to a 101-88 victory over the Orlando Magic on the last day of the regular season. It might have been a moment to savor, a moment of relief, but it would have to wait a couple of hours.“There’s a lot more important things for us,” Bogdanovic said with a wry smile. “We have to wait for another game.”The Nets started the day one game behind the Indiana Pacers for the final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference, and the victory moved them up half a game in the standings. When the game finished, the Pacers were about halfway through theirs against the Memphis Grizzlies. If Indiana lost, the Pacers and the Nets would be tied, and because the Nets held the tiebreaker, having won the season series, they would snatch the berth.AdvertisementSo for the good part of the two hours after the final buzzer in Brooklyn, the Nets players watched the game in Memphis on television, or followed it on their phones, or did not follow at all and simply waited to hear the result secondhand. Just before midnight, the Grizzlies won, 95-83.The Nets will open a series against the top-seeded Atlanta Hawks on Sunday.“The playoffs is a whole other monster,” Jarrett Jack said. “Things could totally be different in that landscape.”It will have to be different if the Nets do not want to be embarrassed. They possessed the highest payroll in the N.B.A. this year and are only sneaking into the postseason. The desperate situation was one they made themselves. Having finally found their form and strung together six consecutive wins, the Nets ascended to seventh place on April 3. But then they went just 2-4, with margins of 23 and 27 points in their two losses heading into Wednesday’s game.And the game was no sure thing, with the final score failing to reflect the back-and-forth action. The Magic controlled play for much of the night, leading at one point by 12. The Nets came to life only in the fourth quarter. Just over three minutes into the final period, Joe Johnson sank a running shot to give the Nets an 83-82 lead that they would not relinquish.Johnson, who finished with 16 points, shook his head after the game when asked to describe the feeling of waiting. He noted that the players had control of their destiny and then “we kind of shot ourselves in the foot.” He let out a long sigh, as if to say the Nets were not entitled to anything.Advertisement“It was a rough year this year,” Johnson said, “simple as that.”Nets Coach Lionel Hollins had looked serene before the game. Reporters asked him whether the stakes made this game feel different, whether he was worried the Grizzlies would rest their key players, whether he would have one eye on the other game. He said he would try to keep a narrow focus on what could be controlled.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hollins was just hoping that his players would be loose, that they would not be afraid to take chances.“Sometimes, in these type of games, teams play not to lose instead of playing to win,” he said. “So we have to go out there and play to win.”After the game, Hollins said that his players took a while to adopt that mind-set. The Magic made eight of their first 12 shots and jumped ahead, 18-10, forcing Hollins to take a timeout. With just over three minutes left in the first quarter, Victor Oladipo ghosted to the basket unattended for a two-handed dunk, rousing audible murmurs from the otherwise placid stands.The Nets, meanwhile, could not find their flow. They were whistled for two traveling violations. They threw passes straight to defenders. The Nets staggered to the locker room at halftime trailing, 52-48.And still, they emerged as winners and playoff contenders. Afterward, Hollins smiled when asked if he had allowed himself to think about the worst-case scenario, if he ever felt desperate or despondent while the Nets were trailing.“This is kind of morbid, but it’s kind of like somebody about to be in a crash,” he said. “You’re not thinking, ‘I’m going to die.’ You’re just thinking, ‘What can I do to avoid this crash?’ And then the crash happens, and you have to deal with it.”The Nets have skidded all season. But somehow, they are still rolling along.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: Win and Help Put Nets in Playoffs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.