By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 1, 2015
U.S. Soccer, which failed to qualify a men’s team for the London Olympics in 2012, takes its shot at a trip to Rio 2016 this month, starting with a match Thursday night against Canada in Kansas City, Kan.Four years ago, the United States washed out of qualifying, losing to Canada and tying El Salvador after surrendering an injury time goal. But that was an entirely different team, long enough ago that Freddy Adu played and scored for it, and with the Americans hosting again, there is renewed hope for a better result.The Olympic tournament doubles as the under-23 world championship, and while teams are allowed to use three over-age players in the Games, qualifying is strictly for players who are 23 and under. The current American team has been somewhat cobbled together, since FIFA rules do not mandate that club teams release their players for the Olympic qualifying tournament.A dream United States under-23 team might feature established professional players like DeAndre Yedlin of Sunderland and John Brooks of Hertha Berlin, but both instead are likely to be part of the senior team for its big game against Mexico on Oct. 10. Also missing is the World Cup hero Julian Green; Green missed a recent training camp because of obligations to his German club, Bayern Munich, and the United States Olympic coach, Andi Herzog, told reporters this week that he had opted mostly for the players who had been there.AdvertisementInstead, this year’s squad includes several key players from last spring’s under-20 World Cup in New Zealand, where the United States made an impressive run to the quarterfinals. They include central defenders Matt Miazga of the Red Bulls and Cameron Carter-Vickers, only 17, who is part of the youth team at Tottenham in England.AdvertisementAmerican fans have been buzzing for a while about midfielder Gedion Zelalem, who has impressed on loan from Arsenal to Rangers in Scotland this season, and forward Jordan Morris, a Stanford University junior who has made six appearances for the senior national team.Should it advance from its group — which in addition to Canada includes Cuba and Panama — the United States would face a crucial semifinal game at Real Salt Lake’s Rio Tinto Stadium, with the winner going to the Olympics. Its opponent would likely be a difficult one, perhaps one of the two teams that qualified for London, Honduras or Mexico, which won the gold medal there.Oddly, the final of this month’s tournament will mean little, with both teams having qualified for Rio de Janeiro. But the third-place game will be vitally important: The winner will earn a last chance to qualify for the Olympics in a one-off against Colombia in March.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.