By PAT BORZIAPRIL 15, 2015
MINNEAPOLIS —  Out-of-town scores are not easy to track at the Target Center.They flash one by one on four end zone corners of the ribbon board, below the arena’s second deck. Seeing them all from the Oklahoma City Thunder bench Wednesday required a long, steely stare.Russell Westbrook was too busy dismantling the Minnesota Timberwolves to pay much attention. Oklahoma City needed to win and New Orleans to lose for the Thunder to claim the eighth playoff seed in the Western Conference, so Westbrook did what he has done for the last two months — dominate.Westbrook wrapped up his first N.B.A. scoring title in Oklahoma City’s 138-113 runaway victory, scoring 23 of his 37 points in the first quarter while adding 8 rebounds and 7 assists. With teammate and four-time scoring champion Kevin Durant limited to 29 games by an injured right foot, Westbrook became only the fourth point guard in N.B.A. history to win a scoring crown.But that, and Dion Waiters’s career high-tying 33 points, failed to get the Thunder into the playoffs.AdvertisementIn New Orleans, the Pelicans defeated San Antonio, 108-103, minutes after the Thunder game ended to secure the final spot. New Orleans and Oklahoma City both finished 45-37, but the Pelicans won the season series tiebreaker, three games to one.AdvertisementSo after five consecutive playoff appearances, three Western Conference finals and one N.B.A. finals appearance, the Thunder are out. So the first word out of Westbrook’s mouth when asked about the scoring title was a profanity.He continued: “Doesn’t mean nothing. Good job. Hurray. I’m at home, watching other teams play.”Westbrook’s career high scoring average of 28.15 points topped Houston’s James Harden (27.37). It provided a measure of his worth to the Thunder in a season defined by injuries. Oklahoma City lost Durant to a broken bone in his right foot in mid-February, and forward Serge Ibaka, a top defender, to right knee surgery last month. Five other players missed significant time.“A lot of things have happened to us that we haven’t had to deal with in the past,” Thunder Coach Scott Brooks said. “We’ve had a whole team full of injuries.”So Westbrook took over, in a manner not seen since the N.B.A.-A.B.A. merger in 1976. Going into the game, Westbrook averaged 31.1 points, 10 assists and 8.8 rebounds in 26 games since Durant’s last appearance Feb. 19, with nine triple-doubles. That put Westbrook in position to join Allen Iverson (three times), Oscar Robertson and Nate Archibald among point guard scoring champions.Durant and Westbrook made Oklahoma City the first team in more than 60 years to have different players lead the N.B.A. in scoring in consecutive seasons. Paul Arizin and Neil Johnston of the Philadelphia Warriors won back-to-back titles in 1951-52 and 1952-53.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Archibald’s magnificent 1972-73 season for the Kansas City-Omaha Kings, where he led in scoring (34 points) and assist (11.4), remains the benchmark for point guard dominance. But Archibald, like Westbrook, could not will his team to the playoffs. The Kings finished 36-46, last in their division.“He’s had an incredible year,” Brooks said. “He’s done things that the league hasn’t seen in decades. He has done a lot of great things this year and he has carried us for a long period of time. The scoring load, he has picked up. He is not going to be able to do this next season, but he has been able to do it this year because he’s had to. He has done a great job of leading us.”Advertisement But it also meant Westbrook put up lots of shots. Sunday night, it took him 43 attempts to score 54 points in a 116-104 loss at Indiana, creating a social media backlash. Kobe Bryant defended Westbrook in a series of messages on Twitter, including: “What ALL TIME Great went 19 for 43 in an nba finals loss?” The answer: Michael Jordan in 1993 against Phoenix. At the morning shootaround Wednesday, Westbrook called Bryant’s support an honor.Beating Minnesota, which lost its last 12 games to finish an N.B.A.-worst 16-66, required no outlandish shooting from Westbrook, who made 11 of 20 from the field and 13 of 17 foul shots.“He puts so much pressure on you, just how he comes at you,” said Minnesota Coach Flip Saunders. “When you see him on film, you talk about what you’re going to try to do. But until you experience it, you don’t realize the experience he really exerts.”Oklahoma City never trailed after Westbrook fed Waiters for a 3-pointer on its first possession. The Thunder’s 47-point first quarter featured two emphatic Westbrook dunks in transition, the first two-handed, the second right-handed tomahawk-style. But in the end, it was not enough.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Westbrook Secures Scoring Title, but Thunder’s Playoff Streak Ends at Five Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.