AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressThe young forwards Brock Nelson, Josh Bailey, Ryan Strome and the Islanders showed that experience is not required for playoff success.Each of the three scored in the postseason for the first time, with Nelson recording two goals, and goalie Jaroslav Halak got plenty of help in keeping Alex Ovechkin off the scoring sheet as the visiting Islanders beat the Washington Capitals, 4-1, in Game 1 of their Eastern Conference first-round playoff series Wednesday.Bailey (2008), Nelson (2010) and Strome (2011) were all first-round draft picks by the Islanders, and Bailey, the oldest, is only 25. The three entered Wednesday with these combined playoff numbers: seven games, zero goals, three assists.“I liked their composure, the way they held their emotions in check, and they came up big for us tonight,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “They skated. And, you know, they played with confidence and poise. And they’ve done that all year.”Bailey, who added an assist, said that his team’s success could be attributed to their confidence.“I think us guys in here believe in one another, believe in what we have, and I think that tonight was an example of that.”Halak, who stymied Ovechkin and the Capitals while playing for eighth-seeded Montreal in a 2010 first-round upset, made 24 saves, allowing only a Marcus Johansson goal in the final minute of the first period.Game 2 in the best-of-seven series is set to be played Friday at Washington. The Capitals will need to figure out a way to slow down the Islanders’ offense, avoid lengthy lulls and get more from Ovechkin.Ovechkin, named the league’s most valuable player three times, scored 53 goals this season to lead the N.H.L. for the third year in a row and for the fifth time over all. But all eight of his shots on Wednesday were turned aside.“We’re going to have to be a lot sharper,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said. “That goes right through the whole lineup. I thought from our top guys to our role players, there wasn’t too many sharp guys.”About six minutes into the game, Nelson took a pass from Bailey, moved in unimpeded and completed a shot just as he reached the right circle. Even though there was no traffic in front and no apparent deflection, the puck slid past Braden Holtby’s glove and inside the right post.Washington forward Brooks Laich tied the score at 1-1 with 56.3 seconds left in the first period. Halak went after a dump-in along the boards behind the Islanders’ net, and Laich challenged him to get the puck free, keeping it away from Nick Leddy and John Tavares, and then fed Johansson for a shot from the right circle.A pivotal sequence came early in the second period, when play was delayed for about five minutes while a broken glass panel behind Holtby’s net was replaced. Less than 30 seconds after action resumed, Tavares, second in the league in points this season, beat Michael Latta on a face-off.The puck went to Strome, whose shot from the left circle flew over Holtby’s right shoulder to make it 2-1.Midway through the period, Bailey got to a bouncing puck off a cross by Kyle Okposo, yet another first-round pick. A sprawling Holtby blocked the initial shot, but Bailey’s second stab sent the puck in off the post and Holtby’s left shoulder.Nelson added an empty-netter with 79 seconds left.CANADIENS 4, SENATORS 3 Brian Flynn scored a tiebreaking goal late in the second period, and host Montreal held on to defeat Ottawa in a wild opening game of their first-round series. Flynn also had two assists for the first three-point game of his career.Tomas Plekanec and Torrey Mitchell scored 15 seconds apart in a frenetic second period that saw five players get goals in less than five minutes. Lars Eller also scored.Mika Zibanejad and Kyle Turris scored power-play goals in the middle period for the Senators. Milan Michalek was credited with the game’s first goal, which Montreal’s Andre Markov tipped into his own net at 12 minutes in. The game broke open when the Canadiens scored twice in a 15-second span of the second period, the fastest two playoff goals by Montreal since 1998, with Mitchell and Plekanec scoring.But six seconds later, Eller went off for slashing. Seven seconds after that, P. K. Subban took a chop at Mark Stone’s hands and Stone, the Senators’ scoring leader, left the ice to be treated. Subban was given a five-minute major and a game misconduct.With the puck near Carey Price’s net, Subban lifted his stick in the air and chopped hard, bringing it down on Stone’s right wrist. Stone fell to the ice, then skated to the dressing room. The Senators scored twice and gave up a short-handed goal on the ensuing power play. Stone, who went into the playoffs on a nine-game points streak, returned to play, left again late in the second period, then returned midway through the third frame.It was a shaky game for Ottawa goalie Andrew Hammond, who got his team into the playoffs by going 20-1-2 down the stretch. The shots were 39-33 in Montreal’s favor.BLACKHAWKS 4, PREDATORS 3 Duncan Keith scored at 7:49 of double overtime, and the Blackhawks rallied from a three-goal deficit after the first period in Nashville.The Blackhawks finished only two points back of Nashville in the Central Division, and they grabbed home-ice advantage back despite benching goalie Corey Crawford after the first period. Scott Darling stopped every subsequent shot, making 42 saves in his postseason debut as Nashville took a franchise-record 54 shots.Jonathan Toews had a goal and an assist, and Niklas Hjalmarsson, Patrick Sharp and Jonathan Toews each scored for Chicago. Patrick Kane also had two assists in his return after missing 21 games with a broken collarbone.Colin Wilson scored twice and Viktor Stalberg had a goal, all in the first period for the Predators.Game 2 is Friday night in Nashville.FLAMES 2, CANUCKS 1Defenseman Kris Russell scored with just under 30 seconds remaining in the third period in Vancouver.David Jones also scored for the Flames, who were down 1-0 entering the third period. Jonas Hiller stopped 29 shots in the Flames’ first playoff game since 2009.Bo Horvat opening the scoring for Vancouver midway in the second period. Jannik Hansen and Alexander Edler assisted on the play.Vancouver hosts Game 2 on Friday night.Russell’s shot from the point found its way through traffic after a dominant shift by the Flames that had the Canucks hemmed in deep.Eddie Lack made 28 saves for Vancouver, which is back in the postseason after missing out last spring for the first time in six years.Advertisement