AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensGREENBURGH, N.Y. — They may have a roster that includes Sidney Crosby, Evgeni Malkin and Marc-Andre Fleury, but these Pittsburgh Penguins are different.Renowned for their skill, the Penguins are used to being the hunted and not the hunters. They had won their division the last two years and had finished first or second in their division (now the Metropolitan, previously the Atlantic) every season since 2006-7.But this season, Mike Johnston’s first as coach, the Penguins finished 18th in the N.H.L. in goals, scoring 2.7 per game. They narrowly reached the postseason, finishing fourth in their division, and are considered a heavy underdog in their series with the Rangers, which begins Thursday at Madison Square Garden.Still, the Rangers are not taking their rivals lightly.“They’re a very dangerous team on their transition,” defenseman Dan Girardi said. “Coming through the neutral zone on an odd-man rush or with speed, they obviously have Crosby and Malkin, guys who can control the game.”A healthy Crosby is a primary concern for the Rangers. This season, in which he had to deal with mumps and a variety of linemates, Crosby registered 84 points — third-most in the league — in only 77 games.The Rangers realize a team-defense approach is the best way to slow Crosby and Malkin, who recorded 70 points.“It’s not one guy,” Ryan McDonagh said. “We need everybody back in the picture. Realistically, know when they’re on the ice. If we have the puck in the offensive zone, make sure we’re 100 percent with it.”Pittsburgh was the hottest team in the N.H.L. for the first two months, winning 15 of its first 21 games. But injuries ravaged the Penguins, particularly on their blue line. The ailments of Kris Letang, Olli Maata and Christian Ehrhoff — as well as the team’s proximity to the salary cap — forced Johnston to use only five defensemen in five of the last seven games.“I consider their defense to be experienced,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “All those guys have been playing big minutes, so they’re ready for what’s coming up here.”Even though Ehrhoff said he would not play in Game 1, the Penguins will be able to dress six defensemen Thursday.“It will allow for our defense to get up in the rush a little bit more,” Johnston said. “We really had to manage our minutes as far as our shift length, and I think it was good for our defense.”The Penguins and the Rangers are no strangers; they met in the Eastern Conference semifinals last season. The Rangers stormed back from a 3-1 series deficit, claiming the final three games en route to the Stanley Cup finals.“It was tight,” Rangers forward Tanner Glass, a member of the Penguins last season, said. Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist “was really, really good,” Glass added. “It was a good series. It could’ve gone either way.”The Penguins’ disappointing exit — they fell short of the Stanley Cup finals for a fifth straight season — led to major changes. Coach Dan Bylsma and General Manager Ray Shero were fired. Johnston and Jim Rutherford replaced them, although they are rumored to be on the hot seat because the team lost 11 of its final 15 games, claiming the final playoff berth in the East with a win over the lowly Buffalo Sabres in the regular-season finale.“It’s a different way of getting in,” Crosby said. “It feels like we’ve been fighting here for a while. It doesn’t feel like we’ve been able to coast here and count the games down. It’s definitely a different feeling; it’s not necessarily a bad thing. It feels like for the last week and a half, we’ve already been in the playoffs.”Glass knows his former team is capable of pulling off an upset.“They’re a very good team,” he said of the Penguins. “I’m surprised to get them in as the 8 seed. It’s funny when you finish first, then you contend with Crosby and Malkin in the first round. They’re a very good team — a team that’s very experienced in the playoffs.”SLAP SHOTSThe Rangers held a 3-0-1 record against the Penguins this season. ... Rick Nash missed practice with the flu. Alain Vigneault said he expected Nash to be in the lineup for Game 1.Advertisement