By SETH BERKMANOCT. 17, 2015
Fall foliage is reaching its rustic-tinged peak throughout the Northeast. In Queens, the colors are beginning to change, too, at least somewhat — from blue to orange.The primary color for all four remaining playoff teams is blue, which could create a bit of a problem for the Mets and the Chicago Cubs, who opened Game 1 of their National League Championship Series Saturday night at Citi Field.Before the game it was hard to discern between the Mets taking batting practice (in blue hooded sweatshirts and caps) and the Cubs stretching around third base (in blue hooded sweatshirts and caps).In an effort to distinguish themselves, more Mets fans at Citi Field appeared to be turning to the team’s secondary color: orange. The Mets have also handed out orange rally towels throughout the playoffs.“We definitely noticed more orange was sprinkled in throughout the last couple of games,” said Darren Meenan, founder of the 7 Line, a Mets-inspired clothing company.AdvertisementMeenan, who wore a bright orange T-shirt under a blue Mets vest, organizes group outings.Before the postseason, he realized that a majority of the teams in the playoffs had blue as a primary color, so he decided to choose orange for his playoff T-shirt design. On Saturday, fans adorned with the shirt, as well as with orange headbands, sunglasses and eye shadow, filled up three sections in center field.Advertisement“There’s no doubt who we’re rooting for,” said Jessica Klein, who had painted an orange Batman symbol on her face in support of Saturday’s starter Matt Harvey, also known as the Dark Knight.Klein and other Mets fans tailgated under the chipped and faded green and tan paint of the Mets-Willets Point elevated train station, wearing a mixture of orange and blue. In the gathering of about 100 fans, it appeared that younger fans were more likely to wear the flashier orange tones.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Saturday’s cooler weather also brought out darker colors. On the No. 7 train, black and blue were the warmest colors. Fans were bundled up in hooded sweatshirts worn under a Tom Seaver jersey, or wore early-2000s-style black Mets jackets. Like outcast teenagers, the Mets, too, had a forgettable all-black fashion phase.Outside Citi Field’s rotunda, Cubs fans seamlessly milled about. The blue pinstripes and blue numbers and letters outlined in red of Kyle Schwarber jerseys blended in with the blue pinstripes and blue numbers outlined in orange of David Wright jerseys.Some Cubs supporters tried to distinguish themselves. Bryan Michalik and Karyn Gajownik of Chicago flew into La Guardia Airport on Saturday. Michalik sported long red sleeves beneath his blue Mark Prior jersey, and Gajownik wore a red Cubs shirt.When the Mets battled the Cubs for the pennant in 1969, orange, blue or red clothing was hardly the norm. Greg Prince, a Mets fan since 1969, who co-created the blog Faith and Fear in Flushing, noted that in that year, most fans wore suits to games. He was glad to see orange coming of age.“I have always been fond of orange and own more than my share of orange outerwear,” Prince said. “Where else are you going to model it without hesitation?”A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Orange Highlights the Postseason.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.