AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinArt Powell, a star receiver for the New York Titans and the Oakland Raiders of the American Football League in the 1960s and a persistent voice protesting the segregation encountered by the pro football players of his time, died on April 6 at his home in Aliso Viejo, Calif., between Los Angeles and San Diego. He was 78.His death was announced by the Raiders. The San Diego Union-Tribune reported that he had had heart problems.Powell was a prototype for the pro game’s big wide receivers. At 6 feet 3 and 210 pounds or so, he had good speed and sure hands, and he provided the type of exciting offense that buoyed the A.F.L.’s challenge to the long-established National Football League. He led the league twice in touchdown catches and receiving yardage and was voted by the Pro Football Hall of Fame to its All-Star A.F.L. team of the 1960s.Powell, who did not experience legalized segregation while growing up in San Diego, was known for speaking out on racial discrimination.“What people fail to realize is, I tried to live the American dream,” he said in an interview with The Los Angeles Times in 1992. “I reached for the sky; I refused to have somebody tell me I couldn’t go where I didn’t belong.”After his rookie season in 1959, when he was a reserve defensive back and a kick returner for the Philadelphia Eagles of the N.F.L., Powell refused to play in a 1960 preseason game against the Washington Redskins in Norfolk, Va., upon learning that the Eagles’ black players would not be given rooms at the team’s hotel.Because Powell’s black teammates did not join in his boycott, he feared that it would effectively end his N.F.L. career. Soon afterward, he signed with the A.F.L.’s Titans, the predecessors of the Jets, and teamed with Don Maynard in a brilliant pass-catching combination.When the Titans faced the Houston Oilers in a 1961 preseason game in Greenville, S.C., and housed their black players at a run-down hotel in a black neighborhood, Powell again staged a one-man boycott.After he joined the Raiders in 1963, racial issues arose once more. The Raiders scheduled a preseason game with the Jets in Mobile, Ala., where the seating would be segregated, and Powell and three black teammates raised objections with Al Davis, the team’s coach and general manager. He moved the game to Oakland.“Art was considered someone who was hard to handle,” Davis told The Los Angeles Times in 1992. “I didn’t think he was hard to handle, but in those days those kids were fighting another battle besides just playing football.”Powell led the A.F.L. in receiving yards in the 1963 season, with 1,304, and in touchdown catches with 16, having also been the league leader in both categories during his time with the Titans. Black players’ anger over discrimination gained national attention in January 1965 when black All-Stars, upon arriving in New Orleans the weekend before the A.F.L.’s East-West Game, were refused service by white cabdrivers and at night spots in the city’s Latin Quarter. Powell and four other players representing their black teammates sought but failed to receive equal treatment, prompting the 21 black players from the two squads to announce that they would boycott the All-Star game. They agreed to play when the league shifted the game to Houston. Arthur Louis Powell was born in Dallas on Feb. 25, 1937. His family moved to San Diego when he was a child, and his father, Elvin, worked there in construction. Art Powell played at San Jose State in 1956 and then went to the Canadian Football League before joining the Eagles. He concluded his pro career with the Buffalo Bills of the A.F.L. in 1967 and the Minnesota Vikings of the N.F.L. in 1968. He had 81 touchdown catches and 8,046 receiving yards in his A.F.L. and N.F.L. career and was a four-time Pro Bowler.After leaving football, he owned an oil company in Southern California.Powell is survived by his wife, Betty; his daughters, Teri Taylor and Tracy Powell; his brothers Ellsworth, Jerry and Tony; his sister, Carmen Powell; and six grandchildren. His older brother Charlie, who played for the San Francisco 49ers and the Raiders and became a contender for the heavyweight boxing championship, died in 2014.“The challenges that were before me were social challenges,” Powell once told The San Jose Mercury-News. “I chose to challenge them while others chose not to challenge them. I made a lot of people angry.”Bill Walsh, a Raiders assistant when Powell played for them who went on to a Hall of Fame coaching career with the 49ers, told the newspaper: “Art was his own man and fiercely independent. He was not afraid to voice his opinions and to take a stand.”Advertisement