By TIM ROHANAPRIL 15, 2015
In the eighth inning of Tuesday’s game against the Phillies, David Wright stood near second base for five pitches, fidgeting and clenching his batting gloves with a strained look on his face. He was debating whether he should leave the game.Moments earlier, as he stole second base, he felt his right hamstring grab. Maybe a half-dozen years ago, and without the mileage he had gradually put on his body, his theft of second would have been a routine play, free of risk to his legs. But that was then. In the 2013 season, when he had already turned 30, he had felt soreness in the same hamstring, kept playing for a while and was eventually sidelined for more than six weeks.Now, as he stood at second base, with the Mets ahead, he considered finishing the game. The Mets did not have a third baseman on their bench; he figured he could tough it out. But with each pitch, he took a lead off the bag and tested the hamstring. He realized that if the ball were put in play, he was not sure he could make it to third. Running home on a base hit seemed impossible.So before a 3-2 pitch to Kirk Nieuwenhuis, Wright walked off the field, gingerly, and headed up the tunnel to the clubhouse. And on Wednesday, the Mets placed Wright on the 15-day disabled list with what was termed a mild hamstring strain. The Mets said they were hopeful he would be back in two weeks, but three seem more realistic.Advertisement“If there is a silver lining,” Wright said, “I guess it could have been worse.”But clearly, he was frustrated. By the time he spoke to reporters before the Mets played on Wednesday night, Wright had seen three doctors, and spoke to them in detail about his daily routine, his diet, every little thing that he does to prepare himself for games.AdvertisementWright wanted them to tell him why he continues to get hurt, to give him some miracle solution that he knew would not be coming.Injuries have gotten in the way of Wright’s career in recent seasons. He missed significant time with a stress fracture in his back in 2011, with a hamstring injury in 2013 and with a shoulder problem last season. He has played more than 135 games in a season only once in that span.This winter, the Mets had their conditioning consultant, Mike Barwis, move his training program to Florida, in part, so veterans like Wright could attend. Manager Terry Collins raved all spring about how strong Wright looked.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, only eight games into the season, Wright found himself injured again.“I’ve talked to our training staff, I’ve talked to our physical therapists, I’ve talked to our strength coaches, just trying to see if there’s anything I could possibly do differently to prevent this from happening,” Wright said. “I’d like to think that I take good care of myself. I hydrate, I work out, I stretch — I do everything I can to try to prevent these types of things. And when something like this happens, it hurts.“You get angry. You get frustrated. I think it’s just one of those freak things. I was fortunate earlier in my career, where I never had to worry about anything like this. These last couple years, it seems like little things like this have prohibited me from going out there and playing every day. That’s not a good feeling.”And the doctors he saw Wednesday?“They basically just say it’s bad luck,” Wright said. “You run hard and unfortunately when you run hard like that, the muscles have to work. Sometimes, one wrong step, or you land the wrong way, or you extend an inch too far — something happens.”Two years ago, when Wright tried to keep playing with a sore hamstring, it gave out as he tried beating out an infield single. Last season, after he jammed his shoulder sliding headfirst on a muddy field, he played on. But his performance dipped and the team shut him down in September.“When you play hard, you’re bound to get hurt,” Collins said. “If you start telling a player, look, you’ve got to back off how you play, you’re not going to be the same guy.”Now, however, Wright may be subtly backing off on his own. At 32, he seems aware of his own limitations as a top-level player. When reporters ask him over and over again about the Mets’ high expectations this year after a long stretch of losing seasons, he often mentions how he, himself, is running out of time.AdvertisementStill, he chose to walk, not run, on Tuesday — off the field. He received a cortisone shot Wednesday and was instructed to rest for a few days. And Wright promised he would not rush back.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Once Again, Wright Is Foiled by an Injury.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.