AdvertisementSupported byOrioles 7, Yankees 5By Billy WitzBALTIMORE — The game was unfolding just the way it must for the Yankees to be competitive this season. Two aging sluggers, Carlos Beltran and Alex Rodriguez, had delivered booming hits. Starter Nathan Eovaldi had pitched his way out of trouble, delivering crucial strikeouts. And Manager Joe Girardi could turn to his bullpen with a lead.But on Wednesday night, the bullpen did not so much shut the door as usher the Orioles through it, thanks to a five-run sixth inning that paved the way for a 7-5 Baltimore victory at Camden Yards.Without the big inning, the Yankees’ late rally might have meant more, but they fell short when Chase Headley grounded out to end the game with runners at first and second.The Yankees have not played 10 games, but they have lost two of three to their division rivals Toronto, Boston and Baltimore. After a day off Thursday, they open a series against the other American League East team, Tampa Bay.“We need to turn it around,” Girardi said. “Obviously, we need to start winning a series, or it becomes a long year.”As the Yankees have changed over the years, one constant has been a deep and varied group of relievers. Although the Yankees rebuilt the bullpen over the winter — only Dellin Betances and Esmil Rogers remain from the end of last season — it is once again filled with power arms who had pitched effectively so far in the young season.But on this night, they did not.Eovaldi had put the Yankees in good position, striking out nine and retiring Adam Jones on a bases-loaded fly ball to end the fourth. But he had thrown 101 pitches through five innings, and Girardi had to turn to the bullpen, which had recovered from the toll of Friday’s 19-inning loss to Boston.“You’re winning after five; you’ve got a full bullpen; you feel pretty good about it,” Girardi said.But the good feelings did not last long. The Orioles immediately tied the score, 3-3, when Jonathan Schoop homered off David Carpenter. After a fastball over the outside corner, Carpenter threw a slider that he left slightly up and on the edge of the plate. Schoop reached out and pulled it an estimated 421 feet to left-center field.“I tried to pound down away the first pitch and throw the slider off it and get a swing and a miss,” Carpenter said. “Hindsight’s always 20-20. I maybe should have busted him in. But it’s a learning experience, and I’m going to get him more than he’s going to get me.”Alejandro De Aza followed with a broken-bat liner to center. Orioles Manager Buck Showalter then played for a matchup: Everth Cabrera bunted De Aza to second, ensuring that the Yankees would walk Jones, who had four home runs in his previous five games.Girardi summoned Justin Wilson, a left-hander, to pitch to the left-handed-hitting Travis Snider, prompting Showalter to pinch-hit for Snider with the right-handed-hitting Delmon Young.Young delivered a single to put the Orioles ahead, and then the left-handed-hitting Chris Davis doubled to left-center off Wilson, making the score 6-3.“A tad bit up, not the tightest breaking cutter I’ve thrown, and the guy’s a good hitter,” Wilson said of the pitch Davis hit. “When you get back to 2-2, you hope to put a guy away right there, but I just didn’t make the exact pitch I wanted. I made a decent pitch that he did a good job of hitting.”Chris Martin relieved, but after retiring Manny Machado on a deep fly to right, he gave up another run when Caleb Joseph singled to center, scoring Davis.The four-run cushion proved to be enough for the Baltimore bullpen, barely. Tommy Hunter, who gave up a grand slam to Stephen Drew in the Yankees’ win Monday, allowed two runs in the eighth — and it surely would have been more if Jones had not taken away an extra-base hit from Brian McCann with a backhanded catch after a long run to deep center field.The Yankees had jumped to an early lead when Beltran, who was batting .156 entering the game, rewarded Girardi for leaving him in the third spot in the batting order, driving a two-run, two-out double to right that was inches from clearing the wall.Rodriguez gave the Yankees a 3-1 lead in the fourth when he belted a solo homer deep to left field, nearly reaching the second deck.“That one felt amazing,” Rodriguez said.The home run was Rodriguez’s second of the season and the 656th of his career, bringing him within four of tying Willie Mays. That achievement, under Rodriguez’s contract, would entitle him to a $6 million bonus, but the Yankees plan to contest the bonuses that were supposed to be paid out as part of a marketing agreement, contending that Rodriguez’s drug suspension fouled any revenue streams the team might have generated from the sale of memorabilia commemorating his achievements.The Yankees, in their five pages of game notes, did not mention any of the home run milestones Rodriguez is closing in on. (After Mays comes Ruth’s 714.) They noted that Rodriguez began the day 17 runs batted in behind Ruth and one run scored behind Derek Jeter. When he scored on the home run, he tied Jeter, with 1,923 runs.Rodriguez acknowledged that the team’s slow start had been frustrating but said it was too early for concern.“We’ve shown flashes of good things in all four facets of our game,” Rodriguez said, referring to pitching, defense, hitting and base running. “The key for us is to collectively get them in sync, and once we do that, we can get on a roll.”INSIDE PITCHThe Yankees’ revolving door in the bullpen continued as they sent the right-hander Joel De La Cruz to Class AA Trenton and recalled the right-hander Brandon Pinder from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. De La Cruz did not pitch in a game for the Yankees. Pinder is the fourth pitcher to be recalled from the minor leagues since the bullpen was overextended in Friday’s 19-inning loss to Boston. Pinder pitched a scoreless seventh in his major league debut, giving up two hard-hit balls — including a triple to Alfredo De Aza — but escaping when Cabrera popped up a bunt on a squeeze play.Advertisement