AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenPARIS — Most of the signs were recognizable: the incandescent hues of the rosebuds and the radiant splendor of parks and bridges and monuments. All of it arrived this week, as if on cue. So, too, did the tourists. Clichés become such for a reason, and springtime in Paris is, if nothing else, bathed in beauty.The exception, it seems, is at Parc des Princes. While the rest of the city looks to have stirred to life, the worldly aspirations of Paris St.-Germain have — yet again — shriveled.Technically, P.S.G. is not eliminated from the Champions League. But after a 3-1 loss to Barcelona in the first leg of a quarterfinal Wednesday night, it will take a gargantuan comeback for P.S.G. to avoid being knocked out of Europe’s top club competition at this stage for a third straight season.Since Qatari investors infused P.S.G. with cash in 2011, the club has won two league titles and three domestic cup trophies, but it has been consistently inconsistent on Europe’s biggest stage.This year, Coach Laurent Blanc had said, was supposed to be different. The only difference appears to be the margin; P.S.G. was eliminated the past two seasons on the away-goals tiebreaker, and that does not seem likely to be a factor as Barcelona looks to reach the semifinals for the seventh time in eight years.“Barcelona were better in virtually every single sector of the game,” Blanc said.Luis Enrique, Barcelona’s coach, remained circumspect; he paid tribute to P.S.G.’s talent and remained wary of the Parisians, who will get back their top star, Zlatan Ibrahimovic, for next week’s second leg. Ibrahimovic watched from the stands Wednesday while serving a one-game suspension for a red card in the tournament’s previous round.But regardless of whom P.S.G. puts on the field, Enrique can counter with his attacking trio of Lionel Messi, Neymar and Luis Suárez, a lethal unit of scorers that produced its own familiar phenomenon Wednesday: brilliance.Messi set up Neymar for Barcelona’s opener, and Suárez scored two goals (which were eye-popping in very different ways) to ensure that P.S.G. would need to score at least three next week if it hopes to advance.“We were very strong, front and back,” Enrique said. “When we’re like that, few teams can beat us.”This was the teams’ third meeting this season. P.S.G. stunned much of the soccer world with its 3-2 victory over Barcelona in the first game, in September. Blanc called that victory a “reference point” in the Parisians’ preparation for this match, but the number of players absent from P.S.G.’s lineup this time made another big night feel all the more unlikely.It was not just that Ibrahimovic was missing; after all, he did not play in that September win because of a heel injury, and P.S.G. did just fine when he was sent off in the first half of its last Champions League match, against Chelsea. As good as Ibrahimovic is, he is hardly P.S.G.’s only weapon.P.S.G. might well have missed Marco Verratti more. Verratti is a midfield star, and his tenacity was critical when P.S.G. rallied to eliminate Chelsea at Stamford Bridge last month. Thiago Motta, a defender, also missed the match because of a thigh injury, and Thiago Silva, the team’s captain, limped off early in the first half as well.“That was just the beginning of the trouble,” Blanc said.Barcelona played with its first-choice team and showed its familiar fluidity with the ball as it produced 62 percent of the possession. Blanc, standing at the edge of his coaching area on the sideline, often had the action directly in front of him as Barcelona’s players toyed at the edges of a packed-in Parisian defense, passing and probing early for the opening Barcelona craved.That opportunity ultimately came after 18 minutes, when Andrés Iniesta seized the ball after a turnover and found Messi inside, who then turned and played an inch-perfect ball into the path of Neymar. His finish, low and quick, was past goalkeeper Salvatore Sirigu before Sirigu could react.“The players are free to move in attack, with balance,” Enrique said. “We’re not interested in freedom without balance.”P.S.G., to its credit, did not fold. Toward the end of the first half, the Parisians had the better of play, pushing forward on counterattacks and creating chances that left Barcelona’s defenders scrambling. Blaise Matuidi led several surges down the wing. Adrien Rabiot had a memorable scamper through a maze of Barcelona players, whose blinding neon yellow jerseys made them look, just for a moment, like a series of stationary traffic markers.The finishing, though, was always lacking. Edinson Cavani was the obvious candidate to account for Ibrahimovic’s missing firepower, but he and Javier Pastore were both wasteful in front of the goal.Suárez, on the other hand, was surgical. His first goal, in the 67th minute, was a feat in itself. After taking the ball on the right side, Suárez overwhelmed three P.S.G. players — David Luiz, Marquinhos and Maxwell — before slotting the ball past Sirigu. The 3-on-1 play prompted raucous celebrations from his Barcelona teammates, who corralled him with a gang tackle while the stunned home fans jeered.That celebration was quickly surpassed, however, when Suárez scored his second about 10 minutes later. This time, Suárez embarrassed David Luiz by slipping the ball through David Luiz’s legs. He then took a few strides into the penalty area and blasted a wicked shot into the top corner of the net that left most of the P.S.G. players, notably Sirigu, standing still.“A striker always wants to go forward and look for the goal,” Suárez said. “The nutmeg on David Luiz was the only option I had.”Gregory van der Wiel offered a sliver of consolation for P.S.G., although he needed a kind deflection from Barcelona’s Jeremy Mathieu to find the net. The goal offered a momentary respite — and P.S.G. pushed for another in the last seconds — but the end of the game soon followed.At the final whistle, Blanc dropped his head. He had hoped to concede zero goals, had hoped to seize control; instead, his team gave up three goals and was rocked on its home field. Blanc shook hands with the referees and stalked down the tunnel.It was another poor showing in Europe. Another spring in Paris turned sour.Advertisement