By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 15, 2015
The Rangers and the Knicks share two buildings, an owner and not much else.That has been especially true this season, with the Rangers claiming the Presidents’ Trophy after assembling the N.H.L.’s best regular-season record, and the Knicks setting new marks for futility on an almost nightly basis. At Madison Square Garden, opposites attract: the best team in hockey and one of the worst teams in basketball, living side by side.On Wednesday, the juxtaposition was more glaring than usual. As the Rangers went through their final preparations before opening the playoffs Thursday night against the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins, the Knicks took the court at the Garden to close out their 82-game slog by facing the Detroit Pistons.“We still have one more day on the job,” Coach Derek Fisher said before the game, “and that’s all we’re focused on.”The finale was fitting for the Knicks, who punctuated their worst season in franchise history with a 112-90 loss — a result largely indistinguishable from their other 64 losses this season. Sated with free food and drink on fan appreciation night, the crowd cheered and groaned, bearing witness to the bitter end.If the Knicks (17-65) are searching for a model in their pursuit of respectability, they could do worse than the Rangers, who occupy the same training facility in Greenburgh, N.Y. Glen Sather, the Rangers’ president and general manager since 2000, has helped to provide the sort of stability that the Knicks have lacked atop their organization.AdvertisementWhile James L. Dolan, who owns both teams, has been meddlesome with the Knicks, in constant search of the quick fix, he has left Sather to do his work with something that at least approaches autonomy. The Rangers are aiming for a second straight trip to the N.H.L. finals. The Knicks, who have cycled through general managers and coaches as if they were ratty socks, have made three playoff appearances in the last 11 seasons. Phil Jackson, the Knicks’ president, has been charged with changing all that.AdvertisementOn Wednesday morning, the Rangers practiced for about an hour: short and to the point. Afterward, Coach Alain Vigneault touched on some of the usual topics ahead of the playoffs: injuries, lineups and tactics, albeit in the vaguest terms possible. The postseason was going to be “very challenging,” he said, but his team was going to be “focused on the game at hand.”Vigneault also paid his respects to the Penguins, who are led by Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin.“We’re going to have to do a real solid job against them,” Vigneault said.The Rangers and the Knicks cross paths occasionally, around the cafeteria for breakfast or lunch. Last season, some of the Rangers participated in the Knicks’ N.C.A.A. tournament pool, the Rangers’ Derek Stepan said. But for whatever reason, the pool fell through this season. Perhaps the Knicks had undergone too much turnover.“I’ve never had a season like that,” the left wing Tanner Glass said. “I can’t say I know what they’re going through, but it’s got to be tough.”In any case, there are subtle reminders that the two teams share the facility, albeit on opposite sides of the building.“You see all their big shoes around,” said James Sheppard, a center who began the season with the San Jose Sharks.Keith Yandle, a defenseman who was traded from the Arizona Coyotes on March 1, was probably the one player on the Rangers who could best relate to the Knicks’ struggles. At the time of his trade, the Coyotes had a 20-36-7 record. When he joined the Rangers, Yandle essentially went from basement to penthouse overnight.Advertisement“It makes for a long season,” Yandle said of the Knicks. “But they’re professionals and know how to handle it.”About six hours later, at the Garden, the Knicks quietly went about their business of getting ready for their final game of the season. Players stretched. Fans trickled in. Fisher participated in his 82nd pregame session with members of the news media, gatherings that began to feel more and more like contractual obligations over the final weeks of the season.The Knicks showed up having won two straight, a landmark achievement for a group that barely resembled the collection of players who had congregated at training camp.Gone: Iman Shumpert and J. R. Smith, now employed by the Cleveland Cavaliers. Gone: Amar’e Stoudemire, who signed with the Dallas Mavericks after being released. Gone, at least until next season: Carmelo Anthony, who underwent knee surgery in February. So Fisher was not exaggerating when he said the team had undergone a “major transformation.” The Knicks are expected to embark on another one this summer, given their imminent pursuit of free agents and their pick in the draft lottery.“I’d say we’ve changed a lot and been through a lot,” Fisher said before the game. “But I’m very proud of the guys that are in the locker room because of what they’ve continued to do. We’ve had a lot of really tough nights, but I don’t think they’ve ever quit on themselves.”Many fans seemed to treat the giveaways on the season’s final night as if nuclear winter were nigh. Merchandise at the team store was 40 percent off. The mood was almost celebratory: school was getting out for summer, an extended stretch in which the Knicks are assured of going undefeated.Minutes before tip-off, Jackson found his seat in the lower bowl. He was joined by Jeanie Buss, his fiancée and the president of the Los Angeles Lakers. Dolan has pledged to give Jackson the freedom to run the team as he sees fit — a concept that sounds familiar to those who follow the Rangers.The Garden went dark for player introductions, and the crowd cheered for the likes of Langston Galloway, Lance Thomas and Cole Aldrich — players who have provided effort, but not many victories.AdvertisementThe Knicks were down by 12 points in the second quarter when a fan wearing an Allan Houston jersey sank a half-court shot for $10,000 as part of a promotion. They were down by 8 in the third when Anthony appeared in uniform on the large video boards to deliver a recorded message.“I’m really looking forward to next season,” Anthony said, “and seeing you back on the Garden.”The Pistons slowly built their lead from there. Each timeout taken by Fisher was more ineffective than the last. He could only slow the pace of the game as fans filtered out, and then the final buzzer: a 22-point loss to a 50-loss team as the Knicks finished with the second-worst record in the league, ahead of only the Minnesota Timberwolves (16-66).“It was obviously a difficult season for us, as a team,” Fisher said. “And we were forced to deal with some realities.”The Garden was empty by the time workers began to remove the court, revealing the ice beneath. Because for one team, the season lives on.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Best Worst.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.