By BEN ROTHENBERGAPRIL 15, 2015
DANIEL ISLAND, S.C. —  After Madison Keys’s breakout performance at the Australian Open, her disappointing losses on hardcourts in March seemed to indicate she needed the rest of the spring for recovery and recharging.But as the WTA Tour shifted to clay, Keys surprisingly took flight.At the Family Circle Cup, near Charleston, she dropped two or fewer games in each of her first seven sets and made the final Sunday, which she lost, 6-2, 4-6, 7-5, to Angelique Kerber. Keys held a 4-1 lead in the final set, as well as a 40-0 lead on serve at 5-5 in the final set, but Kerber won 10 of the last 11 points.Despite the wrenching defeat, it was an undeniably impressive week that shattered expectations for Keys, 20, who has risen to No. 17 in the rankings. Her booming style of first-strike power tennis has not been traditionally associated with clay-court success.“As geeky as it sounds, attitude is really important,” Keys said of playing on clay. “You just have to be positive about it. You have to play your game and make the minor adjustments like clay has. But also still play your game.”AdvertisementHer coach, Lindsay Davenport, admitted that she was surprised by Keys’s success on clay but said there was no reason that her success could not transcend the slow speed of clay.Advertisement“If she plays the right way, there’s no reason she can’t be successful,” Davenport said. “It’s going to be more challenging for her than the faster courts of the hard courts and the grass, but she can still hit winners on clay. She can still serve well, use her serve effectively.”Davenport, who began coaching Keys with her husband, Jon Leach, during the off-season, was impressed especially by her movement on the slippery surface.“I know she’s not going to be like Halep on the clay, but it’s much more fluid and much more un-American than I would have thought,” Davenport said, referring to third-ranked Simona Halep of Romania.Davenport and Leach spent the week at home in California with their four children but stayed in constant communication with Keys by phone. As she made her way through the tournament, Keys was guided by the veteran doubles player Lisa Raymond and her hitting partner Cecil Mamiit.Mamiit had previously worked with Maria Sharapova during her transformation into an elite clay-court player in 2012, which continued the evolution of what a clay courter looks like in the women’s game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With Sharapova’s two French Open titles sandwiching a win by Serena Williams, power has won out over defense more often than not. The surface is more traditionally linked to shorter, speedy players like Justine Henin, Arantxa Sánchez-Vicario and Halep.“Sharapova is not a clay-court player, absolutely,” Davenport said. “I think women’s tennis has always been a little different from men’s tennis in that way. Even when I played, there was not a clay-court specialist who would win the French and not be a factor at other majors. For a little bit in men’s tennis, there was that, more so in the ’90s.”Sharapova has dominated on clay over the past three years, but Davenport still sees the clay swing as the most wide-open part of the season. Most top players begin their clay-court season in earnest when the tour shifts to the red clay of Europe, with a tournament in Stuttgart, Germany, next week and a mandatory event in Madrid in early May.Advertisement“Even though she’s won the French twice in the last three years, still I wouldn’t put Sharapova as the one to beat necessarily,” Davenport said. “It is more wide open than the other surfaces. Serena always controls a lot of the destiny in her own racket. I think Halep is going to be a bigger factor this season than she was even last season.”Although Williams has not yet played a tournament on clay, she is undefeated to start the year, and Davenport hopes that her all-surface success can be a model for Keys.“There’s no question that clay isn’t Serena’s best or favorite type of court, but she’s so good it doesn’t matter,” Davenport said. “Going back to Madison, that would be my wish for her, too. You play that style game, and you can play through the clay. Serena does that very well. Physically, you have to be willing to work and to grind. You can’t end the point in two shots. That’s something that Sharapova improved on so well: waiting five or six shots, hanging in rallies, and working the point. In women’s tennis, a lot of players don’t love to do that.”Andrea Petkovic, the winner in Charleston last year and a semifinalist this year, said she was interested to see how many of the young, powerful players like Keys, Karolina Pliskova and Garbiñe Muguruza transition to clay.“I think clay can be good for them because they need time for their strokes, right?” she said. “And on clay you do have time. On the other hand, you have to build the rally a little bit more.”Petkovic said that having more time to set up shots helped all players but that the more powerful players stood to benefit more. “The thing with hard hitters, most of the time they need time,” she said. “It’s the same with me. I need time for my strokes, or I play better when I have time on my strokes.”A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: As the Season Shifts to Clay, a Young American Finds Unexpected Success.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.