AdvertisementSupported byMichigan State 27, Michigan 23By Joanne C. GerstnerANN ARBOR, Mich. — The game was over, or at least Michigan and its celebrating fans thought it was.The Wolverines led, 23-21, with 10 seconds to go at Michigan Stadium on Saturday, and the jubilation of one of their most important statement victories over Michigan State in years was starting to crank up.But the game is never over until the clock runs out.Michigan was punting at the 50, but punter Blake O’Neill fumbled the snap and Michigan State safety Jalen Watts-Jackson scooped up the game’s first turnover, ran 38 yards and scored a touchdown.The clock ran out as soon as Watts-Jackson crossed the goal line, and Michigan State had a wildly improbable 27-23 victory.“I’d like to say it was unfortunate,” Michigan State Coach Mark Dantonio said of Michigan’s fatal final mistake, “but I just can’t.”The end represented the first time Michigan State (7-0, 3-0 Big Ten) had led the game.“Football is a crazy, crazy game,” Dantonio said. “I can hardly explain it. We just had belief. There was a belief in what went down. We’re 7-0, and that’s the most important thing.”Michigan Coach Jim Harbaugh appeared just as stunned as Dantonio after the game, but he clearly was not smiling about the result.“We overcame so much, calls that were made, not made; kept fighting, we played,” Harbaugh said. “We ultimately played winning football. What do we say about last plays? Unfortunate.“Resolve is the steel in our spine. We have got to move forward.”The Spartans, in celebration, ran across the field and piled on top of Watts-Jackson in the left corner of the end zone. The Wolverines and their fans went from celebrating an apparent win to stunned, slack-jawed silence.The announced crowd of 111,740 became so quiet that the screams of Michigan State’s players could be heard from the top of the stadium.“This felt like a dream,” said Connor Cook, Michigan State’s senior quarterback, who threw for 328 yards and a touchdown. “I ran over to our student section and our parents section to go celebrate with my family. I’ve never felt anything like that.“It was completely crazy.”But the Spartans’ celebration tenor quickly changed, as they realized Watts-Jackson was still lying prone in the end zone. He was placed on a stretcher and carted off the field by Michigan State’s medical personnel. Dantonio said Watts-Jackson had a dislocated hip and was being taken to a hospital.The senior linebacker Darien Harris described the win as the biggest of his career, even over winning the 2014 Rose Bowl and the 2015 Cotton Bowl — because of the backdrop of beating Michigan on its own field in his senior year.“I am still at a loss for words over what went down,” Harris said.The stunning end capped a week of arguments around the state about which team was better: No. 7 Michigan State, which has dominated the rivalry in recent years, or No. 12 Michigan, which is enjoying a resurgent season under its new coach, Harbaugh.Incidents of vandalism occurred on both campuses. The statue of the Spartans basketball great Magic Johnson was doused with Michigan’s maize and blue on Thursday, leading to a wolverine statue being revenge-painted green and white on Friday.The game’s crazy ending capped Michigan State’s fourth-quarter comeback. The Spartans, led by Cook, outscored Michigan, 13-3, during the final 15 minutes.It was the seventh time in eight years that Michigan State defeated Michigan. Since becoming the Spartans’ head coach for the 2007 season, Dantonio has lost to the Wolverines only twice.Many of those wins have been lopsided, but these Wolverines do not resemble the troubled teams of Rich Rodriguez and Brady Hoke.Harbaugh’s return to the university where he played as a quarterback has clearly brought confidence to Michigan (5-2, 2-1), and he has brought the old-school touches of running burly fullbacks on big plays and playing physical, unflashy defense.With less than 10 minutes to go, Michigan was up, 23-14, and seemed to have all the momentum. But thanks to a 74-yard pass from Cook to fullback Trevon Pendleton, Michigan State suddenly lowered Michigan’s comfort level. L J Scott scored on the next play, paring Michigan’s lead to 23-21.Michigan’s defense, which had held its opponents scoreless in the previous three games, stiffened. This was a new-look Michigan, a more aggressive model than Michigan State had experienced in recent years.The game seemed sealed. Until the unimaginable ending of a failed punt.Michigan quickly showed it was ready to match Michigan State’s noted aggressive style. The Wolverines’ opening touchdown, scored by fullback Sione Houma, featured grinding play by the offensive line and Houma powering 2 yards in the second quarter.Michigan State responded with its own rushing touchdown, six minutes later, when Scott rushed 11 yards and tied the game, 7-7. The drive was controversial, as Joe Bolden, Michigan’s leading tackler, was called for a targeting penalty and ejected.Bolden, diving to tackle, made helmet-to-helmet contact with a sliding Cook. Replays showed Bolden was shoved, while tackling, by the Spartans’ Jack Conklin, altering his path into Cook’s head.The play was reviewed, and the targeting call stood, leaving Bolden and Harbaugh to express their displeasure at the referee. Bolden exited the stadium in dramatic style, taking the long, sideline route, while jumping and waving his arms to fire up the pro-Michigan crowd.In the end, it took nearly three hours to play a 59-minute 50-second game.And then, it all was decided in 10 seconds.“I told him to keep his head up,” Michigan defensive end Willie Henry said, recounting what he told his dejected punter, O’Neill. “I didn’t play a perfect game. You go out and play the next down. There weren’t any downs left.”Advertisement