By BEN STRAUSSAPRIL 15, 2015
CHICAGO — The N.C.A.A. filed a new proposed settlement late Tuesday night in a class-action lawsuit brought against the association over its handling of concussions and head injuries. It is the second attempt by plaintiffs’ lawyers and the N.C.A.A. to settle the case after a federal judge asked for changes to the original proposal in December.The core terms of the new plan are similar to the original — a $70 million medical monitoring fund for athletes, $5 million for research and stricter return-to-play guidelines for athletes who sustain head injuries — but several tweaks were made to satisfy Judge John Z. Lee, according to the plaintiffs’ lawyer Steve Berman.The adjustments include new plaintiffs from noncontact sports like golf, softball and track and field to address concerns about the scope of the settlement. Universities would also now have six months to adopt the new return-to-play guidelines or lose protection from the settlement. As for the money, if the full $70 million fund is not used, the remainder would go to research, rather than be returned to the N.C.A.A.; and if the fund is depleted, the N.C.A.A. would have the option to replenish it or leave itself open to another class-action suit in the future.“We took each of the judge’s concerns and responded to them,” Berman said. “He said there’s many things he liked about this in December, and he wouldn’t be putting us through all this work, in my view, if he didn’t want to find a way to approve the settlement.”AdvertisementAnother plaintiffs’ lawyer, Jay Edelson, who was critical of the original terms, said he was encouraged by the new settlement but not satisfied, noting there was still no compensation for athletes suffering from the effects of head trauma.“Over all, we think that it’s moving in the right direction, but it’s still problematic,” Edelson said. “It’s not the type of wholesale improvements that were needed. The class is still neglected.”AdvertisementA status hearing is scheduled for Friday morning in Judge Lee’s court, but given that the settlement was only just filed, Berman said he did not expect the judge to grant approval this week.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | College Sports; Settlement Plan Adjusted.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.