By PETER MAYAPRIL 15, 2015
The playing surface at TD Garden in Boston will be exclusively parquet for the 2015 playoff season. Very few people, if anyone, saw that coming.Within the space of 48 hours last Saturday and Monday, the Boston Bruins’ season came to a shattering conclusion and the Boston Celtics’ was surprisingly extended. The Celtics, who clinched a spot when the Chicago Bulls beat the Nets on Monday, will open the N.B.A. postseason against the Cleveland Cavaliers this weekend. The Bruins on Wednesday fired their general manager, Peter Chiarelli, after the team failed to qualify for the N.H.L. playoffs for the first time in eight years.The Celtics have been one of the best teams in the N.B.A. since Feb. 2, though few have noticed. They made only one national television appearance, and that was on the road against the Detroit Pistons on April 8 as a late addition. On Feb. 2, they were 16-30, three and a half games out of the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.With a victory Wednesday night at Milwaukee, the Celtics (40-42) won 24 of their last 36 games. They won 25 games in all of last season. No other team in the conference had as many wins in that period. The second best team in the conference in that time? The Cavaliers.“To have a chance to compete against the very best in the league is a great opportunity,” Celtics Coach Brad Stevens said. “And hey, it’s a big mountain. But it is a great opportunity.”AdvertisementThe Celtics’ turnaround has been all the more startling because of the enormous turnover — 11 trades since last summer and 23 roster players this season, a franchise record. The team’s two best players entering the season, Rajon Rondo and Jeff Green, were traded. Rondo was dealt to the Dallas Mavericks for three players and a first-round draft pick; only one of the players, Jae Crowder, is still with the Celtics. Green was dealt to the Memphis Grizzlies in a three-team trade with New Orleans that brought Tayshaun Prince, Austin Rivers (who never played for the Celtics) and a first-round pick. Prince was sent to the Pistons in a three-team deal that brought Isaiah Thomas, Jonas Jerebko and Gigi Datome to Boston. Rivers was sent to the Los Angeles Clippers.AdvertisementIn addition to an ever-evolving roster, Stevens had to deal with major injuries to Jared Sullinger, Kelly Olynyk and Marcus Smart. Thomas, whose offense has given Boston a new dimension, also missed eight games in March.Thomas was the Eastern Conference player of the week from April 6 to 12, when he scored 68 points in three Celtics victories, including one in Cleveland that ended the Cavaliers’ 18-game home winning streak. He also was the conference player of the week in the final week of February after going to Boston on the day of the trade deadline.Over the Celtics’ two-month run, the team won six consecutive road games, the most since 2010, the last time they went to the N.B.A. finals. They won seven straight times on the second night of back-to-back games. While Thomas has taken over the role of closer, the Celtics have also won games with last-second baskets from Tyler Zeller, Smart, Evan Turner and Crowder.The Celtics have become what Bruins fans thought their team would be. The Bruins won the Stanley Cup in 2011 and advanced to the Stanley Cup finals in 2013. Last year, they won the Presidents’ Trophy, awarded to the team with the most points in the regular season. If the Celtics are deemed to have overachieved, the Bruins, with an experienced roster, are deemed to have drastically underachieved.This turnabout has been red meat for talk radio. Tony Massarotti, who hosts a popular afternoon show on 98.5, the Sports Hub, said the Bruins’ demise had been the dominant topic.“The Bruins’ fan base is extremely passionate and extremely vocal,” Massarotti said. “And talk radio is built on emotion. It’s more visceral. When you factor in the level of competition and the overall talent, the bigger story is the Bruins. Their fall has been precipitous.”As for the Celtics, Massarotti said: “They are a nice story. But we are under no illusion that they are going to win a championship.”AdvertisementThey will be sizable underdogs to the Cavaliers, who are the No. 2 seed in the Eastern Conference. Boston did beat Cleveland twice last week; Kyrie Irving did not play in either game and LeBron James and Kevin Love sat out the fourth quarter of the first game and all of the second game.James’s first stint in Cleveland ended in TD Garden when the Celtics upset the Cavaliers in the second round of the 2010 playoffs. Boston was an underdog in that series as well.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I like the fun of not knowing what’s going to happen,” the Celtics’ principal owner, Wyc Grousbeck, said in a radio interview on Wednesday. “The fun of it is the uncertainty.”His Bruins counterpart, Charlie Jacobs, is not of a similar mind. Jacobs said midway through the season that the team’s play was unacceptable. And that was when the Bruins were among the top eight teams in the Eastern Conference.Their postseason began with the firing of the man who built that team. The Celtics’ postseason begins this weekend with a team still writing an implausible story.A version of this article appears in print on April 16, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Celtics Soar, Bruins Fall, and Fans Are Surprised.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.