AdvertisementSupported byRoyals 6, Blue Jays 3By David WaldsteinKANSAS CITY, Mo. — Ryan Goins waved his glove and his bare hand in the air as a signal that he was going to catch the ball. It was a simple pop-up off the bat of Ben Zobrist, and it should have been the first out of the seventh inning, one of the final steps toward a Toronto Blue Jays victory.Toronto was leading by three runs at the time, but as Goins and Jose Bautista converged in shallow right field, Goins suddenly stopped chasing the ball. He thought he heard Bautista yell, “I’ve got it.” He looked back at Bautista, expecting him to catch the ball, and then fell on his backside.That is where the Blue Jays ended up, too — flat on their backsides after the ball fell in and gave the Royals the opening they were looking for.“I said, O.K., there’s a break,” Zobrist said. “Let’s see what we can do with it.”They did plenty. The Royals are perhaps the game’s most unforgiving team, a unit that routinely capitalizes on the smallest mistakes.Goins’s mistake led to a five-run rally, and the Royals beat the Blue Jays, 6-3, in Game 2 of the American League Championship Series. Goins stood in the silent clubhouse afterward and declined to make excuses. It was not the crowd noise, it was not Bautista’s footsteps, and even if David Price could have gotten the next three batters out to render the play meaningless, Goins was not taking an escape hatch.“The blame should go on me today,” Goins said. “I gave them that play to start that rally.”The Blue Jays were leading by 3-0 at the time, and Price, who had lost his previous six postseason starts, was dominating. Through six innings, the Royals had only one hit, a leadoff single by Alcides Escobar in the first. Price set down the next 18 batters and appeared to be getting stronger. He struck out the side in the sixth and had thrown only 66 pitches.Zobrist should have been the 19th straight out. But Goins said that as he drifted to catch the ball, he thought he heard Bautista call for it. Goins’s waving gesture was enough to keep Bautista away, and the ball landed in the five feet of grass between them.Kauffman Stadium, rather quiet to that point, came to life.But Goins said he did not hear anything from the fans, or anyone else. He just made a big mistake, and the Royals capitalized. This, after all, is the team that trailed the Astros by four runs in the eighth inning in Game 4 of their division series and still won.“As long as we have some outs left, we feel like we’re going to find a way to win,” Mike Moustakas said.Lorenzo Cain followed the blunder with a single to right, putting runners at first and second with no outs. Eric Hosmer hit a single to center that scored Zobrist, and the Royals had their first run.Then, as Price prepared to deliver to Kendrys Morales, Hosmer broke for second. Morales hit a roller up the middle that very likely would have turned into a double play had Hosmer not been running on the pitch. Troy Tulowitzki, the Blue Jays shortstop, had only one play. He fired across to first base to get Morales as Cain scored, pulling the Royals to 3-2 behind, still with only one out.Toronto catcher Russell Martin called Hosmer’s steal “really smart baseball.” Royals Manager Ned Yost agreed.“Benny got that little hit down the right-field line, and the floodgates opened,” Yost said. “But the key to that whole inning, believe it or not, was Hosmer stealing second base. That was a double-play ball. That got us to the point where we could score five runs.”Moustakas singled to right field, scoring Hosmer with the tying run. Bautista’s throw home was wild, sending Moustakas to second. Price struck out Salvador Perez, bringing the left-handed Alex Gordon to the plate. Gordon worked the count full and then ripped a double into the gap in right-center, scoring Moustakas with the go-ahead run.Price, who is 0-7 as a starter in the postseason with a 5.44 E.R.A., did not fault Goins and instead invoked his personal mantra.“If you don’t like it,” he said, “make better pitches.”After Gordon’s double, Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons trudged to the mound and took the ball from Price, who walked to the dugout, hoping for a comeback that would not materialize.“You really can’t pitch a better game to that point, anyway,” Gibbons said.Reliever Aaron Sanchez surrendered a single to Alex Rios, and Gordon scored the fifth run of the inning. The Royals added another in the eighth. The Blue Jays put the first two batters on base against closer Wade Davis in the ninth, but Ben Revere and Josh Donaldson struck out, and Bautista lined to right.Soon, the Blue Jays were packing their bags and preparing to fly to Toronto without a win.“That’s a very scrappy team, and they put the ball in play,” Price said. “They continue to battle, and that was a tough loss.”Advertisement