AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — There are three miles between Atlético and Real Madrid, but a chasm of wealth and inequality that has grown embittered over 111 years. The score remains, 0-0, after the first leg of their Champions League quarterfinal on Tuesday, but you need only to look at the face of Mario Mandzukic to see what Atlético will give in the return game at Real’s Santiago Bernabéu Stadium next week.Mandzukic is the hard-nosed Croatian forward recruited to fill the shoes of the Brazilian-born Diego Costa, whose mixture of malevolence and sometimes magnificence persuaded Chelsea to pay a fortune for him last year. The replacement isn’t exactly like-for-like, but Mandzukic is no shrinking violet.Struck by an elbow above his left eye but waving away the doctors and getting back into the fray with plenty of mischief of his own, the message he gave was bloodied we may be, but the days of bowing to the almighty Real are over.The two teams have met seven times since Real beat Atlético in extra time in the final of last season’s Champions League. Real has won none of the subsequent matches, and if there is another stalemate — but this time with goals when they go at it again in the Bernabéu next Wednesday — then the red of Atlético will have exacted revenge in the tournament that matters most to Real.It isn’t so much the face of Mandzukic or the defiance that Atlético’s new Slovenian keeper, Jan Oblak, produced in the first leg that reflects what is happening in the Spanish capital. Rather it is Diego Simeone, the demanding, cajoling, defiant Argentine who coaches the supposedly lesser club of the two.“The rival was better in the first half,” he said Tuesday, not bringing himself to use the words Real Madrid. “They played with more intensity and with opportunities, and we had the great Oblak,” Simeone added.“But the best thing of the match was the reaction that we had. Another team that is hurt yields. We changed the intensity of our game and tried to dominate them.”It wasn’t pretty, but it was fierce. It might have been scoreless, but the way in which Mandzukic came back onto the field, looking for Sergio Ramos who he believed had cut open his head with malice aforethought, had the essence of prize-fighting.Within 30 seconds of returning to the fray, the Croat was yellow-carded by the Serbian referee — for swinging an elbow. With Arda Turan, a Turk, producing a scintillating run that eclipsed anything that the largely anonymous Cristiano Ronaldo dared to do, the sway of the contest did swing Atlético’s way toward the end.It might have turned out differently, had Gareth Bale scored with a golden opportunity right at the start. His shot was at least on target, but Oblak, rushing off his line with great courage and decisiveness, sprang down to his right to keep the ball out. Twice more in Real’s opening initiative Oblak proved his agility and his nerve to keep the scores blank.Real’s coach, Carlo Ancelotti, already under pressure to keep his job despite bringing home the Champions Cup last May, had for the first time this season a full complement of his stars. Again, Simeone turned this to his advantage.Real, he said, had individual qualities in areas of the field that Atlético could not afford. But that word — individual — was said with emphasis. Atlético would, through defensive organization, through years and generations of envy, seek to impose greater unity, greater effort to overcome any deficiency in talent.Simeone had been a player for Atlético in the days when Luis Aragonés coached into them that the way to overcome Los Galácticos, the star individuality on the other side of Madrid, was to run until those big name players felt the effort was too much.But after Aragonés departed, not least to build up the Spanish squad that eventually won the 2010 World Cup, Simeone also departed, taking his abrasive game back to Buenos Aires for a time and cutting his managerial teeth there.When Simeone returned as coach at the Vicente Calderón Stadium barely three years ago, he embraced, as Aragonés had done, the burning desire of the crowd as the extra force behind the team. “The 14 years without winning,” Simeone said this week of the omnipotence that Real had established over its neighbor, “didn’t count when we won the King’s Cup final in extra time.”“Next Wednesday,” he added, “will be the classical match that we all like to play.”He paused, chose his words, and continued: “It will be that situation of fear and anxiety that makes us fall in love with this sport. We’re leaving with the idea of trying to do it as well as possible in a very hard and difficult match.”Hard, difficult, and, you can bet, unstinting on the bitingly uncomfortable, intensity that is still Atlético’s best chance in the Bernabéu. Real had itself been borderline, and beyond, in its physical approach in the first leg.Ramos possibly did not intend to draw blood with his elbow on Mandzukic, but the Real defender was lucky in the extreme to stay on the field after a kick into the back of one opponent and a reckless stamp on another.Real’s Dani Carvajal also somehow remained in the game after literally boxing his opponent.Ramos remained because Koke, the opponent he kicked up the backside, sportingly made light of the offense.And Carvajal? The referee appeared to see the punch but took note that the other man was Mandzukic — and so the arbiter did nothing.There is a second leg, a rematch to come. Ronaldo and Bale and Benzema might wake up that night, but one thing is certain: Atlético will not lie down as the little brother in the Bernabéu .Advertisement