
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 17, 2015
The Mets marched through two aces on their way to the National League Championship Series, and when they arrived there, two more awaited them. Their reward for surviving one dominant lefty-righty pair was the challenge of doing it again.They responded to Jon Lester at Citi Field the same way they did to Clayton Kershaw and Zack Greinke at Dodger Stadium. The Mets did not trounce Lester, but they did just enough damage — including the requisite Daniel Murphy homer — that their own ace could take care of the rest.This is the Mets’ October formula, and it worked to perfection against the Chicago Cubs in Game 1 on Saturday. One misjudged fly ball aside, the Mets’ 4-2 victory was an exquisite example of all the ways to win a game: home runs by Murphy and Travis d’Arnaud, stolen bases by David Wright and Juan Lagares, a runner thrown out at the plate by Yoenis Cespedes — and, above all, efficient dominance by Matt Harvey and Jeurys Familia.The task gets no easier on Sunday, when the Cubs’ Jake Arrieta will try to even the series. The Mets’ lineup, which has not produced a multirun inning since a Game 3 blowout in the Dodgers’ series, will bring their slingshots and go for another knockout.Advertisement“It’s Kershaw, Greinke, Kershaw, Greinke, Lester, Arrieta,” Wright said. “We’re not seeing any slouches, that’s for sure. We better bring it again tomorrow, just like we did against the Kershaws and the Greinkes and the Lesters. We better do the same thing and try to manufacture some runs, hopefully jump on them early and continue to add on.”AdvertisementThe Mets are doing more than manufacturing. They complement those slingshots with rocket launchers. They have struck out 41 times in 34 innings against Kershaw, Greinke and Lester, but have also produced 13 runs — including seven solo homers.“We win games because we hit the ball out of the ballpark, and they’re very similar,” Manager Terry Collins said. “That’s why, hopefully, they make more mistakes than we do, and we get some more chances to hit some home runs. But it makes all the difference in the world, when you’ve got guys that go up there and you know you can make it 1-0 or get back into a game.”Lester had a misleading record in the regular season (11-12), but his E.R.A. was just 3.34, with more strikeouts than innings, and he has a strong October track record. The Mets started Michael Cuddyer at first base in Game 1 because of his familiarity with Lester, against whom he was 5 for 19, with two doubles.Cuddyer, who was 1 for 3 off Lester in Game 1, compared Lester’s best pitch, the cutter, with Kershaw’s best pitch.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Maybe not as much depth, but it’s very similar to Kershaw’s slider,” Cuddyer said. “Kershaw’s got the depth on his slider, but it’s very similar action, and he likes to obviously pitch in with it. As far as velocity’s concerned, there’s not many guys that throw the cutter as hard as he does.”Left-handers struggled to hit the cutter in the regular season, with a .198 average and no homers against the pitch. Yet Murphy, a left-handed hitter, connected on one for his homer in the first inning. He also homered twice off Kershaw and once off Greinke.“Murph’s in a good spot right now,” the Mets’ hitting coach, Kevin Long, said. “He’s not missing, he’s executing his swing, he’s getting himself in a good position to hit. He’s as good as anybody I’ve ever seen.”AdvertisementNow, Murphy and the Mets must figure out a way to do something against Arrieta, who was 22-6 with a 1.77 E.R.A., a performance almost unprecedented since the mound was lowered. Since 1969, only two pitchers besides Arrieta have had 22 wins in a season with an E.R.A. as low as 1.77 — Dwight Gooden in 1985 and Ron Guidry in 1978.“Part of it is his crossfire,” said Dan Haren, the veteran Cubs starter, describing Arrieta’s delivery. “He’s stepping across his body, so immediately it’s going to be really hard on righties. It’s like Jered Weaver in his prime, where it’s impossible for a right-hander to see it — and he throws 96 and gets two-seam run on it.”Haren continued: “He could throw his cutter anywhere from 88 to 92, really. Coming out of the hand they look the same, so he’s got to get a hitter to commit to one of the two, otherwise it’s too late, because they’re too hard. And his curveball is nasty, too. He goes right at guys, doesn’t really walk too many, and gets so much weak contact.”Arrieta shut out Pittsburgh in the wild-card game but allowed four runs in his Game 3 victory over St. Louis in their division series. He said after that game that the Cardinals had taken a good approach, laying off his best sliders and cutters and taking advantage the few times he left a pitch up in the strike zone.Mainly, though, Arrieta still dictated the action. His takeaway, he said after that game, was that he had walked two hitters who came in to score. The two walks — to consecutive hitters — matched his total in his previous five starts combined.“We’ve got to get him in situations maybe where we can get him in deeper counts where we’ll get something better to hit,” Collins said. “But if you let these guys get ahead of you and they can expand the strike zone as pitchers, we’re not going to do very well.”Collins was being realistic. The players do not have to think that way. They have beaten Kershaw, Greinke and Lester for three of their four playoff victories. Solving another ace is just a routine workday in October.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Aces Down, Mets Strike First Against Next Two .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »