By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 16, 2015
Kennys Vargas and Kurt Suzuki each hit a two-run homer on Thursday, powering the Minnesota Twins past the visiting Kansas City Royals, 8-5, for their first series win this season.Tommy Milone, recovering from a rough start to log five and a third innings, picked up his second straight victory for the Twins. He allowed seven hits and three walks before giving way to five relievers.Lorenzo Cain put the Royals in front with a two-run homer in the first inning, but starter Jason Vargas struggled badly. He gave up 10 hits and a walk, failing to get an out in the fourth and leaving with a 5-3 deficit.“The guys had my back today,” Milone said. “Especially scoring right after they scored in the first inning. You kind of get that breath of fresh air to go back out there.”AdvertisementRAYS 4, BLUE JAYS 2 Chris Archer struck out 11 in seven shutout innings, pinch-hitter Tim Beckham hit a two-run homer in the sixth and Tampa Bay beat visiting Toronto.AdvertisementIt was the second pinch-hit homer of the season for Beckham, making him the first rookie in Tampa Bay history with two pinch-hit long balls — and the first Rays player since Willy Aybar in 2010 to hit two in a season.Before this season, the only Rays rookies with pinch-hit home runs were Bubba Trammell in 1998 and Jonny Gomes in 2005.Archer allowed just two hits and two walks, lowering his E.R.A. to 1.37. Steve Geltz and Kevin Jepsen worked the eighth, and Brad Boxberger finished for his fourth save. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CARDINALS 4, BREWERS 0 John Lackey threw seven scoreless innings and Matt Carpenter doubled twice, helping St. Louis win at home against Milwaukee.Lackey gave up five hits, struck out eight and walked one.St. Louis took a 2-0 lead on two doubles and two singles in the sixth inning.Carpenter doubled to right to begin the sixth inning. With one out, Matt Holliday hit a 3-2 pitch up the middle for a run-scoring single. Holliday stole second and went to third on a single by Jhonny Peralta. Mark Reynolds hit an R.B.I. double to center, but Peralta was thrown out trying to score.Brewers starter Mike Fiers allowed seven hits in five and two-thirds innings.NATIONALS 5, PHILLIES 2 Doug Fister pitched effectively into the seventh inning, Yunel Escobar and Michael A. Taylor each hit a homer, and Washington beat visiting Philadelphia.Ryan Zimmerman added a two-run double for the Nationals, who, after averaging 2.4 runs through their first seven games, have 22 runs and 28 hits in their last three.Fister allowed two runs and four hits in six and two-thirds innings, striking out four and walking four.AdvertisementDrew Storen pitched the ninth for his third save.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Twins Top Royals for First Series Win of Season; Pinch Home Run Lifts Rays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.