By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 16, 2015
UNCASVILLE, Conn. —  The Seattle Storm of the W.N.B.A. selected Jewell Loyd first overall in the draft Thursday, the second early entrant to earn the honor after the Los Angeles Sparks took Tennessee’s Candace Parker No. 1 in 2008. Amanda Zahui B. was selected second overall by the Tulsa Shock.Since earlier this month, when both players announced they were leaving college to enter the draft, Zahui B., a Minnesota sophomore, and Loyd, a Notre Dame junior, have become the center of attention in women’s basketball. For men, turning pro early has been commonplace, but in the women’s game, it remains a rarity.Only two other players have recently declared early — Parker in 2008 and Kelsey Bone in 2013. “I love showing people what I can do,” Zahui B. said. “Hopefully, that will bring more people to games. There’s not a lot of people watching the W.N.B.A., but it’s growing.”Zahui B. is an interior power. She averaged 18.8 points per game and 12.9 rebounds per game last season. Loyd is more of a dynamic scorer, having led Notre Dame with 19.8 points per game.AdvertisementThe early entries of Zahui B. and Loyd, who have become friends in recent months, have sparked interest in the league.Advertisement“It’s bringing a different look into the league, and it’s getting some outsiders that really haven’t paid too much attention to us to now talk about it,” Connecticut Sun Coach Anne Donovan said April 10 during a news media conference call.But there have also been detractors, mostly aiming their ire at Loyd’s decision to leave Notre Dame. The Fighting Irish were expected to challenge for a national title again next season.According to W.N.B.A. rules, college players are eligible for early entry into the draft during the year they turn 22 (Loyd will turn 22 on Oct. 5). For international players like Zahui B., 21, who is from Sweden, the rule applies to the year they turn 20.Before Notre Dame’s team banquet on Tuesday, Coach Muffet McGraw told local news media she was “shocked” and “disappointed” with Loyd’s decision.“It’s a really bad decision for women especially to try to leave early,” McGraw said. “They’re not making the money the men make.”Donovan said she was also surprised at Loyd’s decision, but that she happily began rearranging her draft board after the announcement.“I think each of the situations are unique, and you can’t just put a blanket statement out about is it good or bad,” San Antonio Stars Coach and General Manager Dan Hughes said.AdvertisementZahui B. and Loyd will earn a base salary of $49,644 as rookies, but both players saw added value in being the top overall picks this season in terms of visibility. Next year, Connecticut’s Breanna Stewart, already one of the most decorated players in women’s college basketball, will likely enter the draft and receive most of the attention.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Loyd said that her decision was made before Notre Dame’s national championship game against UConn on April 7, but that she was focused on trying to win the title and that her pro aspirations were not a distraction. She added that her teammates have supported her since she made her announcement.“People are going to talk,” Loyd said. “It is what it is. People said it’s a new trend coming out. I don’t know. It was the best decision for me.”Zahui B. said she supported Loyd’s decision and did not know her intentions when they met for the first time last month during the N.C.A.A. tournament, when Minnesota fell in the first round at Notre Dame.On Thursday, Zahui B., sitting next to her mother, said that “working for something that you love to do, it’s not really work,” and that making money to play basketball, despite the smaller salaries compared to men, was “a dream come true.”Loyd was surrounded Thursday by business associates and her brother, who played professionally in Europe and has advised her through her career. She said that turning pro was also the first step toward being able to make business investments and support philanthropic endeavors. In an article Thursday for the website The Players’ Tribune, Loyd wrote that she battled dyslexia and wanted to help others overcome disabilities.Zahui B. was also still somewhat amazed at her fortune, having lived alone at age 15 and played with club teams, while Loyd had been planning for this moment for much of her career.“Every step you take in life helps grow your brand,” she said. “We’re a family that prepares for years to come.”Before Loyd was selected Thursday, she said she would not let the moment get the best of her.“You take it in and you be grateful, and then you wake up tomorrow and it’s work,” Loyd said, “because the moment you take off, there’s someone else trying to take your spot. It’s real now.”A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Early Entrants Are Top Two Picks in W.N.B.A. Draft.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.