AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Harvey AratonGREENBURGH, N.Y. — If Phil Jackson’s first full-season performance as president of the Knicks has fallen woefully short of being commensurate with his $12 million annual salary, payback can begin in the playoffs. His 17-victory team has mercifully gone home. It is time for him to learn as much as he can about those clubs that remain.Forget for now the sobering 19.9 percent chance of securing the top pick in June’s N.B.A. draft. That is all about the luck of the lottery draw, beyond Jackson’s control. What he must do in the coming weeks is scrutinize the playoffs with a Zen-like focus, eyeball the body language of every prospective unrestricted free agent, every nuanced movement, and not accept the conventional wisdom that the best of those players will ultimately align with their current locales.Because there is much about the coming free-agent summer to consider that may not necessarily be business as usual.If, as reported, Jackson has already targeted Greg Monroe, a B to B-plus-level forward from a losing culture in Detroit, shame on him. He cannot settle so soon without at least trying to raise the competitive bar.Can he land a more desirable frontcourt player — Marc Gasol of Memphis, LaMarcus Aldridge of Portland or DeAndre Jordan of the Los Angeles Clippers? As noted a few thousand times during the Carmelo Anthony please-stay campaign of last summer, the free agent’s incumbent team can offer an extra (fifth) season in a maximum contract, translating to more money, along with familiarity.But here come the playoffs. Here comes a Memphis-Portland series in which either Gasol or Aldridge is looking at first-round elimination.Here comes an early Clippers-San Antonio showdown that could fracture an already fragile chemistry in Los Angeles and make Jordan, an athletically gifted shot-blocking and rebounding center, at least open to listening to a well-prepared pitch from Jackson.“I think players’ mind-sets change kind of every day,” Anthony said during his see-you-next-season chat with reporters Thursday at the Knicks’ practice facility.Not surprisingly on a roster so depleted of acceptable N.B.A. talent, Anthony was the only player the Knicks made available to speak Thursday, with Jackson said to be saving his front-office farewell address for next week.Anthony wore one of his trademark spiffy hats, was his usual amiable self and agreed with the assertion that players supposedly locked into staying where they are could reconsider based on postseason results. “I hear conversations all the time — ‘I want to see what happens with this situation,’ ” he said.He stayed in New York for the extra guaranteed money and admitted to some justifiable remorse when the Knicks crashed and burned, with his season going down with them when he opted for surgery on his left knee after February’s All-Star Game.As often is the case with Anthony, he quickly embraced the politically correct inverse, claiming to have returned because he believed in Jackson’s ability — at that time, anyway — to build a contender.Now, he said: “Phil really gets a chance to put his stamp on what he wants this organization to be about, what he wants this team to be about, what players he wants in here. This is the time where he’s going to step up to the plate.”Consider that a hope, a prayer or a direct challenge. For all the happy talk from Jackson about not falling into old Knicks habits, not trying to buy talent and instead finding complementary pieces to fit the triangle, he was handed a virtual blank check by James L. Dolan in part because of his presumed ability to resonate with the biggest name brands.Steve Mills? His title is executive vice president and general manager, a job he was said to retain after Jackson’s arrival because he had connections with high-profile agents and players.Between the two of them, Jackson and Mills should be able to develop a strategy that seizes upon the opportunity they have been gifted with for a summer in which they will have roughly $30 million in salary-cap space. The expected dramatic rise in league revenue after next season could convince some free agents to seek a shorter deal in July, with a one-year opt-out timed for the summer of 2016.That is the paradigm LeBron James helped establish when he returned to Cleveland. So let’s imagine Jackson and Mills sitting down in early July with, for example, Aldridge, and saying: You just lost in the first round. You are 29, at the height of your career but with a cursed Portland franchise, with injuries ruining era after era, from Bill Walton to Sam Bowie to Brandon Roy to (this season) Wesley Matthews. Come to New York, rework your deal a year from now, make even more than Portland can pay you now and cash in on Broadway.This is where Anthony — who agreed that his celebrity and off-court earnings have grown despite less-than-hoped-for results in New York — could enter.“As far as using my experience to talk to free agents, it all depends on what those guys are interested in,” he said. “Some guys are not into business and endorsements; they just want to play basketball. Some guys are into that life — it all depends on who the guy is.”He added, “I think my experience can help people, open their eyes up about New York, good and bad.”Asked what’s bad about New York, besides the news media, he laughed and said: “You guys are really not that bad. You’re just doing your job.”There you go, the dispelling of an age-old myth, or excuse.And no excuses for Jackson on the job this spring, at least in determining who’s most likely to listen. The chance of his reeling in an All-Star may never even reach 19.9 percent. But that’s better than zero, or settling too soon for Greg Monroe.Advertisement