AdvertisementSupported byMets 7, Marlins 5By Tim RohanThe Mets talked all winter about winning, about contending, and they dreamed about scenes such as the one at Citi Field on Thursday. Lucas Duda delivered the big hit, sending home the go-ahead run against the Miami Marlins. The crowd was on its feet, chanting “Doo-da! Doo-da!” The Mets won their fifth game in a row and jumped into first place in the National League East. To their credit, the Mets’ 7-5 victory Thursday did not feel like a lazy April game. They made two comebacks playing without their captain, David Wright. They were on the wrong end of an overturned call at the plate that tied the score in the top of the seventh, and then they surged back in the bottom half of the inning to take the lead for good.The Mets’ record is 7-3, and the team is riding its first five-game winning streak since May 2013.“A year ago, we don’t win tonight,” Manager Terry Collins said. After the game, the Mets talked extensively about believing they would win. This year veterans like Wright, Michael Cuddyer and Curtis Granderson have talked about winning as if it were a skill, something that could be learned and nurtured. During spring training, the veterans talked about setting an example for the younger players on offense: grinding out at-bats, moving runners over and manufacturing runs.If Thursday was any indication, the Mets seem to be learning how to win. Their offense, for once, was not the issue. It was their offense that kept responding when their pitching and defense faltered, and it was not just one batter. Four different Mets drove in a run. After Miami’s Giancarlo Stanton hit a two-run homer in the first inning off Mets starter Dillon Gee and Martin Prado hit a solo shot in the fourth to take a 3-0 lead, Wilmer Flores answered with a three-run homer in the fifth.“I got a pitch I was looking for,” Flores said. “It was a front-door cutter. I was just trying to drive the ball, and get a base hit, and get a run. But I put a good swing on it.”Gee stuck out seven and went five and two-thirds innings. He has lasted at least five innings in 48 consecutive starts, the longest active streak in baseball. But on his third time through the order, he came undone. When Gee was pulled from the game, the Marlins had the bases loaded and the score was tied, 3-3.Rafael Montero, the 24-year-old right-hander who lost out to Gee for the last spot in the rotation, replaced him and did not fare much better. He walked his first batter, Marcell Ozuna, forcing in a run. Then Curtis Granderson made a running catch into the wall to avoid a bases-clearing double by J. T. Realmuto.Montero returned for the seventh but was yanked after Ichiro Suzuki hit a pinch-hit triple with one out. The next batter, Dee Gordon, hit a sharp grounder to Daniel Murphy, but Murphy’s throw home to catcher Travis d’Arnaud was wide. Suzuki dove for the plate, Arnaud dove to tag Suzuki, and they both missed. Suzuki was called out, but the Marlins challenged the call and it was reversed. The score was tied again, but this season, the Mets stay calm when things go against them. “You feel like you’re in the game, you really do,” Collins said. “You think, ‘Hey, look we get a couple guys on, we get a run here, a run there, we’re back in the game.’ ” After Montero walked in the run in the sixth inning, the Mets calmly responded with two runs. Duda doubled, Cuddyer singled Duda home, Murphy moved Cuddyer to third on a ground out, and Eric Campbell, Wright’s replacement, scored Cuddyer on a sacrifice fly.After Ichiro was ruled safe in the seventh, and the score was tied, 5-5, John Mayberry Jr. and Granderson worked walks. Then Duda had a seven-pitch at-bat and lifted a single into left field. Cuddyer followed with an infield single that scored Granderson, pushing the lead to two runs. “It’s not like I’m laying out missiles,” Duda said. But that seemed to be the point. He had taken an easy swing instead of a big one, and he was the hero for it. The fans then started chanting his name.Advertisement