AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressPavel Datsyuk scored twice and Petr Mrazek had 44 saves in his N.H.L. playoff debut to help the Detroit Red Wings defeat the host Tampa Bay Lightning, 3-2, in Game 1 of their Eastern Conference opening-round series on Thursday.Datsyuk scored on two of the first four shots the Red Wings took against Tampa Bay’s Ben Bishop. Luke Glendening’s short-handed goal gave Detroit a 3-1 lead early in the third period.Mrazek gave up a short-handed goal to Brian Boyle in the first period and a late goal to Nikita Nesterov that enabled the Lightning to pull to 3-2. Mrazek was named Detroit’s starter for the game over the veteran Jimmy Howard.Tampa Bay outshot the Red Wings, 46-14, but went 0 for 7 on the power play and failed to get a shot off on the final opportunity in the closing seconds.WILD 4, BLUES 2 Jason Zucker and Matt Dumba scored in the first two periods to give Minnesota a 2-0 lead, and Devan Dubnyk made 19 saves to help the Wild open the playoffs with a victory in St. Louis.Jaden Schwartz and Alexander Steen scored in the third period for the Blues. Mikael Granlund and Jason Pominville added goals for Minnesota.Game 2 is on Saturday.A SLASHING INJURY FOR OTTAWA Senators forward Mark Stone sustained a microfracture of his right wrist and some ligament damage, and his status was “very questionable” for the second game of Ottawa’s first-round playoff series with Montreal on Friday, Senators General Manager Brian Murray said. Stone was slashed by Montreal defenseman P. K. Subban at 8 minutes 23 seconds of the second period Wednesday.Subban was given a five-minute major and a game misconduct. Murray urged the league to suspend Subban.Chris Neil, who has not played since fracturing his thumb Feb. 14, will replace Stone.CRAWFORD RETURNING TO GOAL Chicago Coach Joel Quenneville had never pulled Blackhawks goalie Corey Crawford from a playoff game before. But for Quenneville, putting Crawford back in net was an easy decision.Crawford will start Game 2 against the Nashville Predators on Friday despite giving up three goals on 12 shots and being yanked in Wednesday night’s series opener. Scott Darling then stopped all 42 shots he faced in his postseason debut, making save after save for more than 67 minutes in a 4-3 double-overtime win.Advertisement