AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxThelma Coyne Long, an Australian tennis star who won 19 Grand Slam titles at midcentury, died on Tuesday in Narrabeen, near Sydney. She was 96.Her death was announced by the International Tennis Hall of Fame, which inducted her in 2013.One of the dominant women’s players in the world — she was ranked No. 7 in 1952 — Long took titles in singles, doubles and mixed doubles in a career of more than 20 years. She won her first major championship in the mid-1930s and her last in the late ’50s, after an interruption for wartime service.In an era when travel expenses could be prohibitive and players, especially in the women’s game, were far less well capitalized than they are now, Long won 18 of her 19 major victories at the Australian Championships, the forerunner of the Australian Open.She earned the Australian doubles title 12 times, still the record for a player of either sex, competing most often with her countrywoman Nancye Wynne Bolton. Long also won the singles crown twice, in 1952 and again in 1954, when she was nearly 36, and the mixed doubles title four times. (In 1952 she held all three titles simultaneously.)Her 19th Grand Slam victory came in 1956 at the French Championships, as the French Open was then known. The next year, at Wimbledon, Long and Bolton advanced as far as the doubles final.Thelma Dorothy Coyne was born in Sydney on Oct. 14, 1918. She married Maurice Newton Long, a fellow Australian, in 1941, though the marriage did not endure.At the start of World War II she joined the Red Cross, working as a transport driver in Melbourne. In 1942 she enlisted in the Australian Women’s Army Service, attaining the rank of captain. For her wartime service, she was awarded the Australia Service Medal 1939-1945.Long, who appears to have left no immediate family, was a resident of Maroubra, a Sydney suburb. After her playing career ended, she worked as a tennis coach.Her other athletic honors included the Australian Sports Medal and induction into the Australian Tennis Hall of Fame.In 2013, on her induction into the international hall of fame, Long reflected pithily on the differences between the tennis of her era and that of the present day.“I’m very proud to receive the award because it was a bit tougher to be a good tennis player back then,” she told The Southern Courier, an Australian newspaper. “Nowadays they make millions for running around in their undies.”Advertisement