By IAN AUSTENAPRIL 16, 2015
OTTAWA —  The swaggering confidence that fans of the Ottawa Senators displayed Wednesday night is a relatively new phenomenon. Last month, when it looked as if the Senators might defy the odds and make the playoffs, the anxious local conversation was about jinxes, hexes and curses.When Rick Chiarelli, a member of the city council, introduced a motion to mark the team’s surprising comeback by renaming a downtown strip of bars and restaurants Sens Mile, a step normally taken only when the team actually reaches the playoffs, there was a protracted debate about tempting fate.The motion passed unanimously, the Senators immediately went on to lose three games and Chiarelli was suddenly the most unpopular politician in the national capital.“There were those who were concerned that I caused the Senators to lose,” Chiarelli said. “Not just fringe people. Very sophisticated business people were concerned.”AdvertisementThe Senators survived to enter a playoff series against the Montreal Canadiens, and a petition calling on Chiarelli to resign was forgotten. The worry over jinxes had not entirely faded, though. Chiarelli watched Wednesday’s game from home because, he said, “my neighbors told me not to leave the house.”AdvertisementIt did not help. The Senators lost the opening game, 4-3.But there is excitement in Ottawa and throughout much of Canada because five Canadian teams qualified for the playoffs, the most since 2004. It is a sharp contrast to the national hand-wringing last year after only the Canadiens advanced to the postseason. A Canadian team has not won the Stanley Cup since Montreal did in 1993.“There have been some lean years where there have been virtually no Canadian teams in the playoffs,” said Jim Watson, Ottawa’s mayor, who was hobbling around Sens Mile on crutches Wednesday night after breaking his pelvis in the most Canadian of accidents: a snowmobile crash. “It affects everything from ratings on the television broadcast to sort of the esprit de corps in Canadian cities and throughout the country.”Outside of Toronto, however, the absence of the Maple Leafs allowed Watson and countless others to engage in another national unifying force: mocking Canada’s largest city and its chronically failing hockey team.In a Twitter post to his counterpart in Toronto, John Tory, Watson wrote: “isn’t it great that all the Canadian NHL teams are in the playoffs.....oh wait, sorry!” The mayor’s post was not entirely accurate. The Edmonton Oilers, another once-great but now-humbled team, finished with the third-worst record in the league.A break in a seemingly perpetual winter helped boost the overflow crowds along Sens Mile on Wednesday. Before it was apparent that their team would lose, several Senators fans said they were already satisfied with the team’s performance.“Anything is a bonus after getting into the playoffs,” Maria Giacovazzo said while watching the final moments of the game on a large screen television on the sidewalk in front of the Sir John A Pub. “Will they win the Cup? I really don’t believe it. They’re still too young. But I’d like to see it.”Montreal’s proximity to Ottawa, about a two-hour drive, compounds any matchup between them, and a large number of Ottawa’s residents are Canadiens partisans. Bryson Massé did not back away from boisterously cheering for Montreal on Wednesday and was among the many fans at one pub wearing sporting a Canadiens’ sweater.Advertisement“When the Habs come to Ottawa to play, it’s almost like a home game for the Habs because there’s so many people cheering for them in the stands,” Massé said amid widespread ribbing from Senators-supporting work colleagues.In what was seen as an attempt to diminish the influence of Montreal fans, the Senators restricted sales of playoff tickets to people with Ottawa-area postal codes.The tensions between the teams’ fans are sure to rise after the events of Wednesday’s game. In the second period, the Canadiens’ captain, P. K. Subban, was ejected for two-handed slash across the wrists of Mark Stone, Ottawa’s leading scorer. Stone played intermittently after that, and the Senators announced Thursday that Stone sustained a microfracture and some ligament damage in his right wrist. His return for the rest of the series is questionable.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the game, the Canadiens criticized the severity of the officials’ call, while the Senators complained about Subban’s intent and urged discipline from the league.“I think it’s an easy solution — you either suspend him, or when one of their best players gets slashed just give us five,” Ottawa Coach Dave Cameron said.Montreal-Ottawa is not the only all-Canada first-round series. The Calgary Flames defeated the Vancouver Canucks, 2-1, on Wednesday on a goal with 29.7 seconds remaining. If the playoff history between the teams indicates anything, it was just the first battle of a long war.The last three times the Flames and the Canucks met in the postseason — in 1989, 1994 and 2004 — each series went to a seventh game that was decided in overtime. The winner each time went on to play in the Stanley Cup finals, but only Calgary won a Cup, in 1989.Trevor Linden, the Canucks’ president, grew up two hours south of Calgary in Medicine Hat, Alberta, and played in all three of those series for Vancouver.He said the dynamics of the Calgary-Vancouver rivalry went beyond the box score. The cities are about 600 miles apart, close by western Canada standards, and hockey supremacy in the region is always on the forefront.Advertisement“The people in both cities take the rivalry personally,” Linden said, “and I think there’s a dislike between the two teams, and that’s O.K.”The Vancouver-Calgary series may also be the most unlikely one. Both teams finished near the bottom of the Western Conference last year, and the Flames had not been in the postseason since 2009.Johnny Gaudreau, the star rookie forward for Calgary, looked slightly overwhelmed as he faced an atypically large news media scrum several hours before his first N.H.L. playoff game Wednesday. Gaudreau, known as Johnny Hockey, has played in some major tournaments at Boston College and with the United States national team.“Honestly, I don’t think you can compare this,” Gaudreau, 21, said. “This is something really new to me.”Perhaps no Canadian fan base looked forward to the playoffs more than the Winnipeg Jets’. The franchise left Winnipeg for Arizona in 1996, but a team returned to town when the Thrashers relocated from Atlanta in 2011. When the Jets play the Anaheim Ducks on Monday in Game 3 of their first-round series, it will be the first time in 19 years that Winnipeg has hosted a playoff game.“They’ve lost their team, and it came back to them,” Winnipeg Jets Coach Paul Maurice said. “It’s a little bit like, for me, being a teacher in the school and you’ve got their kids. This is their team. So the kids are getting good marks right now.”He added: “It’s what we want for our sport, for the game of hockey, and I think you see it in all the Canadian cities. It’s March Madness and then some across Canada.”Because of an editing error, a reporting credit on Friday with an article about the five Canadian teams in the N.H.L. playoffs misspelled the surname of a contributor in some copies. Gerald Narciso (not Narcisco) reported from Vancouver, British Columbia.Gerald Narciso contributed reporting from Vancouver, British Columbia, and Andrew Knoll from Anaheim, Calif.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: In Canada, March Madness Arrives a Little Late.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.