AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehIf there was a positive thing that Carmelo Anthony could take from the Knicks’ brutal 2014-15 season, he said, it might be clarity.On Thursday morning, Anthony came back to that word — and the general concept — several times to answer questions at the Knicks’ training complex. He was speaking to reporters for the first time since mid-February, when a major surgical procedure on his left knee brought his season to an early close. One day after the Knicks played their final game, a loss that dropped their record to 17-65, Anthony seemed intent on heralding the optimism that would replace the misery now that the season was over, now that the storm clouds had passed.To start, Anthony, 30, acknowledged he did not have such clarity earlier this season. Asked if he had ever second-guessed his decision to sign a five-year contract with the Knicks last summer, he admitted that, from time to time, doubts had clouded his mind.“I try to keep myself away from thinking like that, but as a human being, those thoughts definitely come into play,” he said. “You sit down at night, and you’re thinking, ‘Did I really make the right decision?’ and things like that.”But things have changed that frame of mind, he said. For instance, Anthony said he was surprised and confused when the team’s president, Phil Jackson, first moved to dismantle the team’s roster, notably sending J. R. Smith and Iman Shumpert to the Cleveland Cavaliers in a trade. Anthony joked that it was difficult to ever know what Jackson was thinking. He said as he came to understand Jackson’s motives, it was as if smoke had cleared.“The moves that he made, once he started explaining to me behind closed doors about what was going on, his thought process behind everything, it started to make sense,” Anthony said. “So I don’t second-guess it.”The plan will be critical this summer, as the Knicks will have a top-five draft pick and close to $30 million in salary-cap space. Anthony has gained clarity on these circumstances, too, joking that his personal office looked like a general manager’s office, with names and hypothetical outcomes moving around on a big board.Anthony said he would defer to the front office this summer, help it if it needed him to recruit players and offer feedback when asked. He described the draft class, without mentioning anyone specific, as “powerful.” He noted that it was a great situation, but one that also brought its own pressures. He acknowledged that trading the draft pick provided intriguing possibilities, but his preference seemed to lean toward keeping it.“I think you need a draft pick,” he said. “If we get a top pick, we take our chances with who we’re going to draft, regardless of who that is, and then we build other pieces around that with the money we have that’s left.”Anthony said his knee felt much better. He has begun doing light workouts on his legs, and he said he could return to the court just before June. Even his inability to play basketball all these months, he said, provided him more clarity on the game.“It was a lot of basketball I was able to watch, a lot of clarity, and a lot of things I saw from the outside looking in that maybe I wouldn’t have seen out there playing on the basketball court,” he said.A reporter brought up the idea that Jackson’s triangle offense had come under criticism as an outdated system that relied upon midrange jump shots. Anthony agreed that the game was evolving, but he said the offense could work given the right personnel.“If this is the system that we’re going to run, then we’re going to run it,” Anthony said. “I don’t think it’s something that will be changed, and we all have to accept that.”It was not the most stirring endorsement of the team’s system. But Anthony noted that too much emphasis was placed on the system and that other teams used similar concepts without the same scrutiny that the Knicks had been receiving.Anthony said his layoff from the game had even given him a newfound clarity regarding the desires of the team’s fans, many of whom had started wishing for the team to lose games to give it a better chance at a high pick.“I understand what was people’s frustration with us winning a couple games down the stretch,” he said. “But for me, as a competitor, you can’t come to me and say, I need you to lose these games. There’s no way. I would look at you like you had 10 heads.”Advertisement