By KEN BELSONAPRIL 16, 2015
Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson will be reinstated on Friday, ending one of the N.F.L.’s more complex and embarrassing suspensions.The N.F.L. told Peterson on Thursday that he would be able to rejoin the Vikings, but that he was expected to continue taking part in counseling and treatment programs stemming from his arrest for disciplining his 4-year-old son last year with a switch.While Peterson’s agent has said he wants his client to play elsewhere, the Vikings have said they plan to keep Peterson, who is set to earn a base salary of $12.75 million next season.Peterson was arrested in Texas in mid-September, and he sat out that week’s game. He said he was just disciplining his son as he had been disciplined.AdvertisementHis arrest came less than a week after the release of a video of Ray Rice, the former Baltimore Ravens running back, punching his future wife.AdvertisementAfter the Vikings lost that Sunday, Peterson was reactivated, leading to an uproar from fans and several of the team’s sponsors. The league then took the unusual step of putting Peterson on the commissioner’s exempt list, which allowed him to be paid while he resolved his legal matter.After he pleaded no contest on Nov. 4 in state court in Montgomery County, Tex., to reckless assault of the child, Peterson expected to be reinstated. Instead, Commissioner Roger Goodell suspended him until at least April 15 for violating the N.F.L.’s personal conduct policy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The league’s decision prompted questions about whether it deliberately tried to keep Peterson off the field. Peterson asked for an independent arbitrator to hear his appeal, something that Rice had received.Harold Henderson, a league-appointed arbitrator, upheld the season-long suspension in December, calling Peterson’s actions “egregious and aggravated.” Henderson added that Peterson had not shown proper remorse or appreciation for the seriousness of his actions.Peterson and the N.F.L. Players Association then sued the league in federal court in Minnesota. In February, Judge David S. Doty in the United States District Court in Minneapolis overturned the arbitration ruling.The N.F.L. appealed that decision, arguing that a federal court did not have jurisdiction over the league’s disciplinary matters.To Peterson, that appeal is now moot.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: N.F.L. Reinstates Peterson After Child-Abuse Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.