AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher ClareyThere was surprise in multiple time zones on Thursday when Eugene, Ore., became the first city in the United States to secure the world outdoor track and field championships. It will stage them in 2021 without the usual constraint of having had to win a formal bidding process.In California, Ashton Eaton, the reigning Olympic decathlon champion from Oregon who had worked with the Eugene team on a failed earlier bid, woke up, thumbed through his phone and received the news through Twitter.“I was like, ‘Huh? Cool!’ ” Eaton said.In Sweden, Bjorn Eriksson, the president of the Swedish Athletic Association, had a much less positive reaction.“I am 100 percent confused and very, very disturbed,” said Eriksson, whose country had been planning to bid for the 2021 championships to be held in Gothenburg as part of the city’s celebration of its 400th anniversary.But in Beijing, the prevailing mood was satisfaction after the council of the International Association of Athletics Federations unexpectedly pre-empted the customary process and voted overwhelmingly in favor of Eugene.“We had to make a strategic decision, and to go to the United States is very important for us,” said Lamine Diack, the president of the I.A.A.F., said in a telephone interview from Beijing. “I hope the Americans are going to discover that track and field is not just the Olympic trials and the Olympic Games.”Diack, an 81-year-old from Senegal, has served as I.A.A.F. president since 1999. He will not stand for re-election later this year and repeatedly had expressed a desire to see the world championships awarded to the United States.“I think President Diack really wanted this to happen and pushed very hard for it,” said Vin Lananna, the TrackTown USA president who was a central figure in the Eugene team.Eugene initially bid for the 2019 world championships but was beaten in November by Doha, Qatar, in a 15-12 vote by the I.A.A.F. council.Diack said the I.A.A.F. broached the idea of awarding Eugene the 2021 championships at that same November meeting in Monaco. “We opened up that possibility, but Eugene said it was 2019 they wanted, and so that was that,” Diack said.Diack said he put Eugene and the 2021 event on the council agenda for Beijing and opened up the topic for discussion Thursday. According to Diack, the vote, which he said was made by secret ballot to ensure council members’ independence, ended with 23 votes in favor of Eugene, one against and one ballot unmarked.There is a precedent for Thursday’s vote. The I.A.A.F. also awarded the 2007 world championships to Osaka, Japan, without competitive bidding. But the lack of a formal process this time led to criticism in Europe, particularly in Sweden.“So far as I can see, this smells,” Eriksson said by telephone. “I don’t understand why we don’t follow ordinary transparency rules the way we do in Europe, the way you do in the United States.”Gothenburg hosted the world championships in 1995, and Eriksson said he could see the allure of bringing the world championships to the United States for the first time.“Absolutely,” Eriksson said. “I think that’s fair, and I wouldn’t be surprised if America would succeed in a normal, open process. It’s 100 percent O.K., but I think it would be nice if Eugene itself gets in that position in a fair way but not in closed rooms.”Lananna called the situation a “one-time opportunity.”“I think the I.A.A.F. made a strategic decision,” he said. “We presented the business plan, and they decided to go ahead and take the step to do it. I have to applaud the I.A.A.F. for it, but I am sympathetic to the Gothenburg local organizing committee.” Asked why Eugene did not choose to participate in an open bidding process for 2021, Lananna said: “All our partners were aligned. I don’t know that we could have kept everybody excited. They were all excited for 2019 when we didn’t get it. We had them still lined up. It’s very hard in the United States in particular to keep everybody excited for a long time, so we really had to get it done, and so we went for it.”Diack said of the council, “We decided to make an exception, and everybody was in agreement.”The United States has long been the strongest nation in track and field, regularly dominating the medal count at major events and producing stars like Carl Lewis, Michael Johnson, Gail Devers and Jackie Joyner-Kersee.But paradoxically, it has never staged the world championships, a multiday event that was launched in 1983 and is track and field’s most prestigious showcase after the Olympics.The dearth of big stadiums with regulation tracks in major American markets has repeatedly scuttled plans, along with the I.A.A.F.’s need for the host city to carry the bulk of the financial burden.Eugene, with a population of about 160,000, is no major market, but it is a track hotbed in a nation that would frankly rather watch football.Eugene regularly stages Olympic trials and the N.C.A.A. championships at cozy, atmospheric Hayward Field, which will be expanded to a capacity of over 30,000 for the 2021 world championships. Eugene also stages the Prefontaine Classic, an annual event in the I.A.A.F.’s Diamond League circuit. Last year, it hosted a particularly well-received edition of the world junior championships, which turned out to be the event that helped persuade Diack and the I.A.A.F. that Eugene, despite its demographic challenges, could handle their main event. Above all, they and American track officials want to use the 2021 world championships as a relaunching pad for a sport that struggles for attention in the United States despite the Americans’ enduring excellence and the boom in amateur and professional road running.“The entire, entire basis of our bid was to grow the sport,” Lananna said. “We believe hosting the world championships in the United States has the potential of reigniting Americans’ passion for track and field.”Eaton, the world-record holder in the decathlon, said he believed there would be a long-term effect. “I basically think the benefit of this we will see maybe 10 or 15 years after the event is that a lot of young people will be exposed to track and field in the United States, kind of like how, back in the day, Carl Lewis and Michael Johnson made that impact,” he said by telephone.Oregon already had the world indoor track and field championships, which will be staged in Portland next year. Now it has the world outdoor championships, too, and if Boston somehow manages to revive its faltering bid and secure the 2024 Summer Olympics, track and field will have an unprecedented series of showcases in the United States.“The home run, which I know is a challenge at the moment, is if there’s a U.S. 2024 Olympics,” said Mary Wittenberg, the president and chief executive of New York Road Runners. “Then that’s truly the capstone to all of this.”Advertisement