By BENJAMIN HOFFMANAPRIL 16, 2015
It took all 82 games to decide many of the N.B.A. playoff seedings, but the field is set. A look at some matchups reveals several compelling story lines to follow when postseason play begins Saturday.Western ConferenceFUNNY SEEDINGS The Los Angeles Clippers and the San Antonio Spurs were perhaps the second- and third-best teams in the Western Conference. The Clippers won 14 of their final 15 games and the Spurs won 14 of 16, making them even hotter than the conference-leading Golden State Warriors. The surges had both teams in contention for the No. 2 seed on the season’s final day, but with such a tightly grouped bunch of contenders, they ended up Nos. 3 and 6 and will face each other in the first round. It should be a fascinating series, but one of the top teams in the conference will miss the second round. HOW MUCH HOWARD? James Harden kept things going for the Houston Rockets all season despite Dwight Howard being able to suit up for only 41 games. Harden’s case for a Most Valuable Player Award rests largely on the belief that he carried his team to the playoffs, but now it is worth wondering how much Howard can contribute when the team faces the Dallas Mavericks in the first round. Howard averaged 21.5 minutes a game in nine appearances since his return, and did not do a whole lot in those games, averaging of 13.8 points and 8.9 rebounds. A healthy Howard will make Houston a championship contender, but if he is severely limited, Harden may hit a wall.BREAK UP THE WARRIORS  The last time the Golden State Warriors entered the postseason as the No. 1 seed was April 20, 1976. Only one active N.B.A. player, Andre Miller of the Sacramento Kings, was alive. Tim Duncan of the San Antonio Spurs was born on the day between Games 3 and 4 of the Warriors’ first-round win over the Detroit Pistons. Since then, the team has had a losing record in 26 of 39 seasons. The franchise has two N.B.A. titles, and, as the Philadelphia Warriors, was the champion of the first season of the Basketball Association of America, a predecessor of the N.B.A. But current fans very likely have no idea how to handle their team going into the playoffs as the favorite to win it all.AdvertisementEastern ConferenceLOVE IN THE PLAYOFFS The Cleveland Cavaliers paid a king’s ransom to pry Kevin Love from the Minnesota Timberwolves this season, and things seemed to go wrong from the start. While Chris Bosh was able to check his ego and be the role player LeBron James needed to win two championships in Miami, Love, a former All-Star, seemed to long for his days as a No. 1 option. Things may change on Sunday when Love gets his first taste of playoff basketball after 438 regular-season games with nothing to show for them.TIME TO GET SERIOUS Much has been made of the Atlanta Hawks adopting the strategies of the San Antonio Spurs in a dramatic rebuild of the once-mediocre franchise into the No. 1 team in the Eastern Conference. But as exciting as the Hawks were for long stretches of the season, and as talented as the roster is, with four All-Stars, a 7-8 finish to the season hardly seemed Spurs-like, even if the team had a large lead in its conference. If the Hawks want to be the Spurs of the East, they will need to play their best basketball in April, May and June, not December, January and February.ROSE’S HEALTH The Chicago Bulls finished the season with the No. 3 seed in the East despite having Derrick Rose healthy for only 51 games. The good news is that Rose averaged 17.7 points and 4.9 assists a game — 21.3 and 5.9 on a per-36-minute basis — and seemed capable of elevating the team in the way he did before his knees started to fail him in 2012. The bad news is that he left the final game of the season with soreness in his left knee. That is not the knee he had surgery on most recently, but is the one he hurt in the 2012 playoffs. The Bulls are an impeccably coached team, and have plenty of value beyond Rose, but their chance at a deep playoff run may rest on Rose’s shaky knees.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Playoffs Feature Streaks, Egos and Shaky Knees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.