AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe Rangers finished the season with the best record in the N.H.L. and are widely touted as the Stanley Cup favorites.But to many of the new breed of advanced hockey statisticians, they look like a bad bet.One of the hottest statistics among the hockey Moneyball set is “Fenwick close percentage,” named after Matt Fenwick of the blog Battle of Alberta. The theory behind the stat is that the most important thing for a hockey team is getting more shots than its opponent. Statisticians have shown that a team that shoots more has the puck more, and wins more.Last season was a banner one for the statistic: The Los Angeles Kings had only the ninth best record in the league, but were first in Fenwick. To the surprise of many, but to the satisfaction of advanced statistics mavens, they went on to win the Stanley Cup.This year, the Islanders rank first in Fenwick close percentage, according to Hockeyanalysis.com. Winnipeg, Pittsburgh and Tampa Bay are close behind, and if history repeats they could also be considered teams to watch in the playoffs.But what is most striking is the ranking of the mighty Rangers: only 20th.Understanding this anomaly requires a closer look at Fenwick close. In calculating the stat, each team’s shot total is compared with the shots taken against it. Blocked shots do not count, but, crucially, all others do, whether they go in the net, are saved, or even miss the net entirely.Since power-play hockey is vastly different, only five-on-five situations are counted. In addition, since trailing teams often change their tactics significantly in a desperate bid to score, the statistic is tallied only when games are close, defined as tied or one-goal games in the first two periods and tied games in the third period.The Islanders wound up with the best Fenwick close percentage, 54.3 percent. Buffalo, worst in the league in points, was also worst in Fenwick at only 39.0 percent. The Rangers’ figure, despite their successful season, was a mediocre 49.7 percent, trailing several nonplayoff teams.Does the Rangers’ poor Fenwick mean they are in for a fall in the playoffs? Or does it point to weaknesses in the stat? Opinions on this are divided, said David Johnson of Hockeyanalysis.com.Though the Rangers this season failed to dominate their opponents in shots, the shots they did take went in at a high rate. “Shooting percentage can fluctuate a lot, so one could easily conclude that the Rangers probably had some good fortune on their side this season and might be due for a fall back,” Johnson said.Or, perhaps by counting good and bad shots equally, Fenwick is overlooking a vital part of the game and underrating the Rangers.“I think the addition of Martin St. Louis is a huge factor,” Johnson said. “He historically has been good at driving shooting percentage, as he is both a good passer and a good shooter himself. Martin St. Louis might have taken the Rangers from a subpar shooting team to an above average shooting team, so I wouldn’t necessarily expect a major setback.”He also noted that the Rangers had top-notch goaltending, which reduces opponents’ shooting percentage.Just as the performance of Billy Beane’s A’s was often used as a test case for advanced baseball stats, Fenwick fans and detractors will be watching the Rangers closely this spring.If the Rangers do flop in the playoffs, it will be a boasting point for Fenwick true believers, still reveling in last year’s Kings Cup run. If the Rangers win the Cup, it will be used by some to bash advanced stats.But it is unlikely that either result will give a definite resolution given the small sample size. As Johnson said, “In a seven-game series, anything can happen.”Advertisement