By KATHARINE Q. SEELYEAPRIL 16, 2015
BOSTON —  Support for a Boston Olympics in 2024 may have edged up slightly since some dismal polls last month, but on the whole, more people still oppose having the Games here than support it. And they remain seriously concerned about the financing.For the first time, pollsters tested how people in the Boston region viewed other potential host cities, both in the United States and Europe; only 25 percent wanted the Olympics in Boston, while 36 percent would prefer they took place in Europe, according to a new poll for the public radio station WBUR.Over all, 50 percent of people in the Boston area opposed the city’s bid to host the 2024 Summer Games, and 40 percent supported it. That is up from 36 percent who supported the bid in March, although the increase is within the poll’s margin of sampling error of plus or minus five percentage points.“This is still not good, but it has at least stopped getting worse,” said Steve Koczela, the president of the MassINC Polling Group, which conducted the survey for WBUR. He said the slight improvement from March could be “statistical noise” but would probably come as a relief to Boston2024, the private group that organized the bid.AdvertisementStill, he noted, 40 percent is “a long way from winning a statewide referendum or seeing 70 percent support in Boston, as the mayor has sought.”AdvertisementThe United States Olympic Committee picked Boston in January as its bid city over Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington. At the time, 51 percent of people in the Boston area supported the city’s bid. But the backing dropped as Boston2024 made several missteps and failed to reassure taxpayers that they would not be left picking up the tab for any cost overruns.Residents in the area remain skeptical on the financing. Asked how likely it was that hosting the Olympics would “cost much more than is currently estimated,” 68 percent said “very likely.” Combined with the 22 percent who answered “somewhat likely,” 90 percent of respondents expected overruns.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And few believe that the Olympics would leave Boston with more affordable housing, as has been suggested.One small ray of hope for Boston2024 was that 52 percent said it was very likely or somewhat likely that the region would benefit economically from hosting the Olympics, compared with 44 percent who were skeptical.The International Olympic Committee is to pick the 2024 Games’ host city in 2017. While 36 percent of residents in the Boston area would prefer the committee pick a city in Europe, they were divided over the options, with 13 percent picking each of Paris and Hamburg, Germany, and 11 percent picking Rome.As for American cities, 11 percent picked Los Angeles, and 7 percent picked each of San Francisco and Washington. United States Olympic officials have denied that they are reconsidering any of those cities and said they were sticking with Boston, despite its troubles and lack of popular support.The WBUR poll interviewed 509 registered voters between April 10 and 13.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Support for Boston’s Bid Is Still Lacking, Poll Shows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.