By HUW RICHARDSAPRIL 16, 2015
London — European club rugby’s new ruling class will be on parade as the European Champions Cup reaches its semifinal stage this weekend.The first decade of this century was dominated by the tournament’s “holy trinity” of Toulouse, Leicester and Münster. At least one of the trio was in every final between 2000 and 2010, and they claimed the trophy seven times in those 11 seasons.But none has made the final since Toulouse’s fourth and last win in 2010. Their place has been taken over by the quartet that is contesting this weekend’s semifinals. Clermont Auvergne, playing in its fourth consecutive semifinal, will face Saracens, which is playing in its third. Toulon, also in the final four for the third year running — and winner the past two seasons — takes on Leinster, also a winner in 2011 and 2012.Each of the matches repeats a playoff contest from last season, when Saracens beat Clermont in the semifinal and Toulon eliminated Leinster a round earlier. There is, though, a big difference between the two contests.AdvertisementClermont versus Saracens is a battle of contenders, neither of which has yet lifted the ultimate prize. That’s because each has lost a final to Toulon, whose match with Leinster is the clash of champions, winners between them of the last four tournaments.AdvertisementBoth semifinals will be played in France, but any home advantage is negligible. The home team gets to play in its own country, but not on its own field.So Clermont Auvergne, scarily good on its own ground, will entertain Saracens on Saturday in Saint-Étienne, about 90 miles from home and in a stadium more often used for soccer. If anyone has local knowledge, it is Saracens’ versatile back Chris Wyles, who played in Saint-Étienne for the United States national team in a match against Samoa in the 2007 Rugby Union World Cup.Toulon, which is chasing the competition’s first hat trick, or third straight title, will play Leinster on Sunday at the famed Stade Vélodrome in Marseilles, 40 miles away.For all four teams, familiarity has bred respect. Each team has offered compliments on the quality of its opponent. As Bernard Laporte, Toulon’s director of rugby, said last week. “These games are all 50-50 calls.” Saracens beat Clermont, 46-6, at this stage a year ago, but the two teams split their home and away meetings in this season’s pool stage.“As a club, we admire Clermont as much as anybody because they keep coming back for more,” Mark McCall, the Saracens head coach, said this week. “We always say we want to give ourselves a chance in every competition, and they do that year in year out and respond to setbacks extremely well.”Saracens lost both a European and a domestic final last year, losing the English Premiership after dominating the regular season. That experience has made them even more hungry.“We have a mantra to galvanize us: It is a matter of ‘pounding the rock,”’ said center Brad Barritt, citing the mantra used by the San Antonio Spurs after winning the N.B.A. crown in 2014, following Saracens’ victory over Leicester last week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Barritt’s return after a long injury absence is a boost for Saracens. “Our experience says that in games as big as this, you need your warrior,” McCall said. “Nobody epitomizes that more than Brad. His presence generates great confidence in other players.”AdvertisementClermont, by contrast, relies on the fitness of its high-class halfbacks, Morgan Parra and Camille Lopez. But one of its players, veteran back rower Julien Bonnaire, has extra motivation to be a winner.“It's now or never. I would like the colors of Clermont to hang from the trophy this season and win it with my friends,” said Bonnaire, who will retire at the end of the season. “This will definitely be my last semi. I want to give everything to have no regrets in the end.”Clermont is favored. It has won 10 of its last 12 meetings with English teams but is also aware that the two defeats were against Saracens, which put its resilience and ability to win in France on display with its last-kick, quarterfinal victory over Paris club Racing Metro last weekend.Toulon will also be favored. Leinster does not appear as strong as it was three years ago, and its coach, Matt O’Connor, is aware of the challenge his team faces.“The fact is, we have got to go there and perform very close to our potential to beat Toulon. The lads understand that,” he said this week. “It is a huge challenge for us, they have world-class blokes in every position.”Toulon’s Laporte is similarly respectful. “Leinster are the team which, aside from Toulouse, has been European champions the most,” he said. “They are a semifinal machine. They are present at this stage every year and they are a very good team, but they would have to say the same about us.”That could  be said of all four semifinalists. Like its predecessor, this ruling class could be with us for a while.A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.