AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Bayern Munich, one of the real heavyweights of this or any other Champions League year, has less than a week in which to turn around a 3-1 deficit against FC Porto.History teaches us never to rule out a German side halfway through a contest, particularly when the second leg is yet to come, in Bavaria next Tuesday evening. However, had the rules been applied to the letter in Porto on Wednesday, Bayern’s situation could have been a whole lot worse.A question: When does the FIFA rule that a red card is mandatory for a foul that prevents an obvious scoring opportunity not apply.The answer, it would appear, is when the offense is committed by the world’s most accomplished goalkeeper, Manuel Neuer, in only the second minute of the game. Neuer is a lucky man. Last July, he escaped being sent off in the World Cup final for a reckless high tackle, a knee into the head of Argentina’s Gonzalo Higuaín. And he was let off with a yellow card in the Champions League quarterfinal on Tuesday.Perhaps the Spanish referee, Carlos Velasco Carballo, thought that sending off the goalkeeper so early in the game would spoil the contest. But the rule does not permit that discretion.If Carballo was correct in calling the foul when Neuer rushed off his line and attempted a sliding tackle in the rain that took down the speedy Jackson Martínez, then FIFA’s directive is clear. It has to be a red card, and a penalty kick.We might not like the triple jeopardy inherent in this rule, which would have put Bayern a goal and a man down with virtually the whole game to play — and would also have resulted in Neuer’s being banned from returning to the match. But it is the law.As it was, Neuer was beaten from the penalty shot by Ricardo Queresma, and beaten a second time by the same player after just 10 minutes, this time from open play. In each case, Neuer was not the initial culprit because he was betrayed by lethargic errors in his defense — first by Xabi Alonso, who was caught dwelling on the ball, and then by Dante, whose awful lack of control let in Quaresma.Now, the Portuguese Quaresma and the Colombian Jackson are fliers. They run at defenders with direct and exciting swiftness, and Quaresma is so well traveled that he was fleetingly a winger at Barcelona, Inter, Chelsea, Besiktas and the United Arab Emirates club Al Ahli.So many moves, but never a night quite like Wednesday in the Dragão stadium. Not only did Quaresma dazzle with his two goals, he later corrected the analysts who suggested that the victory was tactical. “It was down to attitude,” the Portugal winger said. “But nothing is decided yet.”The sub plot was that Bayern’s coach, the famous Pep Guardiola, had been outfoxed by Porto’s Julen Lopetegui, a fellow Spaniard who once was a goalkeeper at Barcelona when Guardiola played there.But Guardiola cannot be held responsible for individual errors by his team, any more than he is to blame for the injuries that deprived his team of the speed of Arjen Robben and Franck Ribéry on the flanks and the forcefulness of Sebastian Schweinsteiger in midfield.Injuries are part and parcel of the sport, and Bayer’s potential match saver in Porto turned out to be Thiago Alcântara, the young player that Guardiola prompted Bayern to purchase from Barcelona two years ago. After many months lost to injury, Thiago scored his first Champions League goal midway through the first half.A fine goal it was, too, an improvised finish by this son of a Brazilian national team player, Mazinho. The cross into the goalmouth by Jérôme Boateng skimmed along the turf and appeared to be behind Thiago, who reached back and hooked the ball into the net.Game on, we thought. Even missing so many vital parts, but still with a full complement of 11 players, most observers expected the Müncheners to consolidate their comeback and see out the game without further mishap.But another lapse, this time by Boateng on 65 minutes, let in Jackson, who, making light of prematch talk of his being slowed by a sore hamstring, sprinted, dodged Neuer and stroked the ball in from a tight angle with his left foot. There was one further moment when a shot deflected off a Bayern defender reared up toward the goal. Neuer capitalized on his good fortune in remaining in the game by reacting instinctively and pushing the ball over the crossbar.A two-goal home win in Munich, provided Porto does not score, could reverse this tie. “We are not dreaming,” said Lopetgui, Porto’s coach. “The match in Munich will be different and we will not be able to count on two important players” — the suspended Danilo and Alex Sandro — “so we have to find solutions,” he said.“We are still only halfway through against one of the best teams in Bayern’s history.”Advertisement