By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 18, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Alex Ovechkin and Nicklas Backstrom helped make a winner Friday night of a replacement goalie making his second start of the season for the Washington Capitals.Reunited on Washington’s top line, Backstrom had a goal and two assists, and Ovechkin scored once, leading the Capitals and their fill-in goalie, Philipp Grubauer, past the Islanders to even their first-round playoff series at a game apiece.After the Capitals’ two stars — Ovechkin led the N.H.L. in goals, and Backstrom was No. 1 in assists — were reunited on the top line, both scored to erase a 3-1 deficit.Jason Chimera netted the go-ahead goal with 12 minutes 23 seconds left in the third period.It was the first time the Capitals had led in the series.Advertisement“We got a little less aggressive,” the Islanders captain John Tavares said. “You know, not moving our feet as much.”AdvertisementGrubauer was called up from the minors hours before the game to replace Braden Holtby. Holtby, who tied team records with a league-leading 73 starts and with 41 wins and nine shutouts this season, missed the game because of an unspecified illness. He started Washington’s 4-1 loss in Game 1 on Wednesday, his 26th game in a row, but had not practiced since.Grubauer played in only one N.H.L. game all season, a 3-2 shootout victory against the Anaheim Ducks on Feb. 6. In 20 career appearances for the Capitals, he is 7-6-5, with a 2.44 goals-against average and a .924 save percentage.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Friday, he settled down after giving up goals to Cal Clutterbuck and Ryan Strome. The Capitals’ first goal, by Karl Alzner, made the score 2-1, but Kyle Okposo scored to give the Islanders a 3-1 lead at 14:09 of the second period.Ovechkin scored two minutes later, and Backstrom tied the game at 3:44 of the final period on a power-play goal, with Strome serving a penalty for slashing.Chimera, who had been whistled for penalties at the 20-minute marks of the second and third periods of Game 1, sent a wrist shot past Jaroslav Halak for the decisive goal. Chimera’s initial shot was blocked, but the puck came right back to him, and he converted the second chance.“They were shooting from everywhere,” said Halak, who made 31 saves.The series shifts to Uniondale, N.Y., for Game 3 on Sunday and Game 4 on Tuesday. The Islanders are playing their last season at Nassau Coliseum, their home since 1972, and will move to Barclays Center next season.Holtby’s status was listed as day-to-day.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Backup in Net Staves Off the Islanders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.