By BEN STRAUSSAPRIL 17, 2015
CHICAGO —  A few hours before Kris Bryant made his major league debut at Wrigley Field on Friday afternoon, his father, Mike, a onetime minor league outfielder, stood near the Cubs’ dugout, watching his son rip line drives all over the field during batting practice. Gripped by nostalgia, he recalled how 5-year-old Kris had hit the ball with such power he thought his son could have been a big leaguer even then; how Kris had opted for college instead of turning professional after high school; how his son had never had an alcoholic drink; and how he wept a night earlier, after he had learned Kris was on his way to Wrigley.“My heart got heavy. I felt like I was listening to a Tim McGraw song,” he said.Mike Bryant took an overnight flight from Las Vegas to Chicago on Friday, while the rest of the baseball world did the equivalent in anticipation of the debut of Kris Bryant, the reigning minor league player of the year. Fans lined the streets outside Wrigley to catch a glimpse of Bryant, 23, as he approached the park. Manager Joe Maddon batted him in the cleanup spot, and MLB Network aired Bryant’s at-bats live.Alas, Bryant’s rookie debut was decidedly un-Ruthian. He went 0 for 4, and the Cubs fell to the San Diego Padres, 5-4, on a 70-degree afternoon. Bryant struck out swinging in his first at-bat, then went down on strikes again in the fourth, waving at a James Shields changeup. With two runners on in the fifth, Bryant struck out again, and in the seventh, he grounded into a forceout, stranding two more after an intentional walk ahead of him. The early returns on defense for Bryant, a third baseman, were better: He started a double play in the first inning and later made a diving grab on a liner.“Of course your first game you want to go out there and just do everything,” Bryant said. “You want to hit four home runs in one at bat. You want to show you’re here to help the team win. I didn’t really get any results today, but no reason to hang my head.”AdvertisementHis lackluster debut may do little to quell the hype. Bryant, the second overall pick in 2013, with a golden bat and a Zac Efron smile, has a pedigree that portends much better days. In 181 minor league games, he hit 55 home runs. In spring training, he dazzled with a .425 average and nine homers before he found himself at the center of a brouhaha between the Cubs, his agent, Scott Boras, and the players union over his contract.AdvertisementThe Cubs sent Bryant to Class AAA Iowa to begin the season, saying he needed more development. Boras suspected a different motive: If Bryant spent 12 days in the minors, he would not reach free agency until 2021. And so as Bryant knocked out three home runs in seven games at Iowa, pundits debated and Adidas erected a billboard across the street from Wrigley that read, “Worth the Wait.”But Mike Olt, the incumbent third baseman, sustained a hairline fracture in his wrist this week and followed another infielder, Tommy La Stella, to the disabled list, and presto: Here was Bryant on Day 13 of the season, with no hard feelings.“We wouldn’t have done it today,” Cubs President Theo Epstein said, if not for the injuries. “There is no service-time issue.”“I don’t think about the past at all. I’m here now,” Bryant said, adding that Boras attended the game.Bryant received the news that he was headed for the majors late Thursday night, after hitting a three-run homer for the Iowa Cubs in New Orleans.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He arrived at Wrigley on Friday afternoon after three hours of sleep, a little bleary-eyed, according to Maddon, who was ejected Friday for arguing balls and strikes. The Cubs preached simplicity to Bryant, and a favorite Maddonism — do not let the pressure of a moment exceed its pleasure. Bryant, cool and measured before the game, agreed, even as the Cubs try to capture that oh-so-elusive World Series crown.“There’s no pressure in this game,” he said. “You let pressure creep in, you’re not having fun.”The Cubs dropped a half-game behind the first-place St. Louis Cardinals, who played later Friday in the National League Central, but Bryant is front and center in their grand plans. With another wunderkind, Addison Russell, waiting for his call-up from Iowa, he could join an infield of Bryant, Starlin Castro and Anthony Rizzo. All 25 or younger, and all bursting with talent.Before the game, Epstein was quick to mention Bryant’s professional debut for Class A Boise in 2013, an 0-for-5 game with five strikeouts. “We have to remind ourselves not to overreact,” Epstein said. Bryant rebounded and went 1 for 4 the next day. Indeed, Wrigleyville’s expectations remain sky high.Advertisement“Kid’s a stud,” said Cubs outfielder Matt Szczur. “There’s no beating around the bush.”A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Grim Debut for Rookie, but Hope Is Still Bright.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.