AdvertisementSupported byMets 4, Marlins 1By Seth BerkmanMichael Cuddyer walked around the Mets clubhouse before Friday night’s game against the Miami Marlins wearing a faded orange T-shirt adorned with a Mets logo and the slogan “The Magic is back.” But Harry Houdini would have had difficulty conjuring some of the plays that led to the 4-1 win against the Marlins a few hours later, the Mets’ sixth straight victory.In the fifth inning, trailing by 1-0 with the bases loaded and one out, Mets starter Bartolo Colon stepped to the plate having driven in six runs during his 18-year career.But Colon connected with the first pitch, a 91-mile-per-hour fastball, and the ball carried far enough to center field to score Eric Campbell. The swing tied the game at 1-1 and earned Colon a standing ovation. As a sign of how unconventional this season has been, the sacrifice fly was Colon’s second R.B.I. in two games. Curtis Granderson, the leadoff batter, has yet to drive in a run.Speaking through a translator after the game, Colon said these early weeks of the season had been the best times of his life and that he was enjoying keeping the team loose.The Mets added two runs in the sixth inning and another in the eighth on back-to-back doubles by Cuddyer and Daniel Murphy, as they matched their longest winning streak since April 2011 and jumped out to first place in the National League East. “When you got 150 left, that’s a lot of games,” Manager Terry Collins said. “But we’re very excited about the way we’ve started.”For the fourth straight night, the Mets came from behind to win.The Marlins took the lead when Giancarlo Stanton hit an 0-2 pitch for a solo home run in the first inning. Dating to last season, Stanton has homered in five straight games against the Mets.David Phelps, the former Yankees pitcher, kept the Mets’ bats quiet and entered the fifth inning without having given up a hit.In the fifth, Campbell walked with one out, and Wilmer Flores singled to right field. Phelps then walked Anthony Recker to load the bases before giving up the unlikeliest of runs to Colon.For the third straight game this season, Colon provided the Mets a quality start, picking up his third win against no losses. He went seven innings, giving up seven hits, one earned run and no walks. Colon was also helped by three spectacular catches by center fielder Juan Lagares.“Right at the moment, he’s one of the best,” Colon said of Lagares.Fittingly, Lagares was presented with his 2014 Gold Glove award before the game. He then prevented extra-base hits by Adeiny Hechavarria in the second inning and Christian Yelich in the third with well-timed running catches. Then, in the seventh inning, with two runners on, Lagares made a diving catch on a shallow fly hit by J. T. Realmuto.“When you’re pitching and you know you can make a mistake and you got a guy that can run stuff down in center field like that, I tell you, it gives you all the confidence in the world to pound the strike zone,” Collins said. “I thought he had absolutely no chance on the ball that he made the diving catch on.“This kid’s really, really good out there.”Cuddyer finished 2 for 4 with an R.B.I., and Jeurys Familia earned his fifth save, which leads the majors.INSIDE PITCHBefore the game, the Mets promoted the minor league infielder Danny Muno and optioned Rafael Montero to Class AAA Las Vegas. Terry Collins said Montero would probably make a spot start on April 28 at Miami. Advertisement