By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 17, 2015
Jose Iglesias singled through a drawn-in infield to drive in the winning run in the ninth inning, and the Detroit Tigers beat the visiting Chicago White Sox, 2-1, on Friday to improve their record to 9-1, the best in the major leagues.Detroit’s rally was aided by a disputed call that White Sox Manager Robin Ventura tried to challenge; however, he was denied by the umpires, who said he had objected too late.Nick Castellanos led off the ninth with a sinking liner to right off Zach Duke that Melky Cabrera could not grab cleanly. Castellanos stretched the hit into a double, and while replays appeared to show shortstop Alexei Ramirez tagging him on a toe, the second-base umpire, Brian O’Nora, ruled the runner safe.Ramirez signaled to the Chicago dugout, and Ventura came out to discuss the play with the umpires. He did not immediately ask for a replay review.AdvertisementVentura returned to the dugout, and then went back onto the field after hearing from the team’s replay staff. The umpires ruled that the time for a challenge had lapsed because Ventura had gone back to the dugout and the Tigers had inserted Andrew Romine as a pinch-runner for Castellanos.Advertisement“The video shows what happened,” Ramirez said. “It was clear. I’m 100 percent sure I tagged him.”NATIONALS 7, PHILLIES 2 Max Scherzer struck out nine over eight innings for his first win with Washington, and Bryce Harper hit a three-run homer as the Nationals beat visiting Philadelphia.Danny Espinosa also homered, and Ryan Zimmerman added a two-run double to help Washington earn its third straight win.Scherzer scattered four hits and one run in his third start. Signed to a seven-year, $210 million contract in January, Scherzer has allowed two earned runs in 21 2/3 innings.ANGELS 6, ASTROS 3 Mike Trout homered twice to become the youngest player in history with 100 home runs and 100 stolen bases, and Los Angeles won at Houston.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Trout, who has 104 steals, hit a two-run shot off Astros starter Roberto Hernandez on a full count in the sixth inning for his 100th homer, giving the Angels a 3-1 lead. At 23 years 251 days old, Trout became the youngest player in history to achieve the feat — breaking the mark set by Alex Rodriguez (who was 23 years 309 days old).After the Astros tied it with runs in the sixth and seventh, Trout hit a three-run shot against reliever Chad Qualls in the eighth.PIRATES 6, BREWERS 3 Vance Worley pitched effectively for six innings, and Pittsburgh snapped out of a lengthy slump to top visiting Milwaukee.AdvertisementWorley struck out six while allowing two runs on six hits. Gregory Polanco went 3 for 4 for Pittsburgh. Starling Marte had two hits, including a long two-run homer off Jonathan Broxton in the eighth that broke open a close game. Mark Melancon got the final out for his first save.RED SOX 3, ORIOLES 2 Xander Bogaerts hit a game-winning bloop single with one out in the ninth inning as Boston edged visiting Baltimore.Orioles starter Ubaldo Jimenez held the Red Sox hitless for three and two-thirds innings before being ejected when he hit Pablo Sandoval with a pitch.In the second, Sandoval took out second baseman Jonathan Schoop with a hard slide on a force play.CARDINALS 6, REDS 1 Michael Wacha pitched seven strong innings, and Yadier Molina delivered a bases-clearing double to lead St. Louis to a win over visiting Cincinnati.Joey Votto gave the Reds a first-inning lead with his fourth homer, his third against the Cardinals.ROYALS 6, ATHLETICS 4 Paulo Orlando delivered a go-ahead triple in the eighth inning to help Kansas City beat visiting Oakland.Kelvin Herrera and Wade Davis each pitched a scoreless inning in relief of the Royals’ Jeremy Guthrie, and Greg Holland breezed through the ninth for his fourth save.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Close Call Aids Tigers; Nationals Win in Rout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.