OCT. 17, 2015
Show Some Respect For the BatTo the Sports Editor:Re: “As an Antic Spreads, Negative Opinions Start to Flip,” Oct. 16: When I read about the celebratory bat flip recently glamorized by the Blue Jays’ Jose Bautista after he hit a three-run homer in an American League division series, my mind turned to Ichiro Suzuki. A pre-eminent hitter and future Hall of Famer, Suzuki treats his bats as a violinist would a Stradivarius. His reverential behavior shows a respect for his instrument.Imagine a surgeon tossing his scalpel or forceps across the operating room after an especially successful operation.VIJAY SIKAND, East Lyme, Conn.A Suggestion to the CubsTo the Sports Editor:Until the late 1880s, black players were allowed to play in the major leagues. That ended in large part because of the resistance of Cap Anson, the greatest of the early Cubs, a 3,000-hit Hall of Famer. In the barnstorming games prevalent in that time, Anson refused to take the field against black players, and this type of exclusion became a regrettable custom.The Cubs have never apologized or even acknowledged this, and they should. Because if you believe in curses, you have to believe in the need for relief. Here’s the one I propose: If the Cubs make it to the World Series, they should invite every living member of the Negro leagues to Wrigley Field. That would be an exorcism for the baseball ages and for tolerance.AdvertisementNORMAN L. BENDER, Woodbridge, Conn.Tribute to a Mets CoachTo the Sports Editor:Re “Mets’ Pitching Coach Keeps Young Arms From Harm’s Way,” Oct. 11: Dan Warthen’s history with young arms goes back quite a bit further than working with the Mets’ staff — to a group of 10-, 11- and 12-year-olds who had the good fortune of living in his neighborhood in Portland, Ore. Between coaching stints with the Tigers and the Dodgers, Warthen graciously volunteered his time to work with the pitchers in our local Sunset Park Little League.AdvertisementHow many kids are lucky enough to get this caliber of pitching instruction? Not too many, I’d guess.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.ROB ROSENTHAL, Portland, Ore.Upending a LegacyTo the Sports Editor:Re “Mets Fans Had Their Say. Now, Let’s Play Ball.” Oct. 14: William C. Rhoden has it wrong. Chase Utley’s slide at second base went beyond a hard-nosed attempt to break up a double play. If Utley’s intent was not to injure, surely it was to intimidate — to make Ruben Tejada hesitate in fear the next time he tried to turn two. The force of Utley’s hit broke Tejada’s leg. It was a vicious play that has no place in modern baseball.Joe Torre was right to suspend Utley. But worse than the suspension is the damage that Utley has done to his legacy. When fans speak of Utley, the first thing that will come to mind will not be the exploits of his salad days with the Phillies, but, rather, the dirty play. That should be an instructive lesson for ballplayers at all levels.JOSEPH LEVENDUSKY, Watertown, Mass.A Serious InfectionTo the Sports Editor:Re “Giant With Foot Infection Faces an Urgent Situation,” Oct. 12: The Monday sports section gave a significant amount of attention to the leg fracture sustained by the Mets’ Ruben Tejada as well as countless stories on N.F.L. games, including an injury report. But the most important article was the one reporting the staph infection to Giants tight end Daniel Fells. By report, he is infected with MRSA (Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus), a serious infection that has evolved by antibiotic overuse. Each one of us is at risk for the same type of infection.Though Coach Tom Coughlin is appropriate in wondering why this occurred, as well as where it came from, the answers are rather straightforward: Skin infections are common, and staphylococci and other resistant bacteria are not limited to hospital settings. Fractures and tendon tears may be more interesting. But infections like this are more lethal.Dr. GREGORY L. SHEEHY, Middleton, Wis.A version of this letter appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Show Some Respect For the Bat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.