AdvertisementSupported byYankees 5, Rays 4By Billy WitzST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — Too often in the young season, the Yankees have floundered in the field, flailed at the plate and watched their starting pitchers last as briefly as a June bug.But 10 games into the season, a once inconceivable possibility has emerged: The Yankees could be kept afloat by Alex Rodriguez. Rodriguez, the disgraced slugger who has made a career out of usurping story lines with his out-of-bounds behavior, blasted two home runs and drove in the winning run with a two-out, full-count, eighth-inning single Friday night as the Yankees rallied to beat the Tampa Bay Rays, 5-4. The win did not allow the Yankees to escape the cellar in the American League East, but it did allow them to end a two-game losing streak and begin an arduous stretch — 30 games in 31 days — with a bounce in their step.“It’s hard to say,” Manager Joe Girardi said when asked where his team would be without Rodriguez. “Not 4-6, I know that. He’s a huge part of our offense.”He was nearly all of it Friday. The Yankees managed two other hits — a solo home run in the fourth by Stephen Drew and Carlos Beltran’s leadoff single in the eighth, which was also crucial as pinch-runner Brett Gardner scored the winning run. But they merely served as accouterments to Rodriguez’s night. His first home run, in the second inning, glanced off a walkway awning well beyond the center-field wall. It was measured at 471 feet by MLB Statcast, making it the longest in the major leagues this season.“That one was farther than I could see,” said Jeff Pentland, the Yankees’ 68-year-old hitting coach. Rodriguez’s second, in the sixth, was a more modest drive, but the ball was hit hard and low, and it left the field as if it were late for an appointment. It drew the Yankees even, 4-4.Rodriguez was succinct in his postgame interview with the news media, deflecting credit toward his teammates.“I saw the ball well tonight, and I saw some good pitches to hit and put my A swing on it,” Rodriguez said. “It was nice, and it came with a good team win.”Rodriguez acknowledged that his start to the season was a surprise. “In spring training, I don’t think anyone knew what to expect, including myself,” he said.It was less than two months ago, as Rodriguez prepared to report for spring training after his yearlong suspension, that he was surrounded by questions of whether he would even make it to opening day before he was dumped by the Yankees or took an injury retirement to collect the remaining $61 million on his contract. Now, he appears to be an indispensable member of their lineup, the everyday designated hitter and occasional first and third baseman. He is batting .344, the only regular in the lineup batting over .300, and his four home runs and 11 R.B.I. place him among the American League leaders.“I thought he would be productive,” Girardi said. “I didn’t know exactly what we were going to get and how much we could play him when we got him back. But as I’ve said all along about Alex is that he works and he’s very mechanically sound, and it’s paying off.”If the two home runs, in his 61st multihomer game, served as testimony of Rodriguez’s ability to still inflict damage on fastballs, his single spoke to his intelligence as a hitter. When Gardner, the pinch-runner, stole second base on a 2-2 pitch that missed, it left the Tampa Bay rookie manager Kevin Cash with a decision: Allow reliever Kevin Jepsen the chance to execute one more pitch to Rodriguez, who was hitless in 10 previous at-bats against him, or walk Rodriguez and pitch to Stephen Drew, who has struggled this season, but did hit a solo home run in the fourth. “It went through my mind,” Rodriguez said of the possibility of a walk. “But he’s got great stuff and he’s gotten me out plenty in his career. Then I simplified my at-bat. I knew with a single we had action.”After fouling a fastball back, Rodriguez laced the next pitch, a curveball, that dropped in front of center fielder Kevin Kiermaier as Gardner raced home.Whether he struck out or delivered long home runs, Rodriguez has acted coolly, as one might expect from a player who made his major league debut nearly 20 years ago. But when his single dropped, Rodriguez slapped his hands together as he rounded first base. The home runs not only helped the Yankees win, they also set the stage for more intrigue involving Rodriguez. They were the 657th and 658th of his career, leaving him two behind Willie Mays’s 660 career home runs and moving Rodriguez and the Yankees closer to a confrontation over the first in a series of $6 million marketing bonuses they had agreed to in 2007. The bonuses are for tying Mays (660), Babe Ruth (714) and Henry Aaron (755), and for tying and passing the career leader Barry Bonds (762).The Yankees have told Rodriguez’s representatives as recently as February that they did not intend to pay the bonuses because Rodriguez’s yearlong suspension tied to performance enhancing drugs crippled their opportunities to market the event.Rodriguez said he was trying not to think of such matters and was instead focusing on trying to help the Yankees win. “More than anything, I’m just feeling really grateful to be back in baseball,” said Rodriguez, who then thanked the Steinbrenner brothers. “I’m very grateful to Hank and Hal for having the opportunity to put on the uniform again. It’s something I don’t take for granted, and it’s much appreciated. It feels good to play baseball.”Advertisement