

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
APRIL 17, 2015
On the eve of the N.B.A. playoffs, Commissioner Adam Silver relayed the news that business was good in the wake of two days of meetings by the league’s Board of Governors at a Manhattan hotel.He noted how the league had a set an attendance record, with nearly 21.9 million people filling arenas during the regular season. The league, he said, had also broken a 20-year-old record for games that were sellouts, with 700 this season. In addition, the owners at the meetings reviewed new arena plans for the Golden State Warriors, the Sacramento Kings and the Milwaukee Bucks — and all of those talks went swimmingly, according to the commissioner.It was, all things considered, a 20-minute news conference that celebrated the status quo, not that there was anything wrong with that. Attendance is up. Fans are generally pleased with the product. And not once was Silver asked about Donald Sterling, the deposed former owner of the Los Angeles Clippers. That alone was no small victory for Silver, who was consumed by the Sterling saga for most of last season’s playoffs.But change is coming to the N.B.A., and relatively soon. It will come in the form of the league’s new media-rights deals with ESPN and Turner Sports, which are worth $24 billion over nine years and will have a drastic effect on the size of player contracts, the machinations of free agency and the league-imposed salary cap, which will balloon starting next year. While the new money is a windfall for the league — business is good, no joke — all that cash will also have wide-ranging implications.AdvertisementConsider the seemingly unrelated issue of draft lottery reform, which was a topic of discussion among the owners this week. As it stands, the team with the league’s worst record has the best odds of securing the top pick. Taking into account all that the Philadelphia 76ers have done in recent seasons to pursue that particular path, there has been a growing chorus to revamp the rules and reduce at least some of the incentives for losing.AdvertisementBut the owners are unwilling to budge at the moment, Silver said, which came as a bit of a surprise to him. Their reason? The new TV deals, and the money that will flood the league and inflate team payrolls as a direct result.“The reaction was that we’re going into a world that will look very different than anything we’ve dealt with historically,” said Silver, who cited the “massive amount of cap space” that will fundamentally alter how teams are constructed.Referring to the lottery, he added: “There’s a sense that we need to make a change, but until we see what the team behavior is going to be with all this new cap room, we should hold it and wait and then look holistically at the whole system.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Starting in 2016, the TV deals will bring an average of $2.66 billion to the league each season, nearly three times the amount under the current deal, which expires at the end of next season. Teams currently operate under a $63 million salary cap, but that amount could jump by more than $20 million in 2016 — and increase steadily after that. The looming changes are a primary reason free agents might opt for shorter contracts this summer, with the expectation that much larger paydays are on the way.Given the potential for tumult ahead, Silver appears to be taking a measured approach to the league’s short-term future, and so are the owners, who see no need for sweeping overhauls.Instead, small improvements and adjustments are on the horizon. On Thursday, for example, the league announced that it would expand its antidrug program next season to include blood tests for human growth hormone, a new policy that is not insignificant.Silver said Friday that the league was searching for ways to eliminate back-to-back games, which have been a source of angst for players who think the schedule is too compressed and too demanding on their bodies. One potential solution, Silver said, would be to extend next season by a week, which he indicated was a distinct possibility. There have also been discussions about shortening the preseason.“Every day matters as we look at the schedule,” Silver said.The way that teams are seeded in the playoffs was also the subject of what Silver described as a “robust discussion” among the owners. The Eastern Conference playoffs this season include two teams with losing records: the Nets and the Boston Celtics. The Oklahoma City Thunder, meanwhile, who finished the regular season eight games above .500, finished just out of playoff position in the West. The West is much stronger than the East, yet teams in the West have been somewhat penalized by the postseason gods.“When we presented all the data to the teams, what becomes clear is that there is no obvious solution,” said Silver, who cited unbalanced schedules — namely, that teams play members of their own conference more often. “It’s not to say we don’t think there should be a change. I think this is one of these issues that is going to require a fair amount of discussion and study.”AdvertisementSilver did raise the possibility of a “play-in tournament” for the eighth and final spot in each conference. It was an intriguing idea, but only an idea. For now, with business humming along, the N.B.A. is fine with that.Richard Sandomir contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 18, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: In N.B.A., Sunny Skies With an Eye to the Cash on the Horizon.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »