AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensAbout eight hours before Game 1 of their first-round playoff series Thursday against the Penguins, Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist addressed a media scrum around his locker. He discussed an array of topics, describing his approach and the top-seeded team’s position as the favorite in the series.The stall to Lundqvist’s right was conspicuously void of anything more than a Rangers hat and a few T-shirts in the upper section. Yet it is occupied by one of the team’s most valuable players.That locker belongs to the backup goalie Cam Talbot, and if all goes according to plan, he will not see action in the playoffs. He did not appear on the ice during a 2-1 win in Game 1 at Madison Square Garden, enjoying his seat at the end of the bench.“That’s the role of the backup goalie in the playoffs,” Talbot said. “There’s not much to say about that. I want everything to go well. At this point of the season, you don’t want to get in there. You just hope everything goes well, and the team plays well, and they don’t need to use me.”Talbot established himself as one of the game’s top backup goalies in 2013-14, winning 12 games in 19 starts. He also made a pair of relief appearances last postseason — subbing for Lundqvist against Philadelphia and Montreal — on the team’s run to the Stanley Cup finals.“It’s not easy to come off the bench in a playoff game,” Talbot said. “It’s not always the best way to gain playoff experience, but it is playoff experience nonetheless. I think I played fairly well in the games I got in, so I can take that moving forward.”And that Talbot did. He played in 36 games this season, posting a .926 save percentage and a 2.21 goals-against average while winning 21 of his 34 starts.After Lundqvist sustained a vascular injury on Jan. 31, Talbot showed he could be a No. 1 goalie. He started 23 of 25 games while Lundqvist was sidelined, with the Rangers winning 16. Talbot was given the Steven McDonald Extra Effort Award, presented annually to the Rangers player who goes above and beyond the call of duty.“It’s a very special award,” Talbot said of the honor, which is named after a New York City police officer who was paralyzed when he was shot in 1986. “That award definitely meant a lot to me, and it was a huge honor to receive.”Despite limited playoff experience, Talbot said he would be comfortable if he was required to fill in for Lundqvist.“I got a lot more games in, a lot more experience,” he said. “I definitely feel a lot more confident and composed going into this postseason than last.”Talbot’s routine will not change. He said he would take “a few more bike rides” and “a little more time on the ice before and after practice,” and he will still enjoy one of the best seats in the house for what the team hopes is a long Stanley Cup run. In the warm-ups before Thursday’s game, Talbot spent the time as he usually does, sharing the net with Lundqvist. But from the opening face-off, Talbot was left to spectating, clad in his full gear and a two-tone hat.Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain, said that Talbot was quiet on the bench during Game 1, and is “always pretty positive.”Because he did not have a stick in his hand, Talbot was the only Ranger who did not raise his stick during the team’s customary postgame salute of the fans. As the Rangers left the ice, he was among the last players to walk toward the dressing room. When members of the news media entered, Talbot was nowhere to be found.At least for one night, the Rangers’ plan of keeping Talbot away from game action worked to perfection.Advertisement