By EMMA STONEYAPRIL 17, 2015
WELLINGTON, New Zealand — Hire a coach. Find the right players. Negotiate contracts. Pick a jersey design. Complete plans for a new home.As Super Rugby gets ready to expand into two new continents next year, the to-do lists for the two new teams in Japan and Argentina are long ones.This season, there are 15 teams in Super Rugby, five each in New Zealand, Australia and South Africa. The field will expand by three teams next year, with expansion franchises starting in Tokyo and Buenos Aires, and South Africa getting a sixth team as the Southern Kings return to the competition for the first time since they were relegated in 2013.The Japanese franchise had hoped to announce its head coach by the end of March, but that decision and others relating to the operation and management of the franchise are now not expected until after this month’s Japan Rugby Football Union board meeting.AdvertisementThe coach of the country’s national team, Eddie Jones, has been linked to the job since it was announced in November that a Japanese team would be added.AdvertisementOther coaches in the Japanese Top League with Super Rugby experience include Andy Friend (Suntory Sungoliath) and Robbie Deans (Panasonic Wild Knights). Deans won five Super Rugby titles with the Crusaders between 2000 and 2008 before going on to coach Australia.Jones, who has coached the Brumbies and the Queensland Reds in Super Rugby as well as the Australian national team, would be a logical choice after years of working with the Japanese players.The chairman of the Japan Rugby Football Union, Tatsuzo Yabe, said through an interpreter that the new team will largely consist of Japan national team players plus a few foreigners already playing in the Top League.“But we are open if there are any foreign players playing outside of Japan wishing strongly to play for us in Japan,” Yabe added.National team players like Fumiaki Tanaka, Keita Inagaki, Akihito Yamada and Kotaro Matsushima, all currently playing for New Zealand and Australia Super Rugby franchises, will be high on the list of players the new team wants. Shota Horie, who played for the Melbourne Rebels in 2013 and 2014, is expected to join the Tokyo-based franchise, which will be run by the J.R.F.U. However, Japan captain Michael Leitch, who is playing for the Chiefs, the two-time Super Rugby champions, has said he would prefer to stay in New Zealand.Yabe said that players would not be signed until a coach had been appointed.The Argentina Rugby Union, known as the U.A.R., has already begun its recruitment drive for what will be the first professional team in that country.So far it has signed 20 of the 40 players it wants.Of the 20 signed so far, most have come through the U.A.R.’s developmental program and play in the country. They include Martín Landajo, Tomás Cubelli and Manuel Montero, who are regulars on the Argentina national team, the Pumas. Pablo Matera, also a Pumas regular who has previously played for the English Premiership club Leicester Tigers, is another quality recruit for the franchise.AdvertisementBut the most notable signing to date is that of Pumas captain Agustín Creevy, who has agreed a three-year deal with the franchise. Creevy plays for the English club Worcester and was the first overseas player to choose to return home; Joaquín Tuculet of the Cardiff Blues in Wales was added this week.The U.A.R. has said that from 2016 on, players would not be considered for national team selection unless they are playing Super Rugby — preferably with the Argentina franchise — so the hope is that more of the Pumas players who play professionally in Europe will follow Creevy’s lead.Around 20 Pumas players play for English and French clubs at the moment and negotiations with those players continue.“It’s very difficult for the Southern Hemisphere nations to compete against the owners of the clubs in France or England,” said Agustín Pichot, a member of the U.A.R. board and the driving force behind Argentina’s inclusion in the two main rugby competitions — Super Rugby and the Rugby Championship, featuring the national teams of New Zealand, Australia, South Africa and, now, Argentina.“It has been tough,” Pichot said. “More than tough, it’s been very expensive to compete against a free market without any rules.”While Japan will join Super Rugby, it is not part of the Rugby Championship and does not get membership in Sanzar, the umbrella group under the South Africa, Australia and New Zealand unions that runs those two tournaments. The Japanese Super Rugby franchise will, however, have its setup and operational costs — estimated at $6 million to $8 million a year — paid by Sanzar.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Argentine union will become a full member of Sanzar in 2016 and get to share in a new broadcast deal. While Argentina will not get the same amount as the other three countries, it will be more money than it now receives as a participant in the Rugby Championship.“It was one of the milestones we needed for Argentina rugby,” Pichot said of the full membership. “Not only for the revenue share that happens, but it’s very important to feel part of a group of nations that have been together for a long time.”The expansion into areas outside the strongholds of New Zealand, Australia and South Africa is a bold move by Sanzar, particularly given the travel involved in getting teams to and from Argentina, Japan and Singapore, where three of the Japanese team’s home matches will be played.AdvertisementThis season, Super Rugby’s 15 teams are split into three conferences spread equally across New Zealand, Australia and South Africa.The new format will have four conferences split into two groups. In the Australasian group, the Australian and New Zealand conferences will stay as they are, with five teams each.In the South Africa group, there will be two conferences of four teams each. Each conference will have three South Africa teams and either the Argentine or the Japanese franchise.“With every new step you take there is a risk,” conceded Greg Peters, the Sanzar chief executive. “What we want to do is mitigate the risks as much as possible and for it to be a huge success.“We wouldn’t have taken the step to deliver a competition structure like this unless we thought it had a very good chance of being successful.”There are less than 12 months to go until the new-look competition kicks off, but Peters is confident the Argentine and Japanese teams will have everything ready in time.Neither team has a name nor a jersey design yet. The Japanese team has confirmed that it will play at Chichibunomiya Rugby Stadium in Tokyo and the Sports Hub in Singapore.The Argentine franchise is looking to base itself in the north of Buenos Aires, but its plans to build a new stadium and training center have been put on hold, so it is still looking for a venue.The franchise is searching for a head coach, too, although Argentina Coach Daniel Hourcade could be an option.Advertisement“We have some names in mind — some Argentinians and some foreigners as well,” Pichot said. “I think it’s very important to have people on board that understand the dynamics of Super Rugby. But, on the other hand, there are not many coaches available. We cannot just experiment with new coaches.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.