AdvertisementSupported byBy Huw RichardsAll roads lead to Cardiff for the batsman Kevin Pietersen as he hits the comeback trail in search of his former place in England’s team.Wales’s capital will see the start of that bid on Sunday as Pietersen plays for Surrey against Glamorgan in a four-day match in the Second Division of the County Championship, English cricket’s major league. And he will hope to be back in Cardiff on July 8th, 11 days after his 35th birthday, when England begins its Ashes series of five five-day test matches against Australia.He is set to create a narrative that will transfix cricket fans in England and across the world. It raises possibilities that were unlikely until early March, when Colin Graves, incoming chairman of the England and Wales Cricket Board, said that England “had not closed the door on him.”Since it appeared to have done precisely that in early 2014, when Pietersen was cut from the team after Australia’s 5-0 sweep of the last Ashes series and told he had no future with England, Graves’s comments acted as a bombshell.Pietersen, who had previously endorsed the importance of playing in the lucrative Indian Premier League, sought and obtained his release from his contract this season with the Sunrisers Hyderabad. His I.P.L market value has declined hugely — from about $1.8 million in 2012 to about $300,000 this year — an amount Surrey is unlikely to pay him. He has rejoined Surrey, which released him last year, in search of the first-class (major league equivalent) runs he has been told are essential to his being considered again for the national team. The 170 runs he scored against Oxford University in last weekend’s warm-up are equivalent to spring training hits and home runs in baseball. While not meaningless, neither are they the real thing. “I'm batting as well as I’ve ever batted in my career. It’s just a case of hopefully continuing that,” Pietersen said after the match. “No one’s guaranteed runs, but if I play the way I played today, in the same manner, then I think that I probably will score some.”Glamorgan is one of the weakest teams in the competition and its best bowler, the Australian fast bowler Michael Hogan, is injured. But it is a genuine first-class match, the first in which Pietersen will have played for 15 months.Pietersen insisted throughout his exclusion from the England team that he wanted nothing more than to return. Yet his actions suggested otherwise. He played only shorter formats of the game after January 2014, and late in the year he released a score-settling, bridge-burning memoir. Earlier this year, he described lower-paid county cricketers as “muppets.”He remains cricket’s Rorschach test, an unfailing divider of opinion. To his supporters he is a mishandled giant — a batting genius whose South African origins and unabashed ambition make him a misunderstood outsider in English cricket. They can point to him as the record run-scorer for England across all formats of the game and a fearless player of brilliant game-changing innings.To his detractors he is a serial trouble-maker whose egotistical, team-chemistry-poisoning lack of self-awareness increasingly outweighs his talent, which is already eroding with age.“Maybe team sport is not for you,” Graham Norton, the Irish comedian turned BBC talk show host, commented while interviewing Pietersen after the release of his memoirs.Yet England cricket politics has moved in his favor. Graves’s comments that the door had not been closed on Pietersen’s return were followed by the firing last week of national team managing director Paul Downton, the man who sacked Pietersen last year. No successor has yet been named. But Michael Vaughan, who was England’s captain when Pietersen joined the team in 2005, has declared an interest. Vaughan argued in a Daily Telegraph column that Pietersen should be considered. “If he is one of the top seven batsmen in England by the time the Ashes start, then England have to consider him. It is about picking teams to win games,” he wrote. “KP has done some bad things, but so have some of the other players in the England team. They have got to be man enough to accept it is about winning.”Much will depend not only on how Pietersen performs for Surrey, but how England’s batsman fared in the series with West Indies, which finished Friday, and how they do next month at home with New Zealand. England’s top lineup — including the captain, Alastair Cook, who supported recalling Pietersen from an earlier short period of exile in 2012 but was happy to see him go last year and has since been subjected to highly personalized criticism from some of his supporters — is struggling.But Pietersen bats in the middle order. Among his competitors, Ian Bell and Gary Ballance both played innings of more than 100 in the first test against West Indies last week, while Joe Root twice scored more than 50.Opinions, as always with Pietersen, are widely divided. Like him or not, he compels attention. As Vaughan wrote: “Fans are excited by teams taking risks and bringing KP back is a big one. English cricket has to face up to that decision.”Advertisement