By BEN STRAUSSAPRIL 18, 2015
CHICAGO —  The lights dimmed, and the pump-up songs filled United Center. Fans stood, and spotlights circled the arena. The word “playoffs,” in red lighting, flashed on the floor. The Bulls’ starting lineup for Game 1 of their Eastern Conference series against Milwaukee was introduced, and the public-address announcer had a long-awaited treat for the home crowd.“Frrrooom Chicago,” he bellowed, “No. 1, Derrick Rose!”The rafters seemed to shake.Rose was returning to the playoff stage for the first time since another April Saturday three years ago. That was the day he tore his left anterior cruciate ligament, derailing one of the N.B.A.’s most promising young careers and setting Rose off on a journey of injury, recovery and soul-searching. But on this Saturday, the pain of the past three years seemed, finally, behind him.Rose, 26, was not perfect, but he was close. The league’s most valuable player in 2010-11, he scored 23 points in 27 minutes while shooting 9 of 16 from the floor and adding seven assists in a 103-91 win over the Bucks.He made his presence known early, catching the ball on the wing, splitting two defenders and flying toward the rim for a layup. He later threw down a thunderous two-handed dunk on a fast break, helping to ignite a second-quarter run that pushed Chicago’s lead to double digits. In the third quarter, he drilled three 3-pointers and then stepped to the free-throw line to chants of “M.V.P.! M.V.P.!”Advertisement“I only had, like, three goals tonight, and that was to have fun, have no expectations and to compete,” Rose said.AdvertisementRose overcame four turnovers, including one in which he dribbled the ball off his foot, and an early scare when he fell awkwardly in the lane. He lay on the ground for several moments before hopping to his feet, allowing the crowd — and very likely much of Chicago — to exhale.“I was just tired,” Rose said.That scene was all too reminiscent of the night that everything changed for the Bulls and their star point guard, then 23. They were the top seed in the Eastern Conference, seeking a playoff rematch against LeBron James and the Miami Heat. Late in Game 1 of their playoff opener against Philadelphia, as Rose drove, his knee gave out. The 76ers then dispatched the Bulls.What followed has been well chronicled, with Rose’s career taking on the arc of a tragic novel. The A.C.L. injury cost him all of the next year; his teammates, many battling injuries themselves, fought valiantly in the playoffs, beating the Nets in seven games before succumbing to the Heat.Rose, cleared medically but uncertain of his own health, was accused of a lack of toughness and a me-first attitude. When he finally returned for the next season, 2013-14, another injury — this time a torn medial meniscus in his right knee — felled him in only his 10th game. Rose aggravated the injury this season, had surgery and missed a quarter of the campaign; he returned just before the end of the regular season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his absence, the Bulls were a scrappy underdog — a solid regular-season team that lacked the star power for playoff crunchtime. On Saturday, they had the look of a championship contender.“I love it,” forward Taj Gibson said after the victory. “We haven’t had him in the playoffs with us for a while now, and it just felt so good just to have one of our scorers, one of our leaders, back. It was great to see him come out and take over at times.”Rose has said every new version of himself — this is 4.0, for anyone counting — is older and wiser, but where his career is ultimately headed remains a mystery. Asked about Rose’s return before the game, Bulls Coach Tom Thibodeau could not help chuckling, thinking about his long road back.“You’re talking about a guy now who’s sort of in the middle of his career,” Thibodeau said. “He’s been through a lot. I think early on, you’re 22 years old, you’re the M.V.P. of the league, and there weren’t many bumps in the road. He’s hit a few bumps. He’s gotten through those.”AdvertisementThis year’s Bulls team is also a new vintage, offering Rose more supporting offensive firepower. Pau Gasol, a seasoned veteran and an N.B.A. champion with the Los Angeles Lakers who was signed during the off-season, was an All-Star starter this season. Nikola Mirotic is a sharpshooter and a rookie of the year contender. Jimmy Butler, who led the Bulls with 25 points Saturday, has emerged as a star.“I’m grateful to be playing with my teammates,” Rose said. “They allow me to play the way I normally play. It’s an honor. I’m really fortunate because I think, anywhere else, it wouldn’t be the same.”Through the ups and downs, Rose has never lost his confidence. He has promised again and again he would return to his M.V.P. form, no matter if anyone believed him. As he left the court to a standing ovation, for one night at least, it seemed possible.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: Rose Puts Injuries, and Doubts, Behind Him in a Postseason Triumph.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.