AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim CaseyNearly 20 years after they first met, Karen Keyes and Muffet McGraw shared a telephone conversation that neither could have imagined when they arrived at Notre Dame together, just trying to adapt to their unfamiliar surroundings.Keyes was a freshman guard on McGraw’s first Fighting Irish women’s basketball team, in 1987. Keyes scored more than 1,500 points in her career and served as a graduate assistant under McGraw for two years while earning a master’s degree in business. When Keyes married her husband, Kevin, in 1995, McGraw attended the ceremony. They remained close, even when Keyes moved to the East Coast and McGraw built the Irish into a top national program that has made the Final Four in each of the past five seasons; they lost to Connecticut in the national championship game last week. During their talk in January, Keyes told McGraw that she and her husband had donated $5 million to endow the women’s basketball head coaching position at Notre Dame. Under the typical arrangement, the money is invested by the university, and any interest earned helps pay for a portion or all of the coach’s salary. Kevin Keyes, a former Notre Dame tennis player and longtime investment banker, is president of Annaly Capital Management, a mortgage real estate investment trust based in New York. Even though McGraw knew the athletics department had recently reached out to donors, she still could not believe the generosity of the Keyeses.“That was so incredible,” McGraw said. “Her and her husband are big supporters of our program and of Notre Dame. She was such a great role model when she was here and continues to be a great representative of our program.”It was the first coaching endowment gift in Notre Dame’s history, although other universities have been recipients for several years. Seven of the eight Ivy League football coaching positions are endowed, as are those at Michigan, Stanford and Northwestern. There are also endowments for head coaches for nonrevenue sports and even assistant coaches. The Notre Dame athletic director, Jack Swarbrick, said the university was seeking donors to endow head and assistant coaching positions and athletics scholarships in all sports, a strategy he said was closely related to changes in college athletics. He said Notre Dame’s athletics department contributed a significant amount of money each year to help finance university initiatives and undergraduate scholarships for nonathletes. For the 2015-16 school year, tuition will cost $47,929.Swarbrick said that the athletics department’s business model would be altered and that expenses would increase in the coming years because of N.C.A.A. legislative changes and the potential effects of court cases.In August, the N.C.A.A.’s Division I board of directors granted autonomy to the five largest conferences — the Southeastern; the Pacific-12; the Atlantic Coast, of which Notre Dame is a member; the Big 12; and the Big Ten — allowing them to create their own rules in some areas. In January, they voted, 79-1, to cover the full costs of attendance for scholarship athletes. Swarbrick said he supported the cost-of-living adjustment, even though it could add a few thousand dollars each year per athlete.Swarbrick also cited the federal antitrust lawsuit the former U.C.L.A. basketball player Ed O’Bannon brought against the N.C.A.A. Judge Claudia Wilken of United States District Court in Oakland, Calif., ruled in favor of O’Bannon in August, issuing an injunction against rules that prohibit athletes from earning money from the use of their names and images in video games and television broadcasts. Last month, N.C.A.A. lawyers asked a federal appeals court to overturn the decision. “From the university perspective, it’s very important that athletics not only not be a drain on the university’s resources as it is at some other places, but that athletics be a net contributor to the university,” Swarbrick said. He said of the endowments: “It’s a little bit of trying to ensure that we can maintain the same financial relationship to the university that we’ve had now for decades. This will help us manage those in a way that ensures we’re able to do it ourselves without resorting to university dollars.”Swarbrick is working closely with Sara Liebscher, Keyes’s former teammate, who oversees Notre Dame’s athletics fund-raising. They have studied endowment structures in place at Stanford, Duke, Southern California and other universities. When Liebscher approached Kevin Keyes about endowments, he thought of the gift as a way to honor McGraw and give back to his alma mater, which has helped him both professionally and personally; he met Karen while playing pickup basketball at Notre Dame. Early in his career at the former investment bank Dean Witter, Kevin Keyes received valuable advice from the executives Bill Smith and John Schaefer, both Notre Dame alumni. Before completing the endowment details, the Keyeses wanted to make sure McGraw would be all right with the arrangement and the attention. Karen Keyes called her in January. “When I told her, I said, ‘Out of all the people in my life, besides Kevin’s parents and my parents, you’ve had an incredible impact on who I am as a person,’ ” said Karen Keyes, the girls’ basketball coach at Ridgewood High School in New Jersey. “She was pretty emotional, and so was I. It was just special to be able to do that for somebody that I respect so much. We’re kind of humbled that we’re in this position to do it.”Advertisement