AdvertisementSupported byYankees 9, Rays 0By Billy WitzST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — It took three starts, a cautious protocol and two months of ceaseless questions about the health of his right elbow, but the Masahiro Tanaka the Yankees have anxiously been hoping for was unveiled here Saturday night.Tanaka elicited puzzled looks and uncomfortable swings from Tampa Bay batters, and a sigh of relief from the Yankees after his masterful performance in a 9-0 victory over the Rays.Tanaka did not walk a batter, gave up two hits, struck out eight and threw 85 pitches — the last of which shattered the bat of Desmond Jennings.After two wobbly and brief starts had ratcheted up the level of concern about Tanaka’s right elbow, in which a slight ligament tear was found last year, Tanaka looked like the ace the Yankees had invested $155 million in.Manager Joe Girardi said it was important for Tanaka to see that if he had his best pitches working, the game would go well.“Players need to have some success,” Girardi said.Tanaka was in command of his broad assortment of pitches — two fastballs, a slider, a splitter and a curveball. He gave up a leadoff single to David DeJesus, who stroked an 0-2 pitch from his shoe tops to center field, and then was near perfect.Tanaka retired the next 15 batters before Brandon Guyer doubled to lead off the sixth, and he then set down the next six, departing after seven innings. He caught four Rays looking at called third-strike fastballs.“The hitter kind of tells you where to go next,” catcher Brian McCann said. “Instincts call the game.”It was by far the best performance this season by a Yankees starting pitcher, a group whose 5.37 earned run average entering the game was 27th out of 30 teams.As brilliant as Tanaka was, he was matched for five innings by Jake Odorizzi, who in his second season is establishing himself as the latest in the line of young talented pitchers the Rays continue to produce. The only thing the Yankees had going for them against Odorizzi was McCann.McCann singled twice before breaking a scoreless duel with a two-run triple to right field with two out in the sixth. The ball ricocheted off the yellow railing atop the fence, missing a home run by inches.It took a long bounce, and McCann legged out a triple, his fourth in 4,929 plate appearances.“I’m good for one a year,” McCann said.For his career, McCann is 8 for 13 against Odorizzi with two home runs, a triple and six runs batted in. In three starts this season, Odorizzi has allowed six hits and one run to batters not named McCann. “I treat him the same as everybody else — he just hits it,” Odorizzi said.Odorizzi lasted six innings, and the Yankees then feasted on the Rays bullpen, scoring seven times in the seventh inning with Chris Young delivering the blow that capped the inning: a grand slam to deep left.Alex Rodriguez, who had hit two long home runs the night before, struck out in his first two at-bats on changeups from Odorizzi. In his third at-bat against Odorizzi, Rodriguez laid off a 3-2 changeup. By then Gardner was at second, having stolen a base in front of Rodriguez.Odorizzi struck out Teixeira, but that brought up his nemesis, McCann, who put the Yankees ahead with his triple. As he saw the ball bouncing toward the infield, McCann rounded second and did not look back. And with the way Tanaka was pitching, neither did the Yankees.Advertisement