AdvertisementSupported byMets 5, Marlins 4By Seth BerkmanSitting atop the National League East, the Mets, winners of six straight, carried a noticeably calm vibe into Saturday’s game against the Miami Marlins.Travis d’Arnaud and Michael Cuddyer took in a portion of batting practice relaxing in the plush leather seats behind home plate at Citi Field. Earlier, passing the locker of relief pitcher Alex Torres, a few players curiously examined his protective headgear, thick padding worn around the cap.“We’re all having a blast,” d’Arnaud said. “Every day we show up to the park, it’s instant jokes and laughing and then just having fun.”Led by seven shutout innings from Jacob deGrom, the Mets (9-3) defeated the Marlins, 5-4, giving them a seven-game winning streak for the first time since June 2010.“Minor league coaches that have had this guy said he’s special,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said of deGrom (2-1), who has now pitched 181/3 consecutive scoreless innings. “And they hit it right on the head.”The Mets and the Marlins were expected to be on the rise this season. But while the Mets have surpassed early expectations, the Marlins have sputtered to a 3-9 start, and players have begun voicing their displeasure. They held a closed-door meeting before Saturday’s game.Marlins catcher Jarrod Saltalamacchia told reporters last week that he was upset at being benched for three straight games. Saltalamacchia, who started Saturday, went 0-for-3 and is now hitting .080.After Friday’s 4-1 loss, the Marlins slugger Giancarlo Stanton said “the fire is not there” for nine innings when the team took the field.The Mets’ success, meanwhile, has been a cumulative effort. In addition to quality pitching, there has been timely hitting by Wilmer Flores, Eric Campbell and d’Arnaud, and even by pitchers Bartolo Colon and Jon Niese. Flores and d’Arnaud each homered Saturday.The Marlins tried to ignite a spark from the first pitch, but they could not take advantage of two replays that ultimately determined calls in their favor.Dee Gordon, who was 5 for 5 with three R.B.I. to raise his average to .400, led the game off with an aggressive bunt single down the third-base line. Collins challenged that Gordon was out at first base, but after a review of 2 minutes 58 seconds, the call was upheld.The momentum was fleeting. DeGrom struck out Christian Yelich, and Gordon was caught by d’Arnaud trying to steal second on the third strike. DeGrom finished the inning by striking out Stanton.In the third, with Adeiny Hechavarria on second base, Gordon hit a ground ball to Flores at shortstop and was called out on the throw to first. Marlins Manager Mike Redmond challenged the play, and after a deliberation that lasted 3:17, the ruling was overturned.DeGrom remained unmoved by the delays. With runners on first and third, he struck out Yelich to end the inning. DeGrom struck out eight batters, and his E.R.A. fell to 0.93.The Marlins’ best scoring chance against deGrom came in the sixth. With runners on first and second, he was behind Stanton in the count, 3-0, before coming back to strike him out on a two-seam fastball. Martin Prado flied out in foul territory to end the inning.“No moment’s too big for him, or hitter,” Cuddyer said of deGrom’s facing Stanton in that situation. “That’s as big as that moment gets, and he was able to rise up from that.“He’s got that presence up there on the mound that nothing is going to faze him.”DeGrom said he had no intention of pitching around Stanton, who had homered in five straight games against the Mets.“I was thinking, ‘I’m not going to walk him,’ ” deGrom said. “I’m going to go right after him and try to come back and get an out.”The missed opportunity proved costly for the Marlins; the Mets scored three runs in the bottom of the inning, highlighted by a two-run homer by Flores.The only blemish in the Mets’ performance before an announced capacity crowd of 41,844 came from the bullpen. Collins rested closer Jeurys Familia, who had pitched in five of the past six games. In the ninth inning, with the Mets leading by 5-1, Carlos Torres gave up three runs before Alex Torres closed out the game by striking out Yelich.Collins emphasized afterward that, even though it is still April, the game was not one the Mets could let slip by.“I realize it’s early,” he said. “I certainly understand where we’re at. But you know what? These games count.” Advertisement