By TIM CASEYOCT. 17, 2015
PHILADELPHIA —  When the Philadelphia Eagles selected wide receiver Jordan Matthews in the second round of the 2014 N.F.L. draft, he could not have been happier. He looked forward to playing for Coach Chip Kelly, someone he admired during high school in Alabama and at Vanderbilt.Back then, Matthews took pride in Southeastern Conference football, so much so that he and his friends refused to watch college games that did not involve SEC programs. Their only two exceptions were Florida State and Oregon, where Kelly coached from 2009 to 2012, instilling a fast-paced offense that impressed Matthews.“If we’re watching anybody that doesn’t play in the SEC, it means we’ve got respect for them,” Matthews said.Now in his third year as the Eagles’ coach, though, Kelly has not had as much success translating his offensive innovations from college to the pros. The Eagles are 2-3 heading into Monday night’s home game against the Giants, although they are coming off a 39-17 victory against the New Orleans Saints. If the Eagles defeat the Giants, they will be at least tied for the N.F.C. East lead. As of now, the Giants are 3-2, while the three other teams in the division are 2-3.AdvertisementAnd yet Kelly cannot escape his Oregon days. During the week, rumors emerged that Kelly might replace Steve Sarkisian (Southern California) or Randy Edsall (Maryland), both of whom were recently fired. During a news conference Thursday, Kelly said no one from U.S.C., Maryland or any other university had contacted him or his agent. He displayed some humor, joking that the fictitious North Texas State Armadillos were in touch, but he denied interest in returning to college.Advertisement“I know it’s going to happen,” Kelly said, referring to the college rumors. “We’re not successful and we’re not winning.”Kelly then brought up Giants Coach Tom Coughlin, who is in his 20th year as an N.F.L. head coach after spending three years as Boston College’s coach.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I hope someday to be like Coach Coughlin and win enough games where I can stay around long enough where that speculation ends,” Kelly said. “But I understand you have to ask the question. I answered it the same way a year ago, and I answered it the same way my first year here.”It is not hard to understand why college programs would have interest in Kelly. At Oregon, his first college head-coaching job, Kelly went 46-7 in four years, during which the Ducks averaged 44.7 points per game. When the Eagles fired Andy Reid after a 4-12 season in 2012, they turned to Kelly and saw immediate dividends.In 2013, the Eagles finished 10-6 before losing in the N.F.C. wild-card game and were second in the N.F.L. in yards (417.2) per game and fourth in points (27.6). The Eagles again went 10-6 last year and were again among the leaders in yards (fifth at 396.8) and points (third at 29.6), although they missed the postseason.After last season, Kelly won a power struggle with General Manager Howie Roseman and gained control of signing, trading and drafting players and assembling the roster. Since then, the Eagles have undergone major changes on offense. They traded running back LeSean McCoy to Buffalo, dealt quarterback Nick Foles to St. Louis for quarterback Sam Bradford, lost wide receiver Jeremy Maclin to Kansas City in free agency, released guard Evan Mathis, signed running backs DeMarco Murray and Ryan Mathews and selected wide receiver Nelson Agholor in the first round of the draft.The moves have not yet paid off. Despite scoring 39 points and gaining 519 yards against the Saints last week, the Eagles are 21st in the league in yards (339.0) per game and 14th in points (23.4). They have scored only 10 points in the first quarter of games and committed 10 turnovers, tied for third worst in the N.F.L.AdvertisementStill, they showed signs of progress last Sunday as Murray gained a season-high 83 yards and caught seven passes, Mathews ran for 73 yards and Bradford rebounded from two first-quarter interceptions to finish 32 of 45 for 333 yards and two touchdowns.“I definitely feel like it’s coming together,” said Murray, who led the N.F.L. with 1,845 rushing yards with the Cowboys last season. “There’s a lot of new pieces: quarterbacks, receivers, running backs. I think the scheme is definitely fit for all of us.”Jordan Matthews has not lost faith in Kelly, either. Since joining the Eagles, he hasn’t had much problem adjusting to the offense. He caught 67 passes and eight touchdowns last year as a rookie and leads the team with 30 receptions this year. He is expecting the rest of the offense to catch on soon enough.“Rome wasn’t built in a day,” Matthews said. “Things that are great take time. When you’re trying to be different, there is a little bit of lack of comfort. There is a little bit of sometimes dysfunction and sometimes that struggle to get to where you’re going. But once you get it going, it’s a beautiful thing.”A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Amid the Eagles’ Changes, Belief in the Coach Persists.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.