By JONATHAN ZELLERAPRIL 18, 2015
CENTRAL ISLIP, N.Y. —  Sean Burroughs of the Bridgeport Bluefish fouled off an 0-2 pitch in the first inning of Saturday’s exhibition game against the host Long Island Ducks. The ball landed beyond first baseman Jon Griffin’s reach, and Burroughs lingered near home plate until the umpire Tony Senia explained to Burroughs that he had struck out.The unusual play, which surprised Burroughs, was part of an experiment to speed up baseball games.Paul Auster, the 68-year-old author of “The New York Trilogy” and a devoted Mets fan, wrote in a letter to The New York Times, published Aug. 23, 2014, that games would be faster if a two-strike foul ball were ruled a strike and if three balls resulted in a walk. Those changes would limit batters to five pitches.With the help of a sportswriter friend, Auster sought to put his ideas into practice, and he found a willing partner in the independent Atlantic League, which has made the pace of play a signature issue.According to Rick White, the league’s president, the average length of a game was reduced to 2 hours 54 minutes from 3:01 in the second half of 2014 by making intentional walks automatic, enforcing the strike zone as written and limiting mound visits, among other changes.AdvertisementAuster’s innovations — which are not under consideration as permanent changes — may be more extreme than anything the league has tried before, but he said they preserved the game’s core principles. Advertisement“I think clocks are anathema to the spirit of baseball,” Auster said.Of the major leagues’ beginning to enforce a rule requiring batters to keep one foot in the box, he said: “I like to see guys scratching themselves and getting ready for the next pitch. That’s not the real problem. It’s pitching changes, mostly.”Auster said limiting an at-bat to five pitches would reduce calls to the bullpen.“Relief pitching has become such a specialty now that often pitchers are brought in just to face one batter,” he said, “and then the manager comes out and gets another pitcher for the next batter. That is real dead time.”Auster predicted an aggressive approach from batters and pitchers under his rules.“They won’t be able to nibble as much, and therefore I think batters are going to be swinging more,” he said.Ducks outfielder Lew Ford, who is also the team’s hitting coach, had two hits in Long Island’s 1-0 victory Saturday. Ford said he had swung more frequently than he ordinarily would have.“I just tried to start the at-bat earlier,” he said.Ducks catcher Jose Morales said he had called more fastballs than usual — “about 80 percent” — to get ahead in the count. There were nine three-ball walks and 10 foul-ball strikeouts, a statistic Auster has named the klunk-out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Auster said his main motivation was his concern that baseball was not capturing the imaginations of young people as it did in his childhood, even though by some measures the sport has never been more popular.“We would get out of school and play in backyards and parks every day of the week,” he said, adding that a longer and slower game had little chance of gaining the attention of children growing up with the Internet.“I think a game that is more intense and faster would appeal to young people more than the game as it’s evolving today,” he said.AdvertisementStill, he was not hopeful that the majors would adopt his rules any time soon.“I think the feeling among people in the major leagues was that it would be embarrassing,” Auster said.The experiment succeeded on at least one front: The game lasted 2:15.“The only way to know if this is a good idea or a bad idea in terms of saving time,” Auster said, “would be to get some computer whiz to play out 100,000 games with these rules and see what happens. One game’s not going to tell us. But one game will be able to tell me that these particular players either enjoyed it or didn’t.”Burroughs fell into the latter camp. “It was completely ridiculous,” he said. “The hitter’s already in a hole enough. You get two strikes, you’re up there battling, you foul off one pitch, and you’re out — that’s a joke.”Auster said he saw some value in longer at-bats. He fondly remembers the five-minute-plus, nine-pitch strikeout the Dodgers’ Bob Welch threw against the Yankees’ Reggie Jackson to end Game 2 of the 1978 World Series.“That was very gripping,” he said. “But I think something’s got to go.”After all, Auster said, baseball would not be the first sport to adjust its rules. Basketball had been around for decades when it introduced the shot clock in 1954 to change the pace of games. The 3-pointer — of which Auster is no fan — became a permanent rule in 1980, and a generation can scarcely imagine basketball without it.“My game would be baseball, still,” Auster said. “It would just be a little faster, that’s all.”A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: On This Day, Five Pitches and You’re Done.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.