By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 18, 2015
Odubel Herrera had three hits and scored twice, and the Philadelphia Phillies snapped a six-game losing streak, beating the Nationals, 5-3, on Saturday in Washington.Freddy Galvis had two R.B.I. singles for Philadelphia, which had scored 13 runs over its last six games.Bryce Harper hit a long home run for the Nationals, who had won three straight. Ian Desmond added three hits, but he continued to struggle in the field, making his eighth error.Aaron Harang gave up three runs and seven hits in six innings for the Phillies, and Jonathan Papelbon pitched the ninth for his third save.AdvertisementJordan Zimmermann allowed two earned runs and four hits over six and a third innings.CUBS 7, PADRES 6 Kris Bryant drew a standing ovation after his first major league hit, an R.B.I. bloop single, and he reached base five times as Chicago beat visiting San Diego in 11 innings.AdvertisementA day after Bryant, a prized prospect, went 0 for 4 with three strikeouts in his major league debut, he went 2 for 3 with three walks.On the first play of the game, Bryant allowed a bouncer from Wil Myers to kick off his glove at third base for his first major league error. But Bryant’s broken-bat single tied the score in the fifth, earning a big cheer from the fans at Wrigley Field.In the 11th, Bryant reached on an infield single against Craig Kimbrel, moving Anthony Rizzo to third with one out. Pinch-hitter David Ross walked to load the bases, bringing up Starlin Castro.San Diego brought in Myers from center field as a fifth infielder, and with all five playing in, Castro singled past third baseman Will Middlebrooks.CARDINALS 5, REDS 2 Carlos Martinez pitched six strong innings, and Jason Heyward hit his first home run of the season, leading St. Louis past visiting Cincinnati for its fourth straight win.Zack Cozart homered for the Reds, who have lost three in a row and six of seven. Billy Hamilton left in the eighth inning with a groin injury after beating out an infield single. It was uncertain when he would return.Martinez gave up one run and three hits.WHITE SOX 12, TIGERS 3 Jose Abreu hit a grand slam, Adam LaRoche added a three-run homer and four R.B.I., and Chicago won at Detroit.AdvertisementChicago, which set a season high for runs, scored 11 over the third and fourth innings and collected a season-high 17 hits for the game. Abreu and LaRoche had three hits apiece, and Melky Cabrera matched a career high with four hits.INDIANS 4, TWINS 2 Danny Salazar matched his career high with 10 strikeouts while pitching into the seventh inning of his season debut, and Cleveland won at Minnesota.Roberto Perez had a home run among his three hits for the Indians, and Jason Kipnis stopped an 0-for-16 slide with a two-out, R.B.I. single in the seventh that prompted the Twins to pull starter Phil Hughes.BLUE JAYS 6, BRAVES 5 Josh Donaldson hit his third home run in two days, a leadoff shot in the 10th inning that lifted Toronto over visiting Atlanta.Donaldson’s drive, into the second deck of the left-field stands, was his third hit of the afternoon. Donaldson, who hit 29 home runs last year with Oakland and was traded to Toronto in the off-season, launched his first two home runs Friday night in a loss.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the 10th inning on Saturday, he connected on the second pitch he faced from Sugar Ray Marimon, handing Atlanta its first road defeat of the season.ORIOLES 4, RED SOX 1 Chris Davis hit a two-run homer, Chris Tillman rebounded from a rough start, and Baltimore won at Boston.Adam Jones had three singles for the Orioles, who moved back over .500, at 6-5.David Ortiz went 3 for 3 with a double and two singles for the Red Sox, who lost for the third time in their last nine games. Brock Holt had three singles.PIRATES 6, BREWERS 2 Starling Marte homered for the second game in a row and drove in a career-high five runs to lead Pittsburgh over visiting Milwaukee.AdvertisementThe loss was the fourth straight for the Brewers, who are off to their worst start since 2002, when they were also 2-9.Marte hit a two-run single to cap a three-run first inning that included an R.B.I. double by Gregory Polanco. A three-run homer by Marte in the fifth pushed the Pirates’ lead to 6-1.ATHLETICS 5, ROYALS 0 Josh Reddick hit a three-run homer, Jesse Hahn and Jesse Chavez combined on a seven-hitter, and Oakland coasted to a victory at Kansas City.Yordano Ventura gave up all five runs in the fourth inning, right before hitting Athletics third baseman Brett Lawrie with what appeared to be a retaliatory pitch for an incident the previous night.ASTROS 4, ANGELS 0 Dallas Keuchel and three relievers gave up only three hits, and Robbie Grossman and George Springer homered as Houston beat visiting Los Angeles.Angels batters struck out a season-high 13 times, and they were unhappy with the strike zone of the home-plate umpire, Paul Nauert. Collin Cowgill was ejected after he was called out on strikes, ending the seventh.GIANTS 4, DIAMONDBACKS 1 Chris Heston pitched into the eighth inning, Brandon Crawford hit a two-run homer, and San Francisco snapped an eight-game losing streak with a victory over visiting Arizona.Joe Panik had three hits and drove in a run as the Giants stopped their longest slide in nearly nine years. Buster Posey went 2 for 4 with an R.B.I. single.AdvertisementROSE HIRED AS ANALYST Pete Rose, the career hits leader in the major leagues, who agreed to a lifetime ban from baseball 26 years ago, was hired by Fox as a guest studio analyst.“We informed baseball of Pete’s audition; baseball was informed every step of the way,” the Fox spokesman Dan Bell said.Bell said Rose would not be in stadium broadcast booths. Since the ban began, Rose has not been allowed in areas of ballparks not open to fans, except with special approval from the commissioner’s office.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Phillies End Skid by Halting Nationals’ Streak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.