By PATRICK MAKSAPRIL 18, 2015
It surely was a sight to behold last year when Leonard Williams, a 6-foot-5, 302-pound defensive end at Southern California, would coast to team workouts across campus on a longboard as his wild hair flapped in the wind.Williams, an all-American with an outsize personality to match his large frame, amassed a devoted following and became one of college football’s elite talents.“You see this 300-pound guy on a big skateboard riding across campus, and it would be Leonard Williams,” the defensive line coach Chris Wilson said. “He does things in his own way.”Williams became known as the Big Cat because of his flowing mane and ferocity on the football field. The name stuck, and the legend grew.Advertisement“My name is Leo, so Leo the Lion,” Williams said at the N.F.L. combine in February, offering a guess about where the nickname came from.AdvertisementHis mother, Aviva Russek, compared Williams’s hair to that of the biblical figure Samson. “He’s always, always, always had the hair,” she said.Williams is the size of a professional wrestler and is as graceful as a ballerina. He has hips that move as if they were on swivels and legs that drive like pistons. Because of this, he is expected to be a top-five pick in the N.F.L. draft later this month.“When I think of the Big Cat, it comes from Leonard’s ability to be a big man and then be so light on his feet and so athletic and quick,” said Keynodo Hudson, a defensive quality-control specialist for the Trojans who has known Williams since his days at Mainland High School in Daytona Beach, Fla. “He’s like one of those big apex predators.”Yet Hudson and others close to Williams playfully describe him as a beach-loving hippie who does not have a driver’s license, which is why he rides a skateboard instead. Before football, he played rugby and briefly rode dirt bikes.Russek said Williams once had an iguana, and he would roll around town with the animal on his shoulder.“Who could get this emotional bond with an iguana?” Russek said. “You can’t cuddle with it, but he did.”In a ceramics class his freshman year, Williams, a reggae fan, said he once sculpted a Bob Marley figurine because “they told us to choose, like, a political figure — and I really couldn’t pick one — so I just decided to do Bob Marley.” The figurine was so polished, his professor implored him to enter it in the university’s Artletics exhibit, in which athletes showcase their artwork.AdvertisementHis interests are eclectic, and so is his inner circle.“His social group has no roof,” Wilson said.Hudson added: “He’s one of the most diverse kids I’ve ever seen. Period.”Williams is a star football player for a reason. At the combine, he turned heads after an impressive 4.97-second effort in the 40-yard dash. During a broadcast of the event, the NFL Network analyst Charles Davis said Williams was a “Hall of Fame talent.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his final season at U.S.C., Williams had 80 tackles and seven sacks.“He’s able to do almost anything you ask him to do,” Wilson said. “If he can conceive it mentally, physically he can do it and put it on tape.”In a year that marked a new era for the Trojans, Williams was a centerpiece in Coach Steve Sarkisian’s inaugural season. Perhaps what best defines Williams’s on-field worth is a stretch of galvanizing plays — including a bone-crushing hit that forced a fumble near the goal line late in the second quarter that lifted U.S.C. to a dramatic 28-26 road win over its conference rival Arizona in October. During a 9-4 season, this particular triumph offered hope of better days, and Williams was at the crux of it.Off the field, coaches point to Williams as something of a gentle giant.“What he is, he’s as good of a person as he is a football player,” Wilson said.Russek said, “He has a very mellow soul to him.”Such a disposition was perhaps nurtured by his mother, who has taken care of Williams and his four siblings mostly by herself. There were many trying times. Money was often a problem. They moved around a lot. Williams’s father, Clenon, struggled with drug addiction and is incarcerated until at least October 2019 for multiple offenses, including robbery with a deadly weapon, according to the Florida Department of Corrections. Russek, who is a nurse, still works long hours to support her family.Before high school, Williams wanted to play in a youth football league but was turned away because he was too heavy.“I just remember, like, I was crying, leaving the field because I was, like, waiting in line the whole time, excited to play,” he said.Russek, who saw how heartbroken her son was, scoured the Internet for a way to lift his spirits. She found a football camp in Orlando, Fla., and sent him there for a weekend not long after. She paid for the camp out of pocket.AdvertisementIn high school, Williams’s size was a welcome commodity. Nick Saban, the Alabama coach who has won three national titles with the Crimson Tide, offered him his first scholarship. Ultimately, Williams committed to U.S.C., in part because he developed a deep bond with the former defensive line coach Ed Orgeron.“We thought he’d be a top-five pick in the draft when we got him,” said Orgeron, now an assistant at Louisiana State.Such a moment has arrived for Williams, who declared for the draft after his junior season.“It was definitely hard for me to leave, but I have a single mother who is taking care of five children and a small family,” he said at the combine.Through fame and football, a son’s promise to someday take care of his mother has remained.“When I hear him say that he was raised by a strong woman, that means a lot to me,” Russek said, her voice breaking. “Because as a parent, you don’t think about that kind of stuff. You just get up, go to work, you take care of your kids, you feed your kids, you try to give them everything they want and need.”She continued: “He always tells me stuff like: ‘I made it, Mom. I’m going to spoil you. You’re never going to have to worry anymore.’ When I talk to him on the phone, that’s the one thing he says: ‘You don’t have to worry anymore. Stop worrying.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Free Spirit Prepares to Make an N.F.L. Splash.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.