By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 18, 2015
UNIONDALE, N.Y. —  The Islanders’ almost unfathomable ability to squander two-goal leads rose to the forefront yet again Friday night in Game 2 of their first-round playoff series against Washington.Now they are counting on their enthusiastic fans at Nassau Coliseum to keep them focused and away from such meltdowns as the series shifts to Long Island.After winning the opener on Wednesday, the Islanders wasted a 3-1 second-period lead in Friday’s game, falling, 4-3. The rookie Capitals goaltender Philipp Grubauer — in relief of their ailing starter, Braden Holtby — needed only 18 saves to secure the win in his first playoff game.According to Stats L.L.C., the Islanders wound up losing six games after surrendering two-goal leads in the regular season — including their home finale last Saturday against Columbus, a loss that meant they would have to start the Capitals series on the road.AdvertisementThe Islanders led by 3-1 in Game 2 at Verizon Center, with Kyle Okposo having scored 14 minutes 9 seconds into the second period. But Alex Ovechkin cut the lead to a goal two minutes later, and the momentum clearly tilted in Washington’s favor. The Capitals were faster and more opportunistic the rest of the way.Advertisement“Obviously, when we play our game, you can see the results,” Ovechkin said after the Capitals practiced Saturday at the Coliseum.In the third period, Nicklas Backstrom and Jason Chimera scored less than four minutes apart to lift the Capitals to victory and deny the Islanders a chance to gain a 2-0 series lead on the road.The frustrating Game 2 loss was addressed in a team meeting before Saturday morning’s practice at the Coliseum, where orange towels were draped over every seat a full day in advance of the next game.“For whatever reason, we were a little too passive,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said about the midgame reversal. “As I told the guys, our identity hasn’t been that all year. We’re not a team that plays safe and sits back. We want to dictate the pace.”Despite the frustrating loss, Capuano and his players were upbeat as they looked ahead to the next two games at home, starting with Game 3 on Sunday afternoon.“We fed off this crowd all year; they are a big reason why we have the home record that we do,” Capuano said, referring to the team’s 25-14-2 home mark. “It’s definitely an exciting time for our players and our fans.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain, echoed Capuano’s theme.Two years ago, when the underdog Islanders faced top-seeded Pittsburgh in a taut six-game series in the playoffs’ first round, the noise at the Coliseum rose to decibel levels not heard in decades. Fans have been even more energized in this final season at the 43-year-old arena — the Islanders are moving to Barclays Center in Brooklyn — and players emphasized that they were looking forward to some exciting games.“Certainly these games at home are going to be special,” Tavares said. “We have to control our emotions, stay composed and play hard from start to finish. All year we have been aware of what this building means to everybody.”AdvertisementOvechkin, who led the league with 53 goals this season, said he had no trepidation about playing in front of a hostile crowd.“That’s O.K.; it’s not my first game in the N.H.L.,” he said. “Anyway, it can’t be louder than our fans at Verizon Center.”Islanders forward Josh Bailey said Sunday’s noon start would present several minor preparation challenges, especially in getting proper rest and choosing the best time and menu for breakfast.“Our routines will be a little different, but I’m just really excited, as we all are,” Bailey said. “We want to give our fans a lot to cheer about. It’s going to be tough to sleep.”Capuano hinted at lineup changes after Game 2, but on Saturday he was noncommittal. The forward units skating at practice were essentially the same as those that played on Friday.“For us, it all goes back to managing the puck,” Capuano said. “They are going to get zone time. You just have to contain them and keep them to the outside. Last night, the second period is where the tide was turned. The first and third periods were O.K. We have to play 60 minutes.”Okposo, who on Friday night played perhaps his best game since his return last month from a detached retina that cost him 22 games, said the most important lesson the Islanders could learn was to focus solely on the future.“You have to have short-term memory in the playoffs,” Okposo said.SLAP SHOTSThe Islanders had no update on the injured defenseman Travis Hamonic, who missed the first two games of the series with a lower-body injury. ... Goaltender Braden Holtby practiced with the Capitals and said he was feeling better, although Coach Barry Trotz said he was not ready to announce a starter for Game 3.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: After Collapsing in Game 2, Isles Relish Comforts of Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.