AdvertisementSupported byInboxA Positive PerspectiveTo the Sports Editor:Re “A Marathon as a Small Step,” April 17: It is refreshing to read something positive about North Korea and to see the smiling faces of kids in the stadium cheering the 650 marathon runners from 30 countries. Jeré Longman’s anecdotes brought a human face to the people rather than the too-often-mentioned military face. I visited this past year on a tourist visa and was impressed by the beauty of the country, gracious people, scenic parks, cultural events, museums and interesting historical sites and monuments. Hopefully, many others will visit in the future so they, too, can form their own impressions from what they see and experience and gain a better understanding of this unique nation.KATHRYN WHITMER, Bellingham, Wash.The High-Five’s ValueTo the Sports Editor:Re “He Missed a Shot? Give That Man a Hand,” April 12: High-fiving is not a frivolous part of the game as the article implies. I required my high school players to give a high-five before every free throw. Practicing free throws is not the same as shooting them in a game, unless the player runs the court several times between each free throw. He is breathing heavily and his heart is pumping hard. The high-fives slow the game and give the player a chance to catch his breath and get his body under better control. Also, players can choke when they overthink a routine shot instead of clearing their mind and letting muscle memory from hours of practice take over. The shooter is less likely to be overthinking the shot when the high-fiving is going on. When he then steps to the line, the ball is quickly tossed to him and his muscle memory takes over as he performs his free-throw routine.LAWRENCE HICKMAN, Victoria, British ColumbiaArena ExperiencesTo the Sports Editor:Re “For Canadiens, Heightened Expectations Apply Not Just to Players,” April 15:While the pregame show can be an important part of the fan experience, it’s not the only thing. The arena-to-arena fan experience in the N.H.L. is amazingly varied. Nashville, seemingly uniquely, has a mascot, Gnash, who rappels from the ceiling before some games, in-arena, no-delay FM radio broadcast of the play-by-play and a live band during the intermissions. You would think that all arenas have something in common. For example, the program. But here again the reality is different. The program in Nashville is free. In Toronto it’s $5 (either currency), in Ottawa it’s $3 and printed in French and English. In Montreal, for all their “heightened expectations,” the program does not exist.DAVE DELAGE, Madison, Tenn.Advertisement