AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Deron Williams was surrounded by a group of reporters Friday as he answered questions about the Nets’ new lease on life.When the Nets left Barclays Center on Wednesday after a victory over the Orlando Magic, Williams didn’t know whether the Nets were in or out of the playoffs.Near midnight, he learned that the Nets were in, because the Memphis Grizzlies had held off the pesky Indiana Pacers. Now the Nets play heavily favored Atlanta in the first round, beginning Sunday.Williams was asked how he felt about the Nets’ being huge underdogs. Atlanta swept their season series. “It’s pretty much expected for an eighth seed,” he said. “It’s not too favorable for the eighth seed. We expected that. At the same time, anything can happen in the playoffs. We have four days to figure it out.”The Nets have had more than four seasons now to figure out whether Williams, 30, a point guard who came to the team amid great expectations, will be the player to help lead them to anything resembling glory, or whether he will be another in a seemingly endless parade of players who have collected large checks and failed to lead a star-crossed franchise to the championship.With the Knicks having drifted deep into irrelevance, the door has opened wide for Nets to win the hearts of New York fans eager to embrace a winner, or at least a team that seems to know what it is doing. The question surrounding Williams is whether he wants to walk through that door, and whether he is capable of leading the Nets through that door.In this respect — or rather, in this context — recent comments by Paul Pierce to ESPN.com expressed an interesting perspective from a former teammate about whether Williams really wants to be great. Pierce, who was brought to Brooklyn along with Kevin Garnett to energize championship dreams, made critical comments about Williams. Among other things, he said: “Before I got there, I looked at Deron as an M.V.P. candidate. But I felt once we got there, that’s not what he wanted to be. He just didn’t want that.”After the Orlando game, Williams, asked about Pierce’s comments, said: “Being here, I got pretty thick skin. He has his opinions, and that’s fine. It’s what it is. I can’t change his opinions. So just leave it at that.”On Friday, asked about his assessment of himself, Williams made it clear that he was not going down that road. “It’s a team game, man,” he said. “We’re just trying to go out and win this series. That’s the main thing. That’s the only thing I’m concerned about, nothing individually, just going out and winning.”Pierce was angry, and perhaps wounded, because the Nets had allowed him to leave rather than re-sign an aging player. Critics have pointed out that Pierce spent several years in Boston putting up big numbers, but he won nothing until Garnett and Ray Allen joined the team.None of that takes away from a potential truth — that Williams may not be willing to take this franchise, or himself, through that open door. In 2012-13, the Nets finished second in the Atlantic Division, then lost in the playoffs in embarrassing fashion at home to a Chicago team hobbled by injuries.Last season, the Nets finished second again and defeated Toronto in the first round, but they lost to Miami in the second.This season, the Nets were barely able to squeak in as the eighth seed.“It’s a new season,” Williams said. “The regular season is over. We have a new opportunity ahead of us. We’re going to need everybody to be monsters to beat this team. This team is really good.” Coach Lionel Hollins and Williams have had their differences, but both want to win. Hollins will take Williams out of the game when he feels Williams is not doing what he wants done. Williams will seethe, though invariably he will do what the coach wants him to do once he goes back in. There is no more intriguing franchise in the N.B.A. than the Nets. The intrigue is not in how they won championships (two in the American Basketball Association with Julius Erving). On the contrary, it lies in the team’s pursuit of stability with so many homes in New Jersey and New York over the years. Brooklyn seems to be the most welcoming home the franchise has ever had. The team has a great new arena in a vibrant section of Brooklyn. Hollins, 61, won an N.B.A. title as a guard with the Portland Trail Blazers and laid the foundation for a winning franchise in Memphis. He is in his first year as Brooklyn coach, Hollins said he had spent a large part of the season getting to know this team.“You never know a woman until you live with her, you never know a man until you live with him and you never know a team and players until you coach them,” he said.“We’ve come along way as a group as far as mental toughness, playing together and understanding how we have to play to win and then doing it.”“What I’d like to do,” he added, “is establish a tradition of winning and being in the playoffs and winning series.” In 2013, for want of a splash, the team paid too much for over-the-hill talent — Pierce and Garnett. It miscast Williams and Joe Johnson, two introverted players, as the effervescent faces of the franchise, a dynamic duo who would take New York by storm.Now, the Nets find themselves in a veritable no man’s land of aspirations.While teams like Cleveland, San Antonio and Golden State will consider their seasons a bust if they do not win a title, teams like Milwaukee and Boston consider it a triumph merely to have reached the playoffs. But a team like the Nets, with the league’s highest payroll, cannot be happy simply making the playoffs, although it’s unrealistic to expect them to win the championship. If Williams can help lead the Nets past Atlanta and into the Eastern Conference finals, his tenure in Brooklyn will be regarded as a success.Winning is the ultimate validation. Anything less than that will be a disappointment.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement