AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy Ben RothenbergMy parents don’t remember anything about the first hockey game I went to, but they’ve been talking about the second ever since. Probably because it could also count as the third game and part of the fourth one, too. On April 18, 1987, the Islanders and the Washington Capitals faced off in Game 7 of their Patrick Division semifinal series. More than six hours later, at nearly 2 a.m. on April 19, the game ended in the fourth overtime with Pat LaFontaine spinning a shot through a screen and into the net for a 3-2 Islanders victory.The game, dubbed the Easter Epic, became my parents’ proudest brush with sports history. When the teams reconvened in the playoffs this year for the first time in more than two decades, the three of us sat down over pizza to share memories of that night.I was there, too, but at only 10 weeks old, I can’t claim to remember any of it. “The thing about little babies is they’re very portable,” my mother said. “People underestimate that as an advantage of babies.”And so ported I was, to Landover, Md., after my father had been given tickets by a co-worker.“I had brought a bottle of pumped milk, and that was going to be plenty, because how long do hockey games last?” my mother recalled. “We fed you out in the car, brought you in, had the bottle of milk ready to go.”My father had fallen for the Philadelphia Flyers while a college student during their Stanley Cup wins in the 1970s, and while my parents had no particular rooting interest in either the Caps or the Islanders, a win by the home team would have meant that the Flyers would play in Washington in the next round, giving us a chance to go to more meaningful games.“Going into it we were somewhat invested in the Capitals, because more hockey was what we were interested in,” my mother said.More hockey was what we got, and immediately. The Capitals led for most of the game, but an Islanders goal with just over five minutes left in the third period tied the score at 2-2. There was no cause for alarm. “There had been plenty of scoring,” my mother said. My father added, “And you don’t expect anything to go on like it did.”Marathon games were nearly unheard-of in that era of the N.H.L., with offense beating defense and shooting outpacing goaltending for most of the 1970s and ’80s. There have been five longer games since, but in 1987 no game had gone to a third overtime since 1971, and there had not been a fourth overtime since 1951, before either of my parents was born. But that night, the score stayed tied through the first overtime, and the second, and the third.“I remember when it went into overtime just how exhausted the players were as it kept going and going,” my mother said. “Anytime there was a stop in play, they were bent over. We were sitting close enough that you really had a sense of just how tired they were.“But then every time after this total flop of exhaustion, as soon as play started again it was like full speed, from the amount of adrenaline that they would pull up.”The defense tightened, but the offense never relented. The Capitals fired a total of 75 shots on goal, and the Islanders 57, with the teams combining for at least 20 shots in each overtime period. I can’t claim to have witnessed all the shots, though.“In the third overtime I left with you and went and sat out on the concourse with you for a while,” my mother said. “At that point I was so tired that I was in tears. You had lost your earlier fascination with the lights and the people and everything else, and you were pretty sleepy.”While she retreated, others arrived. Fans who had been watching the game on TV showed up to the arena, where they found open doors, enough empty seats, and no ticket checkers. My father, who remembers seeing an entire wedding party, including a bride in her gown, show up, was staying put.“No way,” he said to the notion of leaving. “It was once in a lifetime. You never know if you’re going to get in the car and five minutes later the game is going to be over.”We were all present for the end. “Early on I had wanted the Caps to win; by the end of it I was saying, ‘Put me out of my misery,’ ” my mother said.We were in the corner near the Islanders’ exit to their locker room, and my father remembers their giddy faces. My mother, however, remembers how quickly Capitals goaltender Bob Mason left the ice after the handshake, how awful she felt for him. Eight years later, that anguish would come too close to home. I had always loved watching goalies, and I pounced on the chance to become one, donning the worn-out, used pads that had been passed around our local recreational league for years.“When your father came home with you from your first Mites hockey practice and you came stomping into the house in your goalie pads, the first thing I thought about was Bob Mason in that game,” my mother said. My first experience with participating in playoffs of my own came the next year of Mites, in the semifinals of our four-team house league. The game went into overtime, and then an absurd 17-round shootout. My father stood at the glass watching a marathon we eventually won. My mother hid from it all in the bathroom.Advertisement