By KEN BELSONOCT. 17, 2015
When football fans think of the New England Patriots, Coach Bill Belichick and quarterback Tom Brady immediately come to mind.But the team’s dominating 4-0 start to the season has provided a fresh reminder of Belichick’s uncanny ability to put castoffs and unheralded players into successful roles. Brady has been superb, throwing 11 touchdown passes and no interceptions, with the best passer rating (121.5) among N.F.L. starters. But some of his lesser-known teammates have overachieved, helping the Patriots win by an average of 18 points a game.As impressive as the victories were, one of them came against the dreadful Jacksonville Jaguars (1-4), and another came against the Dallas Cowboys (2-3), who were playing without their starting quarterback and top receiver. The Patriots’ matchup with the Colts (3-2) on Sunday night in Indianapolis may provide their stiffest test of the season.It will also give fans watching on national television a chance to see New England’s formula.After the Patriots won their fourth Super Bowl title, defeating Seattle in February, they lost Brandon Browner and Darrelle Revis, two standout cornerbacks, as well as Vince Wilfork, a longtime defensive tackle. At cornerback, the Patriots turned to Malcolm Butler, whose interception at the end of the Super Bowl capped a dream rookie season, and Tarell Brown.AdvertisementThe result? The Patriots’ defense has given up an average of 19 points a game, the fourth fewest in the league.AdvertisementThere has been a similar overhaul on offense. Last year, the Patriots leaned on running backs Shane Vereen and Stevan Ridley, who are both gone. A third back, Jonas Gray, ran for 201 yards and four touchdowns in a 42-20 blowout of the Colts. Gray is now with the Miami Dolphins.Dion Lewis, who played three unremarkable seasons with Philadelphia and Indianapolis, has made up for their absence. In the first four games this season — the first four starts of his career — Lewis has rushed for a team-leading 180 yards and two touchdowns and has 23 catches, the second most on the team, after Julian Edelman.Belichick, who offers praise carefully, told reporters that Lewis “makes the most out of what he’s got” and has “a good skill set,” a reference to his ability to run inside and outside and catch the ball.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Patriots’ cast of unknown characters tends to get lost in the shadow of Brady’s performance. That group — minus Brown, who was placed on injured reserve Saturday because of a foot injury — may draw even less attention in Sunday’s game, which is portrayed as a grudge match between longtime rivals with renewed animosity.The last time the teams met was in January in the A.F.C. championship game. The Patriots won, 45-7, and then won the Super Bowl two weeks later.But the A.F.C. title game was a footnote to the controversy that followed. Acting on a tip from the Colts, the N.F.L. began an investigation into whether Patriots staff members had tampered with the game balls at Brady’s behest.After an investigator hired by the league said Brady had probably been aware of a plan to deflate the footballs to gain a throwing advantage, the N.F.L. suspended him for four games. Brady appealed, lost and went to federal court, where the suspension was lifted after a judge said the N.F.L. had penalized him unfairly.AdvertisementWith the way the Patriots have swept their first four games, it appears that Brady and his teammates are out to prove a point. Belichick, though, has brushed off that talk.“There’s always a lot of things on the outside,” he said. “We just try to focus on what we need to do to coach and play well on Sunday night.”The Colts, meanwhile, are trying to right their leaky ship. They dropped their first two games before winning three, all against weaker division rivals. Their coach, Chuck Pagano, said that losses to the Patriots last season did not provide extra motivation.“That’s history,” Pagano said. “What we’re focusing on is us.”“Us” includes quarterback Andrew Luck, who led the Colts to the playoffs in each of his first three seasons but has started slowly this year, with five touchdown passes and seven interceptions. He sat out the last two games with a shoulder injury and was listed as questionable to play on Sunday.Brady and the Patriots — including the players who are unlikely to be in the headlines — will try to show the Colts that the scandal has not affected them, on or off the field.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Patriots Know How to Win, No Matter How Many Players They Lose.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.