AdvertisementSupported byExtra BasesBy Tyler KepnerThe Detroit Tigers have pulled off a trick that only the best teams can do. Their position in the standings never changes, but their roster continues to evolve. The Tigers, who host the Yankees for four games starting Monday, rolled into Saturday as the best team in t he majors, winning nine of their first 10 games and sitting atop the American League Central. They have won the division in each of the last four years, earning the 2012 A.L. pennant by beating the Yankees in the championship series.The Yankees have turned over much of their roster since then, without returning to the playoffs. The Tigers have stayed on top, despite losing 15 of the 16 players they used in the final game of the 2012 World Series, which they lost to San Francisco in a sweep. Only Miguel Cabrera remains.The Tigers’ designated hitter, Victor Martinez, missed that year with a knee injury, and catcher Alex Avila was on the team but did not play the final game. The point is that the look and feel of the Tigers’ roster is much different now, yet the team still wins.“There have been a lot of changes,” said Dave Dombrowski, the Tigers’ president and general manager. “It’s kind of the game that you’re always challenged to do: When you have a core group that you try to build around, you try to bring young players in, if possible, because you don’t want to end up in a position where you wake up and your club is all older, so you’re not able to perform at the same level. It’s a compliment to everybody in the organization, in player development and scouting.”The Tigers ranked last of the 30 teams in Baseball America’s organizational talent rankings this spring. Yet in the last 12 months, they used seven of their top 10 prospects to retool the major league roster, adding three new starters (David Price, Shane Greene, Alfredo Simon) and Joakim Soria, who is their closer because Joe Nathan is dealing with an elbow injury.They also traded a homegrown starter, Rick Porcello, to Boston for left fielder Yoenis Cespedes, and shipped their No. 2 prospect from last year, second baseman Devon Travis, to Toronto for center fielder Anthony Gose.With Gose, shortstop Jose Iglesias and second baseman Ian Kinsler, the Tigers have dynamic, athletic up-the-middle defense, all acquired through trades. Another speedy center fielder, Rajai Davis, shares time with Gose.“We still have some guys with thump in the middle of the lineup,” Dombrowski said. “But we do have a different type of club because we play much better defense and have better speed.”The Tigers, who ranked fourth in the A.L. in steals last season, ranked first through their first nine games this season, with 13 stolen bases. In 2013 they ranked last, with only 35 all season. They lost in the A.L.C.S. that fall to Boston, then engineered a franchise-shifting deal by shipping first baseman Prince Fielder to Texas for Kinsler.Fielder had seven years left on his bloated nine-year, $214 million deal, and while the Tigers sent $30 million to Texas, it was a small price to pay for their reinvention. Cabrera shifted to first base, opening third base for Nick Castellanos, 23. Kinsler was an All-Star at second last season and has started off well again.Shedding so much of Fielder’s contract also made it easier for Detroit to re-sign Martinez, who was the runner-up for the Most Valuable Player Award last season and, when healthy, is part of a strong middle of the order with J. D. Martinez and Cabrera. After off-season surgery to repair his ankle and foot, Cabrera looks rejuvenated, with a .439 average through Friday.“You notice a significant difference in the way he’s moving around,” Dombrowski said. “You can tell it’s not bothering him when he plays the game. That’s why when people said they weren’t sure how Miggy’s going to play, we kept saying, ‘Well, he hasn’t been really healthy,’ and now you see he’s as much a force with the bat as he’s ever been.”The Tigers lost starter Max Scherzer to Washington in free agency, but prepared for his departure by trading for Price last July. Price has been overpowering so far — helped by a curveball he learned from Oakland’s Sonny Gray while training last winter at Vanderbilt — and so has Greene, who came from the Yankees in the three-way deal that brought Didi Gregorius to New York from Arizona.“We saw him firsthand a couple of times last year, he threw the ball well, and we had good scouting reports on him, too, over the last couple of years,” Dombrowski said of Greene, who is 2-0 and has not allowed an earned run in 16 innings. “He has premium stuff: fastball, slider and cutter; he’s worked on a changeup that’s continuing to develop, and he’s thrown strikes. He’s been ahead of hitters on a consistent basis, and when you do that, you’re putting yourself in a good spot.”Price is facing free agency after the season, and while Dombrowski would not comment on his contract status, he said the Tigers had not closed any doors on keeping him. They are committed to Justin Verlander, who is out with a triceps strain, for $28 million per season through 2019.That contract could become a problem if Verlander does not regain his status as an ace. Judging by their history, though, the Tigers will probably find a way to get by. Tekulve’s Inspiring Story Few major leaguers have ever been as durable as Kent Tekulve, or as memorable. Tekulve pitched in 1,050 games (ninth on the career list) from 1974 to 1989, with dark glasses, a submarine delivery and a beanpole frame: 6-foot-4, 180 pounds.Yet by late 2013, Tekulve was a physical wreck. A pre- and postgame commentator for the Pittsburgh Pirates — his primary team as a pitcher — Tekulve could not walk the half-block from the parking lot to the ballpark studio without stopping twice to catch his breath. A lifetime of eating whatever he wanted had finally affected his weight. He was 245 pounds and constantly exhausted.“I could basically do nothing except sit around,” Tekulve said.Tekulve, now 68, said he first thought he was simply getting older. It turned out that his heart was failing. He had a heart attack in December 2013 and a heart transplant last Sept. 5 at Allegheny General Hospital.Less than four weeks later, he threw out the first pitch at the Pirates’ wild-card game. He was strong enough to resume his duties as the president of the Pirates’ alumni association and director of their fantasy camp in Florida. He was back to work at PNC Park for the Pirates’ opening series, and said he bounds to work instead of staggering in.“Now I’m back to taking the stairs — running up the stairs,” he said. “I’m doing everything that I did 10 years ago.”Tekulve does not know the identity of the person whose heart beats inside him, but he hopes to use his story to inspire others to be organ donors.“I’m not supposed to be here anymore,” said Tekulve, who mentioned the joy of holding his first grandson a few months after the transplant.“As full as my life has been, with my baseball career and broadcasting career and everything else, these are things I never would have experienced, and the only reason I’m experiencing them now is because of that donor. I owe it to that donor to do as much as I can to appreciate everything that’s going to happen from here on out.”Advertisement