AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrouseNAPA, Calif. — Jarrod Lyle’s caddie reached into Lyle’s golf bag after their round was over and popped a cough lozenge into his mouth. Of all the threats lurking on the Silverado course, the site of this past week’s Frys.com Open, perhaps none pose a greater hazard to Lyle than his caddie’s sore throat.“I was worried that I’d get him sick,” Lyle’s caddie, Darren Woolard, said.It was a valid concern. Lyle, 34, underwent a double umbilical cord blood transplant in 2012 after his second bout with acute myeloid leukemia. He returned to competition in late 2013 and tried to resume a full schedule last year, starting at this event. After 10 starts, and three made cuts, Lyle took a hiatus and returned to his native Australia, citing mental, physical and emotional exhaustion.He resurfaced last week, at the site of his tie for 31st in 2014. After opening with a three-under-par 69, Lyle posted a 77 on Friday, missing the cut. Lyle, who is playing on a major medical exemption, has nine more starts, during which he must earn at least $217,679, to secure his exempt status for the 2015-16 season.“Through this whole thing, I said if I never play golf again, I’ll be happy,” said Lyle, a two-time winner on the Web.com Tour. “I could walk away from the game and be reasonably happy with what I’ve accomplished.”Robert Allenby, one of Lyle’s closest friends, described Lyle’s return to the tour as “a miracle in itself.” “I don’t think people really realize what he’s gone through,” said Allenby, who kept in touch with Lyle throughout his most recent ordeal. “The only people who could probably fathom it are people who have gone through it themselves, and probably half of them haven’t survived.”He added, “I think he’s a great ambassador for golf and for everyone to watch him play, because it really is totally amazing.”Lyle, who first battled cancer as a teenager, knows there are people drawn to him because of his story. On Tuesday, he said, he met a spectator on the course who said he was a year into his recovery from a bone-marrow transplant.“It’s nice to sort of walk around and meet people like that, and actually let them know they’re still going to be O.K.,” Lyle said.But Lyle is a competitor. He is not content to walk these courses as the tour’s version of Charlie Chip, this tournament’s cuddly computer-chip mascot. He is committed to leaving no avenue unexplored in an effort to regain the form that carried him to five top-10 finishes on the PGA Tour from 2009 to 2012.“I don’t want to get into that position where if I do lose my status and I don’t have a job, I don’t want to waste it and sit there at the end of it and go I didn’t try,” Lyle said.Woolard, his caddie, said there was nothing wrong with Lyle’s game that a different set of wedges couldn’t cure. On the Silverado course, Woolard said, Lyle faced several approach shots of 115 yards, which was no man’s land for him because he hits his pitching wedge 130 yards and his sand wedge 100 yards.“He has a lot of gaps in his short irons,” said Woolard, who began working with Lyle last week. Other than hitting his drive out of bounds on the par-4 third hole, “he played really good,” Woolard said, adding: “He needs to get his swagger back. He’s been out of the mix. He needs to start believing that he belongs.”Allenby, who also missed the cut, played in the group on Friday directly in front of Lyle, who teed off early in the morning after finishing his Thursday round near dusk. From what little he saw, Allenby said, there were “a few lazy shots, and it could just be fatigue.”Allenby added: “He probably put a lot coming into this tournament, had a good round yesterday. He’s pretty excited, I’d say, and then to try and come out early this morning, it’s very difficult for anyone, really, but even more so for him.”Lyle acknowledges that fatigue is an issue. “I get tired very quickly, so it’s very rare I go and hit balls after a round just because I want to go home and have a rest and get ready for the next day,” he said. “That’s probably the only thing I’m going to be conscious of, is how tired I’m getting and things like that, so it’s nothing too bad.”After spending the better part of three years battling for his life, does Lyle have any fight left for the golf course?“Look, the drive and the fight’s still there,” he said. “I think if the cancer comes back again, I don’t know how I’d go with the fight on that one.” Lyle found out his cancer had returned around the same time that his wife, Briony, gave birth to the couple’s daughter, Lusi, now 3. Lyle had been told not to expect to be able to father a child because of the chemotherapy he endured as a teenager.“For him to have a child, that’s pretty much a miracle right there,” Allenby said. “So there’s two miracles in his life — having the child and also being alive. That’s why golf, to him, is not the be-all and end-all.”Lyle agreed. Whatever the future holds, he feels equipped to handle it. “There’s my wife and daughter, and that’d be enough to keep going,” he said. “If the golf doesn’t pan out, I’m still a pretty good dad, anyway. It’s something to fall back on.”He added, “I’m sort of playing with a free mind, I guess you could call it.”Advertisement