By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 19, 2015
The Kansas City Royals overcame five ejections to beat the visiting Oakland Athletics, 4-2, behind a tiebreaking two-run double by Kendrys Morales in a three-run eighth.The Royals’ manager, Ned Yost, and their pitching coach, Dave Eiland, were ejected in the first inning after Lorenzo Cain was hit by a Scott Kazmir pitch.Kansas City reliever Kelvin Herrera was tossed in the eighth after throwing behind Brett Lawrie. The Royals’ bench coach, Don Wakamatsu, acting as manager after Yost’s ejection, was also ejected, along with the injured shortstop Alcides Escobar.On Saturday, the Royals right-hander Yordano Ventura was ejected when he hit Lawrie with a pitch after a Josh Reddick homer.AdvertisementTIGERS 9, WHITE SOX 1 Yoenis Cespedes hit his first major league grand slam and had a two-run homer as Detroit beat visiting Chicago to improve to 10-2.AdvertisementShane Greene allowed his first earned run of the season when a triple by Jose Abreu skipped past right fielder J. D. Martinez.BRAVES 5, BLUE JAYS 2 Jonny Gomes hit a three-run double in the first off the rookie Daniel Norris and added a sacrifice fly as Atlanta took the second of three at Toronto.Shelby Miller gave up two runs and five hits in six innings, raising his E.R.A. to 1.69, from 0.90.PIRATES 5, BREWERS 2 Pittsburgh’s Gerrit Cole improved to 9-1 in his last 10 decisions at home with a win over Milwaukee. He has won six straight. Pedro Alvarez homered for the Pirates, and Mark Melancon worked the ninth for his second save.NATIONALS 4, PHILLIES 1 Stephen Strasburg won for the first time in three starts this season, allowing one run in seven and a third innings against visiting Philadelphia. Drew Storen worked the ninth for his fourth save. Washington took three of four from Philadelphia, which has lost seven of eight.ORIOLES 8, RED SOX 3 Adam Jones went 4 for 5 with a three-run double and a two-run homer as Baltimore won at Boston.Ryan Flaherty added a solo homer, and Jimmy Paredes had three singles for the Orioles.ASTROS 4, ANGELS 3 Scott Feldman allowed two runs and six hits in six innings as Houston beat visiting Oakland.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Luke Gregerson pitched a perfect ninth for his second save.TWINS 7, INDIANS 2 Torii Hunter hit his first home run for Minnesota since 2007, a three-run drive in the sixth off the former Minnesota pitcher Anthony Swarzak, and the Twins beat visiting Cleveland.PADRES 5, CUBS 2 Jon Lester gave up three runs and six hits in five and a third innings, and San Diego won at Chicago.AdvertisementLester has a 6.89 E.R.A. in three starts since signing a $155 million, six-year contract. But he alertly tossed his glove — with the ball stuck in the webbing — to first baseman Anthony Rizzo for an out after fielding a comebacker in the second.Will Middlebrooks and Yangervis Solarte hit two-run homers for the Padres.DIAMONDBACKS 5, GIANTS 1 Paul Goldschmidt hit a two-run homer off Tim Hudson, helping send San Francisco to a loss against visiting Arizona.Chris Owings added a two-run single for the Diamondbacks, and A. J. Pollock had three hits, scored two runs and made a run-saving diving catch.DODGERS 7, ROCKIES 0 Howie Kendrick, Scott Van Slyke and the rookie Joc Pederson hit sixth-inning home runs off Scott Oberg, another rookie, and Los Angeles stretched its winning streak to seven with a victory against visiting Colorado.Brandon McCarthy allowed three hits in six innings, struck out six and walked two to defeat the Rockies for the first time in five career starts.MARINERS 11, RANGERS 10 Austin Jackson singled in the tying run in the ninth, Nelson Cruz followed with a two-out single for his fifth R.B.I. of the game, and Seattle overcame two five-run deficits to beat visiting Texas.CARDINALS 2, REDS 1 Adam Wainwright outpitched Mike Leake, and Kolten Wong had a tiebreaking sacrifice fly in the eighth inning as St. Louis swept visiting Cincinnati.Matt Carpenter hit his fifth career leadoff home run and singled — his eighth multihit game this season.A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: 5 Ejections, but Royals Still Defeat the Athletics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.