AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — The Jets were resembling the same old Jets who missed the playoffs each of the previous four years as Josh McCown took the visiting Cleveland Browns on an extended drive on the first series of the season. The buzz accompanying the coaching debut of Todd Bowles had given way to unease as a journeyman quarterback dissected the Jets’ rebuilt defense.Then the vibe changed instantly.Calvin Pryor, a second-year safety, blitzed on third-and-goal at the Jets’ 14-yard line. He drilled McCown with such force that he jarred the ball loose for a fumble that the Jets recovered, ending a 17-play, 90-yard advance. Pryor also drove McCown from the game with a concussion.Beyond that, Pryor set the tone for an auspicious start after last year’s 4-12 debacle. The Jets (3-1) return from an early bye week to take on the Washington Redskins on Sunday at MetLife Stadium.One enormous factor in that success has all the subtlety of Pryor’s blow. With 13 takeaways — seven fumble recoveries, six interceptions — the Jets have already equaled last year’s total.“It’s been a huge point of emphasis since Coach Bowles walked through the door,” Pryor said. “He noticed we were near the bottom in the category last season. It’s been a big point of emphasis every day, and it’s paying off so far.”The Jets’ 13 takeaways tied the Kansas City Chiefs for fewest in the N.F.L. in 2014. They finished minus-11 in turnover differential. Only Washington (minus-12), the New Orleans Saints (minus-13) and the Oakland Raiders (minus-15) were worse.The 13 takeaways have the Jets tied with the Arizona Cardinals (4-1) for second in the league. The Denver Broncos (5-0) lead with 14. With a plus-6 turnover differential, the Jets trail only the Carolina Panthers in that category. The Panthers’ plus-8 is a major factor in their 4-0 mark.“You win the turnover battle, you probably win 80 percent of your games,” said Darrelle Revis, whose return to the Jets has been instrumental to the turnover turnaround. Revis, in his ninth season, has two interceptions and a career-high three fumble recoveries.Revis’s estimate on the importance of turnovers is not far off. According to Elias Sports Bureau, the team winning the turnover battle has won 79.4 percent of the time (1,515-392-4) since 2006.Charley Casserly, a former N.F.L. general manager who led the Jets’ search for a coach and general manager last off-season, is not surprised by Bowles’s impact. When they discussed game plans against prospective opponents, Casserly was impressed by Bowles’s mastery of various blitz packages.“He is very good at designing blitzes, excellent at getting people free to get to the quarterback, and he’s not afraid to keep doing it,” Casserly said, adding, “The pressure system is going to force turnovers, and it develops a mind-set of aggressiveness in your players.”Pryor’s forced fumble represented a pivotal moment in the Jets’ 31-10 rout of Cleveland. Relentless pressure led to an uncharacteristic performance by Andrew Luck, Indianapolis’s Pro Bowl quarterback. He was intercepted three times during the Jets’ 20-7 victory at Indianapolis in Week 2. Revis’s leaping end-zone interception with about five minutes left sealed a 27-14 win against the Miami Dolphins on Oct. 4.The Jets’ takeaways dishearten opponents while lifting the offense. The Jets have scored 31 points off the 13 takeaways.“To be able to run and grab your helmet and get back on the field because of a turnover is always a big thing,” said Ryan Fitzpatrick, the Jets’ quarterback. “It’s a momentum swing.”The Jets are not content with hurrying or sacking quarterbacks. They are intent on stripping the ball. When it comes to the running game, they attack the ball as much as they do the ball carrier. Their success should only increase with the return of Sheldon Richardson, a Pro Bowl defensive end, who was suspended by the league for the first four games for violating the league’s substance-abuse policy. Richardson led the team last year with eight sacks to go with 84 tackles. Teammates chose him their most valuable player.“It definitely keeps you awake at night,” Redskins Coach Jay Gruden said of preparing for Bowles’s blitz-happy, opportunistic defense. “He’ll draw up all these looks, and you never know which one you are going to get. I’m sure he’ll have a few new designers for us that we’ll have to figure out on the sideline.”Kirk Cousins, Washington’s fourth-year quarterback, has been hurt by turnovers in his career. He said he was still learning when to give up on a play instead of making a risky throw, especially against a ball-hawking opponent.Mike Maccagnan, the Jets’ new general manager, fortified a porous secondary by returning Revis and Antonio Cromartie to the organization while also signing defensive back Buster Skrine and safety Marcus Gilchrist. The defensive line became even sturdier with the drafting of end Leonard Williams sixth over all.“We have a bunch of good guys, and they’re locked in right now,” Bowles said. “We’re just getting better.”Advertisement