AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerTravis d’Arnaud, the stoic and rapidly improving Mets catcher, lost his cool late Sunday. No one could blame him. The Mets are the hottest team in baseball, and d’Arnaud cannot play for them for a while. He learned that his right hand was broken.“I cussed up a storm,” he said.It was not the only bad news from Sunday’s fateful seventh inning. Jerry Blevins, who had quickly established himself as a reliable late-inning lefty, broke a bone in his left forearm on a fielding play. At least the Mets held on to beat the Miami Marlins, 7-6, for their eighth victory in a row.Thirty minutes or so after the game, d’Arnaud, who had been hit by an A. J. Ramos fastball, was composed. His right hand was wrapped in a blue cast, and his California cool had returned. No need to be bummed out, he said.“I’m O.K. now,” he said. “No worries, man. It’s life.”It is, indeed, life in the majors — and life with the Mets, whose season of relevance was never going to be easy. Just look at how they finished Sunday’s win: A fill-in closer got the last out on a ground ball to the fill-in third baseman. The batter was Giancarlo Stanton, the game’s most fearsome slugger.Good teams find ways to win games like this, and the Mets, for now, look the part. Their ace, Matt Harvey, woke up with a cold so severe that he was unable to swallow, and he alerted the trainer with a text message at 7:30 a.m. He gave it a go anyway.“The last thing I wanted to do was give up a start,” said Harvey, who surrendered more than a season’s worth of them to Tommy John surgery. “It was a battle.”Yet he handled it so smoothly that he held the Marlins to two runs through six innings, striking out seven. Harvey even batted in the bottom of the sixth, and singled. He left after allowing three singles to start the calamitous seventh.Blevins came in and hurt himself on a liner by Dee Gordon, which he scooped with his glove and tossed to first for the second out of the inning. Manager Terry Collins signaled with his left arm to the bullpen, but Buddy Carlyle, a righty, trotted onto the grass. Carlyle had been the only pitcher getting loose — but no, Collins insisted; he wanted a left-hander, Alex Torres.Torres struck out Christian Yelich to end the inning. Torres was there only because Sandy Alderson, the general manager, had traded for lefties in bulk in late March.When the Mets lost Josh Edgin to elbow trouble this spring, Alderson replaced him by trading for Blevins and Torres in separate deals. That depth paid off on Sunday. And despite already having d’Arnaud, 26, the Mets have held onto another prized catcher, Kevin Plawecki, 24, whom Baseball America ranks as its fifth-best prospect and as No. 63 over all in the majors.“He’s a great catcher, a great player, a really smart player,” d’Arnaud said of Plawecki. “He can swing the bat really well, and he knows how to work with a pitching staff well.”Alderson praised Plawecki, too, and Collins said he would start. But Alderson made sure to emphasize the performance of d’Arnaud, the No. 2 hitter, who was batting .317 with two homers and a team-leading 10 runs batted in.“Some of the throwing he’s done, blocking pitches, everything has improved defensively, and he’s been outstanding offensively as well,” Alderson said.Simple logic says that, at some point, the number of injuries can reach such a critical mass that a team cannot withstand it. The question is how many hits can the Mets take and stay upright. For now, all these players are inactive: d’Arnaud; third baseman David Wright; starter Zack Wheeler; and relievers Blevins, Edgin, Jenrry Mejia, Bobby Parnell and Vic Black, who recently had a setback in his recovery from a shoulder injury.“There’s a big dent, but we’ve got to enjoy today,” Collins said. “We can’t go home on a sour note. We’ve got to enjoy this. We’ve worked very hard. Huge inning by Jeurys. If he had to step up, today was the day, because the energy was gone.”Jeurys Familia, the closer, has been a revelation in the ninth inning. Blevins had been flawless as Edgin’s replacement, and Torres has also gotten big outs. The Mets have won all five games since promoting Eric Campbell (4 for 16) after Wright’s hamstring injury.The Mets’ division rivals have been hit hard, too. The Marlins are still missing their ace, Jose Fernandez, after Tommy John surgery last year, and their opening day starter, Henderson Alvarez, has shoulder inflammation. The Washington Nationals have lost a setup man, Craig Stammen, and still do not know when their best hitter, third baseman Anthony Rendon, will return from a knee sprain.“The best teams go through times like this,” said Anthony Recker, the Mets’ backup catcher. “We just have to push through.”Of course, the Mets are not as talented without their injured players. More than ever, they need the fearlessness Collins has preached. The Mets keep saying they have built for a season like this, and Alderson said they were prepared.“These aren’t the first two guys we’ve lost,” he said. “They’ve continued to pound and move forward. These two injuries don’t make it any easier, but I think the same attitude, the same commitment and determination is going to keep us moving ahead. I’m confident the most important thing here is not who are the replacements but the atmosphere that they will find when they get here.”Advertisement