AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehATLANTA — Since the moment last week, in the waning hours of the N.B.A. regular season, when the Nets somehow slipped into the playoffs, Coach Lionel Hollins had cataloged the ways that the nature of the competition would change.In the postseason, teams meet each other again and again. They have the same amount of time to rest between games. They have the same amount of time to prepare. Talent gaps may exist, to be sure. But planning — and an ability to adjust those plans — can decide a series, too.Now the Nets have two days to strategize, scheme and figure out a way to beat the Atlanta Hawks, who took Game 1 of the seven-game opening-round series, 99-92, in front of a sellout crowd on Sunday at Philips Arena.The Nets had always been facing long odds this postseason. Aside from their specific struggles during the regular season, history weighs against them: Only five times has a No. 8 seed upset a No. 1 in the N.B.A. postseason.The Hawks have won all five games this season between the teams, and Hollins said it himself when asked last week what inherent advantages the Nets might be able to exploit against the Hawks: There were none, he said.But he struck a more optimistic tone Sunday night, after a game in which his players showed enough stubbornness to threaten the Hawks until the final minute.“We just didn’t make enough plays,” Hollins said. “But as I told the team after the game, if you don’t believe that you can play in this series, you should believe it now. We played hard. But we also have to play better and smarter.”Deron Williams made a 3-pointer with 55 seconds left to cut the Hawks’ lead to 5 points, but he missed another one 40 seconds later that could have sliced it to 2 points. After the game, he seemed eager to get into the gym at Georgia Tech, where the Nets will practice this week, to start planning.Williams praised the Hawks’ ability to hinder the Nets’ first impulses. He said the Nets needed to make extra passes, to peel back the layers of Atlanta’s defensive schemes. He said they needed to do a better job finding Brook Lopez, who scored 17 points but was limited to seven shots from the field.“It’s encouraging,” Williams said of the close finish, “but at the same time, almost is not a win.”The Hawks, who finished the regular season with 60 wins, had such a relaxing conclusion to the regular season that some wondered whether they could have lost some of their edge heading into the playoffs.Mike Budenholzer, the Hawks’ coach, noted before the game that it was a unique challenge balancing health and sharpness down the stretch. “It’s not math, so you never know, exactly,” he said.The Hawks were not at their most crisp — they made some careless passes and some unnecessary ones — but for the most part, they were fine.Atlanta charmed neutral fans and basketball purists this season by playing an unselfish style that encouraged speed and ball movement, and before the game, Hollins was asked how the Nets might slow them down. It would require them to execute on offense themselves, he said, making baskets and limiting turnovers that could lead to fast-break points.“When we’ve turned the ball over, we’ve gotten shattered,” Hollins said.Those words rang true early on. The Nets’ movement on offense was disjointed, and the Hawks scrambled around, turning bad passes into points. The Nets had six turnovers after one quarter, and they reached 11 before they were halfway through the second.The Nets cleaned up their game, finishing with 17 turnovers, compared with the Hawks’ 14. And though the Hawks led in the game by as much as 16 points, the Nets scratched and clawed to make it close.The Nets know they are at a natural disadvantage in this series. They have two days now to figure out how to make up the difference.Advertisement