By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 17, 2015
KANSAS CITY, Mo. —  The Toronto Blue Jays were in Baltimore on Sept. 30 when they clinched their first division title in a generation, and during their Champagne celebration, Jose Bautista spoke to his teammates.With Toronto since 2008, Bautista has the longest tenure on the team, and the title may have meant more to him than it did to any of his teammates, even Edwin Encarnacion, who joined the Blue Jays a year later.Bautista urged everyone to enjoy the moment and then added an important message.“ ‘A lot of the guys in here have waited a long time for this,’ ” the backup catcher Josh Thole said, quoting Bautista. “ ‘So have fun. But these moments don’t come around all the time. Let’s make the most of it.’ ”Through a division series against the Texas Rangers, Bautista followed his direction to the letter, backing up his words in a way people in Toronto have come to expect. Now, many more people are seeing it, too.AdvertisementPlaying for a team that, until this year, had not been in the postseason since 1993 and was rarely on national television in the United States, Bautista had few chances to showcase his talents — until now.Advertisement“I think this is a coming-out party for Jose,” Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons said. “He’s been one of the top players in baseball for the last five or six years. But we never got to the postseason. I don’t think he’s had a chance to show off how good he is.”Bautista made the most of his chance in the seventh inning of Game 5 of Toronto’s division series: He will long be remembered for his go-ahead three-run homer and his defiant bat toss afterward.But Bautista had another home run in that series and two doubles, including one that scored a run earlier in Game 5 when the Blue Jays were losing by 2-0. Bautista had five R.B.I. for the series and a .940 on-base plus slugging percentage.When the Blue Jays celebrated again, this time having earned a place in the league championship series, Bautista was gratified.“Yes, I’ve been here a long time,” he said through loud music and the shouts of his ebullient teammates. “But it’s not just for me. It’s something we’ve all worked for together. And there is still work to do, together.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Aug. 3, after Toronto had made a series of moves to bolster its roster, Bautista was asked by a reporter from New York to assess the Blue Jays’ chances. Toronto was six games behind the Yankees in the American League East and hovering around .500. But that did not stop Bautista from making a brash prediction.“If I was a betting man, I would bet on us,” he said.He and the Blue Jays backed up that declaration, perhaps faster than even they expected. Nine days after Bautista’s forecast, Toronto surged past the Yankees into first place. During that span, Bautista had four home runs, three doubles and nine R.B.I.Advertisement“He’s got that knack — flair for the dramatic,” Gibbons said. “And those guys are rare.”Without a playoff stage to demonstrate his prowess — or even the kind of string of Sunday prime-time games to which teams like the Yankees, the Boston Red Sox and the St. Louis Cardinals have grown accustomed — Bautista has found other times to illustrate that flair. He has had big moments when his team needed a lift and heightened individual moments when a home run was his emphatic response to a pitcher who had thrown a pitch at or near him.The Blue Jays believe that when Bautista becomes angry, the opposing pitcher often pays.“I’ve seen him do it two or three times,” Gibbons said.Some pitchers do not like Bautista. He is difficult to pitch to, and he is not averse to posing and admiring his long home runs (rarely as demonstrably as he did in Game 5, though). Some umpires, too, have had difficulty with him because he can challenge their calls.Bautista thrives on emotion, and some players, even some former teammates, have bristled at that approach. The most recent to object openly was the Rangers’ Sam Dyson, who surrendered Bautista’s Game 5 homer and then said Bautista had reacted like a child.Bautista, who turns 35 on Monday, said he believed that the game and its players were capable of monitoring and regulating behavior on the field.“Baseball has been played for over 150 years,” he said recently. “These are not new things happening. We’ve been there and done that. Everybody knows what the protocol of baseball is. It’s pretty obvious.”As he has grown and matured in baseball, Bautista has learned to focus that energy on the game. In parts of five seasons with Pittsburgh, he played 400 games and hit 43 home runs. In 2010 alone, he hit 54 for the Blue Jays, and this season he hit 40 homers and 29 doubles.Before being traded to Toronto in July, David Price had faced Bautista 58 times — Bautista’s highest number of plate appearances against any pitcher other than Jon Lester and Clay Buchholz. Price explained how Bautista hunted for fastballs, or cheese as they are sometimes called, and how, when he found the right one, he destroyed it.“He might take some funny swings on some breaking balls, but that lets you know where he’s at in his head,” Price said. “There’s a saying in baseball: You can’t sneak cheese past a rat.”AdvertisementPrice then made sure to clarify that he was not calling Bautista a rat — just a really good hitter, with a knack for the dramatic.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: On Playoff Stage at Last, Bautista Is Stealing Show.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.