AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressJonathan Toews had a goal and an assist, and the Blackhawks used a three-goal second period to beat the Nashville Predators, 4-2, in Chicago on Sunday to take a two-games-to-one lead in their first-round playoff series.Marian Hossa had two assists and Scott Darling made 35 saves to help Chicago win for the 20th time in its last 24 postseason home games. Brandon Saad, Brent Seabrook and Andrew Desjardins also scored in an impressive response by the Blackhawks after Friday night’s 6-2 loss in Nashville.Darling made his first postseason start after Corey Crawford was ineffective in the first two games of the series.Mike Ribeiro and Mattias Ekholm scored for Nashville, and Pekka Rinne had 26 saves.The Predators’ convincing victory in Game 2 led Chicago Coach Joel Quenneville to try a different look for the Blackhawks’ first home game of the playoffs. Darling was in goal, and the forwards Antoine Vermette and Desjardins entered the lineup after they were healthy scratches for the first two games.The Predators were without defenseman Shea Weber and forward Mike Fisher, who were sidelined by lower-body injuries. Weber did not travel with the team and most likely will miss Game 4. Desjardins’s first playoff goal in three years gave Chicago a 1-0 lead at 14 minutes 48 seconds of the first. He also assisted in the second on a goal by Seabrook that made it 4-2 with 7:19 left in the period.Weber left in the second period of Game 2 after he was checked into the boards by Saad.Weber, the captain, usually teams with Roman Josi on the Predators’ top defense pairing.Without Weber on the ice, the Blackhawks’ top line of Saad, Toews and Hossa hurt Nashville, especially in the second.Hossa made a nice drop pass to Toews at 36 seconds into the period, giving Chicago a 2-1 lead. After Ekholm responded for Nashville just 22 seconds later, Saad took the puck from Predators forward Colin Wilson and beat Rinne with a perfectly placed shot off the inside of the left post at 3:38. Toews then picked up an assist with a pass on a Seabrook goal. Toews has a team-high five points in the series.Quenneville did not announce his goaltender for Game 4, but talked as if Darling would get another start.CANADIENS 2, SENATORS 1 Dale Weise scored the tying goal late in the third period and then scored the winning goal 8:47 into overtime, leading Montreal to a victory over host Ottawa. Montreal, which leads the opening-round series, three games to none, has a chance to complete a sweep on Wednesday in Ottawa.Weise sent the game to overtime when he scored with 5:47 remaining in the third period. Torrey Mitchell assisted on both of Weise’s goals and Carey Price made 33 saves for the Canadiens. Clarke MacArthur opened the scoring for the Senators at 11:28 of the first. Craig Anderson, making his first start of the playoffs, made 47 saves in the loss.Montreal dominated in the second and third periods, outshooting Ottawa, 31-15, through the final 40 minutes of regulation.FLAMES 4, CANUCKS 2 T.J. Brodie had a goal and an assist, and Calgary Flames beat visiting Vancouver to take a 2-1 lead in their first-round playoff series.Sam Bennett scored his first N.H.L. goal, and Brandon Bollig and Sean Monahan also had goals for the Flames, who hosted a playoff game for the first time since April 2009. Game 4 is Tuesday night.Shawn Matthias and Jannik Hansen scored for the Canucks.Calgary’s Jonas Hiller stopped 23 shots, while Vancouver’s Eddie Lack made 24 saves.Bennett, 18, gave the Flames a 3-1 lead at 2:14 of the third period. The fourth overall pick in the last year’s N.H.L. draft, Bennett scrambled to the net on Joe Colborne’s sharp-angled shot and slipped the rebound by Lack.It was Bennett’s first game in Calgary since he saw action in a preseason game Oct. 2. He had shoulder surgery later that month and made his N.H.L. debut in the Flames’ regular-season finale.Advertisement