AdvertisementSupported byCavaliers 113, Celtics 100By Scott CacciolaCLEVELAND — It had been 1,802 days since LeBron James last appeared in uniform for a playoff game as a member of the Cleveland Cavaliers, so the energy inside Quicken Loans Arena on Sunday afternoon was almost volcanic during warm-ups. The building practically shook when James’s name was announced before the tip. It was another homecoming — the playoff homecoming — in a career now full of them for James, who was raised in Akron, Ohio. And when the Cavaliers strode onto the court for Game 1 of their first-round playoff series against the Boston Celtics, James wore the determined look of a welder. He marched around the court as if his sneakers were on fire.Then he nearly damaged the front of the rim on his first free throw, which set in motion an assembly line of miscues in the game’s opening half: James dribbling the ball off his leg for a turnover, Iman Shumpert bricking two 3-point attempts and Kevin Love shooting an air ball from three feet away.The cumulative effects were a growing deficit and the sight of Coach David Blatt clapping his hands vigorously in front of the home bench.It was, if nothing else, a useful reminder that the playoffs are a slog for even the most talented teams. The Cavaliers, the second seed in the Eastern Conference, showcased their depth and versatility as the game wore on, easing to a 113-100 victory to strike the first blow in their best-of-seven series against the Celtics.Kyrie Irving, who scored 30 points in the first playoff game of his career, described it as a “learning experience.” James, who finished with 20 points and 7 assists, said it was a “feel-out game” — an opportunity for him to assess defenders, concoct strategies and determine how he wanted to approach the rest of the series. Taken together, those statements could be worrisome for Brad Stevens, the coach of the Celtics.“Your margin is decreased when you’re playing a team of this caliber,” Stevens said.James, who returned to Cleveland in the off-season after a four-year sojourn to Miami, where he won two championships with the Heat, had his fingerprints all over the game in ways that went beyond scoring. He searched for Love in the post. He drew defenders away from Irving. He also played an important psychological role in lifting the Cavaliers out of their early morass.“Anyone who’s been around him this week can tell that he’s been locked in,” said Love, who had 19 points and 12 rebounds. “He’s at another level now going forward.”The Cavaliers, Blatt said, suffered from too many individual breakdowns on defense in the first quarter, and he cited 15 points that the Celtics scored in one-on-one situations. The Cavaliers shored up some of those issues, but they were still trailing late in the second quarter when James called his teammates together to encourage them.“Exactly from that point,” Blatt said, “we caught our stride.”Cleveland led by 20 points in the second half. James, of course, has been in this position before, and his experience is invaluable. James has appeared in 159 playoff games. Irving and Love have now each played in one. James assessed their performances as “phenomenal,” never mind that Love shot 5 of 14 from the field. “It’s very important that Kevin stays involved,” said James, who sounded vaguely like a life coach after the game.Blatt, a longtime coach in Europe whose first season with the Cavaliers has been an adventure, also made his playoff debut. About an hour before the game, he sat on a dais and gazed at the assembled members of the news media below.“I’m not comfortable sitting way up here,” he said, deadpan. It was a lighthearted moment before the start of the series. But even if Blatt was only joking about being uneasy, it was another example of how new this experience has been for him. For seven months, Blatt has been on an unrelenting and sometimes unforgiving quest for stability as he manages a cast of global stars.It is no easy task, especially when it involves coaching the game’s greatest player — and doing it in Cleveland, a city that has not won a major sports championship since 1964.Blatt acknowledged that he had been worried about his team’s mentality entering the game. He referred to the Cavaliers’ season-opening loss to the Knicks, saying the Cavaliers had been “overexcited and overhyped” for that game. So he openly wondered how they would react to the start of the playoffs. They passed the test.“I think we’re a different team now — more mature, more ready for this type of thing,” Blatt said.The relationship among the team’s so-called Big 3 has been a source of constant intrigue, too. James, Irving and Love shared the stage at their postgame news conference, and it was impossible not to notice that James and Irving were sitting before NBA TV microphones. Love got stuck with a generic one.So after James and Irving fielded the first several questions and one was finally directed to Love, he stared at his sad microphone.“Can I get an NBA TV mike?” Love asked.Irving practically jumped over the table to try to pass his to Love. They shared a laugh. They referred to each other as brothers. They talked about propping each other up.“We all have egos,” Irving said, “and we all have things we want to accomplish.”Advertisement