By ANDREW KEHAPRIL 19, 2015
ATLANTA —  As the Hawks, a surprise 60-win team in the regular season, were entering the postseason Sunday as the Eastern Conference’s top-seeded team, one of the few things dampening their spirits was the absence of their teammate Thabo Sefolosha, whose ongoing conflict with the New York Police Department will unfurl as a side plot to the high-octane basketball.And it will do so with a variety of moving parts and under the gaze of multiple interested parties.Sefolosha, a 30-year-old small forward, and his teammate Pero Antic, 33, were arrested in the early morning of April 8 outside a Manhattan club amid the commotion that followed the stabbing of Chris Copeland, a player on the Indiana Pacers, and two other people.Sefolosha and Antic were each charged with obstructing governmental administration and disorderly conduct, with the official police complaint saying the players had reacted aggressively to requests to clear the area. Antic was also charged with harassment, while Sefolosha was charged with resisting arrest. Video clips of the incident that emerged days later showed at least one officer swinging a baton.Antic has since returned to the Hawks, but Sefolosha sustained a broken fibula and ligament damage in his right leg. He said in a statement last week that “the injury was caused by police.”Advertisement“I feel for him, as a player, that he can’t be a part of this run that we’re about to make,” said Kent Bazemore of the Hawks, who considers Sefolosha a mentor. “He can’t be replaced.”The legal situation is likely to unfold as a matter of intrigue.The Manhattan district attorney will decide whether to pursue the charges against the players or drop them, taking into account questions that have emerged since the arrests. The Police Department’s Internal Affairs Bureau also has opened an investigation of the event. Sefolosha could decide to pursue a civil case against the police.Adam Silver, the N.B.A. commissioner, said Friday that the league had been in contact with the players’ lawyers and the Police Department, but he emphasized that the league was not conducting its own investigation.On the other hand, in an interview over the weekend, Michele A. Roberts, the executive director of the players’ union, said her staff was conducting its own investigation, seeking out potential witnesses and video evidence to assist the players. Roberts said several times that her staff was taking extra care to stay out of the way of Alex Spiro, the lawyer representing Sefolosha, Antic and Copeland.Spiro declined to comment Saturday, other than to say that the injured players were recuperating well and that his investigation was also continuing.AdvertisementSefolosha had surgery Thursday in Charlotte, N.C., and a team spokesman said Saturday that he was unsure how much Sefolosha would be around the team during his rehabilitation. Sefolosha and Antic are scheduled to appear in court on June 18 for a control hearing, at which the sides simply provide updates on the status of the case.“He’s still smiling,” Bazemore said of Sefolosha, who had been around the team before his operation. “If he was down, it would affect us a little bit.”None of the parties investigating the incident have shared the evidence or information they have obtained, as the initial charges are still pending. There has been an assumption among observers that there are other witnesses who were at the scene during the incident and that there is potentially more video footage from bystanders or surrounding businesses.Roberts noted that she had navigated such situations during her many years as a public defender in Washington. She said the purpose of the union’s investigation was to advise the players involved, if asked, but just as important, to provide information to other players who might have concerns about the incident.Depending on what is found during the investigation, Roberts said she also wanted to be able to have an informed conversation with law enforcement officials about what steps they could take to prevent similar incidents from happening.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was in some ways an early test for the revamped union, which Roberts has led since last summer. Gary Kohlman, a former colleague of Roberts’s who was hired in October to be the organization’s general counsel, and two other lawyers on staff were dispatched to the police station on the morning of the incident to provide support the players. Walter Palmer, recently hired as director of international development, has also been involved. Sefolosha is a Swiss citizen, and Antic is Macedonian.Kevin Tucker, who became the union’s director of security this year after filling the same role for many years with the Portland Trail Blazers and the Phoenix Suns, has been assisting the investigation.“It’s a bit of a dance,” Roberts said of her desire to seek out information while keeping out of Spiro’s way.The Internal Affairs Bureau, a branch of the Police Department charged with investigating wrongdoing and corruption among officers, has also been examining the arrest.AdvertisementIn general, complaints of abuse from civilians can prompt such inquiries, as can anonymous tips or allegations involving officers that come to the attention of the Police Department, sometimes through questions from reporters. Videos, too, can prompt inquiries.In such inquiries, detectives work in teams to gather as much evidence as possible, including capturing video footage that might be available from storefront surveillance cameras or other sources. Whether there is video or not, the detectives will interview anyone involved, including witnesses.If it is determined that officers were involved, the department can compel them to tell their side of the story. However, in cases where there is an accompanying criminal inquiry, prosecutors typically ask the department to suspend internal interviews, though not its entire investigation.Unlike cases in criminal court or in the federal system, internal departmental investigations aim to determine whether officers violated any departmental guidelines.If wrongdoing is found, the Internal Affairs Bureau must decide whether to seek discipline internally or to refer the case to the Civilian Complaint Review Board, an independent agency that investigates allegations of officer misconduct.Internal Affairs detectives could also determine whether an incident involved criminality and make a referral to a prosecutor’s office.If it is determined that departmental charges are needed, they would be presented in an internal trial room at One Police Plaza, the department’s headquarters in Lower Manhattan. There, a police administrative judge can recommend discipline including the loss of vacation days or termination. The police commissioner, William J. Bratton, has final say in such matters.The options leave open the possibility that Sefolosha could pursue a case in civil court in Manhattan.Of the case involving Sefolosha, Stephen Davis, the department’s chief spokesman, said: “We were made aware of a complaint, and we have been provided some video, so I.A.B. is now conducting an investigation. Depending on the findings of that investigation, it could be handled internally or it could be referred outside, to the C.C.R.B. or to a district attorney’s office or both. But it all depends on what is there. It all depends on the findings of our investigation.”Al Baker contributed reporting from New York.A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Side Plots for Hawks: Arrests and Injury.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.