By BILLY WITZAPRIL 19, 2015
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. —  There have been no puffs of white smoke emanating from the office of Yankees Manager Joe Girardi, nor has Girardi issued any proclamations.One of the great questions facing the Yankees this season — who would assume the role of closer? — seems to have settled itself organically.Andrew Miller has been nearly flawless pitching the ninth inning, and Dellin Betances has been rapidly rounding into form getting the outs before him, so really, what reason is there for the Yankees to do anything differently?That was a point Girardi conceded Sunday after Miller and Betances had put the finishing touches on the Yankees’ 5-3 victory over the Rays, which completed their first series sweep at Tampa Bay since 2005.AdvertisementThe right-handed Betances ground his way through the heart of the Rays’ order for five outs before the left-handed Miller — after a leadoff double in the ninth — struck out three straight hitters to earn his fourth save in four opportunities.AdvertisementNeither has allowed an earned run this season.“I’ve just kind of stuck with it right now,” Girardi said of the bullpen arrangement. “I’m not saying I’ve named anyone, but it’s just kind of the way it’s worked out.”For nearly two decades, the Yankees have had little to worry about in closing games, mostly because of Mariano Rivera but also because of John Wetteland before him and David Robertson last season after Rivera retired.The intrigue about the role this season arose because neither Betances nor Miller — top-shelf setup men — had ever been asked to close games regularly. Each had one career save.“Honestly, I don’t think either of us have left the roles we were used in last year,” said Miller, whom the Yankees signed as a free agent to a four-year, $36 million contract. “I’ve gotten the saves, but he went through the meat of the lineup today. If you look at who had the heavier burden today, it was probably him. He came in in a much tougher situation. He got more outs and had to face the middle of that lineup.”If Sunday was a celebration of the new normal for the back end of the Yankees’ bullpen, for much of the afternoon, the rare began to resemble the routine.Stephen Drew was spared an out when his foul pop-up hit the catwalk. John Ryan Murphy had a bat splinter — at the handle, not at the head — and for the second time in less than 24 hours, a less-than-fleet-of-foot Yankee legged out a triple; this time, it was Garrett Jones, following in Brian McCann’s plodding footsteps.Mark Teixeira drove in runs with a fly ball and a groundout, giving him three R.B.I. in a series in which he went hitless. Teixeira also contributed with his glove, snaring a wide throw after Drew slid onto the outfield turf to take a hit away from Allan Dykstra. It was one of several sterling defensive plays that Drew and third baseman Chase Headley were required to leave their feet for.AdvertisementThat was the type of defense the Yankees had hoped to get but had rarely seen until this series. (They entered with a major-league-leading 11 errors but did not make one in the series.) The same could be said for the bullpen, which, after an implosion Wednesday in Baltimore, did not allow a run in 101/3 innings in this series.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The biggest thorn for Yankees starter Michael Pineda on Sunday was Steven Souza Jr., who hit a loosely spun slider over the left-field wall for a two-run homer and also singled and doubled against him. Souza’s double, in the fifth, narrowed the Yankees’ lead to 5-3.Girardi turned to the bullpen with two outs in the sixth, and after Chris Martin and Justin Wilson each got an out, he called on Betances and Miller.Betances, who was a revelation as a setup man as a rookie last season, earning an invitation to the All-Star Game, struggled in spring training but has gradually harnessed his slider and had his velocity creep up. He threw a fastball at 96 miles per hour Sunday and relied on breaking pitches to get his biggest outs, striking out Souza and getting Asdrubal Cabrera to ground out with a runner at third to end the seventh.“In spring training, everything was up,” Betances said. “The biggest thing for me is trusting my stuff and executing my pitches.”Murphy, who caught on Sunday, said, “Dellin has to have that attitude every time he goes out that they can’t hit him.”Murphy also said that when Miller got ahead of a hitter with the first strike, “the at-bat is pretty much over.”Miller has allowed two hits, walked two and hit a batter and has struck out 12 in six innings this season.“I’ve done everything I can to make it not different,” Miller, who next heads with the Yankees to Detroit, where he started his career as a first-round draft pick, said of closing. “In reality, it probably is a little bit. You train for so long that it’s something special or it’s tougher, or whatever it is, but I’ve tried to eliminate that and treat it the same. It’s nice to have a couple under my belt and realize it’s not that different.”Nevertheless, Miller continues to collect game balls from his saves. So while there may be no announcement naming him the Yankees’ closer, a title is not necessary as long as his collection grows.A version of this article appears in print on April 20, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees Solve Rays and a Question at the Back End of Their Bullpen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.