AdvertisementSupported byMets 7, Marlins 6By Tim RohanThe crowd at Citi Field was doing the wave in the seventh inning. The Mets had scored seven runs in the fourth and eventually defeated the Miami Marlins, 7-6, to win their eighth straight game and complete a four-game sweep on a Sunday afternoon when Matt Harvey pitched.But in the eighth inning, the trainer Ray Ramirez emerged in the Mets’ dugout to report that the left-handed reliever Jerry Blevins had fractured his left forearm after being hit by a comebacker earlier in the game. Soon after, Ramirez returned to say that catcher Travis d’Arnaud had fractured his right hand when he was hit by a pitch.As word spread, the Mets’ dugout went silent. Players went to the clubhouse to console Blevins and d’Arnaud. Soon, word spread throughout the ballpark, and the crowd became eerily quiet as well.“It’s not a good day,” Manager Terry Collins said afterward, his arms folded while leaning forward on a table.The Mets did not have a timetable for how long either player would be out; both were expected to be evaluated by doctors on Monday. The Mets said they would call up Kevin Plawecki, their promising prospect at catcher, and Hansel Robles, a right-handed pitcher.Collins had already experienced days like this. Dating to spring training, the Mets have lost Zack Wheeler, Josh Edgin, Vic Black and David Wright to various injuries and Jenrry Mejia to suspension. Adding Blevins and d’Arnaud, the Mets have lost two everyday position players, a starter and four relievers.Still, Sunday had started on a positive note. The Mets blitzed Marlins starter Tom Koehler, who gave up seven runs in three and a third innings. They sent 12 batters to the plate in the fourth to take a commanding lead. Harvey had been feeling sick the past few days, but he insisted on pitching and lasted six innings, striking out seven batters and holding the Marlins to four runs.The Mets were on their way to their eighth straight win, their longest winning streak since 2010. They had not swept a four-game series since 2011. The Mets have started a season 10-3 only two other times: in 2006 and 1986.Blevins relieved Harvey in the seventh inning, and the second batter he faced, Dee Gordon, hit a line drive off Blevins’s left forearm. Blevins fielded the ball and flipped it to first with his glove. But the crowd began murmuring as he was examined.The Mets traded for Blevins before this season so he could be their left-handed specialist out of the bullpen. He had done that, and more. He had pitched five innings this year and had not allowed a base runner.Then, in the bottom half of the inning, Marlins reliever A. J. Ramos threw a fastball that sailed high and inside and struck d’Arnaud on the hand. The crowd murmured again, as d’Arnaud bent over and clutched his hand.During the first few weeks of the season, d’Arnaud had emerged as one of the Mets’ better hitters. When Wright went down with a hamstring injury last week, Collins shifted d’Arnaud into the second spot in the lineup, and the move was seamless. In 11 games, he batted .317 and had driven in 10 runs, the most on the team.In the seven-run fourth, d’Arnaud had tallied two hits.“I can’t stress enough how invaluable Travis has been over the first two weeks of the season,” said Sandy Alderson, the general manager. “Both behind the plate and as a hitter. Some of the throwing that he’s done, blocking pitches — everything has improved defensively. And he’s been outstanding offensively as well.”But Alderson repeatedly said how fortunate the Mets were to have a replacement as talented as Plawecki ready to take over. A former first-round draft pick, Plawecki is considered a talented offensive catcher, just like d’Arnaud. Last year, Plawecki batted .309 in the minors and had 35 extra-base hits in 101 games.“He’s swinging the bat well now,” Alderson said. “Did a nice job for us in spring training. I have all the confidence in the world that Kevin will do a nice job for us.”As if the day could not get worse, the Mets also revealed that Black would have his shoulder re-examined. After pitching for Class AA Binghamton on Saturday, he felt more soreness. Bobby Parnell is also weeks away from returning from Tommy John surgery, and Wright is still at least a few weeks from returning, too.During his postgame news conference, Collins was asked who would bat second, in place of d’Arnaud, who was merely there replacing Wright.“I’m not that far yet,” Collins said. “I’m trying to absorb today. But there will be somebody there.”Advertisement