AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensThe Pittsburgh Penguins had 1,123 penalty minutes in the regular season — the most in the N.H.L. — and were short-handed 277 times, the fifth-highest total. In Game 1 of their first-round playoff series against the Rangers on Thursday, the Penguins sent a cavalcade to the penalty box, taking four first-period penalties, which led to Ryan McDonagh’s decisive power-play goal in a 2-1 Rangers victory. But this is the postseason, which means man-advantage goals are hard to come by, and although Pittsburgh has given the Rangers plenty of opportunities by committing 12 penalties in the first two games of the series, it has minimized the damage.The Penguins killed six of seven penalties in their 4-3 victory Saturday night, with only Derick Brassard scoring when the Rangers held a man advantage. Thanks to two power-play goals of their own on four chances, the Penguins evened the best-of-seven Eastern Conference series, and the teams head to Pittsburgh for Game 3 on Monday.“Obviously 1 for 7 is not good enough,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said of his team’s futility on the power play in Game 2. “They scored two; we only got one.”The Rangers even started to hear boos from the capacity crowd at Madison Square Garden. The Rangers are no strangers to lengthy postseason droughts on the power play: Last season, they were 0 for 36 in the first two rounds; in 2013, they were 4 for 44 in two rounds. In this series, the Penguins are 2 for 5 on power plays while the Rangers are 2 for 12. “We have a group of guys that are frustrated in themselves, and we have to go out and get some good mojo going and find a way to pop a couple in and relax a bit,” Rangers forward Derek Stepan said. “We’ve got a lot of guys who are gripping the stick, and there’s no need for that, especially now.”In Game 1, the first-period penalties took the Penguins’ captain, Sidney Crosby, off the ice and off his game. But penalties by Pittsburgh’s Brandon Sutter and Nick Spaling, who are strong penalty killers, left Crosby on the ice for 49 seconds when the Penguins were short-handed in Game 2. Evgeni Malkin, who kills penalties even less often than Crosby, played five seconds with the Penguins short-handed.“I think just because we had so many,” Crosby said. “With so many kills and guys who normally kill being in the penalty box, you just try to make sure you go out there and know what you’re doing and get it done.”Both sides have said special teams are important in managing momentum swings, and in Game 2, three straight penalty kills in the first and second periods shifted the momentum to the Penguins and led to three straight goals for Pittsburgh.“That’s a huge lift when they’re blocking shots, and with that many, it’s easy for them to get the momentum,” Crosby said, referring to the Rangers’ opportunities to seize the game with so many man-up chances.The Penguins just want to spend less time killing penalties.“It’s great that they feed off it, but I don’t want to see it that often,” Penguins Coach Mike Johnston said.The Rangers still managed 13 power-play shots Saturday, and they demonstrated some superb passing leading to Brassard’s third-period goal, which came on the third of their four straight power plays and cut the Penguins’ lead to 3-2. “We were better in the third, I thought, on the power play,” Vigneault said.But when the Rangers had an opportunity to tie the game after Sutter took a penalty just two and a half minutes later, Stepan snapped a shot off the post, and that was the last good opportunity for the Rangers’ power play. A combination of shot blocking and saves by Penguins goalie Marc-Andre Fleury kept the Rangers at bay. “It didn’t seem like we were getting enough looks, enough shots there in shot lanes,” said the Rangers’ Rick Nash, who scored with 5.1 seconds left. “We weren’t working to get through the shot lanes and get the shots on net.”Advertisement