AdvertisementSupported byBy Lindsay CrouseBOSTON — One year after capturing the Boston Marathon, when he ran alone for nearly the entire race to become the first American to win since 1983, Meb Keflezighi has come to attract the kind of vocabulary less commonly applied to runners than to gods.“When I won New York, I became famous, but when I won Boston, I became a celebrity,” Keflezighi said Sunday. “I heard someone call me a patron saint of running. I don’t know about that, but I run from my heart, and for everyone else out here.”In the last year, as his fame has grown, Keflezighi has thrown out the first pitch at a game at Fenway Park, been feted by corporate executives, attended a state dinner at the White House and published a book, “Meb for Mortals.”Sitting in a modest hotel room the day before he sought to defend his Boston title, Keflezighi looked very mortal himself. He had just returned from his final prerace run and looked weary contemplating the task ahead, but his three daughters seemed unconcerned. They played on the bed, jumping over his race singlet, while his wife, Yordanos, quieted them. Keflezighi, who turns 40 next month, sat at a table strewed with a tub of Vaseline, a few hotel-issue bananas and one of his daughters’ math homework.He grew philosophical as he reflected on the race ahead, relating it to his status as a naturalized American (he immigrated from Eritrea as a child and now lives with his family in San Diego, where his wife supports his running and his brother Merhawi serves as his manager).“I’d won a silver medal at the Olympics, and I’d won the New York City Marathon, but nothing compares to Boston,” Keflezighi said. “New York is the world’s race, but Boston is America’s race, and being an American is very special to me. For this, I run for my country, and I run from my heart.”He was holding court of sorts; a representative from Epson stopped by with the watch Keflezighi was to use the next morning as he attempted to reestablish his dominance.“I’ve been wearing it a lot,” Keflezighi said, showing his watch tan and appraising his pulse displayed on the screen. “Sixty-four — I just did my shakeout run, so that’s O.K.,” he said.“I’m trying to be a trailblazer not only as a runner but in the sponsorship category, to redefine how athletes are able to support themselves,” he continued, looking at the watch. “I want to be the Nascar of distance running. I want people to see me as an ambassador, beyond just my performance.”The partnership with Epson was just one of the many novel sponsorships Keflezighi has accrued since he was dropped by Nike in 2011 and went unsponsored for eight months, a period he still reflects on with visible pain. Fulfilling his goal, he now dresses more like a racecar driver than a marathon runner, his racing singlet and ambassador portfolio promoting a motley billboard of brands: Skechers, which has practically built a franchise around its new star; Sony, and its Keflezighi model Walkman devices; running clubs; energy bars; sports drinks; sunglasses; running equipment; compression socks; beef jerky; and now, even a cellphone company, T-Mobile, led by the avid runner John Legere. “People thought I was over the hill — they had a shot at me and didn’t want it,” Keflezighi said. “Last year I carried the weight of the nation on my shoulders, and I needed to win. Now tomorrow I’m the one to beat, and I’m ready to race and to show what I can do, for both myself, my country and everyone who has believed in me.”When Keflezighi talks about running and his increasingly broad appeal, his words invariably take an introspective turn.“Regardless of where we finish, in the marathon, we all go the same journey,” he said. “Whether we’re different genders, different ethnicities, we are all runners.”As he prepared for his next public engagement, an event with the rest of the American team, he gathered himself. Walking from his hotel to the finish line with the rest of his team and handlers, he was surrounded by cheering runners. “Go Meb,” they cried. “Go U.S.A.!”Nearby, at the race expo, runners patiently lined up to take pictures with a cardboard cutout of the grinning champion, positioned before a picture of the marathon finish line.As Keflezighi passed on Boylston Street, his pants swallowing his small frame, one runner did a double take. “I thought he’d be a lot bigger,” she said. “He looks like a regular guy.”Advertisement