AdvertisementSupported byIslanders 2, Capitals 1, OvertimeBy Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — The chants of “Let’s go, Islanders” that reverberated through the 43-year-old Nassau Coliseum on Sunday before the Islanders took the ice to warm up were merely a preview of the jubilation ahead. After a frenetic 60 minutes in Game 3 of the Islanders’ opening-round series against Washington, the captain John Tavares required just 15 seconds of overtime to send his team’s faithful spilling happily into the sun-splashed parking lots. The 2-1 victory, which gave the Islanders a two-games-to-one lead in the best-of-seven series, was the team’s first postseason overtime win since 1993.The teams are scheduled to return to the Coliseum for Game 4 of the Eastern Conference series on Tuesday night.A raucous celebration followed the quick goal by Tavares, who was the top overall draft pick by the Islanders in 2009 and has carried the team on many occasions over the past six seasons. Tavares was mobbed as a wave of noise enveloped an ebullient tangle of Islanders.“I didn’t have much room, so I was just hoping it would get through, and it did,” Tavares said of the winning goal. “It was a battle, and we were able to get it in.”The Islanders knew it would not be easy to contend with the N.H.L.’s leading goal scorer, Alex Ovechkin, who ignited the Capitals’ comeback from a 3-1 deficit in Game 2 on Friday at Verizon Center. But the Islanders had their boisterous and dedicated followers behind them, and the game’s especially brisk pace was a textbook example of how playoff hockey is unique.Kyle Okposo opened the scoring at 12 minutes 37 seconds of the second period, prompting an eruption of orange towels waving in the crowd, announced as 16,170, a sellout.Okposo’s goal was almost all the Islanders needed, but at 13:54 of the third period, the Capitals’ Nicklas Backstrom finally solved Jaroslav Halak to tie the game with his second goal of the series. Mike Green and Joel Ward assisted.“After they scored that goal to tie it up, we got back to playing on our toes and just wanted to continue to do that,” said Okposo, who has been a force in this series after having missed 22 games with a detached retina after the All-Star break. “We were confident we were going to win the game.” The last time the Islanders scored in overtime was a series clincher by David Volek in the second round of the 1993 playoffs against the Pittsburgh Penguins.On the winning goal, Capitals defenseman Brooks Orpik — who scored in overtime for the Penguins to eliminate the Islanders two years ago — mishandled the puck in front of Braden Holtby, allowing Tavares, whose 86 points led the Islanders this season, to gain control and flip the puck into the net.“Your best players have to be your best players,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We played hard, and it was an exciting game. Today was one of our better games for sure.”Ovechkin, who scored 53 goals in the regular season, was held pointless, limited to three shots and held mostly to the rink’s fringes by the Islanders’ relentless defense.Capuano has often spoken about how the home fans lift his team.And players have waited two years — since the loss to Pittsburgh in a hard-fought opening-round series in 2013 — for another chance to perform in the glare of the playoffs.The fans have turned out in force for this final season on Long Island before the team moves to Barclays Center in Brooklyn in the fall. And they were tailgating in large numbers hours before the noon start.The fans chanted robustly as the Islanders hit every Capital in sight over the first several shifts, and they mocked Ovechkin with choruses of “Can you hear us?” in response to his comment on Saturday that Washington’s fans were louder.The fans also made sure to serenade Holtby with a frequent singsong chant of his last name.Holtby was staunch in the net for the Capitals after having missed Game 2 with an unspecified illness. He made a terrific glove save in traffic on defenseman Lubomir Visnovsky at 6:18 of the first after denying the Islanders on an earlier power play.Holtby made 16 saves in an opening period dominated by the Islanders.“My job is to stop pucks, and we have to be better in Game 4,” he said. “We gave away our chances today.”The Capitals did not register a shot against Halak until almost eight minutes had elapsed. The Islanders had the first 10 shots on Holtby and outshot the Capitals by 42-25.“We spent way too much time in our own end,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said. “They did a really good job. We have to fix the battle in our game.” The Islanders broke through when Visnovsky, who returned after having been knocked flat by a high hit from Washington’s Troy Brouwer, sent a slap shot toward the net. Okposo redirected it past Holtby for his second goal in two games.Visnovsky, 38, was named the game’s third star and took a particularly long lap on the Coliseum ice to soak in the fans’ adulation.“The fans help you like a sixth guy,” Visnovsky said. “This is a great feeling for me, because it gives us all energy. I love this.”The crowd exploded in glee after Islanders defenseman Johnny Boychuk, prone on the ice, knocked the puck from Ovechkin’s stick as time ran out in the middle period, after which the Islanders held a 33-13 advantage in shots. Halak, who set an Islanders record with 38 regular-season wins, made 24 saves for the victory.He made the best of his five saves in the opening period with his glove on a Mike Green slap shot at 14:46. Halak stopped eight more in the second period, including a sliding denial of Ovechkin on a power play in the final minute. Halak raced down the ice after Tavares to join the joyous mob of his teammates. “I was excited about our goal, and I wanted to celebrate with the guys,” Halak said. “Obviously, it was a great job by Johnny, scoring that goal and saving us energy.”Advertisement