AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirThrough the last 66 seasons, Vin Scully’s melodic voice has brought Dodgers baseball to the team’s fans on radio and television. His distinctive sound was accessible to virtually anyone who tuned in — until last season, when a fight erupted over the cost of the team’s new cable network, SportsNet LA.Since then, about 70 percent of the Los Angeles market has been unable to accept Scully’s invitations to pull up a chair and listen to his television calls. A dispute has raged between Time Warner Cable, which paid $8.35 billion for the rights to carry the team’s network for 25 years, and the cable, satellite and telephone companies that have rejected the network’s price as too steep.Scully is naturally reluctant to take sides. At 87, he is the forever Dodger, an employee who calls all home games and some on the road, each solo journey taken without a sidekick offering analysis. But as he prepared for a game last week against the Seattle Mariners — a binder full of notes to his left, his scorecard in front of him — he said he could not let the shrunken size of his television audience determine how he approached his work.“When I was calling football,” he said, “we’d be in a production meeting, and the producer would say, ‘This game is going to 70 percent of the country.’ And I’d say, ‘I don’t want to hear that.’ I didn’t want to hear those percentages. To me, I’m always talking to 100 percent of the audience — and every game is like the World Series.”That sentiment will remain wishful thinking until the impasse is resolved. Time Warner Cable, the largest cable operator in the Los Angeles market, has unsuccessfully sought subscriber fees of up to $4.90 a month but has found no takers among DirecTV, Dish, Charter, Cox, Verizon FiOS and AT&T U-verse. Time Warner Cable is the only major television provider in the market to carry the network.Disenfranchised fans go to sports bars and pizzerias where Time Warner Cable is available. They illegally stream games. They vent on social media. They listen to the radio broadcasts (with the first three innings of Scully’s TV call simulcast for listeners). Some fans worry that if the dispute is not resolved soon, they will have seen the last of Scully, who decides late each season whether he will return the next year.“He’s like the father of the Dodgers,” said Joseph Campos, who lives in the Pacoima neighborhood. “He’s what I grew up on. If it’s Vin Scully, we all listen to what he has to say.”As Scully described the fifth-inning Dodgers rally that tied the score on Monday night against Seattle, his voice was not heard at the 35er sports bar in Pasadena, Calif., a city without Time Warner Cable service. The 35er is a devoted Dodgers bar with a big dose of Los Angeles Kings worship. Signs proclaiming Dodgertown USA and Dodger Stadium adorn its entrance. One wall is filled with framed and signed jerseys of former Dodgers, like Fernando Valenzuela and Eric Gagne. But without Dodgers games, the bar was nearly empty except for a few people playing pool. The televisions were tuned to the Clippers and the Angels.“We got at least 300 calls on opening day asking if we had the Dodger games,” said Jennine Terzo-Smith, whose family has owned the bar since the 1960s. She directed them to sports bars in nearby South Pasadena and the Highland Park neighborhood of Los Angeles that were Time Warner Cable customers. “I won’t tell them not to go there,” she said, adding, “I think people are going to turn into Angels fans.”Business at the 35er has fallen by about 60 percent since the impasse began, especially on weeknights; on weekends, business is still brisk. And Dodgers fans still drive to the bar after games.“We’re very fortunate that we own our building,” Terzo-Smith said. “For people who don’t, I can see this putting them out of business.”The Los Angeles market is jam-packed with regional sports networks — mainstays like Prime Ticket and Fox Sports West as well as newer entrants like Time Warner Cable SportsNet, a channel focused on the Lakers (and bankrolled by the cable operator’s long-term, multibillion-dollar guarantee to the team), and another devoted to the Pacific-12 Conference. The addition of SportsNet LA made watching sports even more expensive in the market and, at $4.90 a month, helped fuel the impasse. SNL Kagan, a research firm, said Los Angeles consumers were paying $12.50 a month for local sports channels.“It’s price and timing,” said Lee Berke, a consultant for regional sports networks. “My guess is that if the Dodgers were the first out of the chute, before the Lakers, they would have gotten the distribution.”With 70 percent of the market cut off from Dodgers games, viewership has plummeted. In 2013, when Prime Ticket televised the Dodgers, an average of 226,000 viewers watched each game. Last season, SportsNet LA’s first, the number of viewers crashed 76 percent, to 54,000. Early in 2015, viewership is just over 51,000, a bit higher than the team’s league-leading attendance average of 47,193“The fans here have been unbelievably supportive,” said Stan Kasten, the Dodgers’ president. “To not deliver these games for them is a bitter pill that we’re trying every day to fix.”With the money received from Time Warner Cable, Guggenheim Baseball Management, the Dodgers’ owner, was able to rationalize its $2.15 billion purchase of the team and create the highest payroll in baseball. But criticism has focused not only on whether Time Warner Cable miscalculated the difficulty of selling one of the most expensive regional sports channels in the nation but also on whether the Dodgers should have accepted less if it would have meant making SportsNet LA less expensive.“The money was guaranteed,” Kasten, sitting on a couch in a stadium suite, said last Monday afternoon. “And no one was more motivated to fully distribute the channel than Time Warner.”Despite the apparent logic of Kasten’s position, Tom Wilson, who produces the Dodger Fan Weekly blog, said: “When the initial deal was made, Guggenheim did not care what would happen to Dodgers fans and their inability to see the games. Guggenheim is the steward of Dodgers fans. I think fans are beginning to realize that the anger should be focused on them.”The dispute evokes memories of Cablevision’s refusal in 2002 to carry the Yankees’ newly started YES Network — a dispute in which James L. Dolan, the head of Cablevision, argued that YES was worth only 55 cents a month, less than one-quarter of what YES was seeking. More than half the market was still able to see YES during that siege, which was resolved with an intervention by Eliot Spitzer, then New York’s attorney general. The primary hope for resolving the Dodgers’ impasse appears to rest on government approval of Comcast’s $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable, which has taken longer than anticipated and would not take place at least until midyear. If the merger is approved — and there appear to be some doubts among Justice Department lawyers — Comcast could end the impasse by using its bundle of networks as leverage to negotiate deals to carry SportsNet LA and, perhaps, merge it with the Lakers’ network into a channel that could be a local powerhouse.Still, the absence of televised Dodgers games has made fans feel as if they have been forgotten amid the stalled machinations of billion-dollar corporations.“I feel like I’m being punished for being a fan of the wrong team,” Lisa Thlick-Khatchadourian, a teacher and third-generation Dodgers fan from Altadena, Calif., said as she waited outside the press box before a recent game. “Somehow they have to fix this monopoly.”Standing nearby, Adrian Pena of Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., added: “I’d pay $4.90 extra to watch the Dodgers. Why can’t they have an app so I can just watch?”Dominic Bonvissuto of Long Beach, Calif., awaits the end of the battle. A Dodgers fan who grew up in Tennessee, Bonvissuto has passed his enthusiasm to his 4-year-old son, Jude, who has Dodgers bedsheets and more than 30 Dodgers bobblehead dolls.Bonvissuto has streamed one game illegally and has listened to other games on the radio, he said, and he received a respite from the impasse last year when vacationing family members rented a house in nearby Seal Beach, Calif., where Time Warner Cable is available. “It was like a week in heaven,” he said in a telephone interview.But Bonvissuto feared that Scully might retire before he could resume watching Dodgers games at home.“My son knows Vin is special and that Vin is in his 80s and that most people die in their 90s,” he said. “You see the dots connecting with him. That’s what’s really sad about this.”Advertisement