AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenOne of the more encouraging aspects of baseball’s postseason is the signs that the game is beginning to loosen up, that the posse that polices decorum is giving into, or being overtaken by, the public’s appetite for personality and emotion.Just in time for the 21st century, baseball has arrived.Baseball has lagged behind basketball and football in popularity for a number of reasons, but primarily because the game is too buttoned down. In many ways, baseball has been the team version of golf.This generation of young fans — the selfie generation of multiple interests and impatience — likes the raw emotion of sports, the exhilaration when players make the right play at the right time: celebrating a decisive home run, a timely base hit, a great defensive play, a rally-ending strikeout.The more emotion shown, the more personality expressed, the more fans become invested in the games.I like the batter who watches a ball leave the stadium, don’t mind his staring at the opposing pitcher or into the opposing dugout.What’s to criticize about the bat flip? It’s the baseball equivalent of football’s end-zone spike.This could be an aberration, but the willingness of players during this postseason to show greater emotion, to let their personalities shine through, is either a function of a new wave of young players coming of age, or a function of the teams that have reached baseball’s league championships. Three are starved for a championship.The Mets have not won a World Series title since 1986. The Cubs’ drought is legendary: The franchise last reached the World Series in 1945 and last won in 1908. Toronto had not, until last week, won a postseason series in 22 years.Kansas City reached the World Series last year; however, its last trip before that came in 1985.Oddly, what distinguishes baseball from the N.F.L. and the N.B.A. is that there really are no explicit rules in baseball during the regular season governing celebration and decorum. Football players score touchdowns, sack the quarterback, intercept the ball and are allowed to pound their chests, point to the sky, do a little jig.There have been excesses, which is why football and basketball, professional and college, have put rules in place to penalize demonstrations that seem to cross the line into taunting. The N.F.L., for example, does not allow players to take off their helmets after scoring a touchdown. Group and choreographed celebrations — fun as they are to watch — carry penalties. And yet there is still plenty of room for personal expression.But baseball largely leaves it up to players and the news media to enforce the holy book of unwritten rules.Baseball decorum is governed by a silly canon of unwritten but widely understood rules of etiquette that are selectively enforced, often by players on the opposing team who think they have been shown up. They determine the time and place for payback.Baseball players and a segment of the baseball media see themselves as keepers of some archaic flame that exists outside the purview of umpires. When is it O.K. to bat-flip? When is it O.K. to stare at the flight of the ball? Why can’t I stare at the pitcher or at the dugout?What are these unwritten rules?■ Don’t steal a base when your team is crushing the opposition.■ If a pitcher hits one of your teammates, you hit one of his.■ When you hit a home run, act as if you have hit one before and trot around the bases with muted excitement.■ When you hit a home run, do not stand at home plate and stare. At anything.■ Do not violate the pitcher’s mound. When crossing the field from one side to the next, do not walk across the mound.■ Do not step into the batter’s box until the pitcher completes warm-ups.■ Do not show up your infielders when they play poorly.■ Do not bunt to break up a no-hitter.What’s the right time? When is the right moment?On Wednesday, Toronto’s Jose Bautista executed the bat flip heard around the world. His three-run homer with two outs propelled Toronto to its first postseason series victory since 1993.As the ball left the bat, Bautista stood and stared. At the pitcher, at the flight of the ball, at the stunned Texas dugout? Who knows? He defiantly flipped his bat and celebrated around the bases.Baseball has no rules barring what Bautista did.The umpire said nothing. The league office has not issued warnings, and there was no talk of suspensions, nor should there have been.Some Texas players took umbrage, of course, because Bautista had violated the unwritten rule of not showing up the opposing pitcher. The fact is that the opposing pitcher had done a pretty good job of showing up himself — as did the Rangers, with a terrible defensive performance.Baseball preserves a quaintness that is out of step with the times.Fans want to see emotion and celebration from, say, the Mets’ Daniel Murphy after he hits a critical home run, as he did on Thursday in the stadium where just a few days earlier a teammate’s season had been ended by a controversial slide at second base.Fans want to see Bautista react with raw emotion after hitting a decisive home run.I’d like to see another unwritten rule: If you play for the Cubs, the Mets or the Blue Jays, decorum police be damned. It’s been a long time coming. Celebrate.Email: wcr@nytimes.comAdvertisement