AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressThe way Justin Masterson of the Red Sox was pitching on Monday afternoon in Boston, he did not need much help. The Orioles gave it to him, anyway.On a rainy, chilly day, Baltimore made three errors that led to five unearned runs, Wei-Yin Chen struggled with his control and Boston won, 7-1, in a game shortened to six and a half innings because of rain.“The errors kind of gift-wrapped or built into the four-run inning, along with some bases on balls,” Boston Manager John Farrell said. “At this level, you give extra outs, you’re asking for trouble.” Masterson (2-0) allowed one run, three hits and three walks in five innings with six strikeouts. He did not want to change his plan to get five innings in before the rain, to make the game official. “We’re not just laying balls in there, because that’s kind of the way things snowball,” he said. With the score tied at 1-1, Boston scored four runs in the third when Chen walked four and made an error, and third baseman Manny Machado committed another error.Chen (0-1) thought the plate umpire, Andy Fletcher, had a small strike zone.“When you make a pitch and can’t throw it for a strike, you can’t throw the next pitch down the middle,” he said through an interpreter. “It kind of upset me.”REDS 6, BREWERS 1 Anthony DeSclafani pitched eight shutout innings, and Zack Cozart and Joey Votto homered as visiting Cincinnati beat Milwaukee. DeSclafani (2-0) held Milwaukee hitless until Adam Lind’s double with two outs in the fourth. Hector Gomez’s fifth-inning single was the only other hit off DeSclafani, who ran his scoreless innings streak to 15.ROYALS 7, TWINS 1 Edinson Volquez dodged trouble for seven innings, and host Kansas City scored two runs on wild pitches before beating Minnesota. Alcides Escobar returned from a sprained knee to score a run, and Kendrys Morales and Paulo Orlando drove in two runs each as the Royals finally figured out Twins starter Kyle Gibson, who gave up four runs in five-plus innings. Gibson (1-2) had earned the win in his first four starts against Kansas City.CUBS 5, PIRATES 2  The star rookie Kris Bryant turned his tiebreaking two-run double into a third run with some heads-up base running, and he had three hits and three R.B.I. to lead visiting Chicago.Bryant’s double off the base of the left-center field fence in the seventh inning snapped a 1-1 tie. He advanced to third base on the throw home, and he raced across the plate when catcher Francisco Cervelli missed the throw for an error.Jake Arrieta (2-1) allowed only one run and three hits in seven innings for the win while striking out seven and walking none.WHITE SOX 4, INDIANS 3  Melky Cabrera capped Chicago’s four-run ninth inning with a run-scoring single off Cody Allen, sending the White Sox to a win over visiting Cleveland.Six consecutive batters reached safely before Cabrera drove a fastball into left-center for his first game-ending hit since he signed with Chicago over the winter. Advertisement