By BILLY WITZAPRIL 20, 2015
DETROIT —  As C. C. Sabathia stood on the mound, the wind whipping his oversize uniform as if it were a Christo installation, he nevertheless displayed the unflappable countenance of his earlier years as a Yankee, before his knee began to disintegrate and his fastball began to desert him.Two uninspiring starts to begin the season gave way to a markedly better performance on Monday, one that left the Yankees encouraged but without a victory, as they lost to the Detroit Tigers, 2-1.Sabathia, relying on a 90-mile-per-hour fastball, a changeup and a veteran’s guile, kept the big-hitting Tigers in check with several big assists from his defense, but the margin for error proved to be too slim. J. D. Martinez and Yoenis Cespedes delivered two-out singles in the seventh to put the Tigers ahead, and that was enough.Detroit starter Alfredo Simon allowed only one run, on a home run to Mark Teixeira. Jacoby Ellsbury’s one-hop smash off the former Yankee Joba Chamberlain was neatly turned into an inning-ending double play in the eighth, and Joakim Soria pitched an uneventful ninth to seal the Yankees’ defeat, ending their three-game winning streak.AdvertisementSabathia, a thoughtful leader and a respected teammate, is still an influential presence for the Yankees. But he is making a late-career transition after losing velocity on his fastball, which used to reside in the upper-90-mile-per-hour range, and cartilage in his knee, which required surgery after his last season was cut short after eight starts.AdvertisementSabathia has spoken with Andy Pettitte, who made a similar transition and pitched into his 40s, though Pettitte never quite had the fastball to lose that Sabathia did.So the results Monday night left Sabathia both heartened and disappointed. He threw all eight innings, the longest outing of the season by a Yankees starter, and his changeup led to three 5-4-3 double plays.“I felt like I’m getting better every time out,” said Sabathia, who dropped to 0-3. “Obviously it’s not equating to wins or helping us out, but if I can start putting some starts like this together, it will help us win games.”With Sabathia, Masahiro Tanaka and Michael Pineda — the top of the rotation — coming off an injury-marred 2014, the Yankees took a deliberate approach in preparing them for the start of the season. Throwing fewer pitches in spring training could have meant that they would not be as sharp early on — or able to go as far into games — but the Yankees hoped that as a trade-off, they would stay healthy.Helping the Yankees was the early schedule, with enough days off built into the first three weeks that each of the three could make each of his first three starts on five days’ rest. That will change this week, when Tanaka starts Thursday on four days’ rest. Sabathia is schedule to pitch Saturday against the Mets and Matt Harvey at Yankee Stadium.If the Yankees would gladly take more performances like Sabathia’s, they were also pleased with the defense, which is turning around after committing an American League-leading 11 errors in the first 10 days of the season.They have not committed an error since, and on Monday they turned in a series of sterling defensive plays in addition to the double plays. Ellsbury made a lunging catch after a lengthy run to deprive Victor Martinez of an extra-base hit to lead off the sixth, prompting Sabathia to throw his arms up as if he were signaling a touchdown. The next batter, J. D. Martinez, had a hit taken away by Brett Gardner, who made a sliding catch of his sinking liner. Gardner also ran down Victor Martinez’s drive to the left-center gap just before he hit the wall.AdvertisementThe Tigers broke through in the seventh inning thanks to a handful of critical plays — and decisions. Rajai Davis singled and took second on Ian Kinsler’s deep fly ball down the left-field line. “It’s a smart play,” Manager Joe Girardi said.Shortstop Didi Gregorius nearly caught Davis off second on Miguel Cabrera’s one-hopper, but when Davis slid safely back, Stephen Drew rescued an out by throwing to first to get the slow-footed Cabrera. Girardi chose to walk Victor Martinez, but J. D. Martinez ripped a changeup off the glove of a diving Gregorius, and Davis scored to tie the game.The walk would hurt the Yankees when Cespedes followed with a single up the middle. Though Victor Martinez has been slowed even more by a leg injury, Ellsbury chose not to throw home, figuring that with two outs he had a large lead and was going on contact.“If there was one out, I’ve definitely got a play,” Ellsbury said. “But with two outs, I didn’t think I had a shot at him.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ellsbury instead threw to third, where the Yankees tagged out J. D. Martinez, but not before the go-ahead run had scored.“It’s frustrating, especially in a 1-0 game, a tight game,” Sabathia said of the seventh. “I kind of want to shut it down and get us back in the dugout.”The frustration on this night was not limited to the pitcher. In the eighth, the Yankees stirred when Chase Headley singled, was bunted to second and advanced to third on Gregorius’s single to center. Headley was initially held — a reasonable decision — but when Davis bobbled the ball in center field, Headley did not have time to restart.Chamberlain relieved starter Alfredo Simon, and Ellsbury hit a one-hop smash right to Kinsler, who started a 4-6-3 that was too crisp for even Ellsbury’s speed.“I hit it at the wrong person,” Ellsbury said. “I’ll take 600 more of those swings the rest of the season.”A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Sabathia Flashes Old Form; Result Evokes More Recent Past.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.