AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressDevan Dubnyk made 17 saves, Jason Pominville and Zach Parise scored second-period goals, and the host Minnesota Wild earned a 3-0 victory over the St. Louis Blues in Game 3 of their N.H.L. Western Conference series. Minnesota leads the best-of-seven series, two games to one.Mikael Granlund had two assists, Nino Niederreiter added an empty-netter and the Wild had the edge in every way. They committed no penalties.Jake Allen stopped 21 shots for the Blues, who lost a road playoff game for the ninth straight time.After getting a hat trick in the Game 2 victory at home for the Blues on Saturday, Vladimir Tarasenko was held without a shot on goal, just as he was in Game 1.Game 4 is Wednesday in Minnesota.DUCKS 5, JETS 4 Fired up for the first playoff game in town in 19 years, Winnipeg Jets fans booed Corey Perry off the ice in warmups and cheered every icing call against the Anaheim Ducks.They went silent when the Ducks scored. The raucous “whiteout crowd” left on a down note after Anaheim’s Rickard Rakell scored at 5:12 of overtime to beat the Jets and take a 3-0 series lead.For the third straight game, Winnipeg blew a third-period lead and in the process became the first team in N.H.L. history to lose the first three of a series when leading at the second intermission each time, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.Winnipeg faces elimination at home in Game 4 Wednesday night.The MTS Centre just about shook when Lee Stempniak’s goal gave the Jets a 1-0 lead in the first period.“I personally have never had anything like that before, and we certainly fed off the energy,” Stempniak said.The Jets dominated play until the final minute of the first, when Cam Fowler scored for Anaheim at 19:53Perry gave the Ducks a 2-1 lead 3:08 into the second. After going 0 for 7 on the power play in the first two games, the Jets got one at 6:40 of the second when Tyler Myers’s shot hit off Anaheim’s Simon Despres and went in.At the 9:37 mark, Wheeler put back a loose puck to give the Jets the lead again. Jakob Silfverberg’s tying goal at 16:04 came off a Adam Pardy turnover, while a Fowler turnover led to Bryan Little’s goal for a couple of minutes later.As in Games 1 and 2, the Jets tried desperately to hold onto a third-period lead. Ondrej Pavelec made a handful of big saves, but could not do anything to stop Ryan Kesler’s one-timer at the 17:46 mark that tied it up and sent the game to overtime.SHARKS AND COACH PART WAYS After seven seasons of regular-season success and play off disappointments, Coach Todd McLellan and the San Jose Sharks decided it was time for a change.The Sharks announced Monday that they had agreed to part ways with McLellan, the coach with the most wins in franchise history, after the team missed the playoffs for the first time since 2003.With the Sharks committed to a youth movement, the two sides agreed it was time to make a change.“This team is clearly in a rebuild,” McLellan said. “With one year left, heading forward I had to analyze where everything was going. I felt with some of the answers I got that it was time.”McLellan had a 311-163-66 regular-season record with the Sharks, the third best in the league since he took over before the 2008-9 season.Advertisement