By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 20, 2015
UNIONDALE, N.Y. —  Lubomir Visnovsky, a quietly intense defenseman, played a vital role in the Islanders’ overtime victory on Sunday over the Washington Capitals.His afternoon seemed to be cut short when he was leveled by forward Troy Brouwer with an unpenalized high hit eight minutes into the second period. Visnovsky briefly remained face down on the Nassau Coliseum ice before heading to the locker room, where he went through concussion protocols. When Visnovsky, with a history of head injuries, was deemed fit to play, he returned with a flourish — taking a shot four minutes later that Kyle Okposo deflected past goaltender Braden Holtby to snap a scoreless tie.Visnovsky, a perpetually smiling 38-year-old native of Slovakia, showed again why he is a wily veteran that teams require in order to excel in the Stanley Cup playoffs. Visnovsky is fifth among active N.H.L. defensemen with 495 career points, 43 behind Boston’s Zdeno Chara despite playing 308 fewer games.“Lubo being able to come back and make an impact was tremendous for us,” said John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain, whose goal 15 seconds into overtime lifted the Islanders to a 2-1 win, their first playoff overtime victory since 1993. “His patience made that play. He knows where to shoot and when to shoot.”AdvertisementGame 4 of the best-of-seven series, which the Islanders lead by two games to one, is Tuesday night at Nassau Coliseum.AdvertisementVisnovsky’s playmaking savvy is a primary reason General Manager Garth Snow acquired him from the Anaheim Ducks before the lockout-shortened 2012-13 season.Visnovsky, a fourth-round draft pick by Los Angeles in 2000, had played his entire N.H.L. career in the Western Conference — with the Kings, the Edmonton Oilers and the Ducks. During the 2010-11 season with Anaheim, he led the league in assists by a defenseman, with 50.He also has a wealth of international experience, including four Winter Olympics appearances for Slovakia and eight seasons skating for his hometown team in Bratislava.Visnovsky was asked after his team’s exuberant celebration whether he had ever been part of a similar rink rumpus.“During the last lockout, when I played at home, the fans helped there like our sixth guy here,” he said softly. “This is a great feeling for me, because it gives us all energy.”The Islanders will need all the vitality they can muster against the desperate Capitals, who cannot afford to fall behind by 3-1 before heading back to Washington for Game 5 on Thursday.With the league’s leading goal scorer, Alex Ovechkin, limited to a point in three games — a goal in Game 2 — Washington will have to contend with the decibel levels at Nassau Coliseum, the 43-year-old arena the Islanders will leave after this season for Barclays Center in Brooklyn.Advertisement“You have to enjoy that kind of energy and noise,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said Monday after his team’s skate. “It was a great atmosphere. This is what you play for. It’s exciting for coaches, too.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Visnovsky has advanced past the first round of the playoffs only once during his 14-season career. That was back in his rookie season, 2000-1, when he played eight postseason games for the Kings.Relishing the chance to excel when the games count most is an element embraced by Visnovsky’s teammates.“You never know how many chances you’re going to get,” Okposo said. “Lubo has been huge for us.”Islanders Coach Jack Capuano, who gave Visnovsky games off to rest during the long season, has always preached how star players have to rise to challenges. He’s aware that having a confident Visnovsky skating with partner Thomas Hickey is more critical because the injured Travis Hamonic has yet to play against the Capitals.The team’s first pair, Johnny Boychuk and Nick Leddy, were dynamic against Ovechkin in Game 3, and the third defense pair of Brian Strait and Calvin de Haan also held their own against waves of Capitals.“Our leadership and character has led us in the right direction,” Capuano said. “A veteran guy like Lubo, he’s been there and he’s done it.”Strait, who has the Coliseum cubicle next to Visnovsky, said he would not trade his locker room spot.“The laughs are nonstop between him and Johnny,” Strait said, referring to Boychuk, also known for his sly humor. “Experience is something you can’t put a price on. The way Lubo plays and what he did on Sunday coming back to the game really inspired everybody.”AdvertisementFollowing Tavares’s heroics, Visnovsky’s in-the-moment fervor carried over when he was selected the game’s third star behind Tavares and Okposo. The usually reserved defenseman skated across the ice to wave at fans as he absorbed crescendos of appreciative applause.“I felt unreal, and I wanted to thank the people,” he said. “This is why I play hockey, why I still love to play.”SLAP SHOTSCapitals forward Eric Fehr, who seemed to sustain a left shoulder injury early in Game 3, will miss at least the next two games.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Amiable but Intense Defenseman Adds Punch to Islanders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.