AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirSince Fox Sports announced its hiring of Pete Rose as a studio analyst on Saturday, I’ve wondered, What took so long?His banishment from Major League Baseball has not precluded him from dispensing commentary from a television studio. He cannot work in a press box or any other credentialed area in a ballpark without permission from Commissioner Rob Manfred. But even if Rose never works outside Fox’s Los Angeles studio, he remains a fascinating personality for his playing career and for his gambling sins, which landed him on baseball’s ineligible list. And viewers might want to pay attention to him more than to any other Fox analyst, whether it is Frank Thomas or Eric Karros.“I hope I do good by them,” Rose said by telephone on Monday. “I follow the game religiously. When I get off work, I’ll go home and watch the Reds play in Milwaukee and whoever’s on TV. I enjoy it. I like the players. A lot of them text me, asking me to critique them. I’ll be able to hold my own.”The idea to hire Rose, 74, came up within Fox several months ago and led to an audition in March in which he worked with Thomas and Chris Myers.“Everybody knows how much Pete loves baseball,” said John Entz, the executive producer of Fox Sports. “It doesn’t matter how much you love baseball, you tend to focus on the time you played in. So we knew he’d know everything about the players he played with and against, but we were most interested in how much he follows the game in its current state. And he passed with flying colors. He knew more about the current game than most of the people we have working on baseball. That really caught our attention.”But more than that went into the decision to hire Rose. He is, as almost any baseball fan of a certain age knows, quite a personality.“The entire control room couldn’t stop watching him,” Entz said. “It was a compelling audition.”Rose is under contract, for now, to make at least 25 appearances a year on programs including pregame and postgame baseball shows on Fox and Fox Sports 1 and on “Fox Sports Live.” Entz said, “We want to move things along slowly, and if things progress as we hope they will, we’d like him to be a big presence in our October coverage.” The date for his first appearance is not set, but whatever his Fox schedule is, it has to fit in with his regular job, signing memorabilia at a store in the Shoppes at Mandalay Place in Las Vegas.Entz acknowledged that Fox should have explored hiring Rose years ago — Rose said he had never pursued a television job — but said the timing now seemed right. “With the new commissioner coming in, Pete’s name seems to come up more than usual,” Entz said. “And throw in the fact that the All-Star Game will be in Cincinnati.”Toss in, too, Rose’s recently submitted request to be reinstated, which Manfred has said he is considering. So, yes, hiring Rose is a way for Fox to get the type of publicity that has not come with its hiring of any other studio analyst. Fox’s message is clear: Come watch Pete Rose, the banished superstar who for many years denied gambling on baseball, the ex-con and the career hits leader. Maybe he’ll be outrageous. Maybe he’ll be revelatory. Maybe he’ll say something that will blow his chance at returning to baseball.“I believe I’m the best ambassador baseball has,” Rose said, repeating his often-heard refrain. “I sit for four and a half hours in a mall in Las Vegas, and all I do is talk about baseball positively.”Whether his efforts, in a mall shop or on television, will lead to reinstatement is difficult to tell. Rose has spent nearly 26 years in exile. Kostya Kennedy, the author of “Pete Rose: An American Dilemma,” a 2014 book, said by telephone, “Pete wants to be reinstated, but I don’t think he’s as consumed with it as one might think.” He suggested that Rose’s case for reinstatement might be helped by working at Fox, provided that he “doesn’t put his foot in his mouth too often or say something egregious.” About a decade ago, Rose appeared on “The Best Damn Sports Show Period” on Fox Sports Net. Entz, a producer of that program, said that when discussion turned to Rose’s quest for reinstatement, Rose had asked the reporter Ken Rosenthal: “Kenny, what do I got to do to get in?” Entz recalled: “You could see the sorrow in his face.”Rose now insists that he does not view the Fox job as an avenue to prove his worthiness for reinstatement to Manfred.“I don’t know about that,” he said. “This gives me visibility, and you know, I can give an insight to maybe helping people understand the game more and maybe have more fun with the game.”Email: sandor@nytimes.com Advertisement