By SAM BORDENAPRIL 20, 2015
BARCELONA, Spain —  It is election season in Catalonia, and the most anticipated race will have all of the expected ingredients: charges of corruption, fringe challengers, improbable campaign promises and blatant pandering to voters (free haircuts, anyone?).The winner will not be a government official but rather the next president of F.C. Barcelona, a position that comes with more clout, some residents argue. Barcelona is among the most recognizable and valuable brands in sports. Given that, the club, and thus its president, sometimes serves as the public face of Catalonia itself.Yet while virtually every major sports organization around the world relies on an owner or a board of directors to select its top leaders, Barcelona, which is owned by its roughly 160,000 members, continues to opt for a more old-fashioned methodology: paper, envelopes and a whole bunch of ballot boxes.The result is either charming or absurd.The balloting process is undeniably quaint — voters will go to the polls in a few months on the concourse of the famed Camp Nou stadium, where they will be organized alphabetically — and members are especially prideful about their votes, often describing them as a part of their identity. Indeed, while matches like Tuesday’s Champions League quarterfinal second leg against Paris St.-Germain are certainly critical, the most important day of the year for a Barcelona member might be when the voting booths open.Advertisement“My vote is like my country,” said Xavier Sala-i-Martin, a lifelong member who previously served as the club’s treasurer and is now a professor in economics at Columbia University. “It is something that belongs to me.”AdvertisementBut as is often the case with any type of politics, wrapped within that idyllic package of glorious democracy are some more difficult questions. First among them is the basic premise: Is it really wise for an organization with a multibillion-dollar valuation and an annual operating budget of about $580 million to let its constituents, who surely love the club but probably have little idea how to operate it, pick the president?“The election for the president of Barça is exactly like a regular political election,” Agustí Benedito, a Barcelona businessman who has declared his candidacy for the position, said in an interview. “The good parts and the bad parts.”The bad parts will seem familiar. Candidates’ boasts are currency, and they routinely promise voters that, if elected, they will bring in a particular player or certain coach, or dismiss him. It is generally accepted that a reason Joan Laporta, the president from 2003 to 2010, won his first election was his disclosure during his campaign that he had entered into a “preagreement” with Manchester United for the star midfielder David Beckham. Vote for me, Laporta said, and Beckham will soon wear a Barcelona jersey. (Beckham wound up at Barcelona’s archrival, Real Madrid.)There is also the financial component of the election. While any Barcelona member can vote for president, not every member can run; to become a candidate, each hopeful and his proposed board, which generally consists of 20 people, must put up 15 percent of Barcelona’s budget as a guarantee. In other words, you can run for president only if you can vouch for a security deposit of roughly $75 million.As expected, this limits the field, and it often leads to candidates who choose their potential board members based on finances instead of, say, corporate leadership skills or soccer acumen. Even Josep Maria Bartomeu, the current president, who initially joined the board as part of Laporta’s presidency, has acknowledged that the people who make up Barcelona’s boards are largely “businessmen who have enough time and money to run.”For those who can raise the required funds, though, traditional political mudslinging is a part of the deal, too. Benedito has tried to appeal to the members’ moral compass, criticizing the current administration for its decision to sign a jersey sponsorship deal with Qatar Airways, which is owned by the tiny emirate’s royal family.“Everyone knows that Qatar is financing Islamic terrorism,” Benedito charged at his office one recent afternoon. “They are behind ISIS. In a club like this, a special club, we cannot be on the same side of those people.”AdvertisementHe added: “Now, we receive 35 million euros a year from them. Even if they make it 100 million euros, I would say no.”The positives to this method of choosing a leader lie in the civil discourse and discussion that members get to have with the candidates, a sort of candor that is surely missing from the way most teams — the Knicks or the Mets, for example — govern themselves.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bartomeu said he regularly tried to engage members in conversations about stadium renovations and ticket pricing. Victor Font, another former member of Laporta’s board who is considering running, said that he had spoken with fellow members about professionalizing the upper tier of Barcelona’s leadership. Benedito, who finished second in the 2010 election, said he had taken 474 meetings with members since his defeat — an assistant keeps count — in an effort to ensure that his platform would be reflective of “what the people want.”Just about every candidate seems eager to emphasize that he is different — very different — from Sandro Rosell, who was elected in 2010 but resigned last year amid a financial scandal related to the club’s acquisition of the Brazilian star Neymar in 2013.The list of problems lingering over F.C. Barcelona’s prize asset, its soccer team, is considerable. Among the most serious is the club’s ban from signing new players until January as punishment for improprieties in its youth academy. Then, most notably, there is the legal dispute regarding accusations of tax fraud in the Neymar transfer.Even Bartomeu, who was Rosell’s deputy and assumed the presidency after Rosell resigned, has tried to separate himself from his close friend. This has been made more difficult by the fact that Bartomeu was intimately involved in the Neymar negotiations and was recently ordered by a judge to stand in court as part of the investigation into the deal. That has left open the possibility, however remote, that Barcelona’s members might elect a president who subsequently winds up in jail.This prospect has been strong fodder for Bartomeu’s opponents. Jordi Farré, who is leading an upstart group known as Som Gent Normal, or We Are Normal People, shook his head when he spoke about Rosell and Bartomeu. He then referred to the site of Barcelona’s courts when he said, “We want to take Barça out of the City of Justice and bring it back to the Sports City.”All of the candidates agree that there are serious issues to discuss. In a previous referendum, members voted to renovate Camp Nou, and choosing the construction’s direction is a critical part of the coming mandate. So, too, are decisions about future sponsorship (should the team remain with Nike, or seek a richer deal?) and whether the membership should be expanded.Farré wants to see Barcelona strongly linked to the Catalan independence movement. Font wants to overhaul the entire leadership process of the club, removing the financial requirements to become a member of the board and instead installing minimum experience standards for each position. Font also said that if he runs and wins, he will find a way to bring back Pep Guardiola, who led the team to a slew of titles from 2008 to 2012 but now coaches Bayern Munich.AdvertisementThe candidates’ various platforms will be on display once the campaign begins, though when that will be is, curiously, not known. Rosell’s mandate ran until 2016, but Bartomeu, after taking over, called for elections to be held this year because there was considerable external pressure for Barcelona to have an elected president, as opposed to one who was simply elevated to the post. The date for the election has yet to be set — it is expected to be sometime after the season ends, perhaps in July — and the official campaign will run for about six weeks beforehand.Many observers think this race may be open. Bartomeu said his legal issues would not keep him from running, and there has been speculation that Laporta may make a late bid to return to office; he declined multiple requests for an interview.Once the campaign officially begins, each candidate will open a headquarters designed to appeal to the members; Rosell’s offered free haircuts and shaves the last time, while Laporta’s, in 2003, had a lot of foosball tables.Recently, there have been protests from a handful of European teams to force Barcelona, as well as the few other Spanish clubs who are member-owned, including Real Madrid, to alter their structure. Operating this way, critics say, allows Barcelona to avoid some of the tax requirements that corporate-owned clubs have to pay. It seems unlikely that the model will change anytime soon.Sala-i-Martin scoffed at the idea. “I don’t know how people from Manchester feel when you have this big rich American family buying your club,” he said, referring to Manchester United, which was bought by the Glazer family in 2005.“Yes, it’s your club; but it isn’t the same, is it?” he said. “It’s yours but it’s not really yours. With Barça, every member knows that the club belongs to us.”Pere Bosch contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 21, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: On One Point Voters Agree: Club Election Has Intrigue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.