By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 17, 2015
The Washington Redskins once won a Super Bowl with a collection of wide receivers called the Smurfs.That just will not fly in the N.F.L. anymore, although there are plenty of vertically challenged wide receivers. The standouts Steve Smith Sr., Odell Beckham Jr., Emmanuel Sanders and Julian Edelman are under 6 feet, some of them well below.Regardless of their skill and production, the short receivers are in a minority. Most wideouts peer down on them, and even among defensive backs, few outside the Legion of Boom in Seattle and its defectors on other rosters (like Brandon Browner, now in New Orleans) pass the height test in comparison.Virtually every team relies on at least one receiver who is taller than 6 feet 1 inch. Vincent Jackson and Mike Evans in Tampa are 6-5. Jacksonville has Allen Hurns and Allen Robinson, both 6-3.The Jets’ Brandon Marshall, is 6-4 and his sidekick Eric Decker is 6-3. Philadelphia’s Jordan Matthews, who often plays in the slot, normally the territory of the shorter wideouts, is also 6-3.AdvertisementFrom Pittsburgh’s Martavis Bryant (6-4) to Dallas’s Dez Bryant (6-2), tall targets are in vogue.“There are some big receivers in this league,” the Dolphins’ 6-foot-1 safety Reshad Jones said. “Some of them are like tight ends. Big receivers, you’ve got to get your hands on them and don’t let them get going. Get them down on the ground.”AdvertisementThat is not so easy when they also outweigh the defensive backs, even the safeties — Jones goes 215 pounds in comparison with Detroit’s Megatron, Calvin Johnson, at 236. And many can run just as quickly as the players trying to shadow them.The All-Pro cornerback Darrelle Revis, 5-11 and 198 pounds, is dwarfed by his Jets teammate Marshall. Revis, of course, makes up for the disadvantage when he faces the likes of Arizona’s Larry Fitzgerald (6-3, 218) or Cincinnati’s A. J. Green (6-4, 208) through experience. At least most of the time.“He is so intelligent as a receiver, he’s very smart; he knows how to get open,” Revis said of Marshall. “He knows how to use his body; he knows how to use his strength and his size. If there could be another Megatron, it would be him. I would put those two, him and Calvin Johnson, in the same category of big, tall receivers, 6-5, 230-plus and can run like a skill player.”One of the most skilled tall receivers in N.F.L. history was the Hall of Famer James Lofton. He went 6-3, 192 pounds in an era when 200 pounds for a wideout was hefty.Lofton had speed, craftiness, durability and diligence, all critical attributes. And he had length.“One of the first things to look at is catch radius,” said Lofton, who played 16 seasons, caught 764 passes, averaged 18.3 yards per reception and had 75 touchdowns. “Some big guys you would think would be can’t-miss guys but are average because they don’t use their length and size.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On some passes, Lofton said, bigger is better.“From a quarterback’s perspective, if you are throwing the ball down the field, the guy who is 6-4 doesn’t have to be as open as the guy who is 5-10,” Lofton said. “That’s why Antonio Brown and Sanders are very unique in their ability to play bigger than their listed size. There are some guys who are tall who play smaller.”One reason teams are enamored of the tall receiver is what he provides in the red zone. That has often been the province of tight ends, with such behemoths as Rob Gronkowski and Jimmy Graham prime examples. It has also become a key area for wideouts with long arms.“But you also have got to have quickness inside, and supple enough hands to catch the ball with that guy on your back in the red zone,” Lofton said.AdvertisementHe added: “Look at Beckham, who’s pretty good in the red zone but has to make the spectacular catch. And the guy who is 6-5 needs less effort to reach the ball.”Lofton said that height was relative. A few years ago, he researched tall receivers and concluded that “one size does not fit all.” Lofton placed Atlanta’s Roddy White among the taller players; White is 6-0.White is relatively short compared with his teammate Julio Jones (6-3, 220), who has 49 catches and four touchdowns despite being hampered for part of the team’s 5-1 start by hamstring problems.Jones is the prototype for today’s wideout. He brings to the Falcons physicality and elusiveness that are emblematic of what the top tall men can offer.And covering them is a tall order.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Tall Receivers Are in Vogue, and They Cast a Shadow Over Most Defensive Backs .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.