AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerThe first time John Flaherty crouched behind the plate in a major league game, the home plate umpire, Rich Garcia, asked how he was feeling.“I’m terrified,” Flaherty said.“Listen, kid,” Garcia replied, resting a hand on Flaherty’s shoulder. “We’ll get through it together.”Chances are that the Mets’ new catcher, Kevin Plawecki, will feel the same kind of nervous energy when he makes his debut this week at Citi Field. Every major leaguer knows the rush of emotions that comes from realizing a dream, but catchers who have reached that level have the added responsibility of running a major league game — without ever having played one.When the Mets lost their starter, Travis d’Arnaud, to a broken right hand on Sunday, Manager Terry Collins said that if the team promoted Plawecki, he would become the regular catcher. The move became official on Monday, when a follow-up exam showed that d’Arnaud had a fracture of a bone in his little finger. He will be in a splint for three weeks and will resume baseball activities if he is healed by then.The Mets, who start a series with the Atlanta Braves on Tuesday, also said that the left-handed reliever Jerry Blevins, who sustained a broken bone in his left arm on Sunday, would be in a splint for six weeks.A right-hander, Hansel Robles, will take Blevins’s place, but Plawecki will get far more attention. He may have to stay awhile. Tim McCarver, the longtime catcher and broadcaster, broke the index finger of his throwing hand in 1970, missed nearly four months and had trouble gripping the ball for two years.“That’s better,” McCarver said when told that d’Arnaud had hurt his pinkie, not his index finger. “But it’s still a very worrisome injury for anybody, especially a guy who’s relying on throwing and getting rid of the ball quickly. It’s tough for you to get a feel for the ball.”While d’Arnaud recovers, Plawecki will have the benefit of a staff that knows what it is doing. The Mets are 10-3, with an eight-game winning streak, and their starters have a 2.84 earned run average.Plawecki will have an experienced backup in Anthony Recker and a staff that has already thrived with a young catcher. D’Arnaud is 26, just two years older than Plawecki.“It’s more, I think, a matter of the pitching staff handling him instead of him handling the pitching staff,” McCarver said. “Those pitchers have done so well and been so strong. I’m not comparing this staff to Tom Seaver, Jerry Koosman, Nolan Ryan and Gary Gentry, but nonetheless, if Jerry Grote went down, that pitching staff would have certainly been capable of handling any catcher they brought up.”These Mets have a long way to go, of course, to match the legacy of the staff Grote guided to the 1969 championship. But the Mets have three experienced starters in Bartolo Colon, Jon Niese and Dillon Gee. The others, Matt Harvey and Jacob deGrom, have less service time but lots of early success.The skill of the Mets’ staff, said Ben Davis, a former catcher for three major league teams, will help Plawecki adjust.“Most of the time they’re going to make him look good, regardless of whether the pitcher shakes him off or not, because that staff, collectively, has the stuff to make pitches at any time and get an out at a critical point,” said Davis, who now broadcasts for the Philadelphia Phillies. “The catcher can learn from that.”Davis, like Plawecki a highly regarded prospect, played one game as a backup for San Diego in 1998 before his promotion the next June to be the Padres’ starter. His transition was easier, he said, because the veterans treated him with respect and had worked with him in spring training. Plawecki played 11 games with the Mets this spring, and five in 2013.McCarver had played a handful of games when he was summoned back to the St. Louis Cardinals in 1961 after the starter, Hal Smith, suffered a heart attack. Everything worked out in time — Smith lived a long life, McCarver had a long career — but McCarver returned to the minors after six weeks and stayed there for more than a year.“The best advice I ever received about pitcher and catcher meetings came from Del Rice,” he said, referring to an earlier teammate and former catcher. “He said, ‘Just remember to shake your head “Yes” in the meetings and then go out and do what you think is right.’ ”When Flaherty prepared for his first game, with the Boston Red Sox in 1992, he and pitcher Matt Young had a clear plan for Kenny Lofton, the speedy Cleveland leadoff man: Pound the strike zone and make him earn his way on. It did not work.“We walked him on four straight,” Flaherty said. “And Matt couldn’t throw to first base, either. He’s going through what Jon Lester is now — he could step off and look him back, but he couldn’t throw. So Kenny stole second, stole third and scored on a ground ball.”Flaherty said that after the first inning, and his first at-bat, he had settled in and realized it was still baseball, the same game he had played all his life. His strategy with Young was to throw the fastball or slider and trust that the Indians could not hit them.Flaherty was right, but with one big asterisk: The Indians indeed had no hits that day, but they scored twice in Young’s eight innings and beat the Red Sox, 2-1. Young walked seven, allowing the other run on two walks and two groundouts.“The whole game, we were losing, so there wasn’t this anticipation of a no-hitter,” Flaherty said. “It’s not something we celebrated. It was like, ‘I can’t believe we just lost this game.’ ”A loss of any kind would feel strange these days for the Mets, who have grown used to winning and now need a newcomer’s help.Advertisement