AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe Philadelphia Eagles’ signing of Tim Tebow raises a host of questions: How will Tebow fare after two years away from the game? What role does Coach Chip Kelly see for him? Will he be embraced by the tough fans?But the most conspicuous is this: Just how many quarterbacks do the Eagles need?It is one thing to stockpile receivers or defensive backs. But teams can use only one quarterback at a time, and sometimes having even two candidates for starter can lead to a controversy that eats up a team. Now the Eagles have five quarterbacks, three of whom have started N.F.L. games.But in another twist, precisely zero of the five could be considered proven, successful N.F.L. starters.Tebow’s signing, announced Monday, is another of the curious, news-making moves made this off-season by Kelly, including his letting go of the team’s starting quarterback, best running back and best receiver.The nominal starter at this point is Sam Bradford, acquired in March from the St. Louis Rams in a surprising trade for the Eagles’ 2014 starter, Nick Foles.Bradford was the No. 1 pick in the 2010 draft out of Oklahoma. His rookie season was a success, as he led a team that had been 1-15 to a 7-9 record and, crucially, played all 16 games. After two weaker seasons, Bradford began to have injury problems: He played just seven games in 2013 and none last year.In his career, he has averaged 6.3 yards per pass attempt, ranking him at the back of the pack among active quarterbacks. Rams fans have been underwhelmed, and there was hardly an outcry when he was shipped to Philadelphia.His status as the starter there, and even his roster spot, may not be locked up. Though jerseys of the Eagles’ other new acquisitions are readily available, Bradford jerseys were not in stock at local stores, NJ.com reported last week.Backing up Bradford at this point will be Mark Sanchez. A No. 5 overall pick out of Southern California, Sanchez spent four years as the Jets’ starter, putting up average numbers at best. The highlight was an 11-5 record and a trip to the conference finals in his second season, 2010. But things turned sour shortly after.No matter what Sanchez accomplishes the rest of his career, he will be remembered for a play that joins Leon Lett’s Super Bowl fumble, Scott Norwood’s “Wide Right” field-goal attempt and the Miracle at the Meadowlands in N.F.L. infamy. In the so-called butt fumble in November 2012, Sanchez simply ran into a teammate’s backside, leading to a fumble recovery for a touchdown by the Patriots.The play quickly came to be seen as symbolic of Sanchez’s failed tenure with the Jets. He missed all of the next season with an injury and then was cut, before being signed by Philadelphia, where he rehabilitated his image somewhat last season, playing fairly well in place of an injured Foles.That brings us to Tebow.Drawing an outsize amount of attention for his college success, rushing ability and overt Christian faith, Tebow has an N.F.L. career that essentially boils down to one season, 2011 with the Denver Broncos. Replacing an ineffective Kyle Orton after five games, Tebow began an attention-getting pattern of performances. He repeatedly seemed to underachieve for three quarters, while the Broncos’ stout defense kept the team close, and then he would pull off a miracle in the last minutes. Opinions were sharply divided over whether these heroics were the result of a gritty winning mentality or just luck.Tebow’s apotheosis came in a playoff game against the Pittsburgh Steelers. He barely threw the ball until the first play of overtime, when he unexpectedly launched an 80-yard touchdown pass that won the game.Despite the team’s success, his season numbers were subpar by any standard. When the Broncos then signed Peyton Manning, Tebow’s time was up.His next team was the Jets, and his arrival, coupled with Sanchez’s unpopularity, led to a news media frenzy that threatened to overwhelm the season. In the end, Tebow threw just eight passes as Sanchez’s backup, and he has not played since. He moved on to broadcasting, and it seemed as if his playing career might be over.(Tebow has a history with Bradford, too. His Florida team beat Bradford and Oklahoma in the 2009 N.C.A.A. title game.)Now Tebow may be competing with Matt Barkley for the Eagles’ third-string slot. A once highly regarded star at Southern California, Barkley has an N.F.L. career consisting of four relief appearances over the past two seasons.The most vulnerable of the five Eagles quarterbacks is probably G. J. Kinne, who has been on rosters of the Omaha Nighthawks of the United Football League, the San Antonio Talons of Arena Football and the Jets.So the Eagles have a full house of quarterbacks. And they might not be done. Speculation is still swirling that Kelly covets Marcus Mariota, who was recruited by Kelly at Oregon and started for Kelly as a freshman there. Perhaps Bradford can be packaged with other picks to allow the Eagles to move up toward the top of the first round next week and grab Mariota.Eagles fans have experienced a roller-coaster off-season, and the fun, and perhaps nausea, may continue.Advertisement