AdvertisementSupported byYankees 5, Tigers 2By Billy WitzDETROIT — The rainbow that appeared Tuesday evening beyond left field at Comerica Park seemed to be a reminder of the parabolic nature of baseball, in which, over the course of time, outcomes generally even out.Another embodiment of the old baseball axiom resided in right field for the Yankees. His name is Chris Young. He was in the lineup because his performance had demanded it. He replaced Carlos Beltran and delivered a home run, a double, a single and two walks in the Yankees’ 5-2 win over the Detroit Tigers. While the season has barely begun to unfold, Young is leading the Yankees with a .344 batting average and shares the team lead with four home runs. This was the type of performance the Mets had envisioned when they signed Young, a former All-Star, to a one-year, $7.25 million contract before last season, thinking they were getting a bargain and turning over the left-field job to him. Instead, Young slumped so badly — hovering around .200 and hitting eight homers — that the Mets benched him and then released him in August. The Yankees scooped him up and signed him to be their fourth outfielder this season. “We’ve always talked about New York being a tough place to get used to and adjust to, and sometimes it takes a player some time,” Manager Joe Girardi said recently of Young’s struggles with the Mets. “The way he’s played for us, yeah, I’m a little bit surprised that that’s what happened, but he’s been really good for us.”Girardi has had few problems finding a place for Young, either as a defensive replacement, filling in for Beltran, who has been ill and slumping, or as an opportunity to rest Brett Gardner or Jacoby Ellsbury against a left-hander, another of whom the Yankees will see Wednesday against David Price. Young said the time he spent with the Yankees last season had helped him feel comfortable. Like his teammates, he has received encouragement from the coaching staff and been appreciated by the fans.“I’ve always felt part of the team,” he said. “It’s important to have positive people around you, the fan base to take you in and give you a fair shot.” Young’s big hit Tuesday was his solo home run in the seventh, which helped provide a cushion for another Yankee hoping to refashion himself: Nathan Eovaldi.Eovaldi, whom the Yankees acquired last December from Miami, has kept the Yankees in every game he has pitched, allowing three or fewer runs in all three starts. But Tuesday, he was much sharper and more efficient and was rewarded with his first win. He allowed one run and pitched into the eighth inning, another sign that he could be something more than a durable inning-eater with a strong arm.“For him to come in and keep them off balance and pitch the way he did today, that lets you know what his ceiling is,” Young said. “If you can do that against the Tigers, you can pretty much do that against anybody.” If it looked as if Eovaldi was courting trouble, allowing eight hits and a walk, his ability to get the Tigers to hit ground balls allowed the Yankees to notch four double plays — and nearly two more. One of the double plays came when Yoenis Cespedes hit a line drive that found Eovaldi’s glove. He doubled J. D. Martinez off first but forced Mark Teixeira to make a diving catch.“I kind of rushed it and gator-armed it right into the dirt,” Eovaldi said. “Tex made a great play.”The Yankees have had seven double plays in the last two games and have not committed an error since Wednesday, when their season total, 11, was the most in the major leagues. Particularly good was Stephen Drew, who excelled at shortstop one night after doing the same at second base. The performance by Eovaldi continued a recent resurgence by the Yankees’ starting pitchers, who as recently as Saturday had the 13th lowest E.R.A. in the American League. Since then, Masahiro Tanaka threw seven shutout innings against Tampa Bay, and C. C. Sabathia was a hard-luck loser in a 2-1 complete-game loss to Detroit on Monday.The Yankees pushed across a run in the first when Gardner walked and then scored on Teixeira’s two-out opposite-field double. For much of the evening, the game looked like a replay of Monday’s loss, when the Yankees leapt to an early 1-0 lead but could not hold it late. This time they built on the lead. Young led off the seventh with a home run off Ian Kroll, and one out later, Drew hit a solo homer, his fourth. The Tigers went through four relievers in the inning, allowing another run on a wild pitch by Al Albuquerque.The Yankees, who left 11 runners on base, nearly rued those missed opportunities in the bottom of the ninth. Chris Martin struck out Miguel Cabrera and Victor Martinez, but J. D. Martinez singled and Cespedes doubled over the third-base bag, prompting Girardi to bring in Andrew Miller.Miller thought he had struck out Nick Castellanos on a checked swing, but the first-base umpire, Gerry Davis, ruled that Castellanos had not gone around. Miller then walked Rajai Davis to force in a run, but he struck out Jose Iglesias to register his fifth save.Advertisement