AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinBob St. Clair, the towering tackle who overpowered defensive linemen while springing holes for his fellow Hall of Famers in the San Francisco 49ers’ “million-dollar backfield” of the 1950s, died on Monday in Santa Rosa, Calif. He was 84.The cause was complications of a broken hip he incurred at his home in Santa Rosa in late February, his daughter Gail St. Clair-Midyett said.Playing with the 49ers, his hometown team, from 1953 to 1963, St. Clair was hulking, even by today’s pro football standards, at 6 feet 9 inches and 265 pounds or so.He was strong, he was fast, and he enhanced his intimidating presence with his taste for raw meat.St. Clair was named to the N.F.L.’s all-decade team for the 1950s, selected for five Pro Bowls and elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1990. At his induction, he remarked that he was used to working in the shadow of other players. “But today,” he added, “I equate this to Rocky running up those steps. I feel like, ‘Yeah! I made it!’ ”St. Clair blocked for halfbacks Hugh McElhenny and John Henry Johnson and fullback Joe Perry, and protected quarterback Y. A. Tittle in the team’s million-dollar backfield — the name referring to their offensive brilliance and not, by any means, to their salaries. He also played on defense during goal-line stands, and he used his height and strength in busting through offensive lines to block opponents’ field-goal attempts and punts.He once paid the price for blocking a punt by Los Angeles Rams quarterback Norm Van Brocklin.“I leaped at him and knocked the ball away from his foot before he had a chance to kick it,” St. Clair told Bob McCullough in the oral history “My Greatest Day in Football” (2001). “He kicked me instead. It was my upper teeth, and they put cotton in it. We were on the 5-yard line, and we were behind, we scored, and then I came out.”He was injected with Novocain and returned later in the game, five of his teeth “crooked or cracked and everything else,” he said.Robert Bruce St. Clair was born in San Francisco on Feb. 18, 1931, and played on the University of San Francisco’s undefeated team of 1951. The team was invited to play in the Orange Bowl, but voted to reject the bid because its two black players, Ollie Matson and Burl Toler, would not have been allowed to play.When the university, run by the Catholic Jesuit order, dropped football after that season, St. Clair transferred to Tulsa to finish his college football career.He was selected by the 49ers in the third round of the 1953 draft. He retired after sustaining Achilles’ tendon injuries.In addition to his daughter Gail, St. Clair is survived by his third wife, Marsha Bonfigli St. Clair; three other daughters, Lynn St. Clair-Gretton, Rene St. Clair and Jill St. Clair; two sons, Gary and Greg; a sister, Rosemary Umland; 19 grandchildren; and 13 great-grandchildren. All six children are from his marriage to his first wife, Ann, which ended in divorce.St. Clair was the mayor of Daly City, Calif., in the late stages of his playing career and later worked in sales for a dairy processing company.As for developing a taste for raw meat, he recalled that his grandmother would toss him scraps when he was a child while she was chopping up meat for dinner.That provided fodder for hazing years later. As St. Clair recalled in “My Greatest Day in Football,” he would sit down with rookies at their training camp tables and “cut a piece of raw liver and put it in my mouth, and I crunch it, and let a little blood trickle down my chin.”The rookies almost invariably left the table with great haste. As St. Clair put it, “That night when they called home I bet they said: ‘I don’t know if I can make this team. One guy is crazy.’ ”Advertisement