By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 23, 2015
UNIONDALE, N.Y. —  When John Tavares, the Islanders’ usually mild-mannered captain, is seething, playoff hockey must be in full bloom.A day after an overtime loss to the Washington Capitals on Tuesday that tied their opening-round playoff series at two games apiece, Tavares was still angry about an early second-period hit leveled by Washington’s Tom Wilson against Islanders defenseman Lubomir Visnovsky.“The puck wasn’t even close to where Lubo was,” Tavares said of the play in which Wilson launched himself into Visnovsky behind the Islanders’ net, bloodying the defenseman and knocking him out of the game. “It was just a complete target of a defenseless player.”Visnovsky was not available to speak with members of the news media Wednesday morning before the Islanders left for Washington, where they will play Game 5 on Thursday night. Islanders Coach Jack Capuano had no update on the condition of Visnovsky, a 38-year-old defenseman from Slovakia, who is especially popular with teammates.Advertisement“Lubo is such a likable guy,” said Thomas Hickey, Visnovsky’s defense partner. “Everyone appreciates him. It makes me sick to my stomach to see him hurt.”AdvertisementWilson was given a two-minute charging penalty, one of four power plays the Capitals killed off en route to 2-1 victory. The Islanders have failed to convert all 10 of their man-advantage opportunities in the series.Capitals forward Brooks Laich said on a Washington radio show that Wilson’s collision with Visnovsky, who has a history of head injuries, may have crossed the line.“That hit was maybe a little questionable,” Laich said on 106.7 The Fan. “The puck was a couple of feet away. It’s a quote-unquote good penalty to take. It knocks them down to five defensemen. We kill the penalty off, we get momentum and now we can really start to lean on their defense corps with only five guys left.”Wilson, who is six inches taller than Visnovsky, defended his actions after the Capitals’ practice in Arlington, Va.“Whenever I make a body check, I’m trying to make sure I’m doing everything as clean as possible,” said Wilson, 21, who had four goals, 13 assists and a team-leading 172 penalty minutes in the regular season. “I hope he’s feeling all right. You never want to see a guy go down like that. But it’s a hard-nosed sport and it’s a hard-hitting sport, so that’s going to happen.”Already without defenseman Travis Hamonic because of a lower-body injury, the Islanders face the likely prospect of moving ahead without Visnovsky, a savvy playmaker who had a strong performance in Game 3, which the Islanders won on Tavares’s goal 15 seconds into overtime.Candidates to replace Visnovsky in the lineup include the rookie Griffin Reinhart or the reserve Matt Donovan, who played only 12 games this season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Capuano said filling the void of two key defensemen would not be easy.“It’s a big challenge, there’s no question,” Capuano said. “You build teams, obviously, from your net out. And I think our defense have done a great job this year. But if Visnovsky and Hamonic are both out, they’re big holes to fill. Who are we kidding?”AdvertisementCapuano added that being tied in the series after four games still gave him confidence in his club, which finished the regular season even with the Capitals at 101 points.“It becomes a two-out-of-three series now and we’ve got to go to Washington and try to win a hockey game,” he said.Game 6 is set to be played Saturday at Nassau Coliseum.Capuano also hinted at possible changes among his forwards. Mikhail Grabovski, out since Feb. 19 with an upper-body injury, may be ready to return. Capuano also mentioned Michael Grabner and Colin McDonald as candidates to play.Left wing Matt Martin, the Islanders’ leader with 114 penalty minutes, said the Islanders could not afford to retaliate and take penalties, giving chances to Washington’s top-ranked power-play unit.“It’s playoffs, you have to be disciplined,” Martin said. “You’re not very valuable if you’re going out there and taking penalties. We want to be physical. We want to finish our checks, but we want to be disciplined and not cost the team.”Tavares insisted his focus would remain on playing another strong road game. The Islanders won the series opener, 4-1, in Washington, then had a two-goal lead midway through Game 2 before losing, 4-3.Histrionics, he said, would not be part of their Game 5 blueprint.“We could have easily hit a lot of guys like that, too,” Tavares said. “We stay within the rules and play the game the right way.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.