By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 23, 2015
Mike Conley and Courtney Lee each scored 18 points, and the Memphis Grizzlies beat the Portland Trail Blazers, 97-82, on Wednesday night to grab the franchise’s first 2-0 lead in a playoff series.The Grizzlies took full advantage of starting the playoffs with home-court advantage for only the second time in their short postseason history. They had only won their playoff opener once before, and that was on the road against San Antonio in 2011.Marc Gasol had 15 points, and Zach Randolph and Beno Udrih added 10 apiece.LaMarcus Aldridge led Portland with 24 points and 14 rebounds, and he also had four blocks with two steals. Damian Lillard added 18 points, but the Trail Blazers lost their first two playoff games for the first time since 2011, when they fell in six games to Dallas.Game 3 is Saturday night in Portland.SPURS TOP CLIPPERS Tim Duncan scored 28 points, Kawhi Leonard added 23 and the defending champion San Antonio Spurs beat the Los Angeles Clippers, 111-107, in overtime in Los Angeles on Wednesday night, tying their Western Conference playoff series at 1-1.AdvertisementThe Spurs lost 10-point leads in the third and fourth quarters, and got into overtime on a pair of free throws by Patty Mills with 8 seconds left in regulation. Duncan scored four straight points in the extra session while playing with five fouls.Mills finished with 18 points off the bench after starting point guard Tony Parker left early with an injury. Boris Diaw had 12.Game 3 is Friday night in San Antonio. (AP)THUNDER FIRE BROOKS Scott Brooks did everything as coach of the Thunder but win a championship. It wasn’t enough.Oklahoma City fired Brooks on Wednesday, parting ways with a former N.B.A. coach of the year who reached three Western Conference finals in four years but failed to make the playoffs this season as injuries helped limit the Thunder to a 45-37 record.Brooks coached the Thunder for seven seasons and was 338-207 (.620), winning coach of the year in 2009-10.AdvertisementIn 2010-11, the team made it to the first of its three conference finals, and Oklahoma City reached the league finals in 2012, losing to the Miami Heat.  (AP)MAVS LOSE RONDO AND PARSONS Point guard Rajon Rondo has played his last game for the Mavericks, Dallas Coach Rick Carlisle said, and forward Chandler Parsons is out for the rest of the playoffs with a right knee injury that requires surgery.The Mavericks trail the Houston Rockets, 2-0, in their Western Conference series. The N.B.A. fined Houston guard Jason Terry $5,000 for violating its anti-flopping rules Tuesday in the third quarter of Game 2. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Grizzlies Defeat Trail Blazers to Extend Series Lead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.