AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressMika Zibanejad gave Mike Hoffman the opening he needed to help keep the Ottawa Senators alive.With Zibanejad screening Montreal goalie Carey Price, Hoffman scored midway through the third period and the host Senators beat the Canadiens, 1-0, on Wednesday night.“More times than not if he sees the puck, he’s probably going to save it,” Hoffman said of Price. “Mika did a great screen for me there, and if he wasn’t there it would probably not go in.”Craig Anderson made 28 saves to help the Senators cut Montreal’s lead to 3-1 in the Eastern Conference first-round series. Game 5 is Friday night in Montreal.“We weren’t going to win four games here tonight,” Hoffman said. “It’s one. We’re moving on to the next one now.”Senators Coach Dave Cameron moved Hoffman from the fourth line to the second unit with Zibanejad and Bobby Ryan during the first period. It paid off in the third when Cody Ceci kept Tom Gilbert’s clearing attempt in at the point and fed Hoffman in the left circle for a quick shot that beat Price at 9 minutes, 5 seconds.“It was a big hockey game,” Montreal Coach Michel Therrien said. “It was very close. The two teams played very hard. They got the last word tonight, but we have no reason to be embarrassed about our performance. I think we worked very hard as well.”For the fourth straight game, the Senators scored first, but this time the Canadiens did not answer. An anemic power play that has gone 1 for 16 in the series has not helped their cause.“They came out with that urgency tonight,” Canadiens forward Max Pacioretty said. “They were the better team in the third period tonight and you have to give them credit.”Price stopped 31 shots for the Canadiens.RANGERS 2, PENGUINS 1 Kevin Hayes scored at 3 minutes 14 seconds of overtime to give the Rangers a victory in Pittsburgh in Game 4 of the Eastern Conference first-round series.The Rangers lead the series, 3-1, heading back to Madison Squre Garden for Game 5 on Friday night.In overtime, Martin St. Louis started a goal-mouth scramble when he threw the puck in front on a wraparound attempt. The puck pinballed to Carl Hagelin and went across the crease for Hayes to flip it past the fallen goalie Marc-Andre Fleury. The point was Hayes’s first in the postseason.The Rangers’ Derick Brassard tied the score at 1-1 with 2:45 left in the second period with his third goal of the series. Patric Hornqvist opened the scoring at 2:22 of the first period.Fleury and the Rangers’ Henrik Lundqvist each made 22 saves.The Penguins are a loss away from elimination after dropping consecutive home playoff games to the Rangers, the N.H.L.’s best regular-season road team. The Rangers have won 12 of their last 13 on the road, allowing 15 goals.Nine of the last 11 playoff games between the teams have been decided by two or fewer goals, including four one-goal games in this series.Hornqvist nearly ended it in the final minute of regulation, but Lundqvist denied him with a sliding save and Dan Girardi swept the rebound away from a gaping net.DUCKS 5, JETS 2 Ryan Kesler scored twice in the third period on Wednesday, and the Ducks won at Winnipeg to sweep the Western Conference first-round series.Andrew Cogliano, Emerson Etem and Sami Vatanen also scored, and Frederik Andersen made 25 saves for Anaheim. The Ducks are the first team to advance to the second round.Anaheim will face Calgary or Vancouver in the second round. Calgary leads that series, 3-1.BLUES 6, WILD 1 Vladimir Tarasenko scored twice, and the revived Blues sent Wild goalie Devan Dubnyk to an early exit and thoroughly dominated Minnesota to even the Western Conference quarterfinal series, 2-2, in St. Paul.Game 5 is Friday night in St. Louis.Advertisement