AdvertisementSupported byHawks 96, Nets 91By Andrew KehATLANTA — With just over 10 seconds remaining on the game clock, Deron Williams had an opportunity to salvage yet another untidy individual performance, to silence for just a moment all the talk that his game has become too passive.The Nets were down by 2 points to the Atlanta Hawks, who elected to chase Williams off the 3-point line when the ball reached him in the left corner. So Williams eluded a closing defender with a fake, took a quick left-handed dribble to the baseline and rose up from 16 feet away, all alone, to shoot.The sellout crowd at Philips Arena collectively exhaled as the ball skipped off the front of the rim, clanged off the back of it and caromed toward the floor. The Nets slunk off the court soon thereafter.The Nets have a tough road ahead after falling, 96-91, to the Hawks at Philips Arena and into a 2-0 hole in their first-round series. The Nets will have two days of practice to right their wrongs before Game 3 on Saturday afternoon at Barclays Center.“I’m sure tonight I’ll think about it a lot — not just the shot, just the game in general,” said Williams, who scored just 2 points, while shooting 1 for 7 from the field, to go with 10 rebounds and 8 assists. “I had a lot of chances, felt like I could have played better. But we’ve got two more at home now that we’ve got to go get.”The Hawks and their fans had spent two days this week fretting about Paul Millsap’s aching right shoulder and Al Horford’s sore right pinkie finger. But in a rough and ragged game, the hobbled All-Stars came through: Millsap finished with a team-high 19 points, and Horford had 14 points and 13 rebounds. “They’re winnable games for us, if we set the tone early and come out and do what we’re supposed to do,” Millsap said of the coming games.As the teams arrived for Game 2, multiple outlets were reporting that the billionaire Antony Ressler and a group of investors had reached an agreement to buy the Hawks and the arena. The organization officially announced the sale, which needs to be approved by the N.B.A. board of governors, during the first half. Coach Mike Budenholzer stressed before the game that it would not be a distraction to his team. Jarrett Jack led the Nets with 23 points. He scored 16 in the first half, helping the Nets erase a 12-point deficit in the first quarter. There were six lead changes before the end of the third quarter, which ended with the Hawks up, 75-67. There were none in the fourth.The Nets received a lift midway through the first quarter when Mirza Teletovic entered as the first substitute off the bench. Teletovic had last played on Jan. 22. That night, he pulled himself out of a game while feeling short of breath. It was later found that he had bilateral pulmonary embolus, a formation of blood clots in the lungs, and the team said that he would miss the rest of the year. In March, Teletovic said he hoped to return to full-speed in July. He played 3 minutes 50 seconds and missed two field-goal attempts.Advertisement