By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 22, 2015
Jeff Samardzija threw six shutout innings for the Chicago White Sox to defeat Corey Kluber and the visiting Cleveland Indians, 6-0, on Wednesday.Samardzija, facing the Indians for the first time, allowed six hits, walked two and struck out three. Kluber, last year’s American League Cy Young Award winner, gave up a career-high 13 hits and six earned runs.BLUE JAYS 4, ORIOLES 2 The rookie Devon Travis had three hits, including a go-ahead home run that sent host Toronto past Baltimore. Aaron Sanchez issued seven walks in five and a third innings, but the Blue Jays still posted back-to-back home wins for the first time this season.CARDINALS 7, NATIONALS 5 Kolten Wong homered and drove in the tiebreaking run with a double in the eighth inning to lift St. Louis to a victory at Washington. Wong finished 3 for 4 with three R.B.I.AdvertisementRAYS 7, RED SOX 5 Jake Elmore homered; Brandon Guyer had a two-run, pinch-hit single in a four-run sixth inning; and host Tampa Bay rallied from a four-run deficit to beat Boston. Brad Boxberger struck out all three batters he faced in the seventh to help Tampa Bay end a four-game losing streak. Steve Geltz pitched the ninth for his first career save.AdvertisementPIRATES 4, CUBS 3 Vance Worley got through five and two-thirds shaky innings for his second straight win as host Pittsburgh held off Chicago. Worley allowed six hits and an unearned run and walked five. He also struck five in a 106-pitch outing. Tony Watson got the final six outs for his first save of the season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MARLINS 6, PHILLIES 1 Adeiny Hechavarria had two hits and scored the go-ahead run as Miami took advantage of host Philadelphia’s sloppy play to end a five-game skid. The Marlins scored five unearned runs.REDS 2, BREWERS 1 Billy Hamilton scored on a two-out wild pitch in the ninth inning, and visiting Cincinnati handed Milwaukee its seventh straight loss. The Brewers (2-13) have the worst record in the majors.TWINS 3, ROYALS 0 Mike Pelfrey pitched seven scoreless innings to pick up his first win since 2013 as Minnesota defeated host Kansas City. Pelfrey gave up five singles, walked two, hit two batters and struck out four. Royals starter Jeremy Guthrie gave up all three runs in the first inning.ROCKIES 5, PADRES 4 Pinch-hitter Daniel Descalso delivered an R.B.I. single in the ninth after Corey Dickerson tied the game in the eighth with his second solo homer of the night, and host Colorado ended a five-game skid with a win over San Diego.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Samardzija’s Gem Lifts the White Sox.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.