By BILLY WITZAPRIL 22, 2015
DETROIT —  Wednesday was a miserable night for baseball — 38 degrees and snow flurries. Most players wore balaclavas under their caps and bundled up in the dugout. Pitchers warming up in the bullpen may have been a loose interpretation.The pace was as dreary as the conditions. It took 52 minutes, and 87 pitches, to complete the first inning, which included six walks and a hit batsman, and 3 hours 35 minutes to finish the game. Balls, as cold and hard as a hockey puck, popped in and out of gloves all night.At the end, with only a few hundred fans left in the stadium, the Yankees beat the Tigers, 13-4, pushing over .500 for the first time. But it would be hard to call anyone a winner.Except perhaps Joe Espada, the Yankees’ third-base coach, who was able to return home — to Miami — for the birth of his daughter.AdvertisementHis replacement, Rob Thomson, who had moved from third base to bench coach, assumed Espada’s place and was put to work immediately.AdvertisementGregorio Petit delivered a bases-loaded double that keyed a six-run first inning, and the Yankees kept scoring.After Petit’s hit, he was intentionally walked by Tigers starter David Price the next time up — the first time that has happened to him. “I was smiling in my head,” Petit said. “I can’t lie.”The Yankees added two in the second, two in the fourth and three more in the seventh on a home run by Mark Teixeira.Chris Young, who has been the Yankees’ hottest hitter, was not cooled off. He had three more hits, raising his team-leading average to .368.When Chase Headley was at bat with the bases loaded in the first, the snow began to fall in flurries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“After the second pitch, it kind of opened up a little bit and I stepped out of the box,” Headley said. “Obviously, it’s a good pitcher, you’re down 0-2 and you can’t see. I was like: ‘You know what? What are you going to do? Just enjoy it.’ There’s no pressure. You’re expected to punch out in that situation.”Headley fouled off three pitches, worked the count to 2-2 and lined a single to left to put the Yankees ahead, 2-0.“You can talk about the weather and how long it is, and when you lose, that’s no fun,” Teixeira said. “It wasn’t pleasant, but we can laugh about it now.”AdvertisementAn odd element to the Yankees’ early outburst was that it occurred against Price, once their nemesis and one of baseball’s best pitchers with Tampa Bay until the Tigers acquired him last summer.When Price last faced the Yankees, on Aug. 27, he was chased in the third inning when he allowed eight consecutive hits. The Yankees picked up right where they left off, with five hits. Over the two games, 17 of 19 batters reached safely against Price.It might have been a breezy night for Adam Warren, who is making the transition from valuable setup man to starter. But he struggled to find the plate. He walked four of the first five batters and nearly did not make it through the inning. Esmil Rogers was throwing in the bullpen when Warren retired Jose Iglesias on a pop-up. After allowing the four runs, Warren settled in and pitched into the sixth.It was a laborious night for other Yankees as well. Didi Gregorius committed a fielding error — snapping the Yankees’ errorless streak at five games — and Teixeira had a ball pop out of his glove as he attempted an over-the-shoulder catch. Jacoby Ellsbury was hit in the chest by a pitch, and Alex Rodriguez had to scramble out of the on-deck circle to keep from getting hit by Young’s foul ball.At the start of the game, Manager Joe Girardi encouraged his players to wear balaclavas.“That’s one of the three or four coldest games I’ve ever played in,” Teixeira said. “I’ve never worn one of those things, but it helped.”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: A Snowy Trudge Yields a Big Win for the Yanks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.