AdvertisementSupported byMets 3, Braves 2By David WaldsteinWhen Curtis Granderson drew a walk to lead off the eighth inning at Citi Field on Wednesday, the reaction from his teammates demonstrated the confidence that this team, the one with the best record in baseball, is starting to exude.It was as if they knew they were about to take the lead and win another game.“You should have heard the roar in the dugout,” Manager Terry Collins said. “It was as if he had hit a double.”What followed was emblematic of the Mets over the first 15 games of the season. Juan Lagares, who earlier made a spectacular catch in the outfield, perfectly executed a hit-and-run to push Granderson to third, and Lucas Duda brought Granderson home with an opposite-field single to break a tie score.With that, and a perfect ninth inning by closer Jeurys Familia, the Mets beat the Atlanta Braves, 3-2, to extend their winning streak to 10 games. Both the Detroit Tigers and the Kansas City Royals lost Wednesday, so the Mets have the best record in baseball at 12-3, which matches the 1986 World Series champions for the best start by a Mets team after 15 games.Collins said he knew before the season that the Mets were improved, but he never expected this kind of a start. Who did? Collins had hoped the team would win six or seven games on this homestand, but going into Thursday afternoon’s game, the 2015 Mets have a chance to become the first team in franchise history to sweep a 10-game homestand.“I don’t have any words for it,” Collins said. “I’ve had some good teams, with good players. But I’ve never been on a team where each and every guy wants to do his part.”The last time the Mets won 10 in a row was in July 2008, during their final season at Shea Stadium, and this year’s team has already set a record for most consecutive wins on one homestand with nine. The 2015 Mets also extended their franchise record by winning the first nine home games of the season. Records are falling everywhere.The Mets did not have much success against Braves starter Eric Stults, but when Atlanta turned to its bullpen in the seventh, the Mets struck decisively. Wilmer Flores greeted relief pitcher Cody Martin by hitting an 0-1 slider over the left-field wall for his third home run, making the score 2-2. He also drove in the Mets’ first run in the second inning.Atlanta led, 2-1, in the seventh and threatened to add to that when Jace Peterson, the second baseman, hit a deep drive to center field. Lagares turned his back to the plate and started to run as hard as he could. The ball seemed headed over Lagares’s head, but at the last instant he reached back to his left and caught the ball over his head, almost Willie Mays style.“I really don’t know how I made that catch,” he said. “It was really hard.”Dillon Gee had his best start of the young season, allowing only two runs and eight hits in seven innings, but he did not figure in the decision. After his last outing he met with Collins to unburden himself of some frustration.“I’ve bottled things up my entire life,” he said. “It can wear on you, as tough as I try to be.”INSIDE PITCHMATT HARVEY has mild a left-ankle sprain but is expected to pitch Saturday against the Yankees, the Mets announced. Harvey, who was not limping, was examined by a team physician on Wednesday. Terry Collins said Harvey twisted the ankle shagging fly balls during batting practice in spring training and has been pitching through the injury for a month. ... ANTHONY RECKER has a bone spur in the back of his elbow but will continue to play, the team said. He may have it removed after the season. ... The Mets acquired the minor league catcher DAN ROHLFING from the Minnesota Twins for cash and sent him to Class AAA Las Vegas.Advertisement