By CHRIS ADAMSKIAPRIL 22, 2015
PITTSBURGH —  Looking for his first career playoff goal, the rookie Kevin Hayes missed the net on an excellent scoring chance that would have tied the game midway through the second period. Given another opportunity, Hayes came through — sending the Rangers to the brink of the Eastern Conference semifinals.Hayes scored 3 minutes 14 seconds into overtime to give the Rangers a 2-1 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins on Wednesday and a three-games-to-one series lead. Hayes flipped a loose puck up into the net over a sprawling Marc-Andre Fleury after Martin St. Louis began the sequence by throwing the puck into the slot and Carl Hagelin’s attempt was stopped.Pittsburgh could not clear the puck, and with Fleury out of position and without his stick, Hayes converted his first career playoff goal.“Two of our guys worked hard and got the puck to the net and it just kind of ended up on my stick,” said Hayes, a 22-year-old out of Boston College. “I just tapped it in.”AdvertisementThe Rangers have a chance to close out the first-round series Friday at Madison Square Garden. They will try to avoid a reversal of last season, when the Penguins blew a three-games-to-one, second-round lead over the Rangers.AdvertisementHenrik Lundqvist made 22 saves and Derick Brassard continued his torturing of the Penguins with his third goal of the series.Keeping in step with the series trend, the game was the third that ended 2-1 — all won by the Rangers.“If you look at the way the whole series has gone, it’s a fine line, a 1 or 2 percent difference,” Pittsburgh Coach Mike Johnston said. “We’re playing the right way. Yeah, I know the results haven’t swung in our favor, 2-1, but they will.”With the desperate Penguins playing in what was a virtual must-win game, the home team dominated early. Pittsburgh took the lead 2:22 in. Patric Hornqvist scored for the second consecutive game by deflecting a puck thrown to the net by Ben Lovejoy from the point. It marked the first time that Pittsburgh scored first, and the Penguins carried that momentum throughout the first period and a half.“We’d talked about how they were going to come at us hard,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “And they did.”The Penguins had a 8-2 edge in shots on goal during the first period; the Rangers did not register a shot over the first 11:35 and did not get their fourth shot until more than 28 minutes had elapsed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The thing we talked about is we didn’t get hurt too bad after the first, fortunately,” said Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain. “They had the pace and they had the shots and to be only be down, 1-0, we just talked about resetting ourselves and getting back to moving our feet.”It began to show around the time of Hayes’s great chance. He corralled the puck while alone in the low slot after a Penguins turnover — but his shot missed wide. Still, it seemed to spark a shift in momentum, as the Rangers outshot the Penguins, 11-4, the remainder of the period.AdvertisementBrassard’s goal was his 12th in 21 games against the Penguins since joining the Rangers. At 17:15 of the second period, he stuffed in a loose puck just inside the right-wing post, outmuscling a desperate attempt by defenseman Paul Martin to keep it from crossing the goal line. Fleury could not hold his outstretched pad down flush against the post after he had stopped Brassard’s initial try at converting a Rick Nash feed from the left-wing corner across the low slot.“I thought we were pretty lucky to come out with that win,” Brassard said. “We’re going to take it, but we’re not happy right now, and we just feel lucky to beat Pittsburgh with two goals.”The Rangers continued to contain the Penguins’ pair of former Hart Trophy winners, Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin. They combined for no points and just three shots on goal.“It could have gone either way, but we had some guys that made some big plays in the end,” Lundqvist said. “It feels really good, obviously.”A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Once Again, Rangers Edge the Penguins.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.