By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 22, 2015
CHICAGO —  The home locker room at United Center was beginning to clear out late Monday night, but Joakim Noah was waiting around.His presence had been requested for a postgame news conference, and Noah was ready to go, but there was a problem: The teammate who was supposed to accompany him was still decompressing from the Bulls’ victory over the Milwaukee Bucks in Game 2 of their first-round playoff series.“Hey, Jimbo,” Noah said quietly as he rolled by Jimmy Butler’s locker, “just tell me when you’re ready.”Butler was operating on his own schedule after steering the Bulls to a two-games-to-none lead in a physical, foul-filled series that will resume Thursday night in Milwaukee. He scored and defended, exuding a late-game confidence that left the Bucks helpless.Advertisement“He got it going there,” Bucks Coach Jason Kidd said, “and we couldn’t slow him down.”The game provided additional evidence of Butler’s growth into one of the league’s premier wings and of the immutable fact that he will be paid handsomely this summer in free agency. At 25, and just four seasons into his professional career, Butler possesses a rare blend of skills, and it was significant that the Bulls, with no shortage of stars, basically deferred to him late.AdvertisementNoah and Derrick Rose implored him to keep shooting, Butler said. So he listened and stayed assertive, scoring 14 of his 31 points in the fourth quarter of a 91-82 win.“I was feeling it a little bit,” Butler said, “so I just put the ball in the basket.”He made it all sound so simple, so easy. But it was neither simple nor easy, and he immediately saw room for improvement, citing his 8-of-14 effort from the free throw line.“Shame on me,” he said.An 83.4 percent shooter from the line during the regular season, Butler sounded mystified by his misses. He shoots enough free throws in practice, he said, to know that he ought to make them in games. He made the same argument about his early struggles from the 3-point arc, where he was errant on all six of his attempts through the first three quarters.But he was confident enough to keep shooting. He seemed to know that the law of averages would work out, and most of his attempts were coming within the framework of the offense. He got himself going with an athletic drive and dunk — “He was really feeling himself after that,” Noah said — and made all three of his 3-point attempts in the fourth.“Take the shots that the defense gives you, and they’ll eventually fall,” Butler said, adding, “They’re all rhythm shots for me.”Butler, who averaged 20 points, 5.8 rebounds and 3.3 assists in the regular season while leading the N.B.A. in minutes played per game (38.7), made those statements without a trace of arrogance — they were simply facts — and they hinted at the roots of his success, his belief that hard work has formed the foundation for everything he has achieved in recent seasons. He has made the calculations, crunching the numbers based on the amount of time he has spent in the gym.“He’s as determined to be great as any player I’ve ever been around,” said Mike Marquis, who coached Butler for one season at Tyler Junior College in Tyler, Tex. “He spends all of his waking hours concentrating on being the best he can be. That’s the way he was when he was here, just going and going and going.”AdvertisementMarquis, who watched Monday’s game on a big-screen television in his living room (as he does most of Butler’s games), described him as a “student of the drill” when he was at Tyler. Butler would study the drill, work at the drill and then be great at the drill. He delighted in drills. Nobody loved them more, Marquis said.“His ability to go 100 percent in the drill was something that separated him,” Marquis said in a telephone interview. “A lot of guys will get the drill, but they only go 50 percent. He was always going 100 percent.”At Tyler, players are taught to jab step with both feet, and Butler honed the skill for weeks and weeks. It was a subtle bit of perimeter-oriented ambidexterity, but Butler anticipated that it would be a way for him to create separation from defenders.Marquis saw it in action in the fourth quarter against the Bucks, when Butler jabbed at Giannis Antetokounmpo, his impossibly long-limbed defender, forcing him to retreat for a half-beat before Butler rose over him and sank a 3-pointer.“I kind of smiled,” Marquis said, “because I’ve seen him work a whole lot on that stuff in our gym.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Butler returns to Tyler whenever his schedule permits, Marquis said, and he was able to attend the team’s regional championship game in March. (The Bulls had a game against the San Antonio Spurs the next day.) Butler typically brings his practice gear with him when he visits.“He comes in and has his own workout before he does anything with the kids here,” Marquis said. “He’ll come back and do a second one later in the day.”In many ways, Butler is the perfect student for Bulls Coach Tom Thibodeau — a living, breathing reflection of Thibodeau’s basketball philosophy. After Monday’s game, Thibodeau went item by item through a list of what he believes matters most in the postseason.“How hard have you worked?” Thibodeau said. “How much discipline do you have? How’s your conditioning? Do you know how to function well within the group?”If preparation is paramount, Butler and the Bulls should be in good shape.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: For a Student of the Drill, Hard Work Pays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.