By KEN BELSONAPRIL 22, 2015
The N.F.L. on Wednesday suspended Greg Hardy of the Dallas Cowboys for 10 games for his role in a domestic-violence case, the stiffest penalty handed out under the league’s new and stronger personal-conduct policy.Hardy, a defensive end who previously played for the Carolina Panthers, was convicted in North Carolina of domestic abuse last year. The decision was overturned on appeal because his former girlfriend Nicole Holder refused to testify against him. But in a two-month investigation, the N.F.L. found that Hardy had used physical force against Holder in at least four instances.“The net effect of these acts was that Ms. Holder was severely traumatized and sustained a range of injuries, including bruises and scratches on her neck, shoulders, upper chest, back, arms and feet,” Commissioner Roger Goodell wrote to Hardy. “The use of physical force under the circumstances present here, against a woman substantially smaller than you, and in the presence of powerful, military-style assault weapons, constitutes a significant act of violence in violation of the personal-conduct policy.”Hardy was placed on paid leave last season after his conviction. Dallas signed Hardy in March knowing that he could be penalized.AdvertisementAt league meetings last month, Cowboys Coach Jason Garrett was asked why his team had signed Hardy. Garrett said that the Cowboys had done their due diligence and that they had structured his contract to reduce the team’s exposure if he were suspended.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones, said in a statement: “Our organization understands the very serious nature of this matter. We will use our resources — work closely with Greg and with the league — to ensure a positive outcome.”AdvertisementHardy will be able to participate in the team’s off-season program and during the preseason.Hardy can appeal his suspension within three days.Players have had a poor record of winning those appeals, in part because they are often heard by Harold Henderson, a league-appointed arbitrator. One exception came this year when a federal judge ruled that Henderson misapplied the league’s personal conduct policy and vacated the suspension of Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson.Hardy’s one-year contract is for $13 million, but most of that is in the form of incentives and bonuses.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Hardy Barred for 10 Games in Abuse Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.