AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan BarryAn exclamation point of a strikeout ended a playoff series in Los Angeles on Thursday night, prompting obligatory rituals of baseball celebration. Here were the victorious Mets, saying nice things about the vanquished Dodgers, dousing one another in champagne, rejoicing in the continued consequence of their October.Perhaps lost in all the expended carbonation, though, was what would come next. The Mets are now facing the Chicago Cubs in a best-of-seven series for the National League pennant and admission to the World Series. That is, New York versus Chicago, a baseball rivalry that goes back — way, way back.How far back? Back before you were born. Back before there was such a lovably vexing organization called the New York Mets.Back when life seemed bathed in sepia tones. And just as Daniel Murphy of the Mets extended his team’s season Thursday with an extraordinary base-running moment leading to a vital run — going from first to third on a walk while Dodgers infielders fell collectively into some sort of California trance — so, too, did a singular base-running event figure into a long-ago Chicago-New York matchup, a makeup game that served as a playoff.The runner was Merkle. Fred Merkle. Also known, unfortunately, as Bonehead Merkle. Ring a bell?Clear your head of 1969, when the upstart Mets sneaked up on the fat and comfortable first-place Cubs to win the division, the pennant and the World Series. Forget the Knicks and the Bulls, the Giants and the Bears, the Big Apple and the City of Broad Shoulders — and, in the name of all that is holy, the debate over thin-crust and deep-dish pizza.Think of late September 1908.The baseball New York Giants, who, along with the Brooklyn Dodgers, are the spiritual ancestors of the Mets, were tied for first place with the Cubs, as well as tied at 1-1 in a game at the Polo Grounds in Upper Manhattan. Their manager was hard-nosed John McGraw, also known as Muggsy.With two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning, Merkle, all of 19 and playing only because the Giants’ regular first baseman was injured, singled to send a teammate to third. Then shortstop Al Bridwell lined a ball into center field to win the all-important game.Or so it seemed.Seeing a wave of Giants fans undulating across the field, Merkle turned and hustled toward the dugout without touching second base. But according to accounts, Chicago second baseman Johnny Evers took note, tracked down the ball in the crowd — it might in fact have been a different ball — and tagged second base. A forceout, the umpires ruled, in a decision that lives in baseball infamy.“The game should have been won for the New York club had it not been for the reckless, careless, inexcusable blunder of one of its players, Merkle,” Harry Pulliam, the National League president, wrote in upholding the call. In case his feelings were not clear enough, he added, “We can therefore come to no other conclusion than that the New York club lost a well-earned victory as the result of a stupid play of one of its members.”Pulliam died several months later of a self-inflicted gunshot to the head. Poor Merkle, who died in 1956, endured abuse for the rest of his life, ridiculed, vilified, forever known as Bonehead. There’s even a bar in Chicago named for him, in cheeky honor.“Anyway, he’s gone now,” Bridwell later told Lawrence S. Ritter, the author of “The Glory of Their Times.” “The newspapers crucified him. The fans ragged him unmercifully all the rest of his life. But now his worries are over. The only thing I lost out of it was a base hit.”The game ended in a tie. The Giants blew several chances to secure the pennant, forcing a one-game makeup with the Cubs at the end of the regular season — the last time that New York and Chicago baseball teams met with the winner heading to the World Series. On Oct. 8, 1908, the Giants and the city assigned phalanxes of police officers and watchmen to Coogan’s Bluff, but they could not control the swell of humanity descending upon the Polo Grounds.Guards had spent a good part of the previous night going through the stands, extracting boys hiding under seats — but this was like raking a few leaves in an autumnal Central Park.As The New York Times reported, hordes descended from a nearby elevated train with faint hopes of getting even near the ballpark: “These flocked upon the tracks, seeking points of vantage, even daring the third rail. One man was killed by falling from the structure, which was the only fatality of the day. His vacant place was quickly filled.”The Giants and their fans expected this game to be a mere pause on their way to the World Series, given that they were playing at home and had Christy Mathewson, every boy’s idol, on the mound. But Chicago scored four runs against Mathewson in the third inning, and the Cubs’ pitcher, Mordecai Brown, also known as Three Finger Brown, vexed the Giants with a curveball that spun crazily from a hand damaged by a boyhood farming accident.Chicago 4, New York 2, in a game that lasted 1 hour 40 minutes.Enraged Giants fans were waiting to hurl more than insults at the Cubs as the winning team hurried off the field. Someone bruised a Cubs pitcher with a thrown bottle. Another bottle struck the team’s player-manager, Frank Chance, in the neck, tearing cartilage and leaving a bruise.A short while later, with the police working hard to control the crowds, the Cubs left the New York ballpark in taxis. Days later, they beat the Tigers to win the World Series, with every expectation of more championships that, so far, have never come.Now, 107 Octobers later, the Cubs are returning to New York to play a team called the Mets, whose players wear the orange interlocking NY that evokes giants named McGraw, and Mathewson, and, yes, Merkle.This goes back. Way back.Advertisement