AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherIn case you missed the three-hour (!) television special that revealed next season’s N.F.L. schedule, here is a look at five games that are particularly intriguing. (Yes, two involve the Buffalo Bills.)Sept. 13, 4:25 p.m. EasternTennessee Titans at Tampa Bay BuccaneersWhat a way to start the season, with a matchup of the two worst teams from last year, both 2-14. The Buccaneers and the Titans do possess the top two draft picks: Could this game be the first professional showdown between Jameis Winston and Marcus Mariota? Remember the Rose Bowl score: Mariota 59, Winston 20.Alternatively, it could be the first showdown between Winston and, say, defensive tackle Leonard Williams. Not quite as compelling.Nov. 12, 8:25 p.m.Buffalo Bills at JetsIn Thursday night action, Coach Rex Ryan returns to face the team that fired him after six seasons. Ryan is the rare coach who may be walking into a better situation than the one he was fired from. The Bills were a respectable 9-7 last season before Coach Doug Marrone quit under murky circumstances.By contrast, Ryan left the Jets and his successor, Todd Bowles, deep in rebuilding mode after a 4-12 season with Geno Smith as the starting quarterback.If the Bills are to break the league-longest streak of 15 seasons without a playoff appearance, this is the kind of game they must win.Nov. 26, 8:30 p.m.Chicago Bears at Green Bay PackersGame 3 of the Thanksgiving triple-header may be the most appealing, as Brett Favre’s No. 4 jersey will be retired. The Packers have not hosted a game on Thanksgiving since 1923, a 19-0 victory over the Hammond (Ind.) Pros at long-forgotten Bellevue Park.It should be an emotional night in Green Bay, but Chicago fans may not be so glad to see Favre there. As a Packer, Favre was 22-10 against the Bears.Nov. 29, 8:30 p.m.New England Patriots at Denver BroncosWho is the greatest modern quarterback? Peyton Manning, with his record-breaking passing numbers, or Tom Brady, with his four Super Bowl rings? The debate may go on as long as Wilt Chamberlain versus Bill Russell, and this game will give partisans one more chance to make their cases.Will it be the final meeting between these two? Despite speculation, Manning has not officially said that he will retire after this season, but at 39, he cannot have too many more left in him.Dec. 13, 1 p.m.Buffalo Bills at Philadelphia EaglesLeSean McCoy returns to Philadelphia after the Eagles traded him away. Over six seasons in Philly, McCoy missed just six games and ran for 1,000 yards four times. He was a beloved figure in Philadelphia, generally known to sportscasters and fans alike by his nickname, Shady.Chip Kelly’s dramatic remake of the team this off-season has shaken Philadelphia fans, though many are still giving him the benefit of the doubt. McCoy will certainly be cheered when he returns. Will the fans be cheering their own team? It all depends on how the new-look team is faring after the first 13 games.Advertisement