By ROB HUGHESAPRIL 22, 2015
LONDON — After the stadium full of 70,000 people finally went quiet following one of the most rousing comebacks in Champions League history, one player spoke for all: “There’s been talk about us being down to the bare bones,” said Thomas Müller, “but they’re very good bones.”Good bones, fit minds and big hearts.The Bayern Munich team that lost 3-1 in Portugal less than a week before was virtually the same one that routed Porto 6-1 in Germany on Tuesday. It was pulsating and pulverizing. It was the mighty against the meek. And when Bayern ran in five goals in a 25-minute span in the first half, it was a devastating example of a European giant that can spend far more than any ordinary club.The best of those goals combined the play from two World Cup winners, Müller and his German captain, Philipp Lahm, but it was finished off by Robert Lewandowski, the Polish striker who could play for any club of his choice. Indeed, Bayern had courted Lewandowski ever since the Pole devastated Real Madrid with a hat trick for Borussia Dortmund two years ago.Germany’s national team actually plays without a center forward because it has no one with his physical presence or timing in and around the goalmouth. Lewandowski scored twice on Tuesday. Few players in the world today could have scored the second goal, such was the speed and clinical aim of his shot.AdvertisementHis first goal, however, captured the team essence of Bayern. It began with the captain, Lahm. “The team is on fire,” Lahm had pledged before the contest. “The team wants it, and the team is fit.”AdvertisementWith that rallying call, Lahm had set the template for the comeback performance. Yes, the team was fit, though it still was depleted. Among the injured bystanders were Franck Ribéry and Arjen Robben, the wingers who would normally be certain starters for Munich.So, your wingers are hurt and in the stands? Fine, Lahm will do their job.The German, who retired from the national team after winning the World Cup, had been among the wounded for the first part of the season. He is fit enough now and has converted himself from a defender to a man who performs wherever the team needs him.Running down the right flank Tuesday, he stretched to reach the ball and instantly crossed it toward the penalty area. Müller met it, but rather than shoot, he cushioned the ball deftly and knowingly into the path of Lewandowski, whose header was simplicity personified.That was the third goal of the night, following headers by Thiago Alcântara and Jérôme Boateng. And at that point, midway through the first half, the game was up for Porto, though the scoring was only half done by Munich.In the audience, Bayern fans had created a mosaic that read “Pack ma’s!”It meant, essentially: “Let’s do this.”Their team was as good as those words. Porto, the opponent that dared to create doubts about Bayern in the first game last week, was without two experienced players lost to suspension. And to clubs such as Porto, which sells its players year after year to the European giants, the loss of two key men hinders the team even more than Bayern’s losing half a team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Porto Coach Julen Lopetegui, a former goalkeeper who once shared the locker rooms with Bayern Coach Pep Guardiola, sensed that the 3-1 win a week ago would stir a reaction. But as the teams lined up in the Allianz Arena, the apprehension on the Porto faces and the resolve on the German ones was clear to see.Guardiola had said beforehand that Porto had fresher legs, but big games are won not by the legs, but by the head. Lopetegui said after the rout in Munich that in terms of experience Bayern had 300 to 400 times as much on its side.AdvertisementHe meant big-match, winner-takes-all experience. And for all the worn hamstrings and the knee and hip ailments that caused the resignation after the first leg of Bayern’s veteran club doctor, Munich had so much in reserve, so much in the heads, that it was able to blow away the naïve and ultimately afraid Portuguese.Romance at this level of soccer is not dead, but it appears barely sustainable when the same two sets of players are put into different stadiums.“Even the best script writer wasn’t that good,” commented Xabi Alonso, the Spaniard who scored Bayern’s final goal with an immaculate dipping free kick.And Xabi, brought to Munich by Guardiola, is the embodiment of what the Porto coach meant by the experience. Xabi had played for years in England with Liverpool and years in La Liga for Real Madrid and has gold medals from the World Cup and the Champions League already in his locker.He is older now, but still can lend that priceless thing called experience. If Guardiola could add anything to a Bayern Munich team that was the champion of both Germany and Europe when he inherited it, it was his intensity and desire to repeat as champion.As Guardiola drove them on from the sideline, yanking aside Müller and Lahm to demand that there be no letting up even when the team was five goals ahead, we saw a coach for whom enough is never enough. Demanding more from the Germans is some tour de force.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.