AdvertisementSupported byBy Jim LuttrellCommissioner Rob Manfred on Thursday discussed topics like Pete Rose, performance-enhancing drugs, metal detectors and foul-mouthed managers in a room full of sports editors and reporters.The Associated Press Sports Editors group meets annually with the commissioners of the major sports leagues, as well as Nascar, the N.C.A.A. and other organizations. Manfred had watched his predecessor, Bud Selig, work the room with his professorial style for years, but this was his first time to run the 90-minute-long gantlet.In the middle of the session, Manfred faced a question that caused some relaxed laughter and brought him some fond memories, and, possibly, a small amount of embarrassment.“The Syracuse Post-Standard?” Manfred, a native of Rome, N.Y., who grew up in and attended college in the region, responded when a journalist identified himself. “The Syracuse Post-Standard. How about that?” he laughed and appeared to be transported to younger days.The reporter asked Manfred whether there was a moment from his time in Central New York that he can look back on as something that led him to his current position.“I was part of a Little League perfect game,” said Manfred, adding that he was probably 10 or 11 at the time. “I played shortstop and my brother played third. Our team wasn’t the greatest, but we had one great pitcher.”Manfred said the team was sponsored by a mechanics union. “This labor and baseball thing goes back a long way for me,” he said.He said he could not remember how many balls the Manfred-led side of the infield handled in that game, but he did remember catching a pop-up for the last out. “And people were a little worried,” he said. “I had knocked out my front teeth before the game and was a little loopy.”Knocked out his teeth?“That was back in the day when kids rode their bikes to their Little League games,” said Manfred, chuckling at his embarrassment.Manfred had draped his spikes on the bike as he pedaled, and one of them became wedged in the front spokes, and he “went over the handlebars,” he said.“If you look at them now,” he said, “my front teeth ain’t that good. Even the fake ones.”The crowd guessed that Manfred is not allowed to ride his bike to games any more.Advertisement