AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensThe Rangers lamented their inability to get in the face of Pittsburgh goalie Marc-Andre Fleury after splitting the first two games against the Penguins at Madison Square Garden.But when the first-round series shifted to Pittsburgh, the Rangers found ways to score goals in playofflike fashion, resulting in 2-1 victories in Games 3 and 4. Three of their four goals were generated near Fleury’s cage. In Game 4 on Wednesday, both Derick Brassard’s game-tying goal and Kevin Hayes’s game-winner in overtime came off net-mouth scrums. “Both goals we scored were on the doorstep due to jamming and getting in the paint,” said Chris Kreider, whose eventual winning goal in Game 3 came at the side of Fleury’s net after Marc Staal’s shot hit the backboard.“The kind of goals that we were able to score, that’s definitely something we talk about too when we talk about getting to the net; those second- and third-chance opportunities,” Kreider said.After a lackluster 30 minutes in Game 4, in which the Rangers struggled to put crisp passes together, Brassard and Hayes both scored. Brassard was initially stopped by Fleury, but put the rebound past him to tie the game, 1-1, with 2 minutes 45 seconds remaining in the second period. “We didn’t really generate that much offensively,” said Brassard, who has scored three goals in the series, which the Rangers lead by three games to one. “I don’t think we were clicking that much. We just kept it simple and got some greasy goals.”Hayes overcame a trip out of the face-off circle, parked himself in front of Fleury to set a screen, then alertly lifted the puck past a prone Fleury into the vacant net after Fleury had stopped Carl Hagelin. “It’s goals in the trenches,” said Rick Nash, who scored his lone goal on a second-chance opportunity with 5.1 seconds left in Game 2. “There’s no tick-tack-toe plays. Both teams are playing really tight defensively, and both goalies are playing really well.”The Rangers have used their size advantage to get to the low slot after struggling to do so in the first two games. Derek Stepan said before Game 2 that the Rangers needed to do a better job of taking away Fleury’s vision, and Kreider echoed those sentiments Thursday. “To a certain extent, you want to get his eyes, you want to create a screen and create a lot of commotion in front of the net,” Kreider said. “There are 30 goaltending jobs in the N.H.L., there’s a pretty good crop of goaltenders regardless of who you’re playing on any given night, so you’ve got to get their eyes, you’ve got to make it hard on them.”Although Fleury was not screened on any of the Rangers’ goals in Games 3 and 4, the Rangers simply outworked Pittsburgh’s short-handed defense — three of their top-four defensemen are sidelined — to corral loose pucks and put them past Fleury.“It seems to be the type of goals that are being scored in this series,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “You’ve got to want to go into those tough areas, and obviously there’s a price to pay, and the two goals we were able to score last night were right six inches in front of the net, and not easy to get.”SLAP SHOTSMats Zuccarello and Keith Yandle were both missing from Thursday afternoon’s practice at Madison Square Garden. Coach Alain Vigneault said each was given a maintenance day and should be good to go for Game 5 on Friday at the Garden. ... The injured defenseman Kevin Klein skated on his own before practice Thursday. Vigneault called him “50-50” to play in Game 5. Klein has been out since breaking his left arm March 11 in Washington.Advertisement