By JEFF SEIDELAPRIL 23, 2015
WASHINGTON —  If the Islanders want to keep their season alive, they will need to play better than they did Thursday in Game 5. Coach Jack Capuano suggested simply forgetting the performance, while defenseman Thomas Hickey agreed and said his teammates should “flush this one down the toilet.”Their season comes down to Game 6 on Saturday in what could be the Islanders’ final game at Nassau Coliseum. They need to shake off a poor third period in which turnovers helped the Washington Capitals create good scoring chances and ring up three quick goals as they took a 3-2 series lead with a 5-1 victory at Verizon Center.“We’re going back home to a rocking building,” said Islanders center Anders Lee. “The fans that have supported us all year. We believe in ourselves in this locker room; we’re facing a little bit of adversity right now, but it’s nothing different than we faced in the season.”The Capitals took this game thanks to help from some unusual sources. Evgeny Kuznetsov contributed two goals and one assist, although he had never scored a playoff point, and Karl Alzner added a goal and an assist. Alzner is a stay-at-home defenseman who has scored only 12 goals in 427 regular-season game — but has two in this series.AdvertisementThe Islanders pushed the Capitals around early and scored the game’s first goal. Washington still held only a 2-1 lead after two periods, but broke it open with goals from Brooks Laich, Kuznetsov and Jason Chimera in a span of 6 minutes 18 seconds. That gave them a 5-1 lead with 11 minutes left, and made Capuano decide to give goalie Jaroslav Halak a break.Advertisement“It just wasn’t a very good period,” captain John Tavares said. “It wasn’t our best game. That’s all there is to it. Obviously, our backs are against the wall.”The Islanders will need to come out playing like they did in the first part of this game. They were determined to send the Capitals a message early. This would be a physical contest, and the Islanders delivered 31 hits in the first period alone, repeatedly stopping the Capitals at both ends of the ice.Lee and Capuano each talked about the importance of putting this game behind them.”The series is 3-2 if we lost 5-1 tonight, 10-1, 1-0,” Lee said. “The series is 3-2, and we’ve got a great test of character, test of ourselves with our back against the wall. We’ve got to be better.”Capuano will insist his players do a better job of managing the puck. They coughed up the puck too often — the Capitals forced five of their 11 takeaways in the third period alone — which gave Washington a lot of chances.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That’s the story of tonight’s game, the turnovers,” Capuano said. “We talk about it all the time, and it’s coming back to haunt us now. You have to manage the puck. Great crowd, great atmosphere to play in, and you cough the puck up. They came back in transition on a couple of those goals, and that was it.”Capuano had no additional information about defenseman Calvin de Haan, who left early in the third period and did not return, leaving the Islanders with five defenseman for a second straight game.The Islanders were still fuming about losing defenseman Lubomir Visnovsky after a crunching hit from Tom Wilson in Game 4, forcing Capuano to juggle his defensive corps. He dressed seven defensemen for warm-ups, including the rookies Griffin Reinhart and Ryan Pulock, before choosing Reinhart to play. Defenseman Travis Hamonic (lower-body injury) remained out.The Islanders hit the Capitals from the start. Thirty-nine seconds into the game, Alex Ovechkin unsuccessfully tried to jam a loose puck past Halak. After the play, defensemen Calvin de Haan and Brian Strait and forward Kyle Okposo all hit and shoved Ovechkin for several seconds.AdvertisementNot surprisingly, they found Wilson a little later when he and Anders Lee tangled in a long fight 5:22 into the game. Both players landed several right-handed haymakers before going to the penalty box for a five-minute break.The Islanders had started slowly on offense but took the lead 26 seconds later when Josh Bailey ripped a high shot over goalie Braden Holtby’s left shoulder. Bailey converted a Tavares feed from near the left boards.But after that, the game belonged to the Capitals.A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Lose Early Steam and End Up on the Brink.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.