
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 23, 2015
Bernie Williams will throw the ceremonial first pitch at Yankee Stadium on Friday. At some point, chances are, the scoreboard will show Williams chasing that deep drive by Mike Piazza in October 2000, catching it and then dropping to one knee on the Shea Stadium grass.That moment, the clinching out of the World Series, cemented the Yankees’ superiority over the Mets. How convenient that Williams, who last played in 2006, just signed his formal retirement papers. He is now, officially, part of the Yankees’ storied past.Their present looks encouraging, too, with six victories in seven games, including a series win on the road in Detroit. But no team is playing as well as the Mets, who roll into the Bronx with a chance to do something they have never done in their history.A victory Friday would give the Mets a franchise-record 12-game winning streak. They have won 11 in a row five times, including in the championship seasons of 1969 and 1986. They just swept a 10-game homestand, something no team has done since the 1991 Minnesota Twins. That team also won the World Series.AdvertisementIt is much too early for the Mets to talk about that kind of goal, but deep down they must be thinking about it. Terry Collins, the manager, has been thinking big for months. The Mets, he insisted, would be winners — for real this time.Advertisement“That was one of our goals coming out of spring training: We’ve got to change the mind-set, not only in our fan base but in our clubhouse, that we are different, that there are expectations,” Collins said Thursday, after a 6-3 victory over the Atlanta Braves.“We’ve got to really concern ourselves with the little things, but I think it sends a huge message to our fans that what we said, we meant. We’ve got a long way — we’ve got a lot, a lot, of games left — but it’s really nice to come out and get our fan base excited.”One factor that seems clear during the Mets’ 13-3 start is that the National League East could be really bad. The Yankees series will be the Mets’ first outside the division, which includes two rebuilding teams — Philadelphia and Atlanta — and another, Miami, that looks vastly overrated.The Washington Nationals have been shaky, but their lineup is getting healthier, and they can pitch. Yet the gap between Washington and the Mets does not seem as vast as it did this spring.“We’re a good team, I think that’s plain and simple,” said Michael Cuddyer, the veteran left fielder. “We pitch well, and I think we still have something to offer on the offensive side of things. I don’t think we’re clicking offensively like we’re capable of. But it begins and ends with pitching.”The Mets have Jacob deGrom, Matt Harvey and Jon Niese lined up for the weekend. In nine starts this season, they are 7-1 with a 1.96 earned run average. The staff leader, Bartolo Colon, is a budding folk hero in Queens, with a 4-0 record, 23 strikeouts, one walk — and two runs batted in.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Colon signed a two-year deal before last season. Cuddyer signed a two-year deal in November. The short-term, low-risk strategy can be frustrating for fans, but the Mets tried it the other way, with mixed results. One team nearly won the pennant. The others fell far short.David Wright still remains from the 2006 team that fell one hellacious curveball short of the World Series. The Yankees also won their division that season, but Wright does not remember much about the shared pulse of baseball in the city.Advertisement“I don’t think any of us really follow too much of what the Yankees are doing,” said Wright, who is out with a hamstring injury. “We have the sports channels on, so we kind of understand vaguely what’s going on around baseball. But it’s fun; the Subway Series is always fun. It’s good to play in front of energy and electricity.”There should be plenty at Yankee Stadium, even for an early-season meeting set against the backdrop of local teams in the N.B.A. and N.H.L. playoffs.“It’s baseball season,” said Collins, who grew up in Michigan and has managed in California and Texas. “You can say what you want — hockey’s big, I know basketball’s big — the Northeast is baseball country. This is where this game started; this is where this game will always be. There’s no better fans to play in front of than the fans in the Northeast. They’re just wrapped up in it.”Imagine how things could be the next time these teams meet, from Sept. 18 to 20 at Citi Field. The Yankees have missed the last two postseasons, but at least they are always alive in September. A pennant race would be new for the Mets.Somehow, though, the Mets have vaulted past the stage of simply hoping for meaningful games down the stretch. The Mets learned a lot last season, while Harvey recovered from elbow surgery. They went 79-83 — their sixth losing record in a row — but found a top starter in deGrom, a middle-of-the-order force in Lucas Duda and a Gold Glove center fielder in Juan Lagares.That is quite a haul from a lost season, and the Mets are enjoying the rewards of patience. The contrast with the Yankees is flattering, for a change, and the teams’ history means nothing to the players.Said Daniel Murphy, the second baseman: “It’s a lot of fun to be a Met.”A version of this article appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Next Stop on Mets’ Express: The Bronx.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »