AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Victor Cruz leapt onto the stage at the auditorium inside the Giants’ headquarters Thursday afternoon in one explosive move, a 30-inch vault that ignored a staircase that would have made for a much easier ascent.Cruz turned and smiled. Just below the hem of his shorts, a dark surgery scar ran in a straight line beneath his right knee, the only apparent evidence of the reconstruction of Cruz’s torn patellar tendon.That injury ended Cruz’s season last October and cast his career in doubt. But Thursday, Cruz wanted to eliminate the uncertainty about his future.“There’s zero doubts that I’ll be playing in that first game,” Cruz said about the Giants’ regular-season opener at Dallas on Sept. 13. “I do feel like I can continue to be the same guy that I was before.”Cruz has been running in a straight line for about a month. Lateral moves and making the kinds of cuts he would while running pass routes is the next step in his rehabilitation. Cruz said he had gotten past the moment when he wondered if his knee would react and feel the same as it once did.“Mentally, I’m confident in my knee and I’m close to doing more things with it — I want to run faster, I want to start cutting,” he said. “But I have to be patient.”Jerry Reese, the Giants’ general manager, sounded a more cautious tone.“He’s running pretty good right now, and he’s scheduled to be back ready for the opener for us,” Reese said. “But until you get out there and turn it loose, you never know what a guy is going to do.”Reese conceded he had weighed the possibility that Cruz either would not be ready to play in September or might not be 100 percent healthy.“He looks great right now,” Reese said. “But I want to be prepared in case he’s not here.”To that end, the Giants could still use their first-round draft pick next week, the ninth selection over all, to take a wide receiver. Reese did not rule out any possibilities.Off the field, Cruz said fans were constantly telling him how excited they were about his playing alongside the second-year sensation Odell Beckham Jr. this season.“If I get another question out on the streets about how excited everybody is about myself and Odell, I might just jump off a building,” Cruz said.But when his Thursday news conference with reporters concluded, Cruz instead jumped off the stage, landing softly on both feet before he jogged out of the auditorium.BECKHAM MAKES A VOW Odell Beckham Jr. said that he had not drawn up a list of goals for the 2015 season, but that one objective was to be more in control of his emotions. Specifically, Beckham mentioned the incident late last year when he was hit out of bounds after a play and ripped off his helmet and tossed it to the ground when a penalty was not called. Beckham was fined by the N.F.L. for the outburst.“I’m learning to stay more composed,” Beckham said. “I don’t want to do anything to draw more attention to myself. You’re not going to get every call, and not everything is going to go your way.”Beckham said he was going to extend his warm-up period before games and practices in an effort to avoid the kind of hamstring muscle strain that derailed much of his season a year ago. And Beckham said the highlight of his off-season so far was meeting the former soccer star David Beckham.“Meeting a guy that I clowned about being a relative for so long was a thrill,” said Beckham, who played soccer as a youth. “He told me to keep the legacy going.”LOBBYING FOR A LINEMAN Justin Pugh, the Giants’ right tackle the past two seasons, said he would not object to being moved to guard this year. Shifting Pugh inside the offensive line formation has been discussed since Pugh was drafted in 2013, but the Giants have needed him at tackle.“When I came here I told them I would play anywhere,” Pugh said. “I’m loving right tackle, but I don’t mind playing guard. I’m here to win a championship wherever I have to play.”Pugh also lobbied for the Giants to use their first-round pick in next week’s draft on Iowa offensive lineman Brandon Scherff.“I like him,” Pugh said. “He’s a tough kid from what I’ve seen.” Thursday, General Manager Jerry Reese said of Scherff: “I think he can play guard, tackle — I think he can play somewhere.”Otherwise, Reese, in a news conference, said almost nothing about the Giants’ intentions in the draft. He said the team had evaluated the top two quarterbacks in the draft, Jameis Winston and Marcus Mariota. Reese said he thought both were good players, then added: “Expect the unexpected in the draft. You can look up and some of those quarterbacks they think are going to be in the first couple picks could be not off the board until 15 or 20. You never know. Funny things can happen, so expect everything to happen.”Advertisement