AdvertisementSupported byMets 6, Braves 3By Seth BerkmanAttempting to tie a franchise record of 11 consecutive victories, the Mets spent much of Thursday afternoon reverting to a style of play that pervaded Citi Field the last six seasons.Base runners and fielders miscalculated. Innings ended with the bases loaded. And the Mets blew an early 3-0 lead over the Atlanta Braves.What sets this year’s club apart, however, is its ability to overcome such lapses with crisp at-bats, dominant bullpen work and uncanny feats of athleticism by Bartolo Colon, who is 41 and listed at 285 pounds.So the Mets did not wither Thursday even when old habits resurfaced, and they put away the Braves, 6-3.“In each ballgame, no matter what happens, I feel like somebody’s going to come through,” Daniel Murphy said. “It’s a really cool feeling to have.”Murphy drove in four runs, and the Mets took advantage of erratic pitching by the Braves to win their 11th consecutive game and their 12th straight at Citi Field dating to September of last season, also tying a club best.Braves starter Julio Teheran (2-1) had his shortest start of the season, walking five and yielding four earned runs in four and a third innings. Teheran walked three of the first four batters, setting up Murphy to clear the bases with a double to right field that gave the Mets their early advantage.The Braves’ control problems continued after Teheran’s departure. In the fifth, the Mets scored another run when reliever Sugar Ray Marimon walked Eric Campbell with the bases loaded. But with a chance to tack on more insurance runs, Wilmer Flores grounded out to end the inning.Colon needed the extra run support. He had his roughest start of the season, giving up three earned runs on seven hits in six innings, but he pitched well enough for his fourth win in four starts. In 17 previous years in the major leagues, Colon had never won his first four starts.Leading by 3-0 after Murphy’s first-inning double, Colon was charged with a run in the second after originally appearing to have escaped the inning unscathed.With A. J. Pierzynski on first base, Andrelton Simmons hit a two-out double over the head of center fielder Juan Lagares. As Lagares threw to Murphy, the cutoff man, Pierzynski rounded third. The throw home beat Pierzynski, and he was called out.But after a manager’s challenge, catcher Anthony Recker was ruled to have blocked the plate, and the call was overturned.Recker said after the game that he believed that Pierzynski had a path to the plate through a gap in his legs and that the home-plate umpire, Jordan Baker, told him there was nothing more he could have done defensively.“That can change a game,” Recker said. “Fortunately for us, it didn’t.”The Braves added two runs in the fourth inning, aided by a questionable fielding decision by Murphy.With Freddie Freeman on first and Nick Markakis on third and no outs, Pierzynski hit a sharp ground ball to second. Murphy threw home, but Markakis had returned to third, and all runners were safe.Two batters later, Simmons singled to score Markakis, and Jace Peterson followed with a sacrifice fly to score Freeman.“It was a bad play,” Murphy said. “There’s really no other way to describe it.”The Mets looked ready to rebound when Flores led off the bottom of the fourth with a single, extending his hitting streak to six games, but he was picked off second to end the inning.Colon fooled the Braves into their own baserunning blunder to end the sixth. He stepped off the mound after catching Pierzynski, 38, breaking for second base, and with a lumbering sprint applied a tag. Colon, who will turn 42 next month, also struck out five batters and had no walks. He has walked only one batter in 26 innings this season.“Nothing fazes him,” Manager Terry Collins said. “He had a blister on his middle finger today and pitched with it and didn’t say a word. Just went out and did his job, no excuses.“He’s the epitome of what pitching’s all about.”Through an interpreter, Colon joked after the game that since he does not throw breaking pitches, the blister did not affect him. The Mets last won 12 straight games at home over the 1995-96 seasons, and they have the best record in baseball at 13-3. They closed their first homestand without dropping a game, and their 10 home wins to start the season are a franchise record. They are the only team with an unbeaten record at home.Colon said that now, in the 18th year of his career, the Mets’ winning streak is “the best feeling” he can ever have.Advertisement