AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurCongratulations, Barry Bonds. You’re no longer a felon. We all owe you an apology.So we’re sorry, Barry, that the government dragged you into courtrooms for more than a decade and forced you to spend some of the $200 million or so you made in baseball not on vacations and fast cars and gigantic ball caps, but on defense lawyers.And we’re sorry, Barry, that federal prosecutors wasted your time trying to prove that you obstructed justice in your testimony to a grand jury in 2003, and that you were sentenced to what must have been 30 agonizing days of house arrest inside your 15,000-square-foot mansion, rambling around its six bedrooms, its 10 bathrooms, its gym and its pool.A federal court’s ruling on Wednesday overturned your conviction, and that changes everything. It’s clear now that we should be ashamed that we ever thought you were using steroids.So what if your body changed into something like the Michelin Man’s before our very eyes — torso as thick as a quarter horse, and bulging biceps that seemed to grow bigger by the second, as if attached to an invisible bicycle pump. Big deal that you started swatting home runs almost as fast as we could count them.Everything gets easier with age, right? Especially with a wholesome regimen of flaxseed oil and arthritis cream. (And certainly not a designer steroid, which came in the form of a clear liquid, or testosterone, which was a cream.) Your oil and your cream were just pretty darn strong.I see now that we should have taken you at your word all along.I sat in the courtroom for the nearly monthlong trial in 2011, and I heard your grand jury testimony and listened to the evidence. When you spoke to the grand jury, you said that you had no idea your trainer was giving you drugs. Of course, you didn’t know. Why would you? You were just a low-key, naïve guy duped by someone on your payroll.Most days I was directly behind your mother, Pat, and her friends, including one who filled out a Bible word finder day after day. At times, it was painful. There was testimony about your testicle size and your mistress and the breast implants you said you bought her and the acne she noticed on your back.None of that should have ever happened to you, a famous celebrity child of a famous ballplayer simply having a rough time in the spotlight’s glare. But those days are past now. It’s time to exhale.“I am excited about what the future holds for me,” you said after Wednesday’s ruling.We’re so excited for you, too!Without that felony conviction on your record, you are free to own a firearm, to serve on a jury, even to run for office. (Maybe that’s something you should consider; after all, you’re still a hero in San Francisco.) Maybe there’s even a job in baseball for you; Commissioner Rob Manfred said Thursday that he was open to it.But that’s for after your celebration. For now, it’s so good to see you get back on your feet, doing what you do best: mentoring younger players. I heard you spent some time tutoring Alex Rodriguez over the winter, too. Wow, you guys — both of you persecuted so unfairly for so long — must have had a lot to talk about.Anyway, welcome back. Now that the courts have exonerated you, we can return you to your place in the pantheon of sports heroes who accomplished amazing things that seemed too good to be true. Like Lance Armstrong, who came back from cancer to win seven Tour de France titles.Or, er, maybe there’s a better example.Email: juliet@nytimes.com Advertisement