AdvertisementSupported byYankees 2, Tigers 1By Billy WitzDETROIT — When the Yankees left New York 11 days ago, they looked like a broken-down team, one that began the season doing little to dispel diminished expectations. Their starting pitchers looked fragile, the fielders looked fraught and their hitters too often looked feeble.It was early April, true, but it seemed only a matter of time before the Yankees ceded relevancy this summer to the other team in town, the Mets.Now, after Thursday’s 2-1 win over the Detroit Tigers, the Yankees return home having won six of their last seven, earning equal billing against the Mets when they open a three-game series Friday at Yankee Stadium.“If you go on a road trip and you go to Baltimore, Tampa and Detroit and are able to win seven out of 10 games, you feel pretty good,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “You win six out of seven, you feel even better.” The Yankees finished the trip by relying on another strong effort by Masahiro Tanaka, who has allowed one run and five hits in his last two starts, and by using small ball to push across two late runs before the bullpen tandem of Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller closed the door on the Tigers.On an afternoon that was as cold and bitter (in the low 30s) as Wednesday night, but without the snow flurries, the Yankees struggled to hit the right-hander Anibal Sanchez, so they counted on the churning legs and the active mind of Jacoby Ellsbury to drive the offense. Ellsbury induced a balk from Sanchez and tied the score in the sixth inning and legged out a leadoff double in the eighth that set the stage for the winning run. “I’m always trying to look for something, no matter what base it’s on, just trying to create havoc,” Ellsbury said. “I guess I’m always trying to look for some kind of advantage.”The Yankees were in desperate need of one when Ellsbury stood at third with two out in the sixth. Sanchez had limited them to one hit, his changeup and slider silencing the Yankees, who entered the day sharing the major league lead with 21 home runs.Ellsbury had walked, stolen second and advanced to third on a groundout, but Carlos Beltran struck out. Brian McCann was up next. As Sanchez began his windup, Ellsbury, with the infield shifted toward the right side against the left-handed-hitting McCann, took off toward home. As he did, Sanchez altered his windup by stepping off the rubber with his right foot and delivering a quick pitch to the plate, causing Ellsbury to stop.When the umpires called nothing, Chase Headley charged from the on-deck circle toward home plate, waving his arms in protest. The Yankees’ dugout added its voice. The umpires then conferred, and the third-base umpire, Gerry Davis, signaled a balk, sending Ellsbury home. “Could you tell by my reaction?” Headley said when asked if he was surprised there was no immediate call. “I was like, ‘You can’t do that.’ I think it kind of surprised everybody. I’m glad that the call was right. To me, it looked pretty obvious when it happened.”The delayed call brought an angry Brad Ausmus, the Tigers’ manager, out of the dugout to protest. The argument with his ejection from the game.“It didn’t really look like anybody said anything about it, then all of a sudden when the Yankees started chirping from their dugout, ‘Oh, balk, balk, balk,’ ” Tigers third baseman Nick Castellanos said. “Then the third-base umpire was like, ‘Balk.’ We were all pretty upset about that, but what are you going to do?”The Yankees needed a pair of superb defensive plays in the bottom of the seventh to keep the score even. After Tanaka gave up a second double to J. D. Martinez and a walk to Yoenis Cespedes, he left with one out for the left-hander Justin Wilson. The Tigers responded by sending the right-handed James McCann to hit for the left-handed Alex Avila.McCann drove a grounder down the third-base line that Headley fielded with a backhanded stab. His throw to second was on a hop, and second baseman Gregorio Petit expertly gloved it for a force out. Betances then relieved Wilson and retired Castellanos on a pop-up.“It happened so quick,” Petit said. “When you see it, you’re thinking the ball can’t go through, but at the same time, we’re trying to catch everything.”The Yankees took the lead in the eighth when Ellsbury dumped a base hit into the left-center gap and raced to second when center fielder Anthony Gose took a leisurely route to the ball. Ellsbury slid in safely to the inside of the bag, away from Gose’s throw, and moved to third on a bunt by Brett Gardner. The Tigers walked Beltran, who was hitting .184 and had struck out three times, to set up a double play — and because Brian McCann was 0 for 16 against Tom Gorzelanny. McCann did not get a hit, but his hard grounder ricocheted off first baseman Miguel Cabrera right to second baseman Ian Kinsler, allowing Ellsbury to score.Betances and Miller were flawless in the eighth and ninth, each striking out two. Betances was rewarded with his third win and Miller with his sixth save.Afterward, as the Yankees donned their suits and prepared for the flight home, they could turn their attention to the Mets, who will carry an 11-game winning streak into the Subway Series. This year’s unusually early edition is no longer a series that only the Mets and their fans are anticipating.“I look forward to the environment,” said Headley, who, like several Yankees, has never played in the series. “Probably nobody likes to hear it if you’re a Yankee fan, but I think it’s good when both teams are good. It’s good for baseball.”Advertisement