AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherYou are probably reading a lot lately about Bruce Jenner. In all the hullabaloo over his interview with Diane Sawyer, set to be broadcast on Friday on ABC, it is often nearly forgotten that Jenner was once an athlete. Indeed, by acclamation he was the world’s greatest athlete, a title often applied to decathlon champions.He was also an actor, although it is unlikely you will find anyone who would have called him the world’s greatest. Instead, he joined a long list of American decathlon champions who had brief, and profoundly undistinguished, acting careers.Jenner went to Graceland, a small college in Iowa, where he switched from football to track. He was a natural, and he qualified for the 1972 Olympics, finishing 10th. After graduation, he climbed the ranks further and by 1976 was one of the favorites.But Jenner did not just win the 1976 Olympics decathlon in Montreal, he annihilated the field. On Day 1, he achieved personal bests in three events, the shot put (50 feet 4¼ inches), the high jump (6-8) and the 400 meters (47.51 seconds). That left in him third place, but still virtually certain to win.That was because Jenner’s best events came on Day 2. His only real concern was blundering and not clearing a height in the pole vault, but he sailed over with ease, eventually getting another personal best at 15-9. One last personal record, in the final event, the 1,500 meters at 4 minutes 12.61 seconds, wrapped up a 207-point victory and world record.That was enough to put him on cereal boxes, but even before the Olympics, Jenner had spoken of his hopes for a career in acting. The vehicle for his stardom was “Can’t Stop the Music,” a fictionalized version of the formation of the disco band the Village People, with the band members playing themselves.Janet Maslin of The New York Times commented, “Bruce Jenner plays an uptight lawyer, and the comic high point of the film occurs when he spills dinner and has to take off his pants.” She described Jenner’s acting as “sympathetically amateurish.”The movie pretty much finished off Jenner’s feature film acting career, though he was called upon to replace Erik Estrada for a few episodes of the action police show “CHIPS.”His more recent appearances on the reality series “Keeping Up With the Kardashians,” along with the much anticipated Sawyer interview, have put him back in the spotlight.He is not the only American decathlon champion to turn to performing post-Olympics. Many of the others’ efforts were also “Can’t Stop the Music” caliber.The first and most famous American decathlon champion, Jim Thorpe, the 1912 winner, had most of his accomplishments on athletic fields, playing major league baseball and professional football. He did appear in small parts as an Indian in some forgotten Western movies, like “Code of the Mounted” and “Treachery Rides the Range.”The 1936 winner, Glenn Morris, appeared as Tarzan in the low budget “Tarzan’s Revenge.” Morris’s career was brief: The film runs just 70 minutes, and Tarzan is hardly on screen until near the end.Bob Mathias, decathlon winner in 1948 and 1952, initially was cast in a role unlikely to test his acting chops: himself in “The Bob Mathias Story.” He parlayed that into the lead in an Italian “swords and sandals” film, “Minotaur, the Wild Beast of Crete,” a retelling of the Greek myth. In a bizarre coincidence, the script called for him to pole-vault and throw a javelin and discus.Mathias eventually found a different calling, serving as a Republican from California in the House of Representatives before being swept from office in the post-Watergate Democratic landslide of 1974.Rafer Johnson, the 1960 winner, was also involved in politics, as an aide to Robert F. Kennedy, and helped apprehend Sirhan Sirhan after he shot the senator in the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles in 1968. But Johnson also had a B-movie career, appearing in, among others, “Pirates of Tortuga” and “Tarzan and the Jungle Boy.”The recent American decathlon winners, Dan O’Brien (1996), Bryan Clay (2008) and Ashton Eaton (2012) do not seem to have been bitten by the acting bug … yet. If a producer is planning a feature film about the founding of One Direction or a reboot of the Tarzan franchise, he may need to look no further.OpinionNicholas KristofAdvertisement