By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 25, 2015
Craig Anderson made 45 saves, and the Ottawa Senators avoided elimination with a 5-1 road victory over the host Montreal Canadiens on Friday in Game 5 of their first-round Eastern Conference series.Bobby Ryan, Patrick Wiercioch, Erik Karlsson, Erik Condra and Mike Hoffman scored for Ottawa.Tom Gilbert scored the only goal for Montreal, and Carey Price stopped 20 shots. The Senators went 2 for 4 on the power play, and the Canadiens were 0 for 3 for the night, dropping to 1 for 19 in the series.Montreal leads the best-of-seven series by three games to two. Game 6 is set for Sunday in Ottawa. The Senators are trying to become the fifth team in the N.H.L. to win a series after trailing by 3-0.Anderson replaced Andrew Hammond for Game 3 and has allowed only three goals on 123 shots in three starts.AdvertisementAmong his best saves were a stop on a Tomas Plekanec on a short-handed breakaway in the second period and a point-blank stop on Alex Galchenyuk. Anderson’s play has been reminiscent of 2013, when he backstopped the Senators to an upset of Montreal in the opening round.AdvertisementThe Canadiens stormed out and had six early shots.The Senators did not get a shot on Price until 8 minutes 42 seconds in. But Ottawa scored on its second attempt, when Ryan fired one through Mika Zibanejad’s screen at 9:29. Wiercioch had time to wait for a screen to form and scored at 15:39, giving Ottawa the first two-goal lead by either team in the series. Karlsson scored on a power play 14:29 into the second to make the score 3-0.A shot by Gilbert got by Anderson at 1:44 into the third period. Condra sealed the win for the Senators when he caused a turnover and scored at 14:02.There was a late skirmish when Anderson poked Brandon Prust near the crease and was speared in return. P. K. Subban and Eric Gryba were given 10-minute misconduct penalties for a separate skirmish. Hoffman scored on the ensuing power play.WEBER OUT FOR NASHVILLE Nashville defenseman Shea Weber’s lower-body injury will prevent him from playing in the remainder of the Predators’ first-round Western Conference series against the Chicago Blackhawks.The team evaluated Weber’s status and said he would miss the rest of the series. Weber, the Predators’ captain, has not played since he was hurt last week in Game 2. Although the Predators have not given specifics on Weber’s injury aside from saying it affected his lower body, they said that he did not have an anterior cruciate ligament injury.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Predators trail by three games to two in the series. The Blackhawks announced Friday that Scott Darling would start in goal in Game 6, which is set for Saturday in Chicago. Darling was in the net Thursday in the Blackhawks’ 5-2 loss in Nashville.OVERHAUL IN EDMONTON The Edmonton Oilers made sweeping front-office changes after another disappointing season. Patrick LaForge stepped down as president and chief operating officer, and the team said Craig MacTavish would move from general manager to a job that has not been decided.Peter Chiarelli was appointed president of hockey operations. Kevin Lowe will transition out of hockey operations but will remain vice chairman of the Oilers Entertainment Group.AdvertisementThe Oilers finished 28th in the league but won the draft lottery and are expected to select Connor McDavid with the No. 1 pick.VEZINA FINALISTS Montreal’s Carey Price, Minnesota’s Devan Dubnyk and Nashville’s Pekka Rinne are the finalists for the Vezina Trophy, which is given to the league’s top goalie. The 30 N.H.L. general managers submitted ballots at the end of the regular season, and the winner is set to be named on June 24.Price led the N.H.L. in wins (44), goals-against average (1.96) and save percentage (.933), becoming the first goalie to top the league in all three categories since Ed Belfour did so with Chicago in the 1990-91 season. Price also had a career-high nine shutouts.Dubnyk set a franchise record with 38 consecutive starts after a trade with Arizona. He finished the season at 27-9-2 with a 1.78 G.A.A., a .936 save percentage and five shutouts for Minnesota.Rinne was 41-17-6 in 64 appearances. He tied for second in the N.H.L. in wins and was third in goals-against average (2.18) and seventh in save percentage (.923).A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Senators Avoid Elimination With Win Over Canadiens.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.