AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — Facing playoff elimination against the Washington Capitals on Saturday, the Islanders are hoping their crowd can lift them one more time.But as boisterous and supportive as the crowd has been through this final season at Nassau Coliseum, the fans cannot score power-play goals, or help skaters “manage the puck,” a phrase Coach Jack Capuano has often employed. And playing with a further depleted defense after the Capitals’ Troy Brouwer leveled Calvin de Haan in Thursday’s 5-1 road loss in Game 5, the Islanders, trailing in the series by three games to two, need all the determination they can muster.“It just kind of happens, high energy for a big game like this,” said center Frans Nielsen, the longest-tenured Islander. “The fans, the building — for sure, they always help us. But we have to find ways to win. All we can do is play hard and play the right way.”Whether their opponents have played the “right way” is open to debate. Islanders defenseman Lubomir Visnovsky has been the recipient of numerous high and unpenalized hits, notably a thunderous charge by the Capitals’ Tom Wilson in Game 3. Visnovsky, 38, has a history of head injuries, and it appeared the Capitals were targeting him.Griffin Reinhart made his playoff debut in Game 5, replacing Visnovsky, and another rookie, Ryan Pulock, could take de Haan’s spot in Game 6. Capuano had no update on de Haan’s condition Friday.Reinhart and Pulock are both recent first-round draft picks. Pulock, 20, scored 17 goals in 52 games for Bridgeport in the American Hockey League this season and could help the team’s power play, which is 0 for 12.“I’ve practiced and I’m focused,” said Pulock, the 15th pick in 2013, who is known for his booming right-handed shot from the point.Capuano also hinted at further changes among his forward lines. Brock Nelson, who scored twice in the opener, was scratched in Game 5 in favor of the returning Mikhail Grabovski. Capuano also has mentioned the speedster Michael Grabner and Colin McDonald as candidates to enter the lineup.The Capitals will be trying to reach the second round for the fourth time in the career of Alex Ovechkin, who has led the league in goals the last three seasons and has 475 goals since his N.H.L. debut in 2005-6. But Ovechkin’s teams have notoriously faltered in the postseason, never reaching the Eastern Conference finals. Under the new coach Barry Trotz, the Capitals finished with 101 points — equal to the Islanders — a year after both clubs missed the playoffs.After winning Game 1 on the road, the Islanders had a 3-1 lead late in the second period of Game 2. But Ovechkin scored, and the Capitals added two more goals in the third to win, 4-3. The teams traded overtime victories at Nassau Coliseum in Games 3 and 4 before Washington dominated the decimated Islanders in Game 5.Despite the Islanders’ scoring woes — with only four goals in the previous three games — and the continued absence of the stalwart defenseman Travis Hamonic — who has missed the series with a lower body injury — Capuano remained upbeat. “We have a chance in our building to take it to a Game 7,” he said. “Our backs have been to the wall many times this year, and we’ve responded really well.”The captain John Tavares, who scored the winning goal 15 seconds into overtime in Game 3, was terse following Friday’s short morning practice at Nassau Coliseum, which the Islanders will leave after the season for Barclays Center in Brooklyn.“We have to score some goals and play better,” he said. “We have to play well for our crowd. We have to win.”Islander players were reticent about the concept that Saturday’s game could be the last at the 43-year-old arena, which is popular among players and coaches, but lacks the amenities of modern sports facilities.“The fact that the Islanders are moving to Barclays — fortunately they had a place to go, because to say this as nicely as I can, Nassau Coliseum is well past its due date,” Commissioner Gary Bettman said Friday.Kyle Okposo, a fan favorite who played strong games in the playoffs two years ago against Pittsburgh and has two goals against the Capitals, said the team’s mission had to stay simple.“We want come out hard and hungry and we have to keep out emotions in check,” Okposo said. “Obviously it’s going to be loud. We’ll be excited to come out in front of our fans.”Advertisement