By BEN SHPIGELAPRIL 24, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  Mike Maccagnan graduated from Trinity College expecting to become not a football scout but a financial analyst. He applied for positions on Wall Street but then chose to pursue a career working in the N.F.L., where he has still managed to put his degree in economics to good use.Heading into his first draft as the Jets’ general manager, Maccagnan compared his approach — assessing risks, projecting returns — to that of a portfolio manager.“Do you pick one stock that you think is going to get the big return,” Maccagnan said, “or do you pick three stocks which may not actually hit the same ceiling but the overall value of it actually gets a higher yield?”For the Jets, Oregon quarterback Marcus Mariota could represent that single stock. They attended his pro day, had him work out privately and met with him at team headquarters, gathering enough information that Maccagnan said he “absolutely” felt comfortable with their evaluation.AdvertisementWith many teams interested in Mariota, he is unlikely to be available at the sixth pick, which the Jets have. Maccagnan intends to speak with the five teams drafting ahead of the Jets — Tampa Bay, Tennessee, Jacksonville, Oakland and Washington — to gauge the cost of moving up. He said he was not fundamentally opposed to doing so, but surrendering a bounty of draft picks would seem to run counter to his philosophy.Advertisement“I would personally like to get more picks,” Maccagnan said Friday. “It’s to me just more opportunities to acquire more talent.”Maccagnan’s valuation of draft picks is much like that of his predecessor, John Idzik, whose mistakes in the draft created a team desperate for quality and depth. Maccagnan’s decisiveness in free agency addressed many of those deficiencies — he bolstered the Jets along the lines, at running back and in the linebacking corps, and he remodeled their secondary with a haul of signings headlined by Darrelle Revis and Antonio Cromartie — and allowed the team to enter its draft preparation without feeling obligated to improve any one position above all.Within days of being hired in January, Maccagnan reshaped the scouting staff, firing two longtime personnel executives — Terry Bradway and Jeff Bauer — and hiring a new director of college scouting, Rex Hogan. One idea that Maccagnan impressed upon his scouts was the importance of evaluating players without considering the team’s needs. He said he wanted them to appraise prospects in a “bubble.”“You’re factoring in something that has no bearing on whether that player’s going to be successful or not,” Maccagnan said, adding, “I’ve seen a lot of mistakes made over the years with that.”It so happens that the Jets could use a pass rusher, though, and this draft is rich with them. They have visited with Vic Beasley (Clemson), Bud Dupree (Kentucky), Dante Fowler Jr. (Florida) and Shane Ray (Missouri), among others, all of whom could slot in as an outside linebacker in the 3-4 defense.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maccagnan scouted loads of potential 3-4 edge rushers when he worked in Houston as the director of college scouting, and, having studied teams who always seemed to have what he called a “pipeline” at the position, he said he values stockpiling them every year. He cited the Steelers, who have featured Greg Lloyd, Joey Porter and Lamarr Woodley, as one example.“They have a long period of time where one would be very productive and then as soon as they would maybe lose him in free agency, they have another one step up right behind them,” Maccagnan said, adding, “It’s sort of a lifeblood of your 3-4.”The only other clue Maccagnan offered into his thinking involved the wide receiver position, which the Jets improved last month by trading for Brandon Marshall. The receivers considered to be the best in the draft — Alabama’s Amari Cooper and West Virginia’s Kevin White — could be available when the Jets pick, but Maccagnan noted that many of the league’s best receivers have been selected later in the first round.AdvertisementEven if Maccagnan declined to say whether he considered quarterback an area of need, the Jets are almost certain to draft one. Aside from Mariota and Jameis Winston of Florida State, who is most likely to be taken first over all, the Jets have met with Bryce Petty (Baylor), Brett Hundley (U.C.L.A.) and Garrett Grayson (Colorado State).For the last 15 years, Maccagnan has sat beside the person entrusted with making the final call during the draft. Now that he is that person, he said the responsibility feels different only when he is alone, long after he has finished watching film and rating prospects, when he allows himself a moment or two of quiet time.“You want to be perfect,” Maccagnan said. “You want to make sure every pick you make is the best pick at that point in time, in theory. That’s where the pressure kind of hits you.”A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Weigh Draft Quantity Against Costly Prospect.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.