By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 24, 2015
The Rangers and the Pittsburgh Penguins were destined to play a one-goal game Friday night at Madison Square Garden.Sure enough, the teams were tied, 1-1, and playing in overtime — for the second in the series — when Carl Hagelin rifled the puck on the short side past Marc-Andre Fleury at 10 minutes 52 seconds of the extra session to give the Rangers a dramatic 2-1 victory in Game 5 and vault them into the Eastern Conference semifinals against the winner of the series between the Islanders and the Washington Capitals. “I can’t describe it,” Hagelin, 26, said of his first playoff overtime winner. “It’s just goose bumps, one of the happiest moments of my life.” The winning goal — made possible by the strong work of the gritty center Dominic Moore to keep the puck in the Penguins’ zone — generated a rare show of euphoria by Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault, who jumped into the air behind the bench and hugged his equally ebullient assistants. Advertisement“These playoffs are a battle of survival,” said Vigneault, who guided the Rangers to the Stanley Cup finals last spring in his first season with the team. “It was obviously a very hard-fought series. Tonight you definitely saw a great goaltending display at both ends.”AdvertisementAll five games were decided by one goal, and all four victories by the Rangers were by a 2-1 score. The rookie Kevin Hayes notched the overtime winner for the Rangers in Game 4.It was the second straight year the Rangers ousted the Penguins, and it was the first time since 1971 the Rangers won consecutive playoff games in overtime.“To experience a win in overtime in the playoffs, it’s hard to find something better,” said goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, who will get a rare playoff rest. The Rangers last won a series in five games in 2008. “It was a one-goal game every game, so the difference between the wins and the losses was some big plays by some great players.”Amid the joy, there was concern for forward Mats Zuccarello, who absorbed a slap shot in the face by his teammate Ryan McDonagh midway through the first period and did not return. Zuccarello, a top-line right wing, has two assists in the playoffs after recording 15 goals and 34 assists in the regular season. After Derek Stepan’s power-play goal, with assists by Dan Boyle and Derick Brassard, at 4:23 of the first period, Fleury was terrific, making 34 saves.“I thought we hung in there,” a disconsolate Fleury said. “We played a good team and kept it close. But at the end of the day, we still lost.” Lundqvist — who stopped 37 shots — was equally stellar until Nick Spaling managed to tie the game at 17:23 of the second when he redirected the puck into the Rangers’ net after a messy goal-mouth scramble. Steve Downie and Sidney Crosby assisted.AdvertisementIn the third, the Penguins had the better play — outshooting the Rangers, 14-7. Over all, the Penguins outshot the Rangers, 38-36.Last spring, the Penguins led the Rangers by three games to one in their second-round series, and the Rangers found inspiration heading into Game 5 when Martin St. Louis’s mother passed away suddenly and the Rangers rallied around the veteran forward.This season, the Penguins entered the playoffs with a depleted defense and one of their top scorers, Evgeni Malkin, was held off the score sheet. Crosby, who was limited to two goals and two assists, was proud of his team’s effort.“Everyone played extremely hard,” Crosby, the Penguins’ captain, said. “They’re a good team with a lot of depth, and we were one goal away from being on the other side of it.”The Penguins had a golden chance when Dan Girardi was called for tripping Crosby at 4:14 of the third, and Crosby fired the puck off the post after a crisp pass from Malkin.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lundqvist denied Spaling from in front shortly afterward and ultimately stopped Ian Cole on a blast from the point and slew of additional chances for the Penguins.The Rangers had third-period opportunities, too.J. T. Miller hit the crossbar behind Fleury a little more than eight minutes into the third. And Boyle, who was brought in to aid the Rangers’ power-play this season but has mostly struggled at both ends of the ice, shanked a perfect pass in front of Fleury with 3:36 left. He responded to missing the open net by slamming his stick into the boards.The Rangers are the only N.H.L. team to win at least one playoff series each of the past four postseasons.“Anytime you can close out a series and heal some bumps and bruises — which we certainly have a few — it’s a good thing,” Vigneault said.Pat Pickens contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: In ‘Battle of Survival,’ Rangers Score Knockout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.