By TIM ROHANAPRIL 24, 2015
Jacob deGrom, the Mets’ promising young starter, turned, looked, then craned his neck higher, as if he were trying to spot a bird. He had floated a belt-high fastball over the plate, and Mark Teixeira had crushed it into the early evening sky down the right-field line at Yankee Stadium.There may not be a more humbling act in baseball than allowing a towering home run. Teixeira crossed home in the bottom of the first with his fists clenched, shouting encouragements at his Yankees teammates.And deGrom paced the mound, trying to forget the sight.This Subway Series would actually mean something, judging by the players’ emotions. Entering Friday’s game, the Mets had the best record in baseball, and the Yankees had scored the second-most runs. This was the first time that both teams were playing each other in the regular season while they were at least tied for first place in their respective divisions.The Yankees, then, delivered an emphatic message, at least for one game. Teixeira homered twice, Michael Pineda outpitched deGrom, and the Yankees won, 6-1, humbling the Mets and ending their 11-game winning streak.“You’ve just got to tip your cap sometimes,” said Travis d’Arnaud, the Mets’ injured catcher.AdvertisementEven if the Yankees did not say it, they must have felt slighted leading up to the game. The Mets had been the talk of the town. Mets hats seemed to be everywhere, from Times Square to Brooklyn.AdvertisementFor the first time since its birth in 2006, the Mets’ television channel, SNY, was closing in on the Yankees’ ratings.The league even released a new commercial Friday featuring Matt Harvey; it was the first time in eight years that the league had promoted an individual Met like that.Before the game, Michael Cuddyer wore an orange shirt that read, “The Magic Is Back.” An amateur magician, he was asked if the magic was indeed back. “I mean, these were free giveaways that we got,” he answered, chuckling.While the Mets built their 11-game winning streak, which tied a franchise record, they made sure to qualify it. They were playing struggling teams, and they were careful not to make any grand pronouncements. It was only April, they said.Still, emboldened by the fast start, Mets fans had taken aim at the Yankees and talked about reclaiming New York. At the home opener, a fan group called the 7 Line did a roll call, calling out players’ names, a Yankee Stadium tradition.“Cheering for your players is not copyrighted or anything — I don’t feel slighted,” Vinny Milano, the unofficial leader of the Yankees’ roll call, said in a phone interview the day after the game.“The 7 Line guys are great,” he added. “I really envy their passion. Mets fans are all about it. I wish Yankee fans got that loud.”AdvertisementThe 7 Line was in attendance Friday night; a group of its members gathered in the upper deck beyond left field. But they did not do the roll call. Instead, they sat quietly as Teixeira belted his first home run off deGrom.DeGrom, last year’s National League rookie of the year, was one of the main reasons the Mets were popular again. He had been unflappable from his first career start, a gem against these Yankees. But Friday, pitching in chilly conditions, he was constantly searching for his command.DeGrom allowed three home runs and six runs, matching a career high in each category. He allowed seven home runs all of last season.“I just, you know, had a tough time throwing the ball where I wanted tonight,” he said.It was a tough night all around for the Mets. In the sixth, Jon Niese, the scheduled starter for Sunday night’s series finale, was ejected from the Mets’ bench for complaining about the strike zone.It did not help deGrom that d’Arnaud was out, and that Kevin Plawecki, his replacement, was making his third career start. Plawecki was so new that the nameplate above his locker had been misspelled.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Like any savvy veteran, Teixeira took advantage. For him, this was a triumphant game.Teixeira seemed to represent what the Yankees were becoming — a team of pricey veterans on the downside of their careers. Teixeira had been bothered by injuries in recent years; he had not hit 30 homers since 2011; and he was due to make about $23.1 million this season.But Teixeira, a notoriously slow starter, began this season feeling healthy, driving the ball, and emerging as a surprise leader. If his bat had a switch, it seemed as if it was stuck in one position: power. He is batting .218 on the season now and has 12 hits. Only one has been a single, and seven have been home runs. After the Yankees’ first 17 games, he has 17 R.B.I.“I am healthy, that’s the good thing,” Teixeira said earlier this week. “The No. 1 thing for me is it’s not what you do for one day or one week, but is being able to be healthy for a long season, and right now I feel good.”In the third inning, when Teixeira lifted his second home run to right field, deGrom tracked it easily; he knew how high to look this time. And this one went higher, and farther, as if Teixeira wanted to outdo himself or prove a point. The ball landed halfway up the second deck.INSIDE PITCHBobby Parnell, the onetime Mets closer who is recovering from Tommy John surgery, recently sustained forearm stiffness, was examined by a team doctor, and was cleared and told to rest for a week.Because of an editing error, a picture caption in some editions last Saturday with an article about the Yankees’ 6-1 victory over the Mets misstated the number of innings Michael Pineda pitched for the Yankees. It was seven and two-thirds, not five and two-thirds.Billy Witz contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets’ Ride Ends at Yankees’ House.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.