By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 24, 2015
James Loney, Rene Rivera and Tim Beckham each hit a two-run homer on Friday, and the Tampa Bay Rays beat the visiting Toronto Blue Jays, 12-3.Kevin Kiermaier also circled the bases on a four-base error as Tampa Bay earned its third consecutive victory. Jose Dominguez pitched one and a third innings for his first major league win, and Matt Andriese pitched the final three innings for his first career save.The home runs by Loney and Rivera came in a four-run fourth inning off R. A. Dickey.MARLINS 3, NATIONALS 2 Martin Prado broke a tie with an eighth-inning single, and four pitchers combined on a six-hitter to help Miami beat visiting Washington.The Marlins, starting a nine-game homestand, won their third in a row after a 3-11 start. The Nationals, beginning a 10-game trip, lost their third straight.AdvertisementPHILLIES 1, BRAVES 0 Freddie Freeman mishandled Ben Revere’s ground ball to first, allowing Freddy Galvis to score in the ninth to give Philadelphia a win at Atlanta.AdvertisementGalvis led off with a single to center against Jim Johnson, went to second on Cesar Hernandez’s sacrifice bunt and third on a passed ball.Revere hit a chopper toward first base, and Galvis broke for home. Freeman had a play at the plate, but he bobbled the ball.INDIANS 13, TIGERS 1 Brandon Moss homered twice and drove in seven runs, Danny Salazar struck out a career-high 11, and Cleveland won at Detroit.Detroit has lost four straight after an 11-2 start.RED SOX 7, ORIOLES 5 Brock Holt hit a tiebreaking three-run homer off Darren O’Day in the eighth inning, and Boston won at Baltimore, extending the Orioles’ losing streak to five games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.David Ortiz and Hanley Ramirez also connected for the Red Sox, who have won three of five this season against the Orioles, the defending A.L. East champions.CARDINALS 3, BREWERS 0 Carlos Martinez struck out eight in seven innings, Jason Heyward and Jhonny Peralta homered, and St. Louis won at Milwaukee.Martinez gave up four hits and walked two in the longest of his three starts this season. Jordan Walden pitched eighth and Trevor Rosenthal finished for his seventh save in seven tries, completing a five-hitter.CUBS 7, REDS 3 Jonathan Herrera singled home the tiebreaking run in the 11th inning, and David Ross followed with a bases-loaded double that sent Chicago to a victory at Cincinnati.Anthony Rizzo homered and doubled and started Chicago’s winning rally with a single off Burke Badenhop.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Three Rays Hit Home Runs in Drubbing of Blue Jays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.