
On Baseball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
APRIL 24, 2015
It was a long, overdue formality that became a feel-good photo opportunity. But with a dotting of the i’s in Bernie Williams and the crossing of the t’s in a nearly decade-old retirement, a beloved era of iconic Yankees was officially laid to rest.Call them the Core No More.Given that Williams was outlasted in the Bronx by Jorge Posada, Andy Pettitte, Mariano Rivera and finally Derek Jeter — the Core Four, as they were celebrated in the post-Williams years — General Manager Brian Cashman launched the countdown to Williams’s May 24 enshrinement in Monument Park by recasting the core as the Fab Five.It was the group, Cashman said, “produced from our system that led to the championships that we have.”Williams was already three years into his second career as a jazz guitarist when the fifth of those contemporary titles was claimed, in 2009. No matter. He fielded earnest questions at a Friday evening news conference on the process that had led to his, ahem, decision.AdvertisementSeriously. Really. “It was funny to not have that chapter closed in my life — I was just having fun with it,” he said of the curiosity his nonretirement became. “But they’re making me do this thing right now.”Advertisement“This thing” included a signing of a contract with the Staten Island Yankees — the team’s minor league affiliate — the application of his signature to his quitting papers and a hug from Jean Afterman, the Yankees’ assistant general manager.“We should put a jersey on him,” Afterman said, in deference to photographers, as Williams, apparently wondering how far the Yankees were going to go with the charade, wore a look that said, “O.K., everyone, that’ll do.”That this bizarre showcase happened on a night when the Mets swaggered into Yankee Stadium with an 11-game winning streak and a rising cast of their own foundational talent was not the most judicious reminder on the part of the home team that New York, competitively speaking, is no longer a one-team town.Fortunately for the Yankees, they picked a good night to demystify Mets starter Jacob deGrom and his 0.93 earned run average, coasting to a 6-1 victory behind their own young, hard-throwing right-hander, Michael Pineda, and a pair of two-run home runs by Mark Teixeira.The Yankees’ recent surge, from a punchless 2015 debut, and the Mets’ blazing start were enough to create a buzz on a frosty April night, a blood-warming fantasy about a Subway World Series in October, 15 years after the last one.That, of course, is what fans and sports journalists are primed or paid to do: Get ahead of themselves. Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, already dealing with a rash of injuries, knows better than to overreact to a month’s sample of stunning success.Just the same, he took a moment outside the Mets’ clubhouse before the game to say: “Look, something’s got to happen eventually at the major league level. You can’t go on forever not developing guys and trying to do better at the major league level while focusing on other things.”AdvertisementThis was his way of admitting that if he couldn’t attach a timeline to a Mets renaissance, after being hired during the 2010 postseason, he was approaching the point where he was going to be working in Wilpon World without a safety net.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For all the criticism Alderson heard, along with some personnel mistakes he made, his core — if not a tease — would appear to have developed on a schedule akin to the pace of the rebuilding the Yankees set after George Steinbrenner was suspended from baseball in 1990, allowing Gene Michael and company to invest in a dynastic future by nurturing and protecting the organization’s crown jewels.Alderson said his strategy wasn’t quite as obvious to others — or to him — because, he said, “So many players that we have now that represent what we would consider our core weren’t really on the radar at that time. Jacob deGrom is a perfect example — he was drafted as a shortstop, converted to pitcher and almost immediately had Tommy John surgery.”He added: “In terms of projection, Lucas Duda is another sort of under-the-radar player, the kind of latent asset that none of us were really counting on.”Unlike Cashman in the 21st century, Alderson never operated with vast amounts of disposable revenue. This season’s early returns would suggest that the ownership’s big-market frugality — vociferously panned by the public — might have had an unforeseen upside.“We thought, ‘O.K., let’s give these guys, our guys, every opportunity to succeed,’ ” Alderson said. “As recently as this winter, we could have denied opportunity to one or two of our guys, and we preferred not to do that. Part of it is confidence in the players; part of it is a preference for your own, an allegiance, a loyalty. It’s not just financial, and it’s not just time — it’s also emotional.“You have to be careful about that, but sometimes it’s the right thing to do. As a result, the residue is a core of players that we can be happy with.”Ah, again the core. People often conceptually equate it with homegrown talent, but that isn’t necessarily the defining characteristic. Were Paul O’Neill, Tino Martinez and others obtained in trades not major Yankees contributors and spiritual leaders of the run that produced four titles in five years?Should Alderson’s prize acquisitions — the injured catcher Travis d’Arnaud and the pitchers Zack Wheeler and Noah Syndergaard, perhaps — be excluded from core consideration because they originally signed with other teams and were sent to the Mets for veteran talent?AdvertisementAbout those Mets building blocks, especially their young power pitchers: Would it be too corporately indulgent to brand those most responsible for the revolution that has been their early spring as the Citi Core?If the Yankees can market a nine-year-old retirement, why can’t the Mets sell collective naming rights to their brand names? Earning is the core principle of baseball that accompanies winning.Seriously. Really.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Closure in the Bronx, New Promise in Queens.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »