By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 24, 2015
NEW ORLEANS —  Anthony Davis punctuated his activity at the Pelicans’ shootaround on Thursday morning by spotting up from the corner, where he took pass after pass from an assistant coach. Davis sank six of his final eight attempts, all from beyond the 3-point line. His release was effortless, the ball traveling in a pleasant parabola.It should be noted that it was only practice, and nobody was defending him. But maybe, just maybe, Davis was offering a glimpse of the future, and the future looked ominous for everyone else.“I mean, it’s already pretty much impossible to guard him,” the Pelicans’ Ryan Anderson said. “If he were to add that 3-pointer?”Anderson let the question hang there for half a beat, as if the answer was obvious to anyone familiar with Davis and his vast assemblage of skills. Davis has a midrange game. He handles the ball with ease. He can post up defenders. And he is listed as carrying 220 pounds on a 6-foot-10 frame, his limbs as long as extension cords.AdvertisementDavis, though, seems determined to expand his game, and developing a decent 3-point shot is on his list. He made that declaration over the N.B.A. All-Star break, and he made it sound almost offhand: “In the summertime, I definitely want to try to work on that.” None of his teammates doubt that he will.Advertisement“He masters something and moves on,” said the reserve center Jeff Withey, who has to contend with Davis in practice.The off-season is closing in fast on the Pelicans, who are down, three games to none, to the Golden State Warriors in their first-round playoff series. On Thursday night, the Warriors erased a 20-point deficit in the fourth quarter here to win in overtime, 123-119. Davis finished with 29 points, 15 rebounds, 3 blocks and 3 assists.“We need to try to figure it out as a team,” Davis said. “No one man is going to win the game.”This is Davis’s maiden trip to the playoffs, and the Warriors are dealing hard lessons. The Pelicans had opportunities to win each of the last two games but squandered them. Game 4 is scheduled for Saturday night at Smoothie King Center.Whether or not the Pelicans are swept, they will surely try to make improvements over the summer. Davis, 22, is a generational talent, and the clock is ticking on his rookie contract.For now, Davis appears to be doing all he can to grow on his own. Since the Pelicans drafted him first over all in 2012, he has improved season by season in nearly every major statistical category: points, assists, rebounds, blocks, field-goal percentage, free-throw percentage. This season, Davis entered the playoffs after averaging 24.4 points, 10.2 rebounds and a league-leading 2.9 blocks. He shot 53.5 percent from the field and 80.5 percent from the free-throw line, showcasing an extraordinarily deft touch for such a large person.“It’s crazy because I remember thinking last year, How can this kid get any better?” Anderson said. “And obviously he’s that much better. So why not see him shoot 3s next? It’s not something that he necessarily needs. But it would just be another dimension that would make him that much tougher.”AdvertisementThe mere threat of Davis hitting 3-pointers from the corners would stretch defenses and create a host of problems for opponents, said Ron Adams, an assistant coach with the Warriors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You can scoot him out on pick-and-rolls and disguise a lot of things,” Adams said. “It’s really a helpful thing.”Adams cited the emergence of the Portland Trail Blazers’ LaMarcus Aldridge as a consistent presence from the 3-point line this season. After attempting 116 3-pointers through his first eight seasons combined, Aldridge attempted 105 of them during the regular season and made 35.2 percent. Aldridge has become reliable enough from long range that he often forces defenders to vacate the paint when he drifts to the perimeter, clearing space for teammates to drive.Davis, who was a 6-foot-2 guard as a high school freshman, is versatile enough to penetrate past defenders on his own. At the 3-point line, he would be a matchup nightmare. (He attempted 12 3-pointers in the regular season.)“You can’t give him space, or he’s going to make that jump shot,” Anderson said. “But if you guard him too close, he’s going to dribble right around you.”On Thursday, Davis asserted himself early, collecting 11 points and 4 rebounds in the first quarter. He connected on his first three shots, including jumpers from 15 and 17 feet. He also dabbled in the spectacular, swooping in from the right baseline and extending his pterodactyl-like left arm to collect an offensive rebound and dunk in one fluid motion.Steve Kerr, the coach of the Warriors, said he was recently asked if Davis was comparable to anyone else in the league. The short answer was no.“He’s unlike anybody,” Kerr said. “Maybe the guy he’s most like is Kevin Durant, with that skill and quickness in such a big body.”Kerr added: “Guys like that want to be guards. I think they grew up that way, and that’s the way the game is being played now.”AdvertisementIf there is any sort of danger for Davis, perhaps it is becoming too dependent on the jump shot. The 3-point line is particularly seductive, Anderson said. Once players starting taking them, it can be hard to stop.As an opposing coach, Kerr said he would almost prefer to see Davis plant himself along the perimeter.“Because that would mean he’s not in the paint dunking and getting offensive boards and all that,” Kerr said.In any case, Davis seems certain to head back to his basketball laboratory this summer, so he can add another layer or two of complexity to his game. The rest of the league will watch from a safe distance to see what he concocts.Zach Schonbrun contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Goal for Pelicans’ Davis: Adding 3s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.