AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherLong-suffering Mets fans are feeling pretty good about taking the 7 train to Citi Field this year; in 10 home games, the team has not yet tasted defeat.The Mets’ run is the longest winning streak at home to start a season since Los Angeles was 13-0 at Dodger Stadium in 2009. “Streaks are fine, but we have more important things in mind,” Manager Joe Torre said then after win No. 13. “Hopefully, it’s just a steppingstone on the way to something more important.”The next day, Manny Ramirez was suspended for 50 games for testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs. That night, the Dodgers lost at home to the Nationals, 11-9, despite a Matt Kemp grand slam.Ramirez returned in July, and Los Angeles went on to win 95 games and advance to the National League Championship Series.The Dodgers hold the record for the modern era of baseball, but it was surpassed several times in the statistically peculiar 19th century.The Chicago White Stockings, as the Cubs were once known, hold the overall record, 21 straight home games to start the 1880 National League season. The team’s streak took place in the friendly confines of Lake Front Park, a stadium in what is now called Grant Park.The White Stockings were 9-0 in their first homestand in May, sweeping the Cincinnati Reds, the Buffalo Bisons and the Cleveland Blues. Returning in June, they ran off 11 more wins over the Troy Trojans, the Worcester Ruby Legs, the Boston Red Stockings and the Providence Grays. Their third homestand, in August, began with a win over the Grays, but Providence finally broke the streak on Aug. 12 by a 6-4 score.The White Stockings won the league with a record of 67-17, a winning percentage that would translate to 129-33 over a 162-game season. The team was led by the Hall of Famer Cap Anson, but its best player may have been center fielder George Gore, who was nicknamed Piano Legs and who hit .360. The 1880 White Stockings were also one of the first teams to experiment with a pitching rotation — a two-man rotation. Their ace, Larry Corcoran, was 43-14 in 60 starts.The Mets, who have won 11 straight games over all, tying their franchise record, play this weekend at Yankee Stadium. They return to Citi Field on April 30 against the Nationals. They could break the modern mark with a four-game sweep of Washington.To match the White Stockings, though, the Mets need seven more home wins on top of that, two against Baltimore, three against Milwaukee and two against St. Louis.Piano Legs can probably rest easy.Additional reporting by Elena GustinesAdvertisement