By ANDREW KEHAPRIL 24, 2015
ATLANTA —  Like so many of his N.B.A. peers, Andrew Lang chose to stay close to the game when his playing days came to an end. But the second act of his career did not relocate him behind a front-office desk or onto a coach’s chair or inside a broadcast booth.It brought him, instead, to a small auxiliary locker room at Philips Arena, bare except for some padded folding chairs. There, before every Atlanta Hawks home game, Lang fulfills his responsibilities as the team’s chaplain, taking prayer requests and imparting a prepared message to players before they step onto the court.Some nights, Lang might sit there alone. Some nights, he might find himself holding hands and praying with nearly a full N.B.A. squad. Whether or not anyone shows up, Lang has made it his duty for the last 14 years to be there, ready to help.“As a player, if I was open in the post, it was, ‘Hey, let’s go!’ ” Lang said this week, clapping his hands. “Those days are over. You have to be patient with these young men. It’s their time, their choice. It’s for their enrichment. You have to accept that, sometimes, you have to wait.”AdvertisementIn his 2006 self-help book “The Warrior Within,” Pat Williams, who served as general manager of the Philadelphia 76ers from 1974 to 1986, wrote that the team’s All-Star forward, Bobby Jones, helped organize the N.B.A.’s first chapel meeting before a game in February 1979 against the Milwaukee Bucks. Williams, now vice president of the Orlando Magic, wrote that there were five attendees: Jones, Williams, Julius Erving, the assistant coach Chuck Daly of the 76ers and Kent Benson of the Bucks. The practice spread quickly. AdvertisementToday, all 30 N.B.A. teams have volunteer chaplains, with no guidance or oversight from the league. One hour before every game, inside every arena, players from both sides are invited to attend a closed-door meeting in some designated corner of the building. The sessions usually last no more than 15 minutes. For some players, attending chapel service has become as much a part of their pregame routine as having an ankle taped.“It’s a little different than just sitting there, reading some Bible verses by yourself, as opposed to getting the word with others and really studying and praying together,” said Draymond Green of the Golden State Warriors, who said that about half his teammates attended chapel before every game.At around 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, Lang, 48, went through his pregame routine while the Hawks and the Nets were preparing to play Game 2 of their first-round postseason series.The Hawks’ attendance at chapel has been low this season, Lang said, guessing it had something to do with the demands of learning Coach Mike Budenholzer’s intricate system.Hawks guard Kyle Korver, who attended chapel regularly while playing for the 76ers and the Utah Jazz, said he was forgoing the sessions lately because they occurred during his regimented pregame shooting workout.On the other hand, Lang said, when the Orlando Magic visited Atlanta, it seemed as if all of their players attended chapel.The Hawks’ low turnout has made Lang focus even more on the five-by-eight-inch placards bearing inspirational messages that he places, with permission, inside players’ lockers before most games. At 6 p.m., after distributing the cards, Lang strolled over to the arena’s chapel space, a spare room next to the visitors’ locker room. He was accompanied by Steve Heifner, a senior elder at his church, and soon the older men were joined by two players: Cory Jefferson of the Nets and John Jenkins of the Hawks.Advertisement“He doesn’t try to force you to go in there,” Jenkins said of Lang. “He just makes you feel like he loves you and you’re family.”Lang spent 12 seasons in the N.B.A., distinguishing himself as a tough defensive center. Some fans in New York remember him as the player who collided in midair with Patrick Ewing in 1997, breaking Ewing’s wrist.Lionel Hollins, the coach of the Nets, and Paul Westphal, one of his assistant coaches, were assistant coaches with the Phoenix Suns in 1988, when the team drafted Lang out of Arkansas. Hollins coached the team’s big men that season and helped Lang with his footwork.“He was the sweetest man,” Hollins said. “Everything was, ‘Yes, sir; no, sir.’ ”  Westphal said that Lang came into the league as a “monumentally bad free-throw shooter” — Westphal and Hollins corrected his form, and Lang ended up shooting 74.4 percent over his career — and that he was one of the quietest players he had coached.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If you would have told me he was going to be a minister and give sermons someday, it would have been inconceivable — not that he didn’t have the moral makeup to do it,” Westphal said.Lang, who became a licensed minister while he was still playing, attended pregame chapel throughout his career, finding that it built his confidence and helped him find his voice. He said it was particularly helpful during his one season with the Knicks, when he and a group of his teammates attended chapel with the team’s longtime chaplain, John Love.In 2001, after Lang had retired, Jeff Van Gundy, then the coach of the Knicks, made headlines because of an interview with New York magazine in which he criticized the practice of pregame chapels and the access Love had to his players.“Now, do people in offices have preachers coming into their place of business, interrupting their work? No,” Van Gundy said in the magazine piece. “They have to do it before or after work. As a team and an organization, you’ve got to try to minimize those distractions, period.”Lang remembered Van Gundy’s comments and said he respected Van Gundy’s position. But he pointed out that he and the teammates who attended chapel then — like Allan Houston, Kurt Thomas and Charlie Ward — avoided problems off the court.Advertisement“What makes one man cringe makes another man strong,” Lang said.Opposition to chapel services still exists, though it tends to be discreet. One former N.B.A. head coach, granted anonymity to speak freely on the subject, said that pregame chapel services were not uniformly productive.“God’s not a good-luck charm,” he said.He said that some players attended chapel because they felt peer pressure from teammates or coaches. And chaplains, he said, sometimes appeared to have ulterior motives, whether it was trying to make connections with the players or promoting their personal projects.“If it’s not real, it can be worse than useless,” he said. Bo Mitchell, who served as the Denver Nuggets’ chaplain from 1991 to 2006, agreed, saying there were certain behaviors that can “make a guy’s life as a chaplain short.”Missteps he had noticed included asking players for autographs, requesting they make public appearances for a church or personal business, or bringing guests to the games.“That crosses the line,” Mitchell said. “Now you’re not the friend, and you’re not a trusted confidant. You’re caught up in the fact that they’re professional athletes.”Mitchell said players often asked him to pray for their families, safe travel and health. His most memorable chapel session occurred in 1999, on the day of the Columbine High School shootings in Colorado. The Nuggets’ game against the Portland Trail Blazers was canceled, but a large group of players from both teams stayed for chapel.Sometimes, inevitably, the prayer requests involve basketball.“When an athlete is pouring his life into what he does — things are not going well or the team’s on a losing streak — sometimes a coach or another player does not suffice for them,” said Kevin Harvey, the longtime chaplain of the 76ers, “and they need guidance or prayer or just a talk.”On Wednesday in Atlanta, Lang’s chapel message revolved around prayer, which, he said, outweighed everything else in the postseason. The men in the room held hands, bowed their heads and prayed.AdvertisementAt 6:07 p.m., Jenkins walked out of the chapel room with a towel draped around his neck and a smile on his face.Scott Cacciola contributed reporting from New Orleans.A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A. Pregame Routine: Stretch. Tape Ankles. Join Hands in Prayer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.