By ANDREW DASAPRIL 24, 2015
Barcelona was drawn against Bayern Munich on Friday for the Champions League semifinals, matching Bayern Coach Pep Guardiola against the club he led to two European titles. Real Madrid, the defending champion, will play the two-time winner Juventus in the other semifinal.The first legs will be played May 5 (Real Madrid at Juventus) and May 6 (Bayern at Barcelona), with the return matches in Munich on May 12 and in Madrid on May 13.Barcelona and Bayern Munich were the class acts of the quarterfinals, making their matchup particularly appealing. Barcelona — led by the strike force of Lionel Messi, Neymar and Luis Suárez — easily dispatched Paris St.-Germain over two legs, and Bayern thumped Porto, 6-1, on Tuesday to claim its place.Guardiola will be returning to the Camp Nou stadium in Barcelona for the first time since walking away from the club in 2012 after a remarkable four-year run in which the club claimed 14 trophies, including the Champions League titles in 2009 and 2011.AdvertisementHis two-year tenure at Bayern has been almost as successful, with the club closing in on a second straight Bundesliga crown. He was criticized, however, after Bayern was eliminated by Real Madrid in the Champions League semifinals last season.Advertisement“It is a special game for us all because Pep is on the other side,” Barcelona Manager Luis Enrique, who played with Guardiola at the club, told reporters in Spain. “It will be the first time that he has faced Barça. It will be the first time that I have faced him as a coach, which will be special for me, and I am sure it will also be for my players.”Asked if Barcelona had been unlucky to draw Bayern, Enrique said, “In a draw like this, I always think the team that has to play against Barça has had little luck.”Real Madrid’s matches against Juventus will also be a reunion: Real’s manager, Carlo Ancelotti, coached Juventus from 1999 to 2001. Like Guardiola, Ancelotti has won the Champions League as a player and as a coach.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The draw was certain to produce marquee matchups. The four clubs have combined to win the trophy 21 times, including a record 10 wins by Real Madrid.Three of the past four trophies have gone to Real Madrid (2014), Bayern (2013) or Barcelona (2011). That makes Juventus — a two-time winner and still one of the most successful clubs in European soccer history — something of an outlier. Juventus last won the Champions League in 1996, but it played in the final most recently in 2003. Two of its key players — goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon and midfielder Andrea Pirlo — actually started in that game, though Pirlo played for Juventus’s opponent, A.C. Milan, which was coached by Ancelotti and won the match.UEFA, European soccer’s governing body, also held the draw for semifinals of the second-tier Europa League on Friday. The defending champion, Sevilla, will face Fiorentina, and Napoli will play Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk of Ukraine.Sevilla spared UEFA a potentially uncomfortable situation when it scored a late goal on Thursday to eliminate Zenit St. Petersburg, the final Russian club in the field, in the quarterfinals. UEFA had pledged to keep Russian and Ukrainian clubs (Dynamo Kiev was also eliminated on Thursday) from meeting in the semifinals, but it would have been powerless to avoid a politically contentious final if teams from both countries had advanced to the title game in Warsaw.FIRE 1, NEW YORK CITY F.C. 0 David Accam scored an early goal, and the Chicago Fire beat visiting New York City F.C.Chicago (3-3-0) won its third straight game, while N.Y.C.F.C. (1-4-3), which played with 10 men after Andrew Jacobson received a red card in the 23rd minute, played its sixth straight game without a win.AdvertisementIn the 20th minute, N.Y.C. goalkeeper Ryan Meara rushed out to prevent the ball from going out of bounds, but he mishandled it and Accam dribbled back to an empty net. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on April 25, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Reunions in Champions League Draw.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.