By VICTOR MATHERAPRIL 24, 2015
The Golden State Warriors had a superb season. But one area in which they did not particularly shine was offensive rebounding percentage, ranking a rather pedestrian 21st.But it was offensive rebounding that was crucial to the Warriors’ latest amazing feat, a 20-point fourth-quarter comeback against the host New Orleans Pelicans late Thursday night.It was the third biggest fourth-quarter comeback in N.B.A. playoff historyWhen a team comes from that far back, a lot must go right. Ordinarily, a lot goes wrong for the other team too. But offensively, at least, the Pelicans did not play terribly in the quarter, scoring 19 points, not a horrible total.And for the first six minutes of the quarter, there were no signs the game was slipping away: the Pelicans still led by 17. But after a dunk by Norris Cole to give New Orleans a 15-point lead with five minutes left, the game turned. The Pelicans made just one field goal and three free throws in the rest of regulation.AdvertisementIn that same five minutes, the Warriors scored 20 points. But they missed quite a few shots, too. The key was the offensive rebounding; the Warriors had 10 in the fourth quarter, giving them chance after chance to cut the deficit.AdvertisementTheir top man this season was Andrew Bogut, with 141 offensive rebounds. But on Thursday it was Draymond Green, Harrison Barnes and point guard Shaun Livingston, who had just 43 in the regular season, who pulled in the offensive boards down the stretch. For the game, the Warriors topped the Pelicans in second-chance points, 30-8.After Stephen Curry hit a 3-pointer with 11 seconds left to cut the Pelicans’ lead to 2, Anthony Davis of the Pelicans made one of two free throws.With five seconds left, Curry took an off-balance 3 to tie the score. This time, some serendipity was involved: The shot was not close, and it caromed off the front rim right into the hands of Marreese Speights for another offensive rebound. That gave Curry a second chance at the miracle with two seconds left.Curry got the ball from Speights in the corner and got a shot off as Davis and Tyreke Evans barreled into him. Somehow he hit a memorable shot, sending the game into overtime, where the Warriors won, 123-119. Curry ended up with 40 points.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Twice teams have bettered the Warriors’ comeback, rallying from 21-point fourth-quarter deficits. In the 2002 Eastern Conference finals, the Boston Celtics, having split the first two games in New Jersey, fell into a big hole at home in Game 3. But Paul Pierce had 19 points in the fourth quarter, and the Celtics outscored the Nets, 41-16, in the period to win.The rest of the series played more like the first three quarters of that game, though, as Jason Kidd and the Nets won three straight to reach their first N.B.A. finals.In 2012, the Los Angeles Clippers came from 21 down against the Memphis Grizzlies in the first game of a first-round series, outscoring them, 35-13. Nick Young had 19 points, including three 3s in the space of a minute late in the fourth. The Clippers won the series in seven games.The Pelicans now trail their series, three games to none. To win it, they will have to break some records of their own. No team has come back from a 3-0 deficit in a seven-game series in N.B.A. history, and only three have even made it to Game 7.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.