By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 26, 2015
Jerryd Bayless made a layup at the buzzer off an inbounds pass to lift host Milwaukee to a 92-90 victory over the Chicago Bulls on Saturday, drawing the Bucks to within three games to one in their Eastern Conference playoff series.With 1.3 seconds left, Jared Dudley threw a high-arcing pass toward the basket from side court. Bayless caught the ball and quickly threw up the layup for the game-winning basket.“We thought we got better tonight,” Bucks Coach Jason Kidd said. “We found ourselves with a ‘W.’ “Bulls guard Derrick Rose walked away in frustration after trying to guard Bayless as green and white streamers descended from the Bradley Center rafters. The Bucks had won their first playoff game in five years.AdvertisementChicago had a chance to win with the game tied at 90-90. But Milwaukee’s Khris Middleton tipped a dribble away from Rose to force a steal. Bucks Coach Jason Kidd called a timeout to set up the final play.Advertisement“I put that all on me; I just wasn’t paying attention to the ball,” Rose said.Coach Tom Thibodeau refused to lay the blame solely on his star point guard. With 28 turnovers, the whole team played a part in failing to close out a four-game sweep.“I’m not going to put it on that last play,” Thibodeau said. “There were a lot of other plays throughout the course of the game.”Game 5 is Monday in Chicago.Jimmy Butler had a playoff career-high 33 points for the Bulls. Rose finished with 14 points, while Pau Gasol had 16 points and 10 rebounds.The Bulls just couldn’t contain Bayless and Dudley at the end. The veterans were a calming influence off the bench on a team known more for the rising stars Giannis Antetokounmpo and Michael Carter-Williams, both starters.But it was the bench that ignited Milwaukee’s second-half push after the Bucks lost a 12-point lead in the first half. The Bucks’ reserves outscored Chicago’s by 47-13 for the game.O. J. Mayo finished with 18 points, including a 3-pointer with 1 minute 42 seconds left while Dudley had 13 points and 5 assists — including the one on the game-winner — while Bayless had 10 points.WARRIORS 109, PELICANS 98  Stephen Curry hit six 3-pointers during a 39-point night, and visiting Golden State cruised to victory over New Orleans, completing a sweep of a first-round playoff series.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Klay Thompson added 25 points for the Warriors, the N.B.A.’s top overall seed, who will wait to host Game 1 of their second-round series against the winner of the Portland-Memphis matchup.AdvertisementDraymond Green added 22 points and 10 rebounds for Golden State, which raced to a 67-54 halftime lead and widened the gap to as many as 24 points in the second half before the desperate Pelicans briefly cut their deficit to single digits in the final minutes.Anthony Davis had 36 points and 11 rebounds to close out what has been a remarkable third season for the Pelicans’ 22-year-old franchise player. He just didn’t have quite enough help.Eric Gordon had 29 points, and Ryan Anderson added 10, but New Orleans needed more than that as Golden State shot 50.6 percent, including 13 of 24 from 3-point range.The Pelicans looked competitive early on, shooting 50 percent in the first half, but Golden State’s accurate perimeter shooting made effective defense a difficult proposition.Then, needing a strong third quarter, the Pelicans instead struggled offensively, hitting only 5 of 18 shots.The Warriors led by 87-63 on Harrison Barnes’s dunk late in the third quarter, and the lead was still 21 points entering the fourth.GRIZZLIES 115, TRAIL BLAZERS 109 Marc Gasol had 25 points and the Memphis Grizzlies took a 3-0 lead in their playoff series over the Trail Blazers by withstanding a late rally in Portland, Ore., on Saturday night.Courtney Lee had 20 points and Mike Conley added 14 before leaving the game late in the third quarter with a facial injury. Memphis was already thin at point guard with reserve Beno Udrih sidelined with a sprained right ankle.Game 4 is Monday night at Portland.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Bucks Topple Bulls With Layup at Buzzer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.