By JOE DEPAOLOAPRIL 26, 2015
At a February news conference promoting his bout with Bryant Jennings, Wladimir Klitschko, the heavyweight champion of the world, invoked an unofficial title often associated with the crown.“As a champion, I have to say that I’m the bad man,” Klitschko said. “The baddest man on the planet.”Despite a win on Saturday night at Madison Square Garden, Klitschko’s performance did not quite inspire the same fear as some of the previous holders of that title.Before a reported crowd of 17,056, Klitschko, a Ukrainian heavyweight, prevailed by unanimous decision over Jennings, who is from Philadelphia. It was Klitschko’s 18th consecutive heavyweight championship defense, the third highest career total.AdvertisementThe bout featured a number of clinches, and neither man ever appeared seriously hurt.“I was expecting to get the win, to defend my titles,” Klitschko said “Unfortunately, I didn’t defend as impressively as I usually do it.”AdvertisementAfter three sluggish rounds, the action picked up a bit in the fourth after Klitschko, 39, landed a strong right cross. The two traded punches several times during the round, with Klitschko mostly getting the better of the exchanges.Klitschko (64-3, 55 knockouts) was able to close in behind a consistent left jab. The punch landed sparingly, but it allowed him to get inside and land the punches he needed to secure the victory.“Jennings is a very good challenger, a very good competitor,” Klitschko said after the fight. “He would have beaten a number of top heavyweights.”Jennings (19-1, 10 knockouts) had his moments, connecting on some wild hooks in the middle rounds. Ultimately, though, he had trouble landing consistently, despite having a three-inch reach advantage.“Every time I started working, he held me,” Jennings said.He added, “I thought the margin should have been closer.”Before the bout, Jennings accused Klitschko of excessively holding his opponents, and in the 10th round the referee, Michael Griffin, deducted a point from Klitschko for doing just that. Even with the deduction, Klitschko prevailed by 116-111 on two scorecards and by 118-109 on a third.Although he did not get the nod from the judges, Jennings appeared to take some solace in going 12 competitive rounds with the longtime champion. Advertisement“Even in a loss, they should — not praise me, but salute me and show respect,” Jennings said, adding, “This fight does not penetrate my confidence.”Still, despite all the clinches, Klitschko did enough to defend his title. He landed several strong combinations in the last few rounds to punctuate his victory.The crowd, largely rooting for Klitschko, seemed satisfied, despite the fact that the action lagged throughout. According to the statistics tracking website CompuBox, Klitschko landed only 144 punches of 545 thrown. Jennings landed 110 of 376.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Klitschko’s trainer, Johnathon Banks, blamed Jennings for the low punch output.“He wasn’t so offensive today,” Banks said of Jennings. “Jennings is usually offensive, throws a lot of punches.”It was Klitschko’s first fight at Madison Square Garden since February 2008, when he defeated Sultan Ibragimov by unanimous decision in a bout derided by many for its lack of action.A number of Klitschko’s bouts over the years have drawn similar criticism. Klitschko, however, was confident that the match against Jennings would produce more fireworks. Klitschko had been hoping to put on a better show in his return to the Garden.“I could have done it better,” he said, visibly frustrated. “I couldn’t engage in the fight, and I couldn’t knock the person out.”“I think I can give a lot of answers for all the criticisms and the doubts,” Klitschko said. “I can deliver a brutal knockout.”Klitschko’s trainer, Johnathon Banks, was aware that it was important not only for his man to defeat Jennings but to look good doing it.Advertisement“It’s not about winning and losing right now,” Banks said before the fight. “All that matters is how you perform.”Aesthetics are important to Klitschko right now, given the emergence of Deontay Wilder, an exciting potential challenger. All but one of Wilder’s 33 victories have come by knockout. He is considered one of the best American heavyweight prospects in years. Banks, however, is skeptical of the level of competition Wilder has faced.“You can’t name five opponents Deontay Wilder has knocked out,” Banks said. “He’s a big punching guy, but you can’t name any of his opponents.”Should Klitschko ever meet Wilder, who watched from ringside on Saturday night, it would give Klitschko an opportunity to post the signature win that many feel has long eluded him. Such a victory would significantly enhance his legacy. Klitschko said after the bout that he would not fight Wilder next but that he hoped to do so early in 2016.Ukrainian flags were visible throughout the Garden on Saturday night. Klitschko has cited fan support as a reason he wants to keep fighting for as long as he is at his physical peak.“I’m enjoying it so much right now,” Klitschko said. “Every second and every moment. Because maybe it could end.”After his victory Saturday night, the end for Klitschko still appears to be far in the distance.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Klitschko Retains His Crown Against an American Challenger .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.