AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzAs soon as the Yankees’ clubhouse opens, C. C. Sabathia is standing at his locker dutifully awaiting the usual questions, virtually all of them pointing back to one: What went wrong?It has become a ritual, and it happened again Saturday when Sabathia followed up a promising performance in Detroit with a deflating one against the Mets, who belted three home runs off him and rode a dominating performance by Matt Harvey to an 8-2 win over the Yankees.Sabathia’s record fell to 0-4, his E.R.A. rose to 5.96, and he is the only Yankees starter to have lost a decision since April 11.“I just want to help the team win, and I haven’t been able to do that my three or four times out,” Sabathia said. “This stings a little more because I didn’t give us a chance at all.”It was clear almost from the start that Sabathia was not sharp, and without a fastball in the upper 90s to rely on, imprecise pitches rarely make it to catcher Brian McCann’s glove — or anyone else’s. Sabathia’s strikeout totals have declined in every start: eight to seven to five to two.Lucas Duda homered. Juan Lagares smacked a triple into the right-center gap. The rookie Kevin Plawecki hit his first major league homer. Eric Campbell hit his first home run this season.The Mets hit four line drives that were caught, and if not for two excellent catches by outfielders Jacoby Ellsbury and Brett Gardner, the Mets might still be batting in the fourth, when they broke the game open with four runs.Adding to the dispiriting afternoon, Sabathia was beaten to the bag on a grounder to first by Curtis Granderson. It was not for lack of hustle, but for the lack of mobility that troubles Sabathia after knee surgery.After Lagares followed Campbell’s home run in the sixth by ripping a single to center field, Manager Joe Girardi came to the mound to relieve Sabathia.As Sabathia walked to the dugout, he was booed, though some behind the home dugout stood and applauded.Sabathia, as a mentor to the pitching staff and as a workhorse who helped deliver the 2009 World Series title, has earned good will in the clubhouse. It is now being paid back. Girardi, along with several teammates, said that this was the only poor start for Sabathia this season.“I’m not going to make too much of one start,” Girardi said. “He’s done a really good job of getting a lot of ground balls and strikeouts and keeping the ball in the ballpark before today. Today, he struggled for whatever reason.”With the Yankees trailing by 5-1 after the Mets’ four-run fourth, Girardi said he had stayed with Sabathia in the hope that he would find his rhythm, though two outs in the fifth were hit hard — one a fly ball to the warning track by Duda.“You have a defense for a reason,” Girardi said. “He’s given up hits that were soft, too, and I kept him in. So you think about it, you think maybe he’s going to turn it around.”McCann was asked what had been the most encouraging aspect of Sabathia’s four starts.“He’s healthy,” he said.The Yankees’ offense has not helped Sabathia, scoring nine runs in his four starts.At this stage of his career, Sabathia, 34, can use all the help he can get. His fastball and his health have been in decline since 2012, when he was 15-6 with a 3.38 E.R.A. He is 17-21 with a 4.97 E.R.A. since.“At 97 with that curveball, he was no fun to face,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said before the game, recalling Sabathia in his prime. “Now he’s evolved into a guy that moves the ball around, changes speed” — the things managers tell young pitchers “that they’re eventually going to have to do.”The Mets’ approach against Sabathia was drastically different than Detroit’s in its 2-1 victory over the Yankees on Monday. The Tigers attacked Sabathia early in counts but rolled over his sinker, hitting into three double plays. The Mets were content to go deep into counts, waiting for Sabathia to get the ball up, which he did regularly.“Today, it was just missing spots — everything was up,” Sabathia said. “The cutter, I couldn’t get down where I wanted to get it. Just a tough day.”Sabathia was asked if he had been surprised by the boos.“No,” he said. “Not at all. You pitch bad, you get booed.”Advertisement