

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
APRIL 25, 2015
SAN ANTONIO — Kawhi Leonard, at age 23, broke from routine before Friday night’s game against the Los Angeles Clippers. He was led to midcourt by Tim Duncan, who presented Leonard with the N.B.A. Defensive Player of the Year Award. Leonard, who typically shows about as much emotion as a lamppost, even managed to crack a smile.The symbolism in the moment was obvious. There was Duncan, on the eve of his 39th birthday, making an exchange with a much younger teammate — even if Duncan hesitated for an instant before handing him the trophy, as if it were difficult for him to let go. Leonard represents the future, and the crowd at AT&T Center roared with approval.The bridge from one era to the next was never supposed to be this seamless for the Spurs. Nor could they have envisioned the impact that one postdraft trade would have on the franchise — the way one player would energize the team’s core and sustain its championship aspirations.But Leonard, acquired by the Spurs after the Indiana Pacers selected him with the 15th pick in the 2011 draft, has done all that for the Spurs, and his performance on Friday against the Los Angeles Clippers — 32 points, 3 steals and 2 blocked shots as the Spurs seized a two-games-to-one lead in their first-round playoff series — was the latest reminder.Advertisement“I thought he was absolutely sensational,” Doc Rivers, the coach of the Clippers, said after his team’s 100-73 loss.Advertisement“We should give him an award before every game,” the Spurs’ Boris Diaw said.“He put on a show,” Duncan said.Given the breadth of his talents, it might be easy to forget that Leonard was not a polished product when he left San Diego State after his sophomore season. He was an outstanding defender, his skillet-size hands forever finding their way into passing lanes. But he was not exceedingly skilled on the perimeter, shooting 29.1 percent from 3-point range.“He was an inside guy,” Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich said.In San Antonio, Leonard has developed for a variety of reasons. If his work ethic formed the foundation — he is the prototypical grinder who comes to practice early and leaves late, Popovich said — Leonard has been a willing student as well, honing his shooting touch and guard skills under the assistant coaches Chip Engelland and Chad Forcier.Most important, though, Leonard has benefited from being around players like Duncan, Tony Parker and Manu Ginobili, with their championship pedigree and selfless approach. The Spurs run the world’s finest graduate school for basketball prospects, and Leonard has embraced the opportunity, soaking up all he can from some members of the faculty.“Maybe it would have been different if he was on a different team,” Diaw said. “Maybe he’d still be a great player, but not quite in the same way.”Leonard, who will be a restricted free agent at the end of the season, seems certain to remain with the Spurs. Why would he ever leave? And why would the Spurs ever let him go?He could operate solely as a defensive specialist for the rest of his career and still be invaluable to his team. Before Game 3, Rivers said that Popovich had done an excellent job of moving Leonard around, varying his assignments. Rivers went so far as to compare Leonard to Deion Sanders, the former N.F.L. cornerback.AdvertisementAnticipating Leonard’s defensive versatility is one thing; unearthing solutions is another. On Friday, it was more of the same as the Spurs dismantled the Clippers. Where was Leonard? He was moonlighting as a help-side defender, blocking a layup attempt by Glen Davis. He was hedging on Chris Paul, who shot 3 of 11 against the Spurs’ Danny Green.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Leonard also spent time defending J. J. Redick, who found just enough space to attempt seven shots, missing five of them. Through the series’ first three games, Redick has averaged 11 points while shooting 31.3 percent from the field. During the regular season, he averaged 16.4 points while shooting 47.7 percent.All of that would have amounted to an exceptional night’s work for Leonard, but he also carried the Spurs on offense. Consider that Duncan, Parker and Ginobili combined for 12 points. Yet the Spurs led by as many as 37, and after Leonard was fouled hitting a jumper in the fourth quarter, the crowd began to chant “M-V-P! M-V-P!” as he walked to the free-throw line.“I don’t know if he came out here tonight to say that he’s more than just a defender,” Duncan said.Duncan felt that it was important to note that nearly all of Leonard’s shot attempts came within the framework of the Spurs’ offense. If some of their bodies are aging, their ball movement never gets old. Sure enough, their hallmark passing produced several open looks for Leonard early on.“And then I think he kind of got comfortable, kind of got on a roll,” Duncan said, “and you see his level of difficulty going up: shooting over double teams, fading away, making plays. From there, he was off to the races.”Leonard went 3 of 5 from 3-point range, and whenever the Clippers extended out to him, he opted to drive past them. He shot 13 of 18 over all.“I just got into a rhythm,” said Leonard, who tends to be less than expansive when it comes to evaluating his play.The good news for the Clippers was that even though the game felt like a catastrophe, it counted as only one loss. They scored the fewest points they had all season. Their previous low, 85, had also come against the Spurs, during the regular season.Advertisement“It doesn’t mean anything,” said Popovich, who sounded as if he had spent nearly three hours at a podiatry seminar.In so many ways, Popovich has molded this franchise in his image: the lunch-pail attitude, the no-nonsense postgame debriefings. So it qualified as something of a spectacle for the Spurs when Duncan and Leonard agreed to participate in that brief trophy presentation before the game. Afterward, Duncan was asked if he could tell what Leonard was thinking.“Can anybody tell?” Duncan said, deadpan. “I don’t know. I gave him the trophy, walked off the court, and he was behind me.”They had work to do together.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: A Rising Star Means the Spurs Won’t Miss a Beat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »