AdvertisementSupported byMets 8, Yankees 2By Tim RohanThe scene that unfolded Saturday at Yankee Stadium was, in a strange way, perhaps close to what Matt Harvey, the Mets’ ace, had imagined as a child, as a Yankees fan, playing catch with his father.By the ninth inning, the crowd had thinned out and was mostly Mets fans, but they chanted his name and cheered when he struck out Alex Rodriguez on a 98-mile-an-hour fastball. Any lingering concern over his recovery from Tommy John surgery had been forgotten. High on the adrenaline, Harvey was one out away from a complete game.Then Manager Terry Collins trotted to the mound to retrieve him.Harvey was at 107 pitches, two more than his unofficial limit.“Come on,” Harvey said to Collins. “Let me get this guy.”But Collins would not relent.Harvey walked off to a standing ovation. He had stifled the Yankees for eight and two-thirds innings, retired Rodriguez four times, and led the Mets to an 8-2 victory. Their record is 14-4, the best in baseball, and Harvey has four of those wins.“I did the best I could to leave him out there,” Collins said.Collins understood this game meant more to Harvey. It was his first career start at Yankee Stadium. Growing up in Mystic, Conn., about two hours northeast of the city, Harvey sometimes came with his father to watch the Yankees.Asked if he had any memories of visiting the old stadium, Harvey said, “I play for the Mets now.”Last year, while he was rehabbing from his surgery, Harvey made sure to attend Derek Jeter’s final home game. Jeter was one of Harvey’s childhood heroes, and the two were becoming friends. Jeter even later named Harvey the New York bureau chief of his website, The Players’ Tribune. But seeing Harvey at a Yankees game, in an expensive seat, regardless of the occasion, rankled Mets fans.During an ESPN profile on Harvey and his comeback, Jeremy Schaap, an ESPN reporter, floated a theory to Harvey: Mets fans are so accustomed to being second fiddle in the city that seeing Harvey at a Yankees game might have made them nervous.“I definitely see that side of it,” Harvey answered. “I completely understand. But the other side is that I have bled in a Mets uniform. I’ve definitely sweat in a Mets uniform. And that’s my life. Right now, that’s who I play for.”The last two sentences, Harvey spoke slowly, choosing his words carefully.In the first inning Saturday, facing Rodriguez for the first time, Harvey struck him out swinging. But that was the end of the theatrics for the most part. Instead of trying to strike out every Yankee and turn the game into a highlight reel, Harvey showed restraint. He mixed his pitches, got outs early in the count and conserved his energy.He struck out two batters in the sixth inning, two more in the seventh. He struck out Rodriguez once more in the ninth, and Rodriguez looked up at the replay on the scoreboard.“As good as advertised,” Rodriguez said of Harvey. “He’s a horse.”The most impressive aspect of this comeback season for Harvey may be how sharp his command has been. Through four starts, he had 31 strikeouts and only three walks.The Mets’ offense provided Harvey enough run support that he could relax even more.Juan Lagares went 4 for 4 and scored three runs. Lucas Duda, Eric Campbell and Kevin Plawecki all hit home runs off C. C. Sabathia, the Yankees’ starter. For Plawecki, it was his first major league homer. The Mets pummeled Sabathia (0-4) for seven runs in five innings.Around the sixth, Harvey peeked at his pitch count. Then he glanced down in the bullpen and, seeing no activity, set his sights on trying to finish the game. He allowed a home run to Mark Teixeira, his eighth, in the seventh inning, but otherwise was pitching well.When Harvey came off the mound in the eighth, he was at 91 pitches, but he told Collins he wanted to pitch the ninth. Collins decided this was a special circumstance because Harvey had had an extra day off between starts, but he would limit Harvey to 105 pitches.Harvey came charging out of the dugout for the ninth inning and got two outs. But Teixeira singled, and then Harvey walked Brian McCann, and Collins came to the mound. Desperately, Harvey asked again to stay in the game.“Matt,” Collins said, “I can’t.”Advertisement