By ZACH SCHONBRUNAPRIL 25, 2015
The banner billboard stripped across the face of the second deck in right field of Yankee Stadium must have been teasing Mark Teixeira, whose two home runs against the Mets on Friday landed in the same location: Section 207, directly above an advertisement for potato chips.Teixeira said after the Yankees’ 6-1 victory that his new diet — abstaining from the junk food that used to tempt him — had been a key contributor to his revived home run power this season. His home run Saturday was his eighth. The Yankees are certainly pleased to have Teixeira, a switch-hitting power source, back in the middle of their lineup, albeit with a slightly different effect from the one Teixeira was originally expected to bring.With 15 hits, Teixeira has a batting average of .254, and it seems as though the halcyon days of being close to a .300 hitter are firmly in his rearview mirror. But with eight home runs, four doubles, 18 R.B.I. and a .729 slugging percentage, the new Teixeira is a version the Yankees will gladly accept.“I want the run production,” Manager Joe Girardi said Friday. “The bottom line is how many runs you score. If you drive in 17 a month, you’re going to have a pretty good year.”AdvertisementTeixeira’s teammates have been wondering just what has gotten into him — or, more precisely, what exactly his diet has removed. He is a notoriously slow starter, and April has historically been Teixeira’s worst month, with his career on-base plus slugging percentage in that month almost 100 points below his percentage for June, his second worst month. But he has been one of the American League’s top offensive performers this season, stubbornly refusing to give in to the defensive shifts that teams have employed against him.AdvertisementOnly once through Friday had he put the ball on the ground for a hit, and only once as a left-handed batter had he gotten a hit going the opposite way, to left field. Instead, Teixeira’s target has been high and deep — and, at least on Friday, red, the color of that Lays potato chips sign.He attributed his ability to put the ball there to his off-season diet, which included removing all gluten, sugar and dairy from his regular meals. The goal was to reduce foods that might cause inflammation in his body, which contributed, Teixeira said, to his needing three cortisone shots in his wrist and two in his back in 2014.“I knew I had to address inflammation,” Teixeira, 35, said. “That’s what I did. It’s allowed my body to feel better, to work out harder. It’s only three weeks into the season, but hopefully it continues for the next six-plus months.”Dr. Alexis Colvin, an orthopedic surgeon who specializes in sports medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan, said Saturday in a telephone interview that she often told patients with joint pain about the benefits of changing their diet.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think there’s validity to anti-inflammatory power in foods,” Colvin said. “I see a lot of people with muscle strains and injuries and also joint problems, joint pains. Obviously, there are other elements involved in taking care of joint problems, like exercise and physical therapy and stuff like that, but I do think there’s some validity to what we eat.”Colvin said weight loss was almost always beneficial in reducing joint pain, and Teixeira said he lost about 15 pounds this winter. He said he felt “like garbage” all last season.“I knew I had to kind of go all in with the diet and really kind of ramp up everything about my off-season program,” Teixeira said. “It’s paid off — the new trainer, the new nutritionist, it’s paid off. It doesn’t always work out that way, but you hope it does, and it has so far.”Injuries have been the dominant theme of Teixeira’s last two seasons. He played in only 15 games in 2013 before needing surgery to repair a torn tendon sheath in his right wrist. The wrist continued to bother him throughout 2014, along with injuries to a hamstring, fingers, his back and his groin.AdvertisementHis current diet is tailored for him by a nutritionist, and it is unclear whether he has a particular sensitivity to gluten. But so far, the results of Teixeira’s new regimen have been hard to argue with. The exit velocity of Teixeira’s second home run Friday was 106 miles per hour, according to M.L.B.’s Statcast.“He looks better, his bat speed’s better,” catcher Brian McCann said. “He drives runs in as well as anybody in baseball.”Teixeira said: “It’s what I envisioned. Hitting more home runs and driving the ball, taking that ‘A’ swing that you’ve heard me talk about before. Being able to be strong and healthy and take my normal swing.”He added, “That’s one way to beat the shift.”A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Teixeira’s New Diet Fuels a Resurgence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.