By ANDREW KEHAPRIL 25, 2015
It took some time Saturday afternoon for the ambience to rise inside Barclays Center. Just after 3 p.m., there were empty seats all over the arena as the Nets’ first home playoff game of the year was set to start, giving the occasion the subdued feeling of a weekend brunch.But the vacant seats were gradually filled, the Nets slowly found their groove, and as they were closing out a 91-83 victory over the Atlanta Hawks, spontaneous singsong chants of “Brook-lyn” — largely missing from the arena this season — poured out of the stands.It was a crucial win for the Nets, who had lost the first two games of this first-round series against the top-seeded Hawks. Only five No. 8 seeds have ever advanced past a No. 1 seed in N.B.A. postseason history. Several Nets players noted afterward that no team had ever come back from a 3-0 deficit to win a seven-game series. The series, which has not been among the league’s most aesthetically pleasing thus far, will resume Monday night in Brooklyn.“When you look at it, it’s playoff basketball: We shot 39 percent, and they shot 36 percent from the field,” said Nets Coach Lionel Hollins, who praised his team’s defense and mettle.AdvertisementThe Nets got off to a hot start, following the lead of Bojan Bogdanovic, who scored 11 points in the first quarter and finished with 19. Three Nets starters had double-doubles: Brook Lopez (22 points, 13 rebounds), Thaddeus Young (18 points, 11 rebounds) and Joe Johnson (16 points, 10 rebounds), and each contributed to a crucial 18-0 run that stretched from the third quarter to the fourth and gave the Nets control of the game.AdvertisementThe only starter who struggled was Deron Williams, who sat out the final 16 minutes, shot 1 for 8 from the field and scored just 3 points. Through three games, he has shot 7 for 26. He and his teammates linked some of his struggles Saturday to injuries. Within minutes in the second quarter, he fell hard on his tailbone, and an opponent’s knee drove into his right leg. And when he limped out of the trainer’s room after the game, two fingers of his left hand were wrapped.The Hawks tied the score at 58-58 when Dennis Schroder streaked down the court on a fast break and flipped an alley-oop pass to Kent Bazemore, who had been sprinting along the other sideline. Williams turned the ball over on the Nets’ next possession, and Paul Millsap made a driving layup to give the Hawks their first lead since they opened the scoring in the game.Williams was pulled out with four minutes left in the third quarter, and after another Hawks basket, the Nets scored 18 straight points. He never returned to the court.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I was pretty sore, so I don’t know how effective I could have been,” Williams said of his absence down the stretch. He said he hoped to get treatment and be ready to play Game 4.Jarrett Jack proved an able substitute for Williams, contributing 8 assists to go with 5 points and 5 rebounds.The Nets had one more rebound than the Hawks and two more assists. They shot 7 for 22 from the 3-point line, while the Hawks went 6 for 30.“I think from the beginning they have been a confident team,” Atlanta Coach Mike Budenholzer said, noting that the Nets had fought back in Games 1 and 2 after falling behind.Game 3 seemed different from the first two, though. It was the first playoff game at Barclays Center this season. Smoke hung over the court as the game began, the result of some pregame pyrotechnics. The Nets, diverting from routine, wore their black road uniforms. Williams, who had sported a bushy beard through the regular season, reduced his facial hair to a moderate stubble.Also diverting from the norm, the Nets got off to a quick start. They jumped out to a 14-3 lead, a change from the previous two games, in which they fell behind early.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets Show Some Life, Beating the Hawks After a Crucial 18-0 Run.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.