AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe pressure of the N.F.L. draft is as high for teams’ decision makers as it is for the players hoping to build a career.While general managers say they have always paid attention to a prospect’s character and behavior, never before have those issues been such a focus of the draft, which is set to begin Thursday in Chicago. And it starts right at the top with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and Jameis Winston.The question marks do not stop with Winston, who was investigated after an accusation of rape and has exhibited immaturity often enough to raise red flags.There are a number of other players who have had run-ins with coaches, university officials, teammates, fellow students or the law, which could jeopardize their standing in the draft. This group includes Missouri receiver Dorial Green-Beckham, Nebraska linebacker Randy Gregory, Washington cornerback Marcus Peters, Florida State cornerback P. J. Williams and Michigan defensive end Frank Clark.So when the Buccaneers open the proceedings, how many background checks will they have performed on Winston?Plenty.“I’ve been around some picks where we have done almost as much work,” Bucs General Manager Jason Licht said, adding that the amount of work was not bothersome.“Sometimes you find out more and more good as you go,” he said. “So it’s not unsettling that we are doing this much. It’s actually comforting that we are putting as much work into it as we are.”It has become necessary not just because so much is at stake with high draft picks, or because several prospects made the wrong kind of headlines in school. The headlines made by Ray Rice, Adrian Peterson, Greg Hardy and Jonathan Dwyer, all a part of the N.F.L. when they ran into trouble, make it essential.“I think teams always have emphasized that in the draft process, they get good background info,” said Bill Polian, who built the Buffalo Bills, the Carolina Panthers and the Indianapolis Colts into Super Bowl teams and is now a TV and radio analyst.“I think the fact that the league office has been so public and has been quite forthright in terms of discipline will give clubs some pause,” Polian said. “So if there is a chance that a player could come into the league and have some difficulty, you are going to think twice about him and think twice about where you might draft him, or if you draft him at all.”Sometimes a player’s indiscretions are isolated or are not that much different from those of other college students. Teams must weigh that possibility, too.“They do young kids’ stuff,” Giants General Manager Jerry Reese said. “You can’t just absolutely kill them. You wouldn’t have anyone to draft. Kids do kid things and do college things, and it happens.“If a guy has a long list of issues, that is when you have to throw the red flag in there.”And in today’s social media environment, nothing escapes scrutiny.No N.F.L. team will rely on Twitter or Facebook accounts of such events. But all 32 teams know they need extra diligence this year and more precise evaluations of player personalities.Were Peters’s run-ins with coaches at Washington a sign he cannot handle instruction or discipline, or a matter of allowing his temper to get the better of him? Peters has the talent to go in the first round, and might have in other years.“We want to get as much exposure to those players as possible,” said Ed Marynowitz, the Eagles’ vice president for player personnel. “The combine affords us a small window to do that. There is a 15-minute formal interview period that we’ll visit with those guys there. Guys that we have additional questions on, we have an opportunity to bring 30 players to Philadelphia for the top 30 visits. We go out and see those players.”Teams use every segment of scouting — interviews, private workouts, pro days — to evaluate players. And still, as Marynowitz noted, “You can only know to a certain degree, but we try to do our due diligence on every player to make sure if we bring a guy in that there are no surprises.”Yet there are surprises. Rice was generally considered a good citizen with no demons until that night in an Atlantic City casino when he hit his fiancée.Ozzie Newsome, the man who drafted Rice for the Baltimore Ravens, recognized that his franchise would be in the spotlight as much for the character of the players it selected this year as for their talent. The Ravens had one 2014 draft pick, running back Lorenzo Taliaferro, who was arrested and charged with public intoxication and destruction of property two weeks after he was selected.“I would hope that wouldn’t happen again, but we will do any and everything that we can to make sure the 10, 11 or six, seven or eight players who we bring into Baltimore will hopefully stay out of trouble,” Newsome said. “And we’ll probably do the extra work on that. But there’s not a guarantee that it’s going to happen. It’s just impossible for us to guarantee that.”Advertisement