AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaBOSTON — When almost unimaginable adversity struck Zach Hodges while he was still in high school, his response was always the same: He pressed on.When his father, grandfather and mother all died before he completed his junior year, his desire to continue his education and play football as a defensive end in college took him on a most uncommon path. He attended four schools in four years: Independence High School in Charlotte, N.C.; Tri-Cities High School in East Point, Ga.; Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, N.H.; and Harvard University.When he dealt with homelessness and hunger after his mother left a stepfather he described as mentally abusive toward his mother, it only increased his determination to make certain he would never have to do without basic needs again.“People look at my life and say, ‘How could someone be so strong?’ ” Hodges, Harvard’s career leader with 27 sacks, said during a recent interview in the Murr Lounge, next to Harvard Stadium. “In actuality, I don’t really feel there is a choice in strength. Sometimes you don’t have an option but to keep moving and not stop.” Hodges, one of the top small-college prospects in this week’s N.F.L. draft, was born in Queens. His father, Tony Hodges, died of a brain tumor when Zach was a year old. Hodges grew close to his grandfather Millard Wright, only to lose him when he was about to enter high school.Hodges’s mother, Barbara Wright, remarried when he was 8. Although his stepfather played an instrumental role in introducing Hodges to football and persuaded him to start playing when he was 10, he has such disdain for him that he would not provide his name.“He’s not going to be in this story,” Hodges said.With the loss of his father and grandfather and the introduction of a stepfather he grew to detest, Hodges drew closer to his mother. Her relationship with his stepfather ended after three years. According to Hodges, his mother held multiple jobs, from catering to janitorial work, but there were times when opportunities dried up and she could not provide, leaving them without food and shelter.“Homelessness usually wouldn’t last long,” Hodges said. “My mom would try to figure something out.”Hodges was dressing for school on Sept. 5, 2008, when his mother collapsed. She had a massive stroke and died exactly 15 years after his father. Hodges’s attempts to describe the horrifying events of what began as just another day were punctuated by long, painful pauses. Finally, he said simply, “It was a long day.”Hodges left Charlotte to live with relatives in Atlanta. He said he often felt alone and would turn to his faith in God. “He was the only one who understood my pain and hurt,” he said.His relatives found that there was little they could say to console him.“I remember one visit and he stepped outside and you could hear wailing,” said Eric Delamar, a cousin who lives in Atlanta. Delamar went outside to check on Hodges, saw how distraught he was and returned to the house. “Sometimes you don’t need to say anything,” Delmar said. “You just let them get it out.”The goal of playing college football gave Hodges hope. Harvard was among the first programs to recruit him, joined later by Stanford and 50 or so others. The more the Crimson coaches learned about him, the keener their interest became.“I never got any sense from him that ‘woe is me,’ ” Harvard Coach Tim Murphy said. “I think that’s an important part of the story. He did not wear his tragedy on his sleeve. It’s not that he wouldn’t talk about it. He was never going to use it as a crutch.”The field became a much-needed refuge for Hodges.“It is freeing, in a sense,” he said. “I could inflict as much force as I wanted to. I could be as brutal as I wanted to.”Hodges, who stands 6 feet 2 inches and weighs 250 pounds, was the Ivy League’s defensive player of the year in 2013. He shared the award last season with Mike Zeuli, a linebacker from Princeton, after recording a league-leading eight and a half sacks. Todd McShay, an ESPN draft analyst, said Hodges would have to wait to hear his name called when the N.F.L. held its three-day draft beginning Thursday in Chicago. No one doubts it will take time for Hodges to convert from defensive end to linebacker and to acclimate himself to a level of play far superior to the Ivy League.“He’s a really good mid- to late-round pick if you have the right guy to develop him and you can bring him along slowly,” McShay said.Murphy is confident Hodges will again find his way.“I think in time, Zach will be a successful N.F.L. player,” he said, adding: “He has the ability, he has the toughness. The only variable is time.”Hodges, a government major, said he believed that he would be able to gain a foothold. He yearns to sign his first contract, knowing that it would provide a modicum of financial security.“I should never be homeless,” he said.Advertisement