
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
APRIL 25, 2015
WALTHAM, Mass. — After a recent Boston Celtics practice at the team’s training site here, I asked guard Marcus Smart why he felt that so many great college coaches had failed to make a successful leap to the N.B.A.The list of those who have tried and failed is impressive: Lon Kruger, Tim Floyd, Mike Montgomery, P. J. Carlesimo.Rick Pitino had a good first run with the Knicks but failed with the Celtics.There was talk during this year’s N.C.A.A. men’s tournament that John Calipari might leave Kentucky and try for a second stint in the N.B.A. Calipari is currently the emperor of Lexington, but as the coach of the Nets from 1996 to 1999, he was 72-112 and 0-3 in the playoffs.“The biggest thing is you have to be able to leave the ego at the door,” said Smart, who as a rookie is only recently removed from the college game and thus has a fresh perspective on the differences between coaching on the college and professional levels.Advertisement“You’ve got guys who have been in this league for a long time,” Smart said. “It’s not college kids, 17, 18, 19, 20 years old. There are grown men. There are certain things you did in college you can’t do up here.”AdvertisementSmart said that the great college coaches often had egos that worked against them in the N.B.A.“It’s not their fault,” Smart said. “That’s what makes them great in college. They’re so prideful, they have an ego, they have a swagger. Your swagger has to change coming to the N.B.A.”The jury is still out on Celtics Coach Brad Stevens, but if his first two seasons in Boston are any indication, he at least has the even temperament to have a sustained N.B.A. career.Stevens, 38, led Butler to two unlikely Final Four appearances in six seasons and did it without pounding his chest or wearing the imperial cloak of grandeur bestowed on superstar coaches by the news media and fans.The Celtics had a losing record last season, Stevens’s first, and they started poorly this season. But they surged and surprised by earning a playoff spot, though they trail LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers, three games to none, in a first-round Eastern Conference playoff series.“We don’t know if it’s a success yet,” Stevens said of his Boston tenure. “Long term, we don’t know. It’s a real positive experience, and I’m going to make sure it’s a positive experience for everybody who’s in here.”Leonard Hamilton, the Florida State head coach, lasted only one season in the N.B.A. after signing a five-year contract in 2000 with the Washington Wizards.Hamilton doesn’t agree that raging ego is the reason that so many good college coaches fall into the lurch when making the jump to the N.B.A.AdvertisementHamilton believes that too many college coaches have taken professional jobs with teams that had dysfunctional front offices.“There are ego guys who are successful in the N.B.A.,” Hamilton said. “It depends on the coach’s relationship with management and owners.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If players know the ego guy is tied into management and ownership, they know they can’t mess with him, and he’s safe.”Stevens has the backing of the Celtics organization and a front office that has been able to provide playoff-caliber talent.College coaches recruit their own talent. N.B.A. coaches largely rely on the front office to acquire players who can help win games.“You can’t be successful in this without the support of your ownership and your management team,” Stevens said. “I’ve never felt like that’s ever wavered.“We weren’t very good last year, and we weren’t very good at the start of this year, and we’ve still got a long way to go. But these guys, they’ve committed to me and I’ve never felt like it wasn’t long-term commitment.”He added: “People get antsy in this business, which I understand. People are paying a lot of money. I get it.”The Celtics reportedly gave Stevens a 6-year, $22 million package. He said his other motivation for taking the Celtics job was to become a better coach.Advertisement“I’ve looked at it more like a chance to learn about the game — get a Ph.D. in the game,” he said.Stevens added: “In the N.B.A., you’re playing against basically 30 similar styles. There might be tweaks and adjustments, but it’s 30 similar styles because the players are so good that probably everything has been tried. You’re playing against LeBron James, paying him the appropriate amount of attention, getting to Love and Irving” — Kevin Love and Kyrie Irving — “and keeping them off the glass. The challenges are so great, and they do really provoke a lot of thought. It makes you think and it stretches you.”The Celtics have given Stevens the gift of time; he in turn has put the Celtics ahead of schedule.But is Stevens sold on the N.B.A. as a long-term commitment he would like to make?Patience is not a virtue in the N.B.A. Just ask Scott Brooks, who was fired last week by the Oklahoma City Thunder.Teams are constantly falling in and out of love with coaches.Stevens clearly likes his financial compensation and enjoys the challenge of coaching great players. But he also said that the most difficult part of his N.B.A. adjustment was leaving Butler, and that there still were times when he thought about his decision. While many an ambitious college coach has jumped to the N.B.A. and failed, I wouldn’t be surprised if, one of these seasons, Stevens makes a voluntary leap back.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Celtics Coach Finds Solid Footing After a Perilous Leap.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »