By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 25, 2015
Ten years ago, there was no better Kentucky Derby loser than the trainer Kiaran McLaughlin.McLaughlin watched in disbelief as his first Derby starter, Closing Argument, the longest shot in the field at odds of 71-1, seized the lead in the stretch only to be overtaken in the final yards by another long shot, the 50-1 Giacomo.Minutes after the close call, McLaughlin’s brother and assistant, Neal, summed up the mood: “We’re the happiest second-place finishers you’re ever going to find.”Next weekend, McLaughlin will send out his sixth Derby starter, Frosted, who won the Wood Memorial and could give McLaughlin his first Derby victory.“It’s going to be hard to get by them all,” McLaughlin said last week during a conference call, “but we hope we can.”AdvertisementA full field of 20 3-year-olds is expected to be entered May 2 at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky., with Bob Baffert set to send out the two favorites in the unbeaten Dortmund and the Arkansas Derby winner, American Pharoah.AdvertisementThe Blue Grass winner, Carpe Diem, should be the next choice, with Frosted likely among the next wave.“It might be the toughest Derby that we’ve had in quite a few years,” McLaughlin, 55, said. “I feel like 10 or 12 horses can certainly win. So many of them are just so talented. It seems like one of the most talented groups of 3-year-olds that I’ve seen.”McLaughlin is happy to have a horse in the race. Last year, he had a top contender in Cairo Prince before an injury sidelined that colt a few weeks before the Derby. This year, McLaughlin, a former assistant for the Hall of Famer D. Wayne Lukas, started with four Derby prospects, but it was Frosted who delivered.Frosted, the gray son of Tapit, went into the Wood at Aqueduct Racetrack in Queens on April 4 following an inexplicable fourth-place finish in the Fountain of Youth at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale Beach, Fla., in February. A certain winner as the field turned for home, the colt faded badly in the stretch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.McLaughlin was baffled and decided to change everything. He switched jockeys. He switched racetracks. He altered the colt’s training and tinkered with the blinkers. He had the colt checked for breathing problems.“I thought, like everybody else in America watching the race, or around the world, that he was going to win easy,” McLaughlin said of the Fountain of Youth.The jockey Irad Ortiz Jr. was replaced by Joel Rosario. McLaughlin called for the colt to train with other horses. No major breathing problems were found. Frosted was sent from Florida to New York for the Wood, where it all clicked.Frosted settled in well off the lead, moved his way up, overtook the 21-1 long shot Tencendur in midstretch and won by two lengths — just his second victory in seven career starts. The Wood victory netted 100 points for Derby qualifying, which clinched Frosted’s spot at Churchill Downs.AdvertisementMcLaughlin, who has multiple sclerosis, is among the sport’s most popular and successful trainers. In 2007, he won the Dubai World Cup with Invasor, the horse of the year in 2006, the year McLaughlin won the Belmont Stakes with Jazil. He also trained the Eclipse Award winners Lahudood in 2007 and Questing in 2012.Frosted is owned by Godolphin Racing, the worldwide operation run by Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum.McLaughlin spent 10 years in Dubai working for Godolphin before returning to the United States and opening his own stable in 2003.“You can’t put a price on winning the Kentucky Derby,” McLaughlin said. “I would love to win it myself, and I would love to win it for Godolphin.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.