By KRISTIAN DYERAPRIL 25, 2015
HANOVER, N.J. —  The shouting is as loud as ever around the Red Bulls, but then that is nothing new. Fortunately for the team, the reasons for it are entirely different these days.Three months ago, much of the vitriol was directed at the club. Frustration had built up over years, but the final straw came when the team fired a popular coach who had led the trophy-challenged Red Bulls to the playoffs in consecutive seasons. Fans threatened to protest at matches, to cancel season tickets and not to go to games at all.But just as quickly, the mood has changed. Now there are mostly shouts of support for a Red Bulls team that, a month into the season, has yet to lose a game. In a year when the Red Bulls were supposed to founder, they are instead tied for first place, and the discontent that surrounded the club has largely been forgotten.“I’d be lying if I told you it hasn’t made our life easier, because it has,” Coach Jesse Marsch said.AdvertisementMarsch had more at stake than most. It was his hiring in January to replace the fan favorite Mike Petke that set off a segment of the fan base. To those fans, the firing — coupled with the retirement of Thierry Henry and the slow-motion departure of Tim Cahill — were signs of a club adrift under its new leadership. When Marsch and the Red Bulls’ new sporting director, Ali Curtis, struggled to outline their vision for the club in their first interactions with reporters and fans — speaking in broad terms about “culture” and “analytics” — it only deepened that impression.AdvertisementThings became so bad that a town-hall meeting with fans about 10 days after the coaching change is remembered mostly for insults screamed by supporters at Curtis and Marsch. One group of fans paid for a highway billboard near Red Bull Arena demanding that the team’s Austrian owners sell the club, but Curtis and Marsch were undeterred.“Having early results solidifies and validates things within the organization and within the team,” Marsch said. “It does build belief and build strength in the purpose of what we’re doing.”The next test comes Sunday against the Los Angeles Galaxy, Major League Soccer’s defending champions.The Red Bulls team that will take the field is younger than last season’s, and Marsch has fashioned a pressing style intended to create turnovers. Without discipline, the tactic can be risky and susceptible to counterattacks, but the style is a sign of the club’s new approach.The Red Bulls’ biggest move in the off-season was the addition of Sacha Kljestan, an experienced midfielder who cycles in and out of the United States national team picture. If nothing else, the signing shifted the dynamic away from star players like Henry, a sublime talent who was given the freedom to roam freely on the field. Kljestan is not a star on Henry’s level, but he is a workhorse with experience in the Champions League and a perfect fit in Marsch’s system.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Everyone on this team is all in,” Kljestan said. “If you’re not all in, you can go away.”The start has turned down the volume on a protest movement that continues to press for the team to be sold.“While the Petke firing was no doubt a catalyst for many people to finally display their frustration with ownership, the reality is that there has long been an undercurrent of anti-Red Bulls sentiment within a fairly significant portion of this fan base,” said Matthew Rappo of Brooklyn, a spokesman for the #RedBullOut movement.A protest planned for the home opener did not fully materialize, however, and given the team’s strong start — three wins and two draws in five games — it may be hard to justify the angst directed at team leadership. Management opponents also face what seems like an uphill battle. The #RedBullOut page on Facebook had 127 followers as of Saturday; the official Red Bulls account had more than 664,000.AdvertisementEven with the tumult of the off-season, the departure of Henry and a new rival in the market, New York City F.C., the Red Bulls have sold more than 10,000 season tickets this season, a team record.“I hope maybe some of the fans who were disappointed with Petke being fired stick by the team,” Kljestan said. “If they haven’t come to some games that they will see the way we play, the way we fight for each other, the mentality, things like that. I hope they respect that.“Jesse,” he said in reference to the team’s coach, “has said that he wants to put a team on the field that the fans will be proud of. I think through two home games, the fans should be pretty proud of the team we put on the field.”A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Unbeaten Streak Helps Red Bulls Silence Protests.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.