AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchLAS VEGAS — In the industrial area behind Circus Circus, where tourists do not venture intentionally, is a squat concrete-block building that houses Barry’s Boxing Center. Inside, high on a wall crowded with framed photographs of boxers, familiar and not, is the defeated face of Floyd Mayweather Jr.He is looking at his right hand while, on the other side of the referee, Augie Sanchez is forever caught in celebratory midleap. It was 1996, at the United States Olympic trials, the last fight that Mayweather admits that he lost fair and square.“I never thought this guy, who I roomed with, who was 106 pounds when I met him, now he’s the best pound-for-pound fighter and going down as one of the best fighters in history?” Sanchez said Tuesday in the quiet lobby of the gym. “I would have never predicted it.”Two miles west, journalists and fans swarmed Mayweather Boxing Club, in a suburban strip mall. Cars were towed to make room for the satellite television trucks. Tents were set up in the parking lot for catered food and a news conference. Bodyguards the size of door frames and wearing matching Mayweather T-shirts kept order among fans and loiterers with their mere presence and the occasional soft-spoken word. David Hasselhoff emerged from a car, and everyone surged toward him.Mayweather arrived to talk about his May 2 fight with Manny Pacquiao, a bout that will earn Mayweather, 47-0 as a professional boxer, the richest payday in the sport’s history, perhaps close to $200 million.“I can’t say this is hype,” he told reporters. “I mean, this is real life.”Meanwhile, the last American to beat Mayweather quietly went back to work nearby. Sanchez is a boxing coach at the club owned by his in-laws, Pat and Dawn Barry. He will be rooting for Mayweather to beat Pacquiao, and thinks he will, handily.“Of course I’m going to watch it,” Sanchez said, planning to buy the pay-per-view broadcast and invite friends over. “It’s the day of my daughter’s first communion. I told my wife, thank God that’s in the morning, or I would have to miss it for the fight.”Sanchez was born and raised in Las Vegas, the son of a boxing coach and a younger brother to two standout amateur fighters. As a boy, he knew the Mayweather name. Floyd Mayweather Sr., from Grand Rapids, Mich., was a top boxer who lost to Sugar Ray Leonard in 1978. Roger and Jeff Mayweather, Floyd Mayweather Jr.’s, uncles, were world-title holders who lived and trained in Las Vegas at the same gym as the Sanchez family.“They used to talk about him all the time,” Mayweather said of Sanchez last month.Mayweather and Sanchez were both born in 1977. As teenage boxers, Mayweather was slower to fill out, so he competed a couple of weight classes lower. Before long, they were winning national Golden Gloves tournaments and traveling the elite circuit. They were roommates at the 1994 United States Olympic Festival in St. Louis.“So me and him got close,” Mayweather said. “We were on the team together. I was at 112, he was at 125. We went to all the tournaments together.”Sanchez liked Mayweather from the start.“He was a nice guy,” Sanchez recalled. “Very talkative, very open. We kind of clicked right away when we were together. It’s kind of cool. I didn’t know we would eventually fight each other.”But Mayweather moved up to the featherweight division at 125 pounds. He suspended all niceties and beat Sanchez in a close decision the first time they fought. But he lost the next time, in the 1996 Olympic trials in Oakland, Calif., a 12-11 decision. Sanchez, then 18, jumped in excitement. Mayweather, 19, hung his head in dejection.A few years ago, Mayweather was at Barry’s Boxing Center with a girlfriend. She spotted the photograph.Floyd, is that you up there? she said.“He said, ‘Yeah, that’s me,’ ” Sanchez recalled. “He didn’t knock it or anything. He didn’t say to take it down. He said, ‘He beat me.’ ”In a different year, that victory would have been enough to send Sanchez to the Olympics. But the trials in 1996 were different from the usual, merely the start of a best-of-three selection process. A couple of weeks later, a box-off was held in Augusta, Ga. Sanchez needed one more victory in two tries to get to the Atlanta Games.Mayweather needed two wins against Sanchez, and got them — 22-8 the first day and 20-10 the second.“I might have just been discouraged because I had to fight him again and I was like, Wait, I thought I already qualified for the Olympics,” Sanchez said. “Or maybe he was just a better fighter those days.”Sanchez laughed.“Or both,” he said.Mayweather received the Olympic bronze medal after losing in the semifinals against Bulgaria’s Serafim Todorov — a widely disputed decision, one that even Todorov recently said may have been tainted by corrupt judging. (“It’s possible, absolutely,” he said.)It is why most boxing experts, including Mayweather, consider Sanchez the last fighter to beat Mayweather legitimately.“The only thing I can remember is me going to him and charging him and cutting the ring and countering and staying on him the whole time,” Sanchez said.“It was like white on rice. Very aggressive. Stay on him. Not letting him breathe or think. The first two rounds were pretty good rounds. I knew in the third round I had to pick it up. I rocked him a couple of times in that fight. I rocked him with the left hook, and I also rocked him with the right hand. It was fun. There was so much going on, so much adrenaline, so much excitement.”But there were no Olympics.“I had my foot over the threshold,” Sanchez said.Mayweather and Sanchez both turned professional and were sponsored by Top Rank Boxing. Mayweather has never lost. Sanchez, christened Kid Vegas and fighting in sequined trunks, won his first 16 bouts before he was stunned by a first-round technical knockout at the hands of Edgar Garcia, a journeyman.Sanchez rebuilt his résumé by winning his next 10 fights. He earned a shot at the World Boxing Organization’s featherweight title against the unbeaten Naseem Hamed in 2000 but was knocked out in the fourth round.He fought three more times, losing his last match to John Michael Johnson in another knockout in 2001. He finished 28-3 as a professional.Mayweather, at the time, was 27-0 and the superfeatherweight champion. Several more titles, 20 more victories and hundreds of millions of dollars were on the way.“I really feel in my heart, if I would have beaten Hamed, I would have been in the position of Mayweather now,” Sanchez said. “But that money would have probably changed me. I wouldn’t be the person I am today. It probably would have ruined things with my beautiful wife.”They have three children, siblings adopted a couple of years ago. Sanchez now trains boxers, traveling the world to coach some of the top American amateurs. He hopes to be a United States boxing coach at next year’s Summer Olympics.Mayweather can see Sanchez making the Olympics — finally.“We were supposed to have fought as professionals, but his career went one way, my career went another way,” Mayweather said.But as of right now, he added, “He’s one of the best trainers in boxing.”The men rarely see each other but have remained friendly over the years. Mayweather trained at Barry’s while preparing to fight Oscar De La Hoya in 2007. And Mayweather has been the biggest financial supporter to the national Golden Gloves tournament and other events that the Barrys organize in Las Vegas.“There’s no bad feelings,” Dawn Barry, Sanchez’s mother-in-law, said from behind the counter at the gym. “We like him.”Two miles away, the media event at Mayweather’s gym was getting underway. “Is that today?” Sanchez said.A boxer was asking for his help. He said goodbye and thanks, then went out to the parking lot to say one more thing.“Hey, if you get the chance,” he said, “tell Floyd I said hello.”Advertisement