AdvertisementSupported byExtra BasesBy Tyler KepnerThe soothing, authoritative voice that greets fans at Yankee Stadium is the same one that sparked the first widely broadcast manager’s rant. Yes, Paul Olden, the Yankees’ public-address announcer, was the reporter whose simple question inspired Tommy Lasorda’s famous Dave Kingman tirade at Dodger Stadium in 1978.“I jokingly say that in my obituary in Southern California, that will be in the first paragraph,” Olden, 61, said. “In my obituary in the East Coast, it won’t even be mentioned.”Maybe not, but in the YouTube era, Lasorda’s profane response to Olden is just a click away for fans anywhere. Bryan Price, the Cincinnati Reds’ manager, found that out last week, when his six-minute pregame interview on Monday — laced with 77 mentions of the same swear word, or a variant thereof — spread rapidly across the Internet.Price is one of baseball’s friendliest, most thoughtful people, an intensely loyal and bright man widely known for his patience and candor. He never turned personal in his confrontation with a Reds beat writer, but he did seem to misunderstand the role of the reporter, asking him repeatedly how it benefited the team to publicize a star player’s absence. The writer, of course, is there to report the news, with no vested interest in the team’s performance.On May 14, 1978, Olden simply wanted a comment he could feed to his radio station — KLAC, a country station in Los Angeles — after a 15-inning Dodgers loss to the Chicago Cubs. Kingman, the Cubs’ left fielder, had slugged three homers and driven in eight runs in a Mother’s Day game that stretched more than five hours.“I was in the front row with my arm extended, holding the microphone, and no one was asking about the main thing from that day: the three home runs by Dave Kingman,” Olden said. I just needed a quick sound bite, 10 or 15 seconds, and then get the heck out of there. “So I sort of innocently asked his opinion of Kingman’s performance. A minute and a half later, he’s still talking.”And not just talking. Lasorda immediately repeated the question, and did so 10 more times, lacing cuss words throughout. At one point he conceded he was mad and had not given a good answer, to which Olden replied, “It wasn’t a good question.”Olden was not backing down, he said; he was actually repeating a Groucho Marx line, a heady ad-lib in a tense moment. Olden was young but had dealt with angry managers before. Walter Alston, he said, once threatened to bash him over the head with his tape recorder.Lasorda has said that he never expected his answer to air, because he cursed so much during it. But Jim Healy, who hosted a popular gossip show, used it in all its bleep-filled glory, and it became a staple on radio stations for years.“If the guy had asked it a dif(ferent way, I would have been O.K. with it,” Lasorda told The Los Angeles Times in 2009. “But he said, ‘What is your opinion?’ That changes it. If he’d said, ‘What did he hit?’ or ‘Was he swinging right?’ that would have been different. But he said, ‘What is your opinion?’ and I proceeded to tell him.”Olden went on to have a long play-by-play career for several teams, and he was the public-address announcer for 12 Super Bowls. He has joked about the incident with Lasorda and sold the original tape to Rhino Records in 1990. He got $300.After Lasorda’s fiery postgame speech, Olden finally did make it to his mother’s house in Los Angeles for an evening holiday celebration. His father was a minister, Olden said, and Lasorda’s words were not exactly fit for the dinner table.“Oh,” Olden said, laughing, “I didn’t mention that.” Comeback Candidate Alex Rodriguez’s strong start after a drug suspension could make him an early favorite for the American League Comeback Player of the Year Award. But a better candidate, in light of the obstacles, would be reliever Ryan Madson of the Kansas City Royals. Madson had Tommy John surgery in 2012 after signing with the Cincinnati Reds. He never pitched for the Reds, or for the Los Angeles Angels, who signed him for 2013. He sat out the 2014 season and probably would have stayed retired if not for Jim Fregosi Jr., the scout who signed him for the Philadelphia Phillies in 1998, when Madson was 17.“He said, ‘I stay with my players’ — and he did, throughout my career,” Madson said this spring. “That’s what brought me back. I didn’t go out of my way; it was brought to me. I would get calls from him: ‘Hey, do you want to scout, do you want to coach? Anything you want to do, in or outside the game, I’ll help you do it.’ ” Madson was giving pitching lessons to children, and Fregosi brought him a high school prospect to tutor. Madson, now 34, rediscovered the urge to try pitching again, and because Fregosi now works for Kansas City, he signed there and made another comeback.“I remember how hard a worker he was, and how he tried to come back two times and didn’t really pitch for either club,” Fregosi said. “As a competitor, that’s really frustrating. You feel like you let your team down. He wanted to pitch, but he just couldn’t do it.“When he started giving lessons and getting his arm in shape, all of a sudden, he started throwing good. I said, If you can throw the ball across a mound, I’ll sign you to a minor league contract, because I believe in you.”That faith was well placed. The Royals’ bullpen is again a major strength, and Madson has been an important part of it. After six appearances, he has a 1.17 earned run average, with eight strikeouts in seven and two-thirds innings. Madson does not throw as hard as he did before his operation, but his changeup and his attitude are unchanged. “The Royals are built around good players, but also good people with good makeup,” Fregosi said. “He fits all the molds for our ball club, and he’s been a very big positive for us.” Four Balls and You’re Out Three years ago in a game at Seattle’s Safeco Field, Doug Fister, pitching for the Mariners, walked a batter despite issuing only three balls. The scoreboard mistakenly added a ball during the at-bat, and, incredibly, nobody noticed.Something similar happened again in Seattle on Tuesday. In the fifth inning of a game against Houston, the Mariners’ Taijuan Walker threw four balls among his first six pitches to George Springer. Yet Springer did not take first base, and the plate umpire, C. B. Bucknor, did not send him there. The at-bat just kept going, and Springer struck out.“At first I thought, ‘O.K., that was ball four,’ ” Walker said, according to MLB.com. “But I looked up and he was still in the box, so I thought, maybe I’m tripping or something. In the dugout, they said it was ball four. So thank you, I guess.”A. J. Hinch, the Astros’ manager, said that everyone somehow missed it, but that it was his fault for not jumping out of the dugout to clarify the count. In any case, the mistake did not hurt the Astros, who staged a late rally to win the game. Class A Snack Players for the Class A Wilmington Blue Rocks in Delaware wear on their left sleeves a patch of a cartoon vegetable named Mr. Celery. The team even calls an area of its souvenir store the “fresh produce section” in honor of the character, who sprang — organically, if you will — from a healthy-eating promotion years ago.But don’t let that fool you. The Blue Rocks also want fans to indulge in all things sweet and savory. And they do mean all — or, at least, more treats than you might have thought possible in one food item.Meet the “Sweenie Donut Dog,” a gut-busting dish the team calls baseball’s sweetest weenie: a hot dog drizzled with raspberry jam and crumbled bacon, served in a glazed-doughnut bun. It sells for $7.50 and includes a bag of chips.“For the last several years, we’ve been trying to come up with a food concoction that is unique and different — something no one would ever think of,” said Chris Kemple, the Blue Rocks’ general manager. “We just never seemed to come up with the right recipe.”They tried going big — think of a giant hamburger with egg — but finally chose a different combination, in a smaller form.“Why don’t we make it simple and pick items people like?” Kemple said, explaining the logic. “Everybody likes hot dogs, everybody likes bacon, everybody likes doughnuts. We put something together, sampled it, and everybody liked it.”So last weekend, for their first home series, the Blue Rocks set up a doughnut dog stand on the third-base side of Frawley Stadium. They sold more than 250 on the first night, and Kemple said the response was so favorable that the team might promote the dog with its own logo on a T-shirt or cap.As for the calorie count, Kemple said he did not know it, and it is not listed on the stadium menu. That is probably for the best.“If we don’t have to show it,” he said, “we wouldn’t.” Advertisement