By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 25, 2015
Tom Koehler outpitched Stephen Strasburg, Giancarlo Stanton homered, and the revitalized Miami Marlins earned their fourth win in a row Saturday by beating the visiting Washington Nationals, 8-0.Washington, the defending National League East champion, lost its fourth straight and fell into a tie for third place with the Marlins, who have put together their winning streak after a 3-11 start.Stanton had three hits, including his fifth homer in nine games, and drove in two runs. Justin Bour, recalled Friday from the minor leagues, had two run-scoring singles, and Adeiny Hechavarria hit a three-run homer.Ichiro Suzuki had two hits and scored in the eighth, for a career total of 1,967 runs — 1,309 in the major leagues and 658 in Japan — surpassing Sadaharu Oh’s record for Japanese players.AdvertisementStrasburg allowed eight hits and four runs in six innings. Opponents are batting .317 against him, and his E.R.A. rose to 4.88. He has a 5.65 E.R.A. in eight career starts at Marlins Park.AdvertisementORIOLES 5, RED SOX 4 David Lough hit a game-ending homer in the 10th inning to cap a two-run rally against Koji Uehara, and Baltimore beat visiting Boston.Xander Bogaerts homered in the top of the 10th off Brad Brach before Brian Matusz finished. In the bottom half, Adam Jones tripled off Uehara and scored on a fly ball by Chris Davis.Lough, who entered as a pinch-runner in the eighth, followed by driving a 3-2 pitch to right. As the ball soared toward its destination over the wall, Lough thrust his left arm into the air to celebrate the first game-ending home run of his career.During the game, thousands gathered outside the stadium to protest the April 19 death of Freddie Gray, who sustained an unexplained spinal injury in police custody.TIGERS 4, INDIANS 1 Victor Martinez drove in three runs, taking advantage after Cleveland pitched around Miguel Cabrera, helping Alfredo Simon and Detroit beat the visiting Indians.Cabrera drew four walks in a game for the first time. Three of them were intentional. Earlier this season, he went 11 for 14 with six R.B.I. in a three-game series at Cleveland.T. J. House gave up three runs, four hits and four walks in three innings. He started in place of Trevor Bauer, who was ill.AdvertisementASTROS 9, ATHLETICS 3 Jose Altuve hit a three-run homer to extend his hitting streak against the Athletics to 28 games, and surging Houston won at Oakland.Jed Lowrie drove in two runs, and George Springer homered for the Astros, who have won six of seven and are off to their best start since winning 12 of 17 games to open the 2006 season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BRAVES 5, PHILLIES 2 Andrelton Simmons led off the seventh inning with a homer, starting a rally that helped Atlanta win at Philadelphia.The Braves scored three runs in the seventh and chased David Buchanan while stopping a four-game losing streak. Chris Johnson had a run-scoring single, and Eric Young Jr. delivered a double that lifted Atlanta to a 3-2 lead. The Braves scored two more in the eighth.RAYS 4, BLUE JAYS 2 Tim Beckham hit a tiebreaking double during a three-run eighth inning, and Tampa Bay beat visiting Toronto for its fourth straight win.James Loney got the Rays even at 2 with a pinch-hit R.B.I. double before Beckham’s hit off Miguel Castro gave Tampa Bay a 4-2 advantage.CARDINALS 5, BREWERS 3 St. Louis lost its ace, Adam Wainwright, to an ankle injury and then got a boost from Mitch Harris that helped the Cardinals to a victory at Milwaukee Brewers.Wainwright was helped from the field by a trainer after injuring his left ankle while stumbling out of the batter’s box in the fifth inning. He had popped up to first to lead off the inning. He allowed three hits in four shutout innings.Harris, 29, then pitched one and a third scoreless innings in his major league debut. He had served five years of active duty in the United States Navy.AdvertisementPIRATES 2, DIAMONDBACKS 2 Starling Marte singled home Neil Walker with two outs in the ninth inning, and Pittsburgh won at Arizona.Walker doubled to the center-field wall against Addison Reed, his second double of the game, before Marte hit a grounder past diving shortstop Cliff Pennington.Tony Watson pitched in and out of trouble in the eighth to earn the win. Mark Melancon worked the ninth for his fifth save.SIX SUSPENDED FOR BRAWL Seven players from the Kansas City Royals and the Chicago White Sox were fined and six were suspended by Major League Baseball for their roles in a brawl Thursday night.For the Royals, Yordano Ventura was suspended for seven games, Edinson Volquez was suspended for five games, and Lorenzo Cain and Kelvin Herrera were suspended for two games each. For the White Sox, Chris Sale and Jeff Samardzija were suspended for five games.All six players were fined undisclosed amounts, as was Chicago’s Tyler Flowers.A version of this article appears in print on April 26, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Marlins Beat Nationals for Fourth Straight Victory After a 3-11 Start.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.