By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 26, 2015
Carey Price made 43 saves, Brendan Gallagher scored in the first period, and the Montreal Canadiens defeated the host Ottawa Senators, 2-0, on Sunday night to advance to the Eastern Conference semifinals. Max Pacioretty sealed the win with an empty-net goal with one second remaining.Montreal, which had taken a three-game lead, won the series in six games after losing two in a row. Ottawa had a chance to force a seventh game with a late power play but was unable to score.Price rebounded after allowing five goals in Game 5 with a masterly effort as the Senators outshot the Canadiens, 43-20.The Canadiens controlled the game early and got the first goal for the first time in the series when Gallagher took a shot from Greg Pateryn and sent it past Craig Anderson at 13 minutes 26 seconds into the first period.AdvertisementMontreal had the first six shots of the game, but the Senators outshot them, 16-3, in a dominant second period in which they did everything but score.AdvertisementJacob de la Rose was called for tripping late in the third period, giving Ottawa a power play. Near the end, the Senators pulled Anderson from the goal to create a two-skater advantage. Ottawa failed to convert all four of its power plays.WILD 4, BLUES 1 Zach Parise scored twice, including a short-handed, highlight-reel goal to open scoring for Minnesota in the first period, and the Wild advanced to the Western Conference semifinals with a 4-1 victory over St. Louis in Game 6.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Justin Fontaine also scored, Nino Niederreiter added an empty-net goal and the Wild set up a rematch of their second-round loss last year to Chicago. The Blackhawks beat Nashville in six games to move on. The Blues’ elimination was their third straight in the first round.Devan Dubnyk made 30 saves, giving him 67 over the last two games after a 6-1 defeat in Minnesota that allowed the Blues to tie the series. The Wild outscored them by 8-2 after that.Coach Ken Hitchcock pulled goalie Jake Allen after Fontaine scored with 8:41 left in the second, and T. J. Oshie’s first goal of the series came with 4 seconds left in the second. The Blues outshot the Wild, 27-11, in the last two periods.Parise’s next goal came on a rebound of Jason Pominville’s attempt early in the third, and Dubnyk and the Wild were unflappable after that. Only one of the six games in the series was decided by fewer than three goals, a 4-2 win by the Wild in Game 1. The average margin was 3.2.The Wild won three of their previous nine playoff series, all with Game 7 victories on the road.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Canadiens Advance Past Senators; Parise Scores Twice as Wild Oust Blues.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.