By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 26, 2015
When Paul Pierce headed to the sideline with the Washington Wizards leading the Toronto Raptors by 23 points in the third quarter on Sunday night — ensuring that Game 4, and the series, was all but over — he was met with a standing ovation from the home crowd. Pierce waved, requesting more noise.With the 37-year-old Pierce — who has an N.B.A. championship ring from his days in Boston — helping show his younger teammates how to win, Washington emphatically completed the first sweep of a seven-game series in club history. The Wizards eliminated the Raptors by winning, 125-94, on Sunday night to quickly close out their first-round Eastern Conference series.Marcin Gortat had 21 points and 11 rebounds for Washington, and John Wall contributed 14 points and 10 assists.Six Wizards scored in double figures, including Bradley Beal with 23 points and Pierce with 14, and the two players made seven of the Wizards’ 15 3-pointers, a team playoff record.AdvertisementToronto’s Kyle Lowry found himself in foul trouble, picking up his third midway through the first quarter, and shot poorly. He finished with 21 points.Washington led by 16 points in the first quarter, by 20 in the second and by a whopping 32 — at 102-70 — entering the fourth.The Wizards have reached the second round of the playoffs in consecutive seasons for the first time since making it to the N.B.A. finals in 1979, a year after winning the title.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Next up for the No. 5-seeded Wizards will be either No. 1 Atlanta or the No. 8 Nets, who play their Game 4 on Monday, with the Hawks up by two games to one.MAVERICKS 121, ROCKETS 109 Monta Ellis scored 31 points, J.J. Barea had 17 points and 13 assists in his first playoff start since 2011 and the Dallas Mavericks avoided elimination with a 121-109 victory at home over the Houston Rockets on Sunday night.Dallas cut Houston’s lead to 3-1 in the first-round series. Game 5 is Tuesday night in Houston.The Rockets, trying to wrap up their first postseason series victory since 2009, missed 17 consecutive shots over the second and third quarters. The most-prolific 3-point shooting team in N.B.A. history in the regular season was 7 of 31 from long range.MIKE CONLEY SIDELINED  Memphis guard Mike Conley will not play Monday night in Game 4 of the Grizzlies’ playoff series with the Portland Trail Blazers because of a facial injury.AdvertisementThe team said Sunday that Conley was returning to Memphis for additional evaluation.Conley left Saturday night’s Game 3 in the third quarter after he appeared to be caught inadvertently by Portland guard C. J. McCollum’s elbow while going after the ball.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Rout Caps Wizards’ Sweep of the Raptors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.