By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 26, 2015
Delmon Young drove in five runs, Chris Davis homered, and the Baltimore Orioles received a bounce-back pitching performance from Bud Norris in an 18-7 victory over the visiting Boston Red Sox on Sunday.Baltimore took control with a six-run third inning and led by 12-0 by the end of the sixth. Davis, Jimmy Paredes and Steve Pearce each contributed three R.B.I. to the Orioles, who had 20 hits without even batting in the ninth and who have won two straight since a five-game skid.The offensive showing was Baltimore’s most prolific since an 18-9 win over Cleveland on April 19, 2006. The Orioles also finished with their highest run total against Boston.WHITE SOX TAKE 2 FROM ROYALS In the first of two games, Avisail Garcia hit a tiebreaking single with two outs in the ninth inning, and Chicago beat visiting Kansas City, 3-2. The game was a resumption of a contest that had been suspended because of rain Friday night.AdvertisementIn the second game, Conor Gillaspie hit a two-run single in Chicago’s five-run sixth inning, and the White Sox rallied to win, 5-3.BREWERS 6, CARDINALS 3 Adam Lind hit a two-run homer, and Milwaukee beat visiting St. Louis for its second victory in 12 games.Before the game, the Cardinals put their ace, Adam Wainwright, on the 15-day disabled list with an injury to his Achilles’ tendon and left ankle, but he could be out for much longer — possibly the season.ASTROS 7, ATHLETICS 6 Evan Gattis hit a two-run double in the ninth, and visiting Houston completed its first sweep of Oakland. Gattis matched a career high with four R.B.I. His double in the ninth came with one out, after the Athletics had loaded the bases by intentionally walking Jed Lowrie.PHILLIES 5, BRAVES 4 Ryan Howard hit his second home run in two games, helping Philadelphia beat visiting Atlanta.AdvertisementJonathan Papelbon earned his fourth save despite allowing a solo pinch-hit home run by Alberto Callaspo in the ninth.TIGERS 8, INDIANS 6 Miguel Cabrera homered and drove in three runs, and Detroit beat visiting Cleveland. Cabrera has three home runs this season, all against Cleveland, and nine of his 13 R.B.I. have come against the Indians.PIRATES 8, DIAMONDBACKS 0 Francisco Liriano pitched effectively into the seventh inning in a combined three-hitter, and Pittsburgh completed its first sweep at Arizona. Liriano, making his 200th career start, offset six walks by striking out seven and allowing only two hits in six and a third innings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.RAYS 5, BLUE JAYS 1 Chris Archer allowed two hits in seven scoreless innings, and Brandon Guyer drove in four runs as Tampa Bay won its fifth straight, against visiting Toronto.Archer became the first American League pitcher to go four starts without giving up an earned run in the same season since Zack Greinke did it for Kansas City in 2009.CUBS 5, REDS 2 The rookie Addison Russell doubled with the bases loaded — one of his best moments from his first week in the majors — and Chicago held on for a victory at Cincinnati.Russell, a 21-year-old second baseman who had been in a slump, broke open the game with his three-run double in the fourth inning off Anthony DeSclafani.PADRES 3, DODGERS 1 Brandon Morrow pitched seven strong innings to earn his first win with host San Diego, and Alexi Amarista and Derek Norris homered against Los Angeles to help the Padres break a four-game losing streak. A night after the Padres allowed four home runs, Morrow gave up only one homer, a leadoff shot in the fifth by Alex Guerrero.MARLINS 6, NATIONALS 2 Adeiny Hechavarria hit a bases-loaded triple after a botched rundown kept the fourth inning alive, and Miami completed its first three-game sweep of visiting Washington since May 2012.AdvertisementMiami hit three triples in a game for the first time since 2000.TWINS 4, MARINERS 2 Joe Mauer hit a two-run triple with two outs in the 11th inning, lifting Minnesota to a win at Seattle.Mauer had three hits and drove in three runs. In addition to the triple, his first of the season, he had a run-scoring double as the Twins won for the third time in four games.RANGERS 5, ANGELS 4 Leonys Martin led off the 11th inning with a home run, and after Texas scored another run on an Erick Aybar error, the Rangers held on to win at Los Angeles, ending a three-game skid.Jose Alvarez, working his second inning of relief, fell behind in the count, 3-0, before Martin drove a full-count pitch just over the right-field wall.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Orioles Crush Red Sox, Scoring 18 Runs; White Sox Finish a Win and Then Add Another.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.