Reporting by THE NEW YORK TIMESOCT. 19, 2015
Dan Campbell has been preaching a different approach since taking over as the Dolphins’ interim coach on Oct. 5, and in his debut on Sunday, no one embodied the physicality he sought quite like Cameron Wake, who recorded his first four sacks of the season and forced two fumbles — in the first half alone. Miami finished with six sacks and twice intercepted the Titans’ Marcus Mariota, who was replaced by Zach Mettenberger after the two-minute warning. “Winning’s always fun,” said Wake, the first N.F.L. player with four sacks in a half since Seattle’s Chris Clemons in 2012. “And to do it with the guys with all the stuff that’s been going on the past two weeks, it definitely feels good.”Cam Newton connected with Greg Olsen on a 26-yard touchdown pass with 32 seconds left to complete the Panthers’ comeback from a 23-14 fourth-quarter deficit. Newton, who was 12 of 15 passing for 169 yards in the fourth quarter, led Carolina on 80-yard touchdown drives on its final two possessions, ending the second by finding an open Olsen down the seam as Seahawks defensive backs Earl Thomas and Richard Sherman looked at each other in confusion. The Texans’ Brian Hoyer, who took over for Ryan Mallett last week, validated Bill O’Brien’s decision to start him, throwing three third-down touchdown passes against the Jaguars. Hoyer, who passed for 293 yards, showed some toughness, too: After he was leveled by a late hit and left for one play, Hoyer found DeAndre Hopkins in the back of the end zone.Injury ReportThe Steelers lost Michael Vick (hamstring), and tackle Kelvin Beachum will miss the rest of the season with a torn knee ligament. ... The Bills, already missing Tyrod Taylor and Percy Harvin, lost receivers Sammy Watkins (ankle) and Marquise Goodwin (ribs) and defensive tackle Kyle Williams (leg). ... Defensive end Mike DeVito and receiver Jeremy Maclin of the Chiefs had concussions. ... Two Broncos linebackers, Shane Ray and Corey Nelson, had knee injuries. Receiver Emmanuel Sanders hurt his shoulder.Information from The Associated PressA version of this article appears in print on October 19, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Day’s Best.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.