AdvertisementSupported byYankees 6, Mets 4By Billy WitzIf the Mets had arrived at Yankee Stadium intent on showing that their 11-game winning streak was no illusion, that they had bid adieu to bad baseball and below-.500 finishes, then they made a bold statement:They have Matt Harvey.The so-called Dark Knight delivered a command performance on Saturday, shutting down the Yankees. But virtually everything else on this weekend was rendered darkly comedic.The Mets, having been pummeled Friday, lost on Sunday night to the Yankees, 6-4, in a display that crossed far into slapstick. They committed four errors in the field and two blunders on the basepaths, short-circuiting any opportunity they might have had.“In a game like this, you can’t make those kinds of mistakes,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said. “It was just a bad night — just a bad night for us.”It was something of a resurgent evening for Alex Rodriguez, who hit his 659th home run, leaving him one shy of tying Willie Mays for fourth on baseball’s career home-run list, and also doubled during a four-run second as the Yankees jumped out early and turned the game over to their reliable-as-the-sunrise bullpen.Chasen Shreve, Chris Martin, Justin Wilson, Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller held the Mets hitless over the final four and two-thirds innings, with Miller earning his seventh save in seven chances.The Yankees relievers’ ruthless efficiency stood in stark contrast to the Mets’ fielding and base running.Michael Cuddyer’s throw from the left-field corner surely killed any worms that stuck their heads out of the outfield grass on its way toward second base. Cuddyer fielded Rodriguez’s liner into the corner and came up throwing to second, thinking he had a shot at Rodriguez. But as he prepared to throw, he looked up and realized that all the Mets infielders were lined up for a throw to third. He spiked the ball into the ground, and it dribbled toward second.“Look, you’re going to have ugly games, and unfortunately this was one of them,” Cuddyer said.The Mets’ infield nearly went around the horn with errors: Third baseman Eric Campbell, shortstop Wilmer Flores and second baseman Daniel Murphy each committed one. Campbell’s error was not even his most egregious lapse. That came when he reached in the sixth inning on a fielder’s choice. Wilmer Flores hit a lazy fly ball to right field, and Campbell took off and rounded second, heading toward third.“Bonehead play,” Campbell said.When did he realize there was only one out?“When it was too late,” Campbell said. He was doubled off first.After the Mets had clipped the Yankees’ lead to 5-4 and chased Nathan Eovaldi in the fifth, Murphy bungled a potential double-play ball in the bottom of the inning. That set the stage for the Yankees to push across their final run.When the Yankee Stadium scoreboard accompanied a video with a tune familiar from “The Benny Hill Show,” it was appropriate for the Mets as well.The Yankees were far from perfect in the field, committing two errors, but one of them — a throwing error by shortstop Stephen Drew — was on a throw to the plate that skipped away from catcher John Ryan Murphy just as Cuddyer was sliding home. And Drew atoned with a slick behind-the-back flip out of his glove to force Murphy out at second. Murphy most likely would have been safe if he had slid on the play, as second baseman Gregorio Petit came off the bag to catch the throw, but he was able to tag Murphy as he came in standing up.The Mets also hit into two double plays that short-circuited rallies.If the Mets were disappointed, the performances of pitchers Jacob deGrom on Friday and Jon Niese on Sunday were dispiriting. They combined to give up 11 runs in the first three innings of the two games. Niese squandered an early two-run lead.“This is kind of what it’s like in October,” Cuddyer said of the atmosphere on Sunday. “I think it’s good for guys to experience that and at least know, because that’s what we’re shooting for.”While the Mets and the Yankees battled to win this unusually early series between the crosstown rivals, Rodriguez’s at-bats were events unto themselves.Since hitting two home runs against Tampa Bay nine days earlier, closing in on Mays’s mark — and on a claim to a $6 million bonus the Yankees are contesting — Rodriguez had slumped. Before Sunday’s game, he had just three hits in 24 at-bats since, though he had walked nine times.“I don’t concern myself with power,” Rodriguez said before Sunday night’s game. “I just focus on one at-bat at a time, the same approach my whole career. I feel like when I’m swinging at strikes and I take my walks, it’s always a good sign,”Jeff Pentland, the Yankees’ hitting coach, added: “He’s just a hair anxious. He’s going out and getting in front a little bit. He just needs to wait for the ball to come to him a bit. He’ll figure it out.”Rodriguez, who struck out twice on Saturday against Harvey — the second on a 98-mile-per-hour fastball — figured it out quickly on Sunday. In the first inning, he drove a 2-2 pitch from Niese to right-center field. As outfielders Juan Lagares and Curtis Granderson gave chase, the ball hit off the top of the outfield wall and landed in the Yankees’ bullpen.Rodriguez doubled in a run in his next at-bat, one of three extra-base hits the Yankees had against Niese in their four-run second. Rodriguez also grounded out and lined out to left.“Willie was my father’s favorite player,” Rodriguez said afterward. “I remember hearing a lot about Willie Mays and Mickey Mantle all the time.”As for any celebration of No. 660, a prospective event the Yankees have assiduously ignored, Rodriguez said he did not know.“I don’t have a marketing degree,” he said.Advertisement