AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzFor a designated hitter who is soon to be 40, going more than a week without a home run is nothing to be alarmed about. But for Alex Rodriguez, who, entering Sunday’s game, was two shy of tying Willie Mays at 660 homers for fourth on the career list, it followed a familiar pattern.When Rodriguez nears a home run milestone, he does not sprint past it.As Rodriguez was approaching his 500th home run in 2007, it took him 10 days to reach the mark after he hit his 499th. That was in a season in which Rodriguez hit 54 homers and won his third American League Most Valuable Player Award. He also took his time reaching No. 600. Rodriguez hit his 598th on July 22 and his 599th on Aug. 4 before delivering his 600th off Toronto pitcher Shawn Marcum on Aug. 10.This season, Rodriguez homered against Baltimore, and in the next game, on April 17, he hit two more against Tampa Bay, moving him to within two of Mays. Nine days later, on Sunday, in his first at-bat, he homered against Mets starter Jon Niese.Equaling Mays could net Rodriguez a $6 million marketing bonus, but the Yankees have told him they will not pay it because they say his use of performance-enhancing drugs has undermined their marketing opportunities.Rodriguez shrugged off the suggestion that he was in a slump.“I don’t concern myself with power,” Rodriguez said before Sunday night’s game against the Mets. “I just focus on one at-bat at a time, the same approach my whole career.”Since his last homer, Rodriguez was 3 for 24 entering Sunday, but he had nine walks, an encouraging sign, he said. Now it is the man behind him in the lineup, Mark Teixeira, who has been swinging the hot bat, having hit three home runs in the first two games against the Mets. That could lead to more pitches to hit.“I feel like when I’m swinging at strikes and I take my walks, it’s always a good sign,” Rodriguez said. “And with Tex swinging the bat so well, it should help everybody.”One mitigating factor was the blustery weather the Yankees have played in since leaving Tampa Bay, which plays indoors. In Detroit, which has a deep center and left-center wall, Rodriguez drove a ball to the warning track in left. “He’s just a hair anxious,” said Jeff Pentland, the Yankees’ hitting coach. “He’s going out and getting in front a little bit. He just needs to wait for the ball to come to him a bit. He’ll figure it out.”In Rodriguez’s second at-bat Sunday, in the second inning, he had a run-scoring double. In his third at-bat, he hit into a run-scoring fielder’s choice, and in his fourth, he lined out to left.Manager Joe Girardi, who acknowledged last week that Rodriguez had as he approached previous milestones, said, “I haven’t sensed it yet, but if I was, I’ll sit down and talk to him.”Girardi used Rodriguez’s recent drought to emphasize the difficulty of hitting home runs, even for a hypothetical player on a pace to hit 40 in a season.“A lot of times, they’re going to be mistakes,” Girardi said. “Sometimes you’re just going to have a perfect swing. The bottom line is when you hit a home run, it’s usually just a really good swing and really good contact — and that just doesn’t happen perfectly very often during the course of the season.”INSIDE PITCHJACOBY ELLSBURY was out Sunday after leaving Saturday’s game with a hip strain. ... CHASE WHITLeY is likely to be recalled to pitch Tuesday against Tampa Bay, JOE GIRARDI said, so that Masahiro Tanaka and Michael Pineda can have an extra day of rest. The Yankees have a day off Thursday, their only one in a 31-day stretch, so the rest of the rotation would have had five days between starts. Now, C. C. Sabathia, Nathan Eovaldi and Adam Warren will have six-day breaks. Whitley is 2-0 with a 2.12 E.R.A. for Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre. ... DAVID WRIGHT reported to Port St. Lucie to begin baseball activities after straining his hamstring April 15. Advertisement