By JAMES CARDAPRIL 26, 2015
BROOKFIELD, Wis. —  It starts with a block of wood, four wheels and four nails. It fills boys with hope and creativity; it fills parents with obsession or dread.On a Saturday morning in February, Cub Scout Pack 45 held its annual Pinewood Derby at a local community center. In the hall, scouts lined up against the wall and waited for their names to be called so they could dash into a strobe-lit room and take their spot along the racetrack.From the racing software, the ceiling projector illuminating the race, the best times listed on the wall and the names for cars — Speedy Spidey, Prankster Gangster, Born Free — it was clear that the sport that Don Murphy started in 1953 had come a long way from its roots in Manhattan Beach, Calif.Long a staple of the Boy Scouts of America and its more than 1.3 million Cub Scouts, the Pinewood Derby has found new life among fathers who have developed a passion for the sport.Advertisement“The dads drive it,” said John Halliburton, who operates the website derbydad4hire.com and runs the National Pinewood Derby Racing League in Cedar City, Utah. “A large group of them have kids in Scouts and when the kids get out, they disappear, but there’s a chunk of hobbyists that don’t have kids involved.”AdvertisementFor them, there are private leagues, national rankings and a cottage industry that sells Pinewood-specific tools and custom components.For Halliburton, racing is a full-time job. His monthly league attracts 130 to 230 cars that are mailed to him from across the country. On race day, the car owners can watch the race on a live video feed and receive updated stats. Prizes are trophies, car parts and digital banners listing their victories on an online profile.Halliburton’s league is the largest of four in the country, including the Association of Pinewood Racers, Pro Derby Drag Racing and PWD Racing.“Occasionally a scout dad will get curious and send a car in,” Halliburton said. “Most people think they are unbeatable until they come to a race and then they get slaughtered. Usually that’s the last you see of them, but the competitive ones dig in and learn to build a car.”Joel Redfearn, an auto mechanic and former drag racer from southeastern Utah, is one of those fathers. He said that he and his son wanted their car to show that they knew what they were doing.“Out of fear of looking like a complete moron, my son and I spent quite a bit of time on that car,” he said.Redfearn planned a family trip to Cedar City on a day when Halliburton was putting on a race.“We took a car up there that we thought was superfast and we got annihilated,” Redfearn said. “I was like, Are you kidding me? You can make them faster than what they are already?” He is now one of the fastest racers in the country, winning multiple N.P.D.R.L. national championships.Advertisement“I’ve been fortunate enough to win a few races,” Redfearn said. “It’s been a climb, but the problem is when you make it to the top, the only way to go is down.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Scott Law, an engineer in Bettendorf, Iowa, beat Redfearn by a thousandth of a second in 2013 to win the overall national championship. After building a car with his oldest son, he built a track in his basement and started league racing, sending in four to six cars per month.It quickly became costly — a $40 entry per car, plus shipping them back and forth.“I’d say there are guys spending $300 to $400 a month, plus an extra $100 in shipping, just racing Pinewood Derby cars,” Law said. “I’ve seen a lot of divorces. There could have been other reasons, too, but a lot of it has to do with people that can’t race anymore because they’re spending too much money. It’s an addicting thing to try to get faster and faster.”Both Redfearn and Law organize races in their local scouting community.“My favorite Facebook post is there is an image of two scouts sitting on the curb and the one scout says to the other, ‘I can’t wait until I’m an adult and I can build my own Pinewood Derby car,’ ” Redfearn said.When Redfearn runs a race for a Cub Scout pack, his expertise often turns young boys’ tears into smiles. He will make some adjustments to a struggling car and then take on the fastest car of the day.“I’d say probably eight times out of 10 we can take the slowest car and turn it into the fastest car in five to 10 minutes,” he said. “It’s really quite comical because it frustrates the dads who spent a ton of time on it.”For Pack 45, one of about 40,000 packs in the country, the Pinewood Derby is the biggest event of the year.“There are 49 boys in the pack, and for Pinewood Derby, we have almost a 100 percent participation rate,” the cubmaster, Steve Krieg, said. “It’s a better turnout than going to a Brewers or Admirals game,” he said, referring to the Milwaukee Admirals of the American Hockey League.In previous years, the racetrack was a homemade wooden track assembled by some fathers.Now, the pack has a six-lane aluminum track with a mechanical start gate and braking section.AdvertisementAs the cars pass the finish line, an LED display lists the finishers and times. Sensors measure the cars within a thousandth of a second. It’s not cheap — aluminum tracks can cost up to $2,000.“We had to sell a lot of popcorn for that,” said Dave Roller, referring to the pack’s annual fund-raiser.Roller also formats the racing software to weed out the cars the fathers make versus the cars the scouts make. He uses a program that determines a winner through a point system that relies on heats and measures how cars perform against one another.“If you go strictly on speed, the cars from the teams, if you will, that have more skill will mop the floor every time,” Roller said. “You want them to succeed, but there are some dads that are really good at helping their kids and some dads that don’t have any woodworking experience, so we try to make it fair as best we can.”A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Not Your Dad’s Pinewood Derby (at Least in Theory).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.