By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 26, 2015
UNIONDALE, N.Y. —  John Tavares always exudes calmness, so it is no surprise to hear that he views his first postseason Game 7 as he would any road game.But even the outwardly unflappable Tavares admits that nerves are a factor as pressure increases on a franchise trying to win a playoff series for the first time since 1993. Tavares, the Islanders’ captain, and his teammates will have to quell Alex Ovechkin and the Washington Capitals once more to advance.“I’ve had butterflies for every game of the series — it’s the excitement,” said Tavares, who opened the scoring in a 3-1 Islanders home victory in Game 6 on Saturday to force Monday’s deciding contest at Verizon Center. “We’ll all be nervous in a positive way. But we’re looking forward to the opportunity.”The Game 6 victory may have been the final game at the 43-year-old Nassau Coliseum, which will close after the season. The Islanders will move to Barclays Center in Brooklyn in the fall.AdvertisementThe Islanders, who finished the regular season with 101 points after missing the playoffs last year, have reason to sense that their moment to shine in the playoffs could be at hand.The Capitals historically fold under the glare of Game 7s at home. Washington is 2-7 in such games in franchise history, and the Islanders are responsible for one of those defeats, courtesy of Pat LaFontaine’s quadruple-overtime winner in the first round in 1987.Islanders Coach Jack Capuano, who shuffled his lineup for Game 6 after the Islanders lost, 5-1, in Game 5, said a major reason his team won 47 games this season — including 22 on the road — and led the Metropolitan Division until being overtaken by the Rangers was that it had played in the same focused way throughout.“We don’t deviate from our game plan,” Capuano said. “We know what to expect. I don’t believe in momentum or pressure too much. We’ve got a relentless bunch of guys in here, and we hold each other accountable.”Tavares, whose 6 points, including two goals, lead the team in the tense series against Washington, said the club’s mission would remain simple.Advertisement“We have to win one hockey game to move on,” he said. “We want to keep playing.”The Islanders are 3-4 over all in Game 7s. Their last loss in a Game 7 was at Toronto in 2002, and their last victory in a Game 7 occurred when David Volek scored in overtime to defeat the defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins in 1993.Islanders defenseman Johnny Boychuk, a member of the Boston Bruins when they beat the Vancouver Canucks in Game 7 in 2011 to win the Stanley Cup, agreed with Tavares.“It’s one game, but it’s a very big game,” he said. “You have to stay in the moment and not let your emotions get the best of you.”Two of Capuano’s lineup maneuvers seemed to give the team a jolt on Saturday. He inserted right wing Colin McDonald on a line with Mikhail Grabovski and Nikolay Kulemin. The grouping was effective, as Kulemin scored the winning goal midway through the third period to ignite a frenzy among the sellout crowd of 16,170.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And with defensemen Travis Hamonic, Lubomir Visnovsky and Calvin de Haan injured and unable to play, Capuano opted to dress the rookie Scott Mayfield, pairing him on the blue line with the seldom-used Matt Donovan.Mayfield, 22, who had only five games of N.H.L. experience before his playoff debut, gave the Islanders a lift against the burly Capitals.“I try to use my size and long reach,” said the 6-foot-4 Mayfield, who dumped the husky Washington forward Jason Chimera to the ice with ease at one point. “I try to keep my game simple.”Capuano praised the newcomers to the lineup after Game 6 but would not say who would be in his lineup for Game 7.“We’ve got some decisions to make,” he said.Waiting for the Islanders or the Capitals are the Rangers, who needed only five games to dispatch the Penguins.AdvertisementThe Islanders and the Rangers have not met in the playoffs since 1994 — when the Rangers last won the Stanley Cup — and they have not met beyond the first round since 1983.But first, the Capitals await, as the Islanders try to extend their season in this final year of Nassau Coliseum, where they won four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 to 1983.“We’ve got to get back here,” said McDonald, whose physical play had a significant role in the Game 6 victory. “That’s what we’re focused on. We really enjoy feeding off the energy of our fans. But we’ve been a good away team, so we’re not worried about a Game 7 on the road.”The Islanders squandered a chance for home-ice advantage in the first round when they lost to Columbus in a shootout in their regular-season finale at the Coliseum. They recovered to win two of the three home games during the series, with the only loss coming in overtime in Game 4.Capuano reiterated that a chance to be one victory from Round 2 — and an all-New-York showdown with the Rangers — is one he would have welcomed before the playoffs.“We’re going into Game 7,” he said. “If you asked me before the series, I’d take it. Our battle level will increase. We have to match the opposition. We had 20-plus road wins, and we’re not going to change how we go about our business.”A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Enter Finale on Road Buoyed by a Win at Home.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.