By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 26, 2015
With a tenacious defensive display, Chelsea held host Arsenal to a 0-0 draw on Sunday and closed in on its first Premier League title in five years. Arsenal had only one shot on target.Aside from penalty decisions that did not go Chelsea’s way, the only thing that frustrated Coach José Mourinho at Emirates Stadium was a chant from Arsenal fans at the end, “Boring, boring Chelsea.”Chelsea is 10 points ahead of Manchester City, the defending champion, and Arsenal at the top of the standings with five games to go. Mourinho was quick to remind Arsenal fans after the game that their team has not won the league title since 2004. (Chelsea has won it three times since then, with its 2005 and 2006 titles coming in Mourinho’s first stint as the team’s coach.)“You support a club, and you are waiting, waiting, waiting and for so many years without a Premier League title,” Mourinho said. “I think that is very boring.”AdvertisementChelsea can seal the title with victories over Leicester on Wednesday and Crystal Palace on Sunday.Injuries to strikers Didier Drogba and Loïc Rémy forced Mourinho to start without a recognized striker, and midfielder Oscar was the player farthest up the field for much of the first half. Oscar, though, was hit hard by Arsenal goalkeeper David Ospina after 15 minutes and left at halftime as a precaution, with Drogba replacing him.AdvertisementMourinho said Oscar went to a hospital because “we were a bit scared.” But when asked if Oscar had sustained a concussion, Mourinho said, “I don’t know.”In another Premier League game, Manchester United lost at Everton, 3-0, which left United in fourth but still on course for Champions League qualification.FANS ATTACK BUS AND ONE ANOTHER Juventus was prevented from clinching a fourth consecutive Serie A title in part because of a 2-1 loss at Torino, a game marred by fan violence.Andrea Pirlo put Juventus ahead on a free kick 35 minutes in, but Matteo Darmian tied the score just before halftime, and the former Juventus forward Fabio Quagliarella scored the winner in the 57th.The loss was Juventus’s third in the league this season. Torino won a league matchup with Juventus for the first time in 20 years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before the match, Torino fans attacked the bus carrying Juventus’s players as it approached the stadium, breaking a window. Juventus supporters retaliated by throwing fireworks at Torino fans inside the stadium, injuring several. At least five people were arrested.Juventus is 14 points ahead of Lazio, which was held to a 1-1 draw at home by Chievo Verona, with six matches remaining.BAYERN SEALS TITLE WITH HELP Bayern Munich clinched the Bundesliga title with four games to spare as its rival Borussia Mönchengladbach scored in the last minute to beat second-place Wolfsburg, 1-0, at home, giving Bayern an unassailable 15-point lead. Bayern, which has won three straight Bundesliga titles, beat Hertha Berlin, 1-0, at home on Saturday.AdvertisementREAL MADRID STAYS IN HUNT Javier Hernández scored twice as Real Madrid fought back for a 4-2 win at Celta Vigo to keep the pressure on the Spanish league leader, Barcelona, which is 2 points ahead with five games left.LYON RETAKES LEAD Alexandre Lacazette scored his 26th goal, a total that leads the French league, as Lyon passed Paris St.-Germain on goal difference, returning to first place with a 4-2 win at Reims. Lyon has played one more game than P.S.G.AN END TO A LONG STREAK Benfica failed to score for the first time in 93 home games, drawing, 0-0, with Porto in the Portuguese league.FANS RIOT IN SERBIA At least 50 people were injured and 40 arrested in Belgrade in fierce clashes between Red Star and Partizan fans, Serbian authorities said. The riots erupted before a game between the clubs, Belgrade rivals.The start of the match was delayed for 40 minutes as fans hurled stones at one another and battled with sticks. The game, which ended in a scoreless draw, was also stopped for seven minutes because of flares hurled onto the field. The police said 20 officers were injured while trying to separate the fighters.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tie Moves Chelsea Closer to League Title; Italian Upset Comes Amid Fan Violence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.