AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Deron Williams’s mercurial postseason took another hairpin turn Sunday when his Nets teammate Joe Johnson let slip that Williams might be playing with “severe” tendinitis.Johnson was not clear about where the tendinitis was located, although Williams has worn a brace on his right knee throughout the season. A Nets spokesman declined to comment on Johnson’s diagnosis, saying only that Williams had been healthy enough to play.Johnson had been asked whether he thought criticism of Williams’s play this series against the Atlanta Hawks was fair after Coach Lionel Hollins delivered an impassioned defense of Williams, a veteran point guard who has scored 5 points in the last two games. Johnson indicated that Williams had been playing through previously undisclosed pain.“Tendinitis has pretty much been my kryptonite, and I know he has a severe case of that,” Johnson said. “It’s tough, man. It’s tough. But we all have his back, and whatever we have to do, we have to do it.”Williams’s status for Game 4 on Monday at Barclays Center was already in some doubt. Williams had suffered injuries to his tailbone and his right leg in Saturday’s win, the Nets’ first of the series after two losses. He sat for the final 16 minutes of the game, during which time the Nets came from behind to win, 91-83.The game before that, Williams missed an open 15-foot jumper that would have tied the game with just over 10 seconds left. He finished the game with 2 points on 1-of-7 shooting and is shooting 26.9 percent from the field in the series.Hollins, however, credited the other things Williams has done to generate offense, like his 7 rebounds, 5.3 assists and 1.3 steals per game. After being asked about Williams’s health for Game 4, Hollins detoured into an impromptu defense of his performance.“Deron has played well,” Hollins said. “Would he like to shoot better? Yes. Would we like him to shoot better? Yes. But he’s played extremely well. He’s gotten us off to great starts with his pace, he’s made passes. When you’re getting seven to eight assists and eight to 10 rebounds, you’re doing a lot of stuff right.”Hollins added that he felt the news media’s portrayal of Williams had been “totally unfair.”“It’s not just about the scoring,” Hollins said. “It’s about winning. It’s about doing the right things for the team. And I’ll defend Deron to the end on that.”Hollins said he did not expect to make any changes to the starting lineup for Game 4 unless Williams was unable to suit up. He said he was “banged up pretty good.” Williams was not made available to comment.The rest of the Nets are feeling revived after they avoided falling behind by three games to none in a tightly contested series against the Hawks, the No. 1 seed in the Eastern Conference. Sunday’s practice was light and spirits seemed equally buoyant after the Nets closed out Saturday’s game on an 18-0 run. It was the team’s first win in seven tries against the Hawks this season.“We haven’t been paying any attention to the seeding,” center Brook Lopez said. “We feel we’ve been very competitive in the series.”While Lopez said momentum had switched to the Nets’ side, Hollins tried to keep the team’s emotions subdued. “The playoffs are an emotional roller coaster,” Hollins said. “You lose, everybody’s down on you. You lose two, everybody’s really down on you, thinks that the season’s over. Then you win and, oh, maybe they have a chance. You have to avoid being in that mind-set and stay even-keeled.”One of the key difference Saturday was the Nets moved the ball well and made big shots early in the game, contributing a 31-16 first quarter lead, after the Nets had trailed by double figures early in the previous two games. It allowed them to work their offense from inside-out. And it gave Atlanta something it could be wary about Monday night.“We’d been shrinking the court and trying to play in close quarters. It hadn’t really been working out too well for us,” forward Thaddeus Young said. “Last game, we spaced it out well and guys were in the spots they needed to be.”Advertisement