By ANDREW DASAPRIL 26, 2015
HARRISON, N.J. —  The early wins were one thing. But when the Red Bulls started scoring goals accidentally — shots that went in off a teammate’s face, say, instead of out after clipping the post — it became easier to believe that their unbeaten start in Major League Soccer might not be a fluke.The Red Bulls certainly are starting to think so. The latest sign may have been an accident — a goal scored after a deflected shot ricocheted in off the face of Red Bulls midfielder Felipe in the second half Sunday — but it produced a 1-1 tie against the Los Angeles Galaxy, the defending champion.The result allowed the Red Bulls to remain M.L.S.’s only unbeaten team (3-0-3). And it also reinforced the growing notion that the restructured Red Bulls may be building something special under the first-year coach, Jesse Marsch.The reaction to the goal, and to the tie, might have said more about the Red Bulls’ new mind-set. Rather than pleasure at securing a point after an early lapse left them behind, the Red Bulls expressed frustration that they did not claim all 3 points for a win. Since the New England Revolution and D.C. United each won Saturday, the Red Bulls’ failure to do so cost them their share of first place in the Eastern Conference.Advertisement“It’s a good result in the sense that we came back,” midfielder Dax McCarty said. “But it’s a bad result in that we didn’t win when we kind of dominated the game.”AdvertisementMarsch, and others, echoed McCarty’s feelings, and in many ways, they were right. The Red Bulls controlled the action for long stretches — controlling possession of the ball and pursuing it relentlessly on the rare occasions when they lost it.Part of that was because the Galaxy fell back after taking an early lead on a lightning-quick strike by Bradford Jamieson in the ninth minute. Jamieson, an 18-year-old who was born a month after Galaxy Coach Bruce Arena coached D.C. United to victory in the first M.L.S. championship game, graduated from high school last June. On Sunday, he made his second career start in place of the injured Robbie Keane, the most valuable player in the league last season, and his goal seemed to stun the crowd of 20,026.Taking the ball about 40 yards from goal, Jamieson swiftly turned and sprinted past right back Chris Duvall before pausing at the left edge of the penalty area just long enough to draw McCarty into a double team. But just as quickly, he was gone, leaving both of them behind and slotting the ball past goalkeeper Luis Robles, inside the far post.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“In a lot of ways, our first half might have been one of the best halves of the season,” said Marsch, an optimist who might see a broken glass as half full. His players reacted to the goal by immediately pressing forward again and again to try to match it.The equalizer started as strangely as it ended, with midfielder Sal Zizzo driving the ball toward the left corner flag around defender Dan Gargan.“He kind of had it covered, so I knew going through his legs was the only option,” Zizzo said. “So I just kind of tried to hit the ball through his legs, and it kind of ended up working out.”The ball landed at the feet of striker Bradley Wright-Phillips 6 yards from goal. A. J. De la Garza slid into him just as he shot to block the attempt, but the clearance went right in off Felipe.“I haven’t scored many,” Felipe said of the goal, “but I think this was the luckiest.”If it sometimes seems as if the Galaxy always have the Red Bulls’ number — and every other team’s — that is because they have won five league titles and the Red Bulls are still chasing their first. But Los Angeles has struggled recently against the Red Bulls, who now are 3-1-2 in the teams’ last six meetings, and they have not won at Red Bull Arena since 2010.They may not this season, either; the Galaxy will not face the Red Bulls again unless the teams meet in the playoffs. It is a prospect few thought possible before the season. Now neither side will count it out.Advertisement“We have a long way to go,” Arena said. “We’re going to be a much better team than we are right now.”A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Odd Goal Against Galaxy Leads to Draw, and Red Bulls Stay Unbeaten.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.