By BILLY WITZAPRIL 26, 2015
So many people, it seemed, wanted to make this series between the Mets and the Yankees into something significant. The teams each owned a share of first place — the first time that has happened when they met each other. Matt Harvey would face Alex Rodriguez, a showdown that might have had historic — and theatrical — implications if Rodriguez were to tie Willie Mays on the career home run list. Were the Mets, who had won 11 in a row, really for real? Were the Yankees, who had won six of seven, tiptoeing back toward relevance?Fox turned up to broadcast Saturday’s game, and ESPN visited for Sunday night’s finale, a 6-4 victory by the Yankees.But this early edition of the interborough rivalry, which is traditionally played when the weather is warmer and the teams’ paths at least have some direction, showed something else.Games will be meaningful when they really are.The atmosphere at Yankee Stadium during the weekend was somewhere between meh and a shrug. Pockets of empty seats dotted the stadium all three days, and the Friday and Saturday games were as one-sided as the Harvey-Rodriguez duel, the lasting image being the Yankees slugger stealing a glance at the scoreboard after his ninth-inning strikeout to see the speed of the fastball that he had swung past. (It was 98 miles per hour.)There were some hearty “Let’s go, Mets” chants, and the orange-shirted 7 Line Army took over the upper reaches down the left-field line on Friday. But other than booing C. C. Sabathia off the mound on Saturday, the home team’s fans did not often make their presence felt.AdvertisementThe most fervent reaction Saturday came when the Rangers’ Ryan McDonagh and Cam Talbot were shown on the video board.AdvertisementIt was not until Sunday night, with baseballs flying everywhere — over the fence by Alex Rodriguez and Curtis Granderson, and all over the infield with the Mets’ slapstick fielding — that there was any back and forth between the teams. Even then, it was not enough to keep the crowd’s attention: Fans from both teams spent the home half of the sixth inning joining together to do the wave. It was as engaged as they had been all weekend.All this seemed to suggest that the metabolism of New York baseball fans was not set up to care until the events really mattered, such as when the teams meet again in September at Citi Field.It was easy to understand, after so many seasons in the wilderness, why these games, at this point in the season, mattered more to the Mets.The underlying story of this just-hatched season will be whether the Mets, who have rekindled memories of the 1986 World Series champions (minus the fights and drugs), can seize the city’s center stage from the Yankees.Just as interesting will be whether the Yankees, without the farewell tours of Derek Jeter and Mariano Rivera, can reinvigorate their fans by fielding a championship contender.Television viewership on YES was down 21 percent this season entering the series. And even with Harvey pitching, Rodriguez closing in on a milestone and a Brett Gardner replica-bat giveaway, there were still plenty of empty seats everywhere in the park Saturday, though it was announced as a sellout.“Bat day?” asked Vinny Milano, a denizen of the right-field bleachers. “That’s always been for a Sunday against Kansas City.”AdvertisementMilano’s point was that this series, like the atmosphere at the Stadium, is not what it once was. Another example he pointed to were the 1,300 Mets fans, who sat together in the far end of the upper deck in left field on Friday night. “It’s like a college football crowd,” Milano said, admiringly.The 7 Line Army’s march into the Bronx on Friday underscored the availability of tickets to Yankees games, which are the second most expensive in baseball, behind Boston’s, according to Team Marketing Report. Darren Meenan, the fan group’s founder, said they had begun traveling to Yankee Stadium en masse two years ago. They bought 300 group tickets then, 500 last year and 1,300 for Friday night. Meenan bought 1,000 tickets through the Yankees and sold them in 45 minutes. He went back for 300 more.It was a spirited group that chanted, “We can’t hear you,” toward the Yankees fans in right field and braved the bone-chilling wind with a sense of humor, serenading their slugger Lucas Duda by singing to the tune of “Camptown Races”: “Yankees fans like potpourri, oh, Duda day.”Meenan felt somewhat conflicted being at the game. In 10 days, his wife, Kelly, who was at home, was due to deliver their first child.A friend of Meenan’s had asked him a hypothetical question: If the Mets’ pitcher Friday, Jacob deGrom, were throwing a perfect game — something no Mets pitcher had done — and his wife went into labor in the seventh inning, would he stay or go?“She’d kill me, but a perfect game might not happen again,” said Meenan, who was spared such a conflict when Mark Teixeira hit a first-inning home run off deGrom.The notion that the Mets had come to take over the city seemed to be dismissed by Yankees fans. They acknowledged that their team might or might not turn into something interesting this season, but the Mets?“No matter how many times you watch ‘The Titanic,’ the boat always sinks,” said Marc Chalpin, who was bundled up in the right-field bleachers.AdvertisementNot far away, Patrick Quinlan, a hard-core Mets fan, was making his presence felt.Quinlan was so certain that the series would stamp the Mets’ legitimacy that he bought four tickets in the heart of the Bleacher Creatures in right field and gave three to his Yankee-fan friends.“The Mets run New York,” Quinlan said, rising to his feet to start a “Let’s go, Mets” chant.It was admirable pluck, considering the Yankees had seized an early lead on Teixeira’s home run. Then Jacoby Ellsbury hit a homer. And Teixeira added a two-run homer in the third inning.The blows took their toll.“That’s a popout in Citi Field,” Quinlan said after Ellsbury’s home run, shaking his head as he took ribbing from his friends and other fans that surrounded him. “Hey, it’s a long game.”It was a long night for the Mets. But as the series ended, it served as a reminder that it is a long season as well — one that both teams hope might extend even longer.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: There’s More Meh Than Meaning In an Early-Season Subway Series .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.