AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressJim Fanning, the longtime Montreal Expos executive who managed the franchise to its only playoff appearance in Canada, has died. He was 87.   His death was confirmed on Saturday by the Toronto Blue Jays, for whom he had worked as an ambassador to amateur baseball. The team did not say where or when he died.   Mr. Fanning was the Expos’ first general manager. Hired in 1968, a year before the team’s first season, he spent 25 years with the franchise in various capacities. In 2005, the Expos moved to Washington and became the Nationals.   Late in the 1981 season, Mr. Fanning, who was then in charge of the Expos’ farm system, replaced Dick Williams as manager. “When I took over, I didn’t give the team a pep talk because I didn’t know how,” he told The New York Times that October. “I gave them a fact talk. I told them they had 27 days to win it.” Because a players’ strike interrupted the season and no games were played from early June to early August, that year the teams with the best first-half and second-half records in each division met in playoff series. The Expos finished with the best second-half record in the National League East and beat the Philadelphia Phillies in five games, but then lost the five-game National League Championship Series to the Los Angeles Dodgers, who went on to beat the Yankees in the World Series. It was the Expos’ only postseason appearance before the move to Washington. Mr. Fanning remained the Expos’ manager through the 1982 season and briefly managed the team again when Bill Virdon was fired near the end of the 1984 season. He then returned to the front office. His overall record as manager was 116-103.   William James Fanning was born in Chicago on Sept. 14, 1927, and attended high school in Moneta, Iowa. He played college baseball at Buena Vista in Iowa and the University of Illinois. He was a backup catcher with the Chicago Cubs from 1954 to 1957, hitting .170 with five runs batted in in 64 games. He then managed in the minor leagues before joining the Milwaukee Braves’ front office and remained with the Braves when they moved to Atlanta.   Survivors include his wife, Maria; a son, Frank; and a daughter, Cynthia.   A resident of London, Ontario, Mr. Fanning became a Canadian citizen in 2012.   “Jim Fanning was a baseball pioneer in this country,” said Scott Crawford, director of operations for the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame, which inducted him in 2000. “Without his tireless efforts, there may not be Major League Baseball in Canada.” The New York Times contributed reporting.Advertisement