AdvertisementSupported byCavaliers 101, Celtics 93By Peter MayBOSTON — The Celtics were undeniably a feel-good story over the last two months of the N.B.A.’s regular season. But in the playoffs, the cold, hard reality is that warm and wonderful stories of plucky underdogs and spunky overachievers invariably end when they collide head-on with showstopping talent. That was again the case on Sunday at TD Garden as the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the Celtics, 101-93, to sweep their first-round series in four games.The Cavaliers lost two starters — one to injury, another to ejection — but as had been the case throughout the series, they still had the two best players on the floor in LeBron James and Kyrie Irving, and that was enough. James, who played 46 minutes, and Irving, who played 43, combined for 51 points, 21 rebounds and 11 of the team’s 13 assists.Although each game in the series was competitive, there was never a doubt as to the identity of the superior team, with the Celtics never holding a second-half lead in any of the four games. In the finale — an uneven game that Irving, who finished with 24 points and 11 rebounds, called “the most physical” he had ever played in — Cleveland was simply too much for Boston. The Cavaliers will now have several days of rest before beginning their next series. They will need them.Midway through the first quarter, while tangled up with Kelly Olynyk, Kevin Love dislocated his left shoulder. He did not return, and his arm was in a sling after the game. He will be further examined this week.“I thought it was a bush-league play,” Love said. “I have no doubt in my mind that he did it on purpose.”Love added: “When he has to go to those lengths, that’s not how it’s supposed to be. That’s not basketball.”James agreed, saying: “It didn’t look like a basketball play. I’ve seen a lot of tie-ups in my day, and that tie-up was a little different. You want to play the game of basketball the right way.”Olynyk was not immediately available to comment after the game, but his teammate Evan Turner said: “Kelly doesn’t have a mean bone in his body. He’s not that type of dude.”The Cavaliers will also be waiting to hear from the N.B.A. on the status of J. R. Smith, who was ejected early in the third quarter after striking Jae Crowder in the head. Crowder fell awkwardly, spraining his left knee, and did not return. Smith said he was “nervous as hell” about a possible suspension even as he said there was “nothing malicious” about the play.Smith — who, while with the Knicks in 2013, was ejected from another first-round series against the Celtics for elbowing Jason Terry and was suspended for a game — added of his hit on Crowder: “I didn’t try to do anything to hurt him or anyone else. That’s not the way I play the game.”James said the statuses of Love and Smith for the Cavaliers’ next series were out of his control.“It’s next man up — no excuses,” said James, who had 27 points, 10 rebounds and 8 assists.On Sunday, James and Irving had help from Iman Shumpert, who came off the bench to score 15 points and grab 10 rebounds, and Timofey Mozgov, who had 12 points, 11 rebounds and 3 blocks.Isaiah Thomas and Jared Sullinger each had 21 points for Boston, and Sullinger also had 11 rebounds.The Celtics did not make a 3-pointer until the third quarter and finished 3 of 23 from beyond the arc. They also missed 13 of their 37 free throws. Thomas and Turner, the team’s top scorers in the series, were a combined 5 of 23 from the field, going 0 for 11 in the first half for the Celtics, who were swept in a best-of-seven series for only the fourth time in the franchise’s history. The Cavaliers blew open the game in the first half, taking a 21-point lead, but gave the Celtics some hope by shooting 4 of 20 from the field in a 13-point third quarter.Boston cut its deficit to 8 points with 37.5 seconds left as Thomas scored on an uncontested layup. Thomas then made contact with James, who was out of bounds for an inbounds pass, from behind without a call from the officials, and Boston got 2 more points off James’s errant pass to make the score 99-93. Another James turnover — his sixth — gave the Celtics a chance to draw even closer, but Luigi Datome missed an open 3-point attempt, and Irving made two free throws to seal the result.James said Thomas should have been given a technical foul for hitting him on the inbounds play. “That’s never happened to me,” James said.Cavaliers Coach David Blatt, who had been fuming on the sideline, said when asked about the play: “I got to be careful in how I answer that. Have I seen it? Yeah.”Referring to his extensive coaching experience in Europe and Israel, Blatt said: “It’s an automatic technical foul over there. I don’t know what they call it here.”With no call issued, for one brief moment, the Celtics could envision a comeback. But that was all they could do. The Cavaliers made sure of it.Advertisement