By SCOTT CACCIOLAAPRIL 26, 2015
SAN ANTONIO —  When Doc Rivers, the coach of the Los Angeles Clippers, gathered to review film with his players on Saturday, the experience was not enjoyable.For two hours, Rivers picked his team apart, player by player, in the aftermath of a blowout by the San Antonio Spurs in Game 3 of their first-round playoff series.No one was immune from the unpleasant truth: that the Clippers had failed to move the ball, that their defense was lacking, that their many mistakes were egregious but correctable.“Doc pretty much went at all of us,” Chris Paul said, “told us about ourselves.”When the Clippers reconvened Sunday for Game 4, they seemed to approach the afternoon with more focus, more resolve — all the staples of successful postseason runs. Paul, in particular, shouldered much of the load, playing through foul trouble to steer the Clippers to a 114-105 victory at AT&T Center that evened their best-of-seven series at two games apiece.Advertisement“It was awesome,” Rivers said of Paul’s performance, which included 34 points and 7 assists. “We needed it.”AdvertisementBlake Griffin collected 20 points and 19 rebounds as the Clippers fended off every rally the Spurs could muster. The Clippers also got valuable contributions off the bench — their much-criticized bench — from Austin Rivers, who scored 16 points and played solid defense, and Jamal Crawford, who added 15 points.Game 5 is scheduled for Tuesday at Staples Center.“I came into one of the timeouts,” Paul said, “and I told Austin: ‘Man, I trust you, I believe in you. Be aggressive.’ And without his production today, we don’t win the game.”It was never easy for the Clippers, not until the closing seconds. They had built a slim lead in the third quarter when Matt Barnes, responsible for defending Kawhi Leonard, picked up his fourth foul. Crawford promptly replaced him.The first time Leonard touched the ball, he backed Crawford down, drew a double team and found Tim Duncan for a layup. On the Spurs’ next possession, Leonard connected on a jumper.If ever there was a moment when it would have made sense for the Clippers to fold like a pup tent, here it was: on the road, staring at the prospect of a 3-1 series deficit, the pressure mounting as one of their top defenders watched from the bench.The Clippers survived it all: the Spurs, the screaming fans, the memory of losing by 27 points in Game 3.Crawford, too, found redemption, drawing a foul on Manu Ginobili early in the fourth quarter while sinking an 18-footer. His 3-point play gave the Clippers a 10-point lead. Shortly after Paul was called for his fifth foul late in the fourth quarter, Crawford answered again, driving from halfcourt for a spinning layup.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Leonard scored 26 points to lead the Spurs, who were 6 of 25 from 3-point range (24 percent). Duncan finished with 22 points and 14 rebounds.AdvertisementBefore the game, Rivers emphasized the importance of stopping the Spurs’ dribble penetration. In Game 3, the Spurs were able to get into the paint whenever they felt it was necessary, and Leonard was the leader of that parade, scoring 32 points. Many of his scoring opportunities came on straight-line drives.“You can’t allow it over and over again,” Rivers said before the game. “Dribble penetration kills everything; it really does. It creates offensive rebounds. It creates points in the paint. It creates 3s. It creates foul trouble. If you’re allowing it a lot, you’re going to lose.”Unlike their effort in Game 3, though, when they fell into a hole early and stayed there, the Clippers were amped from the start. On the Spurs’ opening possession, Leonard went baseline and rose for a short jumper but was met by the Clippers’ DeAndre Jordan, who blocked the shot, collected the rebound and at the other end, escaped for a dunk.The game was just minutes old when Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich called for his first time out, and serenity came in the form of Duncan lobbing an alley-oop pass to Leonard. The game soon settled into a tightly contested affair, as both teams looked to attack the rim — and each attempted to prevent the other from doing so.For Paul, the series has turned into a bit of a referendum for him at this stage of his career. He has accomplished a great deal — an eight-time All-Star, Paul is also a perennial selection for the league’s all-defensive team — but he has yet to reach the finals.Since he joined Griffin in Los Angeles four seasons ago, the Clippers have had a spotty playoff record, advancing to the conference semifinals twice while losing in the first round once.Paul, Rivers said, is forever trying to strike the right balance between producing opportunities for teammates and creating for himself. Rivers would prefer that Paul do more of the latter.“It’s almost like he doesn’t think of himself as a scorer,” Rivers said. “He thinks of himself as a point guard.”On Sunday, Paul and his teammates found the winning mix.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Clippers Absorb Their Coach’s Tongue-Lashing, Then Make a Statement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.