By ANDREW KEHAPRIL 27, 2015
To grasp just how good Deron Williams was feeling Monday night, consider the uncharacteristic moment of unadulterated celebration he allowed himself with seven minutes left in regulation in the Nets’ game against the Atlanta Hawks.This was the same Williams who had spoken so candidly about his struggles to keep up his confidence while his body failed him, who has mostly maintained a poker face even in moments of success, who has criticized himself this postseason as his teammates and his coach have defended him.So Williams’s swaggering down the sideline, three fingers extended on his right hand as Barclays Center erupted around him, was something of a remarkable sight.It was a modest display in the grand scheme of professional sports ostentation, but for Williams it was significant: He had just nailed a 3-pointer in transition, the sixth of seven shots he made from long range, and he was in a buoyant mood.AdvertisementBreaking up another storm of criticism that was raging around him, Williams produced a scintillating individual performance, matching his playoff-career-high point total with 35, to guide the Nets to a 120-115 overtime win over the Atlanta Hawks.AdvertisementAnd Williams’s outburst of points could not have been better timed. The teams’ first-round series now stands tied at two wins apiece. They will meet again Wednesday in Atlanta.“Man, he has a stoic demeanor, but he has more of a personality than you guys may realize,” Jarrett Jack said when asked about Williams’s happy gesturing. “It’s like he was having fun.”Williams made the arena his playground on Monday, his coolness peaking in the fourth quarter. He whipped no-look passes to his teammates. He hopscotched to the rim. And most vividly, he bombed away from 3-point range with startling assurance.The Hawks started the fourth quarter ahead by 82-74. But Williams, who took 10 of the Nets’ 20 shots in the period, scored 16 points. He also finished the game with seven assists and five rebounds.With 1 minute 53 seconds left, the Hawks leading by 101-99 and the shot clock winding down to zero, Williams dribbled behind his back, from left to right, and launched a fall-away shot from 27 feet that, of course, dropped cleanly through the net. But there was more work to do.Paul Millsap dunked with 16.4 seconds remaining in regulation to tie the score at 104-104, and Williams missed a close-range attempt in the waning seconds. With 1:25 left in overtime, Bojan Bogdanovic sank a 3-pointer from the corner, putting the Nets up by 114-113. And with 20.2 seconds left in the extra period, Williams snatched the rebound on a Kyle Korver 3-point attempt that could have tied the score, took a foul and made both of his free throws to help seal the game.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He had a lot of adversity with the injuries and with the negativity around his name,” Nets Coach Lionel Hollins said of Williams. “It showed a lot of character to put on a performance like that.”It was a stirring turnaround for Williams, who had scored 13 points in Game 1, 2 points in Game 2 and 3 points in Game 3. He acknowledged last week that he was not playing to his standard. His teammates offered him support, pointing out how many different parts of his body were aching. Jack sent him a series of text messages telling him he was due for a big game.AdvertisementHollins redoubled his defense of Williams on Sunday afternoon, telling reporters that any articles or commentary detailing Williams’s demise were unfair. The vitriol had come from everywhere. Even Paul Pierce of the Washington Wizards, who played for the Nets last season, had criticized Williams in an interview earlier this month.“All those people that was talking all that crazy stuff about him — now we’ve got to see what they’re going to say,” Jack said.Williams started strongly, making two of his first three shot attempts, all of them from 3-point range. He also took a hard knock, getting crushed on a drive to the rim and falling to the floor with a thud. He rested there a moment, his eyes closed, his cheek on the court. He arose slowly, but then he picked up where he had left off.Midway through the second, Williams produced the standout moment of the first half when he sent DeMarre Carroll stumbling the wrong way with a left-to-right crossover dribble, drawing a collective purr from the crowd, before coasting to the basket and flipping in a layup high off the glass.Williams said he had ridden the adrenaline of the moment and the support of his teammates. He said someone had sent him an article detailing Hollins’s comments from Sunday, and after the game, he thanked his coach.“I do have a tendency to get down on myself pretty hard, and pretty quick,” said Williams, who noted all the support he had received. “All those things, they mean a lot.”Now, Williams’s ability to replicate that performance, to keep up his confidence, could decide whether his team will upset the top-seeded Hawks.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams Buries Self-Doubt, and Seven 3s, as Nets Pull Even.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.