By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 27, 2015
Tyler Johnson scored two goals in his latest stellar performance, and the Tampa Bay Lightning held on for a 5-2 victory over the Red Wings in Detroit on Monday night, forcing a Game 7 in their first-round playoff series.Johnson and Jason Garrison scored in the first period, and Johnson added another goal in the second to give the Lightning a 3-0 lead. Tomas Tatar scored twice for Detroit, but Alex Killorn answered with an unassisted goal with 5 minutes 9 seconds remaining, and Cedric Paquette added an empty-netter.Ben Bishop made 22 saves for the Lightning, who led the N.H.L. in goals during the season but had been struggling to score on the Red Wings and goalie Petr Mrazek in this series. Mrazek made a sensational save on Brian Boyle in the second period, but Tampa Bay had already taken a 2-0 lead.Tampa Bay found enough space on its first goal to go the length of the ice in only a few seconds. Defenseman Victor Hedman, standing near his own net, hit Nikita Kucherov at the opposite blue line with a perfect stretch pass. Kucherov flipped the puck to Johnson, who came into the zone with a head of steam and calmly beat Mrazek.AdvertisementBoyle nearly made it 3-0 early in the second period. Alone in front of the goal, he stickhandled around Mrazek, only to have Mrazek deny him with perhaps the best save of the postseason so far, with Mrazek reaching his stick back and blocking Boyle’s shot out of midair to keep the Red Wings’ deficit at two.But it did not stay that way for long. Johnson was again left with too much space in the Detroit zone, skating in with only one Red Wings player in the vicinity. His sixth goal of this postseason tied Vladimir Tarasenko of St. Louis for the league lead.AdvertisementCRAWFORD TO START Chicago Coach Joel Quenneville said goalie Corey Crawford would start Game 1 of the Blackhawks’ second-round series against Minnesota. Crawford was shaky early in the Blackhawks’ six-game series win over Nashville and lost the starting job to Scott Darling.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Lightning Take Early Lead and Force a Seventh Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.