By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 19, 2015
Before games, Rashad Jennings, a Giants running back, spends 25 minutes executing an intricate​ routine of drills and exercises, including some dancelike moves, to get ready to play.East Rutherford, N.J. — Now in his seventh year in the N.F.L., Giants running back Rashad Jennings has developed an inimitable, elaborate 25-minute pre-game routine that is part performance art, part plyometrics and part flexibility training. It involves dance moves, stretching and atypical agility drills that have Jennings hopping, high-stepping, skipping, bobbing, twisting and crawling – all of it mixed in with the occasional moment of quiet meditation.On a football field crowded with players getting ready for the game by throwing, catching and kicking footballs in seemingly every direction, Jennings’s odd, solitary warm-up in one corner stands apart. Although recently, some of his teammates – and opponents – have begun to emulate at least parts of Jennings’ regimen.“At first, guys would peek over then ask me what I was doing, like I was crazy,” Jennings said. “Now I have guys asking me how to do it. I tell them, ‘Come do it with me, man.’ And some do.”Jennings calls it “body activation.” He developed the routine, which has an exact sequence that is assiduously followed step by step, as a way to avoid injury and to focus himself mentally. He leaves the locker room and heads to the playing field about two hours before kickoff. .Advertisement“Getting the body awake, engaged and prepared for 60 minutes of pro football is hugely important,” Jennings said. “It takes dedicated attention. Most of what I do is based on sprinter’s firing patterns.”Andre Williams, another Giants running back, has been closely watching his teammate at work before games.Advertisement“Rashad knows the science of what he’s doing,” Williams said. “And there’s a Zen quality to it, too. It’s all about focusing for the moment at hand.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.