AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichLarry Fitzgerald is the second best wide receiver in fantasy football, and no, we have not traveled back to the year 2011.It should surprise most who play and analyze fake football that Fitzgerald, who leads all N.F.L. receivers with five touchdowns, has outscored every receiver not named Julio Jones (21.1 standard fantasy points per game). But there were signs that this was coming, and how long it lasts probably rests on the health of quarterback Carson Palmer.In the six games that Fitzgerald played with Palmer in 2014, he averaged 12.7 F.P.P.G., compared with 5.7 when he did not. Over 16 games, that would have given Fitzgerald 204 fantasy points and made him the eighth highest scoring receiver of 2014 (he was 55th instead).Palmer is healthy heading into Week 4, but a matchup with the St. Louis Rams does not necessarily bode well. Continue reading to find out why, and be sure to check out our complete player rankings for N.F.L. Week 4. You can also find us on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.Favorable MatchupsQuarterback Andy Dalton (CIN) vs. Kansas City — Dalton has been the third best fantasy quarterback so far, completing 66.3 percent of his passes with an 8-to-1 touchdown-to-interception ratio. The Chiefs have also allowed the same ratio over the last two weeks. Week 4 has Dalton at home against a Chiefs defense that is coming off a short week of rest and was just taken for five touchdowns. With a $7,600 salary on FanDuel.com, and $5,900 at DraftKings.com, he is one of the premier value plays at the position in daily leagues.Derek Carr (OAK) vs. Chicago — Carr stayed hot in Week 3, throwing for 314 yards and two touchdowns against the Browns. Over all, he has been the 11th best quarterback in fantasy. The Bears do not seem capable of slowing him down, allowing 20 F.P.P.G. (sixth most) with just one interception and four sacks through three games. They also have allowed the fifth highest completion rate (71 percent).Philip Rivers (SD) vs. Cleveland — The Browns have yielded consecutive 20-point fantasy performances, to Derek Carr and Marcus Mariota, and surrendered two touchdown passes in each of their three games played. Rivers has not been great since his big Week 1 performance (404 yards and two touchdowns), but a home game against this unit should get him back on track.Joe Flacco (BAL) vs. Pittsburgh — Flacco completed 32 of 49 passes for 362 yards with two touchdowns and an interception against the Bengals, his second consecutive 300-yard passing performance. With the Ravens run game struggling, there is reason to believe Flacco will be forced to keep airing it out. The Steelers defense has been soft, with just one sack, and has allowed the third highest completion rate (72 percent) and an average of 273 passing yards per game (20.3 F.P.P.G.).Update: Flacco was not able to take advantage of this matchup and did not look sharp Thursday night, competing 20-of-33 passes for 189 yards, one touchdown and an interception. Losing his top target, Steve Smith, at the end of the third quarter did not help either. He’s still someone to consider in Week 5 against the Browns.Running Back Karlos Williams (BUF) vs. Giants — With LeSean McCoy likely to sit, Williams is set up to be the Bills’ featured back this week. The Giants, yielding the eighth most fantasy points to running backs, have allowed a back to score at least 10 fantasy points in all three games. He’s a no-brainer DraftKings.com value play at $3,400 and a FanDuel.com bargain at $6,300.Joseph Randle (DAL) vs. New Orleans — Randle hit a wall in the second half against the Falcons (-5 yards on four carries), but he still finished with 87 yards and three touchdowns. All three Dallas backs remain involved, but Randle has asserted himself as the featured back and must be in lineups against a Saints run defense that is surrendering 126 rushing yards per game.Latavius Murray (OAK) vs. Chicago — The Bears’ 28th-ranked run defense is surrendering 135 yards per game on the ground and has permitted at least 10 fantasy points to an opposing back in each game. This includes the Cardinals and Seahawks backups David Johnson and Thomas Rawls. Murray has performed better every week this season, including 139 yards and a touchdown last week against the Browns.Melvin Gordon (SD) vs. Cleveland — No defense is worse against the run than the Browns at 158 yards allowed per game. With the assumption that the Chargers can build an early lead in this game, the game flow should tilt in favor of Gordon over the pass-specialist back Danny Woodhead.Wide ReceiverMarvin Jones (CIN) vs. Kansas City — The Chiefs’ secondary enters Week 4 as the most generous to opposing receivers (43 F.P.P.G). Kansas City has allowed a league-high nine passing touchdowns, and the second most receiving yards (750). Jones has hit pay dirt in consecutive weeks and asserted himself as the WR2 for the Bengals.Amari Cooper (OAK) vs. Chicago — After consecutive games of at least seven catches and 100 yards, Cooper gets the sixth most favorable receiver matchup. The Bears secondary has allowed huge fantasy performances to James Jones (2 TDs in Week 1) and Larry Fitzgerald (3 TDs in Week 2).Jordan Matthews (PHI) vs. Washington — He struggled last week against the Jets and Darrelle Revis, but is a prime bounce back candidate this week against the Redskins, who will be without the starting cornerback DeAngelo Hall. Cornerbacks Bashaud Breeland and Chris Culliver struggled to contain the Giants’ wideouts in his absence last Thursday night, as Odell Beckham Jr. and Rueben Randle combined for 14 catches for 195 yards and two touchdowns.Steve Smith (BAL) vs. Pittsburgh — Smith has been the dominant force in this offense and is coming off another top performance against a tough Bengals secondary (13 catches for 186 yards and 2 TDs). With the running game struggling and the tight end Crockett Gillmore expected to sit out Thursday night, he should remain the focal point of the passing game.Update: Smith caught four of his seven targets for 24 yards before leaving the game with a back injury late in the third quarter. The injury shouldn’t keep him out of Week 5, and he’ll remain Flacco’s favorite target against the Browns. Tight End Martellus Bennett (CHI) vs. Oakland — The Raiders have permitted five touchdowns to the position in this young season, making them the most favorable matchup for fantasy tight ends (20 F.P.P.G.). The Browns’ Gary Barnidge was the latest tight end to exploit this unit (105 yards and 1 TD). Jimmy Graham (SEA) vs. Detroit — The Lions have yielded a touchdown to opposing tight ends in all three games this season, allowing an average of 11 fantasy points a game to the position. Graham saw eight targets in Week 3, up from two the previous week. Defense/Special Teams Arizona vs. St. Louis, Carolina vs. Tampa Bay, Jets vs. Miami, San Diego vs. Cleveland.Unfavorable Matchups  Quarterback Jameis Winston (TB) vs. Carolina — This is not a good week to take a chance on the rookie Winston. The Panthers have allowed two touchdowns compared with four interceptions and 5.4 yards per throw to opposing quarterbacks. This translates to the sixth fewest fantasy points allowed per game to the position (12.9 F.P.P.G.).Teddy Bridgewater (MIN) vs. Denver — The Broncos have yielded only 505 passing yards and two touchdowns over the first three games. Over all, the Broncos, who rank third in sacks with 11 and second in passing yards allowed per game (196), are the toughest team for a fantasy quarterback to face (5.7 F.P.P.G.). Bridgewater has had his struggles regardless: He is ranked as the 29th best fantasy quarterback (nine F.P.P.G.).Tyrod Taylor (BUF) vs. Giants — Taylor is off to an impressive start as the fifth-ranked quarterback in fantasy through three games. He is likely to be a popular daily league play with his modest Week 4 price, but this matchup may be more difficult than it looks with Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie set to return to the Giants secondary and the likely absence of Sammy Watkins. Despite giving up a league-high 345 yards per game through the air, the Giants own a respectable 5-to-4 TD-to-INT ratio.Alex Smith (KC) vs. Cincinnati — The shape of the Chiefs offensive line should be a major concern for Smith owners, as the Chiefs enter Week 4 with the highest sack percentage in the league (14 sacks taken in 98 pass attempts). Seven of those sacks came against Green Bay on Monday. Despite finally hooking up with a wide receiver for a touchdown, Smith is off to a rocky start, with 7.2 yards per completion and a 4-to-3 TD-to-INT ratio.Running Back Jeremy Hill (CIN) vs. Kansas City — The fantasy community has yet to elect this year’s mayor of Bustville, but Hill may be the leading candidate. The second-round pick has fallen into a time share with Giovani Bernard in which game flow determines who receives the most work. Both backs should have a tough time against the Chiefs, who have allowed 248 yards on 70 rushing attempts (third worst fantasy matchup). Doug Martin (TB) vs. Carolina — In another reminder about how misleading the preseason can be, Martin has been a fantasy dud with 176 yards rushing on 46 attempts with no scores. Charles Sims and Martin nearly split snaps last week (30-31) and a date with a stout Panthers front seven that is ranked fourth over all against the run is next.Alfred Morris (WAS) vs. Philadelphia — Coach Jay Gruden claims Morris is still the Redskins’ lead back, but the rookie Matt Jones continues to carve out significant playing time. Both backs could find the going tough against the league’s eighth best run defense, which is allowing a league-low 3.1 yards per carry and has yet to allow a rushing touchdown this season.Justin Forsett (BAL) vs. Pittsburgh — Forsett continued to disappoint his owners in Week 3 after being held to 13 yards on 10 carries against the Bengals. He has now failed to top 68 yards in any game this season and has yet to reach the end zone. The Steelers are holding opposing backs to 3.6 yards per carry and have yet to allow a touchdown on the ground.Update: He’s alive! The Steelers kept him out of the endzone Thursday night, but he finally gave his owners something to smile about with 150 yards on 27 carries.Wide Receiver Calvin Johnson (DET) vs. Seattle — A stat that caught our eye: Johnson is averaging 9.95 yards per catch this season after not averaging less than 14.55 yards per catch in any previous season. He saw just one attempt of 20-plus yards on Sunday. While the Lions are likely to remedy this at some point this season, we don’t like the Lions to turn things around on the road against a Seattle defense that is permitting the fifth fewest passing yards per game (203). Larry Fitzgerald (ARI) vs. St. Louis — As we covered earlier, Fitzgerald is once again a must-start every week. But daily leaguers should be aware that the Rams rank as the third worst fantasy matchup for receivers, having permitted just 347 yards and one touchdown through three games. With the Rams run defense as bad as it has been (122 Y.P.G., 25th over all), the Cards would be wise to lean on the run game anyway. Roddy White (ATL) vs. Houston — White has no receptions in consecutive games and nine targets on the season, compared with Leonard Hankerson’s 21. There is no reason to expect better fantasy results in Week 4 against the seventh toughest fantasy matchup for the position. Mike Wallace (MIN) vs. Denver — Wallace leads the Vikings in targets, but there have been only 14 of them, which has translated to 12 catches for 150 yards. Denver has permitted just 246 yards and no touchdowns to opposing receivers this season.Tight End  Jared Cook (STL) vs. Arizona — After a disappointing performance in Week 3 (one reception, seven yards), Cook faces a Cardinals defense allowing 3.7 F.P.P.G. to opposing tight ends (fourth worst matchup).Jordan Cameron (MIA) vs. Jets — Cameron is averaging only 5 fantasy points per game (21st best fantasy tight end) and will have a very tough matchup in London against the Jets (4.8 F.P.P.G., fifth worst matchup).Defense/Special Teams Kansas City vs. Cincinnati, St. Louis vs. Arizona, Minnesota vs. Denver.The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. Follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy. Advertisement