By DAVID WALDSTEINAPRIL 27, 2015
After Alex Rodriguez drew to within one home run of Willie Mays’s total of 660 on Sunday night, there was no sudden change in the Yankees’ approach to the contentious matter. They still do not intend to pay Rodriguez a bonus that he believes he is owed for matching Mays.For Rodriguez, the matter is worth $6 million. For the Yankees, it is actually $9 million, according to multiple baseball officials. The reason is that the team would be taxed 50 percent on any added payment to Rodriguez because the Yankees are over the luxury-tax threshold and the figure would be added to the team’s payroll for 2015.The contract that Rodriguez signed after the 2007 season stipulates that the Yankees “have the right but not the obligation” to establish the home run milestone and market it, said one of the officials who provided details of the contract on Monday.The Yankees believe that all they have to do is show that they acted in good faith when they decided not to market the home run milestone because of Rodriguez’s one-year suspension for his involvement in the Biogenesis doping scandal. Their claim is that the feat is unmarketable.AdvertisementAfter Rodriguez hits his 660th home run, the Yankees would have to establish it as a milestone and essentially pay Rodriguez for the rights to his image if they market the achievement. Rodriguez is expected to file a grievance through the players’ union if enough time passes without a payment, and an arbitrator would hear the case. Rodriguez could argue at a hearing that the spirit of the agreement called for him to be paid for reaching the 660 mark, not for marketing it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The home run bonus, or the marketing aspect, was part of the 10-year, $275 million contract, a record at the time, that Rodriguez signed after the 2007 season. When word got out that Rodriguez would receive $6 million for each of five home run milestones, other teams complained that the deal violated a rule that prohibited players from receiving bonuses based on skilled numerical performance, such as the number of home runs they hit.AdvertisementIn November 2007, Major League Baseball sent a memo to all its teams and to the union saying that the deal was a promotional and publicity agreement at the club’s discretion and therefore did not violate the rule against numerical bonuses.The home run addendum was unique, and the negotiations involved a number of parties, including Scott Boras, Rodriguez’s agent at the time; financial advisers from Goldman Sachs; the Yankees; the union; and Major League Baseball.Any ruling or settlement in the case could have implications on the next threshold, which is Babe Ruth’s mark of 714 home runs.An article on Tuesday about the Yankees’ approach to marketing Alex Rodriguez’s 660th career home run misstated the actual cost to the team if they paid him a disputed $6 million bonus for the feat (tying Willie Mays for fourth on the home run list). It would be $9 million — not $12 million — because the team would also pay a luxury tax at a rate of 50 percent, not 100 percent. The error was also reflected in the headline.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Marketing No. 660 Could Cost Team Double.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.