By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 27, 2015
The Cavaliers will move forward in the N.B.A. playoffs without Kevin Love and with their title hopes shaken.Love, Cleveland’s starting forward, has been ruled out for the team’s next playoff series — and perhaps longer — after Love sustained a dislocated left shoulder in Sunday’s 101-93 victory to sweep the Boston Celtics.Love, playing in his first postseason as a pro, was injured when he became tangled with Celtics forward Kelly Olynyk while chasing a loose ball in the first quarter. Olynyk clamped down on Love’s arm and pulled so hard it popped out of the shoulder joint. Love had an M.R.I. and other tests performed Monday, and the team said he had sustained a dislocation with torn ligaments and labrum.The Cavaliers will also be without guard J. R. Smith after the league suspended Smith for two games without pay, and Olynyk was suspended one game for his encounter with Love.AdvertisementThe league announced the suspensions Monday night.Smith swung backward and smacked Boston’s Jae Crowder in the face during the game. Smith was ejected, and Crowder sustained a sprained knee ligament.AdvertisementSmith will miss Games 1 and 2 of the Cavaliers’ next series.The league said Olynyk would serve his suspension in the first game of the 2015-16 regular season for which he is eligible and able to play.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The loss of Love is a potentially devastating blow to the Cavaliers, who are likely to face Chicago in the second round. The Bulls lead the Milwaukee Bucks by three games to two in their best-of-seven series.The Cavaliers said Love would obtain more medical opinions. There is a possibility he could need surgery, which would end his postseason.BUCKS 94, BULLS 88  Michael Carter-Williams had 22 points and 8 assists, Khris Middleton scored 21 points, and visiting Milwaukee avoided elimination again with a victory over Chicago in Game 5 of their first-round playoff series.The Bulls, with a three-games-to-two lead, will try to win the series Thursday in Milwaukee.But the Bucks aren’t going quietly after dropping the first three games. They won Game 4 on a last-second layup by Jerryd Bayless, and Monday they withstood several pushes by the Bulls in the fourth quarter.The Bucks regrouped after a 9-point lead dwindled to 3, and they hung on again after a 7-point lead dropped to 4 with just over a minute remaining.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Cavs’ Love Will Miss 2nd Round.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.