By JEFF SEIDELAPRIL 27, 2015
WASHINGTON — Islanders goalie Jaroslav Halak stood in front of his locker, the picture of disappointment. Hands on hips, he stared disconsolately at the ground, dripping sweat, his face showing the frustration he felt minutes after his team’s season ended.Halak routinely torments the Washington Capitals in elimination games. Halak had won all four times, three with the Montreal Canadiens five years ago and again Saturday in Game 6, and he turned in another strong effort Monday in Game 7. He finished with 24 saves but could not stop Evgeny Kuznetsov at 12 minutes 42 seconds of the third period as the Capitals eliminated the Islanders, 2-1, at Verizon Center.The Islanders’ long playoff dry spell continued. They last won a playoff series 22 years ago, and will begin a new era at Barclays Center in Brooklyn next season.The Capitals will meet the Rangers in the Eastern Conference semifinals beginning later this week. At that time, the Islanders might still be trying to get over the loss of this seven-game series.Advertisement“It’s just tough right now,” Halak said softly. “We didn’t play great, but we still felt pretty good going out there for the third period in a one-goal game.”AdvertisementHalak kept the Islanders in the game with a number of tough stops, but he was unable to do much of anything on the game-winning goal.Kuznetsov made a strong individual effort, gathering the puck on the right wing and cutting all the way across to the left circle through the defense. Halak went down to try to stop him, but Kuznetsov flipped the puck over the prone goalie.An anemic offense plagued the Islanders. The Capitals held a 26-11 edge in shots, forcing Halak to make several difficult saves, something he’s been good at in elimination games.“To come to the playoffs, you have to have a great goaltender, and Halak obviously is a great goaltender,” Islanders defenseman Johnny Boychuk said. “He gave us a chance to win, and I mean he made some saves this series that other goalies probably wouldn’t have made.”The Islanders had scored just 14 goals in the first six games, the fewest in the first six games of any playoff series since 1979, and the offense lacked punch again in Game 7. The Islanders got only one power play in the game, in the final three minutes, and could not score, finishing the series 0 for 14 in extra-man situations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coach Jack Capuano and the players all talked about how much they wanted to get back to Long Island and play more hockey in front of their fans.“The theme that they have at the Coliseum, with the Jumbotron and the music and the chats, we actually played that before our game,” Capuano said. “So they were definitely in our thoughts.”The Capitals did a good job of keeping the Islanders’ scoring chances to a minimum, and goalie Braden Holtby (10 saves) was not tested often. Washington finally broke through when Joel Ward scored at the 18:35 mark of the second period.AdvertisementWard pounced on the rebound of a Brooks Orpik slap shot from the left point and jammed it between Halak’s legs for a 1-0 lead. The Capitals held a 21-7 lead in shots after two periods and appeared to be in command.But the Islanders came out hard in the third period and tied the game at 3:13 when Frans Nielsen fired a shot that Holtby stopped, but the puck then slipped between Holtby’s pads and rolled into the net.That gave the Islanders short-lived momentum, as the Capitals quickly bounced back and took the lead on Kuznetsov’s third goal of the series. Washington has had a number of Game 7 nightmares, losing nine of 12 finales.“They had 11 shots,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said. “That says it all right there. I thought that was our best game.”The Islanders captain John Tavares said: “It seemed like we were worried or on our heels a bit. We didn’t want to make a mistake, and I think in these games, in Game 7s, you’ve got to play a little bit more aggressive.”An article in some editions on Tuesday about the Islanders’ 2-1 loss to the Washington Capitals in Game 7 of their N.H.L. playoff series misstated the number of saves by Islanders goalie Jaroslav Halak. It was 24, not 25.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Capitals Eliminate Islanders, Extending Two Decades of Playoff Futility.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.