
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
APRIL 27, 2015
HBO and Showtime usually operate in separate orbits of the boxing universe: Linked to different promoters, they feature different fighters.But on Saturday night, the interests of the rival networks will align as Floyd Mayweather Jr. fights Manny Pacquiao at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas in a welterweight title bout that is expected to generate more pay-per-view revenue than any bout in history. Pent-up demand for the fight has fostered expectations that it will exceed the records for pay-per-view boxing purchases (2.48 million for Mayweather’s win over Oscar De La Hoya in 2007) and for revenue ($152 million for Mayweather’s defeat of Saul Alvarez, known as Canelo, two years ago).The telecast will be a joint venture of the networks, with a slight edge in influence by Showtime. Mayweather, who fights for Showtime, is getting 60 percent of the fight’s revenue.The fight will be produced from a Showtime truck, with David Dinkins Jr., the executive producer of Showtime Sports (and the son of a former New York City mayor), and Bob Dunphy, the director, in charge. Two of HBO’s boxing announcers, Jim Lampley and Roy Jones Jr., will call the fight, along with Al Bernstein of Showtime, who was the analyst for Mayweather’s debut as a professional for ESPN.AdvertisementJim Gray (Showtime) and Max Kellerman (HBO) will be the ringside reporters, and James Brown (Showtime) will be the host. The music and graphics will be new, with no connection to either network.AdvertisementOn Friday, the networks will simultaneously carry the fighters’ weigh-ins, and early Saturday evening, they will televise the countdown program.“We’ve approached this as a partnership,” said Rick Bernstein, the executive producer of HBO Sports, who has known Dinkins for about 35 years.The enmity and disagreements between the Mayweather and Pacquiao camps that prevented the two from fighting years earlier have not infiltrated Showtime’s and HBO’s efforts.“It’s been easy,” Rick Bernstein said.Dinkins said, “Some issues have to be worked out when rival companies get together like this because this is unprecedented,” but the issues they have dealt with have been minor: how often to use CompuBox statistics or when to use the networks’ unofficial ringside judges, Steve Farhood for Showtime and Harold Lederman for HBO.“There are subtle, nuanced differences between us,” said Dinkins, who, like Bernstein, could not delineate major differences in the two networks’ philosophies for producing boxing. Bernstein will work behind Dinkins in the Showtime truck Saturday night, not as a back-seat producer but as an adviser familiar with HBO’s production dynamics.“If I see something coming while David is engaged in something else, I’ll bring it to his attention,” Bernstein said. “I’ve worked with Lampley for decades, and I might see something where I’ll say to David, ‘You might want to tell Jim.’ ”HBO and Showtime had a collaboration of sorts 13 years ago when Lennox Lewis knocked out Mike Tyson in Memphis. Lampley called that match alongside Showtime’s Bobby Czyz.“In those negotiations, it was like, ‘You get the blow-by-blow guy, and we’ll get the analyst,’ ” said Ross Greenburg, a former president of HBO Sports. “But HBO produced that fight from the truck.”AdvertisementEach network sent its ring announcer to the fight: HBO’s Michael Buffer introduced Lewis, and Showtime’s Jimmy Lennon Jr. introduced Tyson.(On Saturday, they will be back — Buffer’s booming voice for Pacquiao, Lennon’s for Mayweather.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Tyson-Lewis, each network also produced a separate replay, with different sets of announcers. Both knew that only one network — the one that was connected to the winner — would show its replay. When Lewis won, HBO carried its version, with Fran Charles, George Foreman and Larry Merchant. The Showtime version, which featured Steve Albert, has never been shown.“There’s never been any clamoring for it,” Dinkins said.Al Bernstein reported on that fight for ESPN’s “SportsCenter,” but he recalled that the network would not release him to analyze the fight for Showtime.“I’ll confess: I was annoyed,” he said. “I couldn’t understand it.”Knowing that Showtime’s version of the broadcast never aired, he said, “It would have been fun to be part of sports trivia.”Al Bernstein has never called a fight with Lampley but has appeared with him on film in “Play It to the Bone” and in an episode of “Arliss,” an HBO comedy series about a sports agent played by Robert Wuhl.“The only work we’ve done together is fictional,” Bernstein said. But collaborating with Lampley on a real fight will not be a problem for him, he added.“I’ve worked with a lot of partners — at ESPN, I once worked with eight different partners for eight straight weeks,” Bernstein said. “Jim’s a master technician in terms of his broadcasting mechanics, and he’s delivered some of the most iconic calls of all time. Working with him should be fairly seamless. We’ll rehearse later this week.”AdvertisementBernstein said that the buildup to Mayweather-Pacquiao reminded him of the anticipation that preceded Tyson-Lewis (whose prelude included a melee during the prefight news conference on the stage of a Manhattan theater after Tyson was alleged to have bitten Lewis). But fights involving Sugar Ray Leonard, Marvin Hagler, Thomas Hearns and Roberto Duran — some of which Bernstein called — remain vivid to him, too.“This kind of feels like those fights in the 1980s, which makes the casual sports fan and the sports media pay attention,” Bernstein said.The cost of watching Pacquiao fight Mayweather — at a suggested price of $89.95 to $99.95 — is a record for boxing, a reminder of how the sport has marginalized itself by putting its best fights on pay-per-view. But that has been standard procedure for a long time.When Lewis fought Tyson, the price was originally set at $49.95 even though Showtime and HBO felt the marketplace would have accepted $59.95. When cable operators said that the price was overly cautious, it was raised to a record $54.95, which did not deter record buying. Fans may not feel any differently about paying upward of $100 on Saturday.Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Pay-Per-View Knockout Unites Two Rival Networks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »