AdvertisementSupported byYankees 4, Rays 1By Zach SchonbrunFans flocked to Yankee Stadium on Monday to see a milestone for Alex Rodriguez. They had to settle for just another Yankees victory instead.A home run by catcher Brian McCann in the sixth provided the go-ahead run in the Yankees’ 4-1 win over the Tampa Bay Rays, the team’s ninth victory in its last 11 games. It was also the only ball to leave the yard during the game, meaning that Rodriguez’s compelling pursuit of career home run No. 660 will endure for at least one more game.The surprising on-field success of Rodriguez, 39, who is one home run shy of tying Willie Mays for fourth on baseball’s career list, has been creating a huge off-field headache for the Yankees, who have told Rodriguez they will not honor the marketing agreement that calls for him to receive a series of $6 million bonuses for tying Mays (660), Babe Ruth (714) and Henry Aaron (755) and for tying and passing the career leader, Barry Bonds (762).The Yankees insist that the agreement, reached in 2007, is void because Rodriguez’s use of performance-enhancing drugs will prevent them from recouping the bonuses through the sale of merchandise connected to the events. Two years after the agreement, Rodriguez admitted using steroids, and six years later he was suspended for his role in the Biogenesis scandal.But Rodriguez is back and swinging with a rejuvenated vigor this season, having hit his fifth home run of the season on Sunday night. Before Monday’s game, Manager Joe Girardi acknowledged that he believed home run No. 660 would be a milestone achievement for Rodriguez, regardless of what the monetary or promotional circumstances were.“The reality is it’s 660 home runs,” Girardi said. “I don’t know what you’ll say, but when you look in the record books, his name is going to be there.”How Rodriguez might be received by players around the league, including his teammates, for reaching the mark remains something of a mystery. But McCann said he would be excited for him.“It’s a big number,” McCann said. “It’s a treat to watch him day in and day out. Watching him hit off a tee is exciting.”On Monday, Rodriguez played third base for only the second time this season. He seemed anxious at the plate, which is not unusual — throughout his career, as he approached milestone home runs, he has struggled climbing over the hurdle.Sure enough, Rodriguez heaved at the first pitch in his first at-bat and popped the ball up into the infield for an easy out. In his second at-bat, Tampa Bay starter Nathan Karns got Rodriguez to ground out to third base.The Rays had won five in a row, but in an odd scheduling quirk, Monday was the first time all season that Tampa Bay had not played inside a domed stadium. Twelve of the team’s first 19 games were at home at Tropicana Field, and the other seven were played in Miami and Toronto, where the stadiums have retractable roofs.The cool night sky might have been a little disarming for Tampa Bay’s offense, which was averaging six runs a game during its winning streak. Adam Warren allowed the Rays only five hits and one run, with six strikeouts, in five and two-thirds innings.“It was probably the first outing this year where I had all four pitches working and I could locate them,” Warren said. “I think that confidence comes through just throwing between starts and the bullpens and getting the confidence back.”Karns was also moving at a crisp rate into the fifth, but he could not put away the bottom of the Yankees’ order. Stephen Drew walked, Didi Gregorius reached on an infield single, and Jacoby Ellsbury walked after eight pitches to load the bases. With that, Tampa Bay went to its bullpen, bringing in reliever Brandon Gomes to face Brett Gardner. Gardner walked on six pitches, bringing in the first run of the game.The next batter was Rodriguez, with no place to go. The few fans who had braved the chilly weather in the Bronx began to come alive, imagining a grand slam to make history. But Rodriguez tapped a weak grounder to third, and Evan Longoria made the force out to end the inning easily.The Rays tied the game in the top of the next inning, but McCann’s solo homer — his second of the season — put the Yankees ahead in the bottom of the sixth. Stephen Drew then added a run-scoring double later in the inning to make the score 3-1, and the bullpen polished off the remaining three-and-one-third innings to seal the win.“We’re playing a lot better baseball than the first time we were here, and that’s a good thing,” Girardi said. “Just need to continue to do it.”INSIDE PITCHYankees outfielder Jacoby Ellsbury returned to the lineup after leaving Saturday’s game against the Mets with hip tightness. ... Mark Teixeira was named the American League’s player of the week after hitting five home runs with 10 runs driven in over his previous seven games entering Monday. ... Joe Girardi played coy with a reporter who wanted to know whether he was ready to name Andrew Miller the team’s closer officially. “I don’t know,” Girardi said. “We’ll take a few more days.” Miller is eight for eight in save opportunities this season.Advertisement