AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensGREENBURGH, N.Y. — The Rangers’ defense returned to full strength Monday, but their forward lines sustained a major blow.Defenseman Kevin Klein, who has been sidelined with a broken arm since March 11, will be available to play in Game 1 of the team’s next playoff series, against the Capitals, who defeated the Islanders, 2-1, in Game 7 of their first-round series on Monday night in Washington. “I felt very good out there — no issues,” Klein said after practicing on Monday. “Nice being around the guys for an actual practice, and I’m excited for the second round.”The Rangers did not get the same kind of good news on the status of right wing Mats Zuccarello, who left Friday’s series-clinching victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins after taking a puck to the head on a shot by his teammate Ryan McDonagh. The Rangers announced Monday that Zuccarello was out indefinitely with an upper-body injury.“He brings a lot to the table the way he plays — lot of energy, can open up a game with his passing,” goalie Henrik Lundqvist said. “Obviously we’re going to miss that. We don’t know when he’s going to be back, so we’ll wait and see, but he’s obviously an important player for this team.”Zuccarello was one of three Rangers absent from Monday’s optional practice, with defensemen Keith Yandle and Marc Staal being the others. Yandle and Staal have minor ailments — Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault called Yandle’s injury “an overall soreness that we’re trying to manage” — and both are expected to be available when the Rangers’ second-round series begins.Klein injured his left arm blocking a shot late in a victory over the Capitals last month. In 65 games before the injury, he posted nine goals and 26 points, team highs among defensemen at the time he was hurt. Klein finished tied with Dan Boyle for the team lead in goals among defensemen and trailed only McDonagh in points among defensemen.“He’s excited to be back, and we’re happy to have him back,” Lundqvist said. “He’s been a big part of this team throughout the year here.”Klein had been skating for weeks but was waiting for his arm’s strength to improve. He said he could have played in a Game 6 against the Penguins.Klein’s return to the lineup means that Matt Hunwick will probably be relegated to healthy-scratch status. Hunwick has played well with Yandle in the Rangers’ third defense pairing. However, although Vigneault did not explicitly say Hunwick would sit out, Vigneault prefers to pair a defenseman who shoots left-handed with one who shoots right-handed. (Hunwick and Yandle are left-handed shooters; Klein is a right-handed shooter.)“It sort of easier both for breakouts and on transition in the neutral zone,” Vigneault said.It seems likely that Martin St. Louis will take Zuccarello’s spot on the Rangers’ top line with center Derick Brassard and left wing Rick Nash. St. Louis, who has been playing right wing with Kevin Hayes and Carl Hagelin, took over Zuccarello’s spot after Zuccarello was injured Friday. Jesper Fast will probably replace St. Louis with Hayes and Hagelin, and Vigneault said he expected the team to call up a forward from Hartford of the American Hockey League after the Wolfpack’s playoff game Tuesday night.Having ousted the Penguins in five games, the Rangers had two days off before returning to the ice Monday. The Rangers won a playoff series in fewer than six games for only the third time in 17 playoff series over the last 10 seasons — and the first time since 2008.Vigneault said the two days were helpful for some of the Rangers’ veterans and those with injuries.“I think this should be beneficial both mentally and physically,” Vigneault said. “We’ve got a couple of little bumps and bruises that are in the process of healing right now, and when they announce when we start, we’ll be ready.”McDonagh said the break would help in other ways, too.“Mentally, you want to make sure you’re as prepared as you can and got the right focus,” he said. “You get the job done, you get the first step done here, and you get some time to enjoy with family and friends and get your mind away so you’re as refreshed and energetic to come back to the rink again today.”Advertisement