By TOM PEDULLAAPRIL 27, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  Larry Jones, a trainer renowned for his ability to develop fillies, will saddle the prime contenders Lovely Maria and I’m a Chatterbox in the 141st Kentucky Oaks on Friday at Churchill Downs, bidding for his third victory in the sport’s most prestigious race for 3-year-old fillies.But what is most remarkable is that Jones, 58, is at the top of his sport again after a horrific riding accident nearly claimed his life last April.Jones is among a small percentage of trainers who ride their horses every morning. That practice allows the trainers to be as hands-on as they can possibly be, but it carries risk. Last spring, at Delaware Park in Wilmington, Del., Jones was riding a 2-year-old who became spooked and violently tossed him. He struck the ground face-first, knocking him unconscious.Jones was rushed to a nearby hospital, where a scan revealed bleeding in his brain. He also sustained two broken ribs and a bruised lung.Advertisement“Before they could get him prepared for surgery, he crashed,” his wife, Cindy, said. “He quit breathing, and they brought him back.”AdvertisementJones was placed in a medically induced coma. His wife started a prayer chain with the hope that the bleeding would stop. Two days later, as he remained unconscious in an intensive care unit, it did.Jones does not recall anything about the accident.“I just remember waking up at 3 in the morning with a nurse shining a light in my eyes, I guess to see if I was still alive,” he said.Although Jones — who is, at 6 feet and about 180 pounds, an imposing figure on horseback — experienced severe headaches and dizziness for about a month after the accident, the sport had a more powerful hold on him than those symptoms did.“Anybody who kind of gets roped into this thing, it’s in your blood,” he said. “This is what we do.”Jones retired in 2010 and turned the operation over to his wife. That lasted one year.When he returned to the barn after coming out of the coma, Jones was determined to do everything he had done before. That meant riding again — against the advice of doctors. They warned that if he were to fall again, he should expect the worst possible outcome.“Across horseback, that is where I am most comfortable,” Jones said, adding that his dizziness stopped once he resumed riding.Jones, from Hopkinsville, Ky., won the Oaks with Proud Spell in 2008 and Believe You Can in 2012. He oversaw the development of Havre de Grace, a filly who emerged as the horse of the year after defeating male horses in the Woodward Stakes in 2011. But Jones is perhaps best known for another filly, Eight Belles, who sustained catastrophic injuries and was euthanized on the track after finishing second in the Kentucky Derby in 2008.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jones has produced some good colts, most notably Hard Spun, the 2007 Derby runner-up. Brereton Jones, a former governor of Kentucky who owns and bred Lovely Maria, views him as a skillful trainer, period.Advertisement“He can have the same success with colts; the fillies just happened to be there,” Brereton Jones said. “Larry is 100 percent a horseman. He knows what he is doing. He is very alert to specific things that need to be done for a specific horse.”Still, Larry Jones’s success with fillies is striking, and even he is at a loss to explain it.“I really don’t know,” Jones said. “My wife has shown me one thing: You’ve got to keep females happy. If the females ain’t happy, ain’t nobody happy.”Cindy Jones said that because they found fillies had calmer demeanors, she and her husband might cater to them more.“If you don’t have a happy horse in the barn, you are not going to have a happy horse on the racetrack,” she said. “They’re just not going to perform for you.”The emergence of I’m a Chatterbox is a prime example of Larry Jones’s ability to bring out the best in a filly. After winning once in three starts as a 2-year-old and earning $48,614 for Ken McPeek, her previous trainer, she is 3 for 3 this year for $420,000 in purse money.Cindy Jones said that showering I’m a Chatterbox with affection — and a steady stream of snacks — made a difference.“She loves sweet potatoes, peppermints and apples of all kinds,” Cindy Jones said.She also said that despite the name, I’m a Chatterbox tended to remain at the back of the stall when she arrived. Now, the horse is front and center, waiting for the next treat, eager to nuzzle her caretakers. Lovely Maria, typically in the stall beside her, demands and receives the same attention.Lovely Maria and I’m a Chatterbox appear to be entering the mile-and-an-eighth Oaks in peak form, which would be another testament to Jones. Lovely Maria gave the jockey Kerwin Clark his first Grade I victory in his 40-year career when she rolled by three and one-quarter lengths in the Ashland Stakes at Keeneland Race Course in Lexington, Ky., her most recent start. I’m a Chatterbox continued her rise with a convincing two-and-a-half-length victory in the Fair Grounds Oaks at the Fair Grounds in New Orleans, her latest effort.The storied trainer Woody Stephens, who died in 1998, holds the Oaks record with five victories. Brereton Jones thinks Larry Jones could someday threaten that mark, saying, “If he can get to three, he can get to six.”A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Recovered From a Fall That Nearly Killed Him, a Trainer Gets Back to Winning.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.