AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesThe best drama in the week’s big match may be taking place off the field. Soccer editor and shamelss Ajax supporter Andrew Das tells you what to watch.The Montreal Impact’s bid to win the Concacaf Champions League title is the story to watch, but not because of the soccer. The trouble started in the closing minutes of last week’s first leg against Club America in Mexico City, when Impact goalkeeper Evan Bush picked up a yellow card. That meant he would be suspended for Wednesday’s return match in Montreal (8 p.m., Fox Sports 2), and that’s when things got interesting.With its other goalkeepers either cup-tied or injured, the Impact signaled over the weekend that they were considering acquiring a goalkeeper on loan from another M.L.S. team, perhaps Chicago’s Sean Johnson or even N.Y.C.F.C.’s Josh Saunders, for the second leg against America. This seemed (at best) shady and (at worst) completely unfair, but the story refused to die. As of Monday afternoon, the issue had not been resolved. Tune in Wednesday to see who actually runs out to the position.Update, Tuesday 9:45 a.m.: Crisis averted. Montreal acquired the veteran German goalkeeper Kristian Nicht from Indy Eleven of the North American Soccer League on Monday.The league races are winding down in Europe. You’ll probably want to wait to check in on Ligue 1 (where P.S.G. and Lyon are tied for first) and La Liga (where Barcelona leads Real Madrid by 2 points with five games to play) until the season’s final days. Bayern Munich clinched its third straight Bundesliga crown on Sunday, and Juventus can win Serie A by beating Fiorentina on Wednesday (2:45 p.m., beIN).In England, the Premier League race is effectively over, too. Chelsea will inch closer when it (spoiler alert) beats Leicester on Wednesday (2:45 p.m., NBCSN). That will position the Blues to clinch at home on Sunday against Crystal Palace (8:30 a.m., NBCSN), making that a perfect morning for even Arsenal masochists— is that an oxymoron? — to sleep in.Ajax, the greatest club in the world and one you should consider supporting, has the week off. But a last-minute tie over the weekend clinched second place in the Dutch Eredivisie — and a place in the UEFA Champions League qualifying rounds next season. Pep Guardiola is no doubt trembling.Advertisement