By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 27, 2015
The Baltimore Orioles’ scheduled home game against the Chicago White Sox on Monday night was postponed because of safety concerns regarding riots that broke out near Camden Yards after the funeral for a 25-year-old man, Freddie Gray, who died in police custody on April 19.Rob Manfred, baseball’s commissioner, who was at the ballpark for a previously planned visit, said Tuesday night’s game between the Orioles and White Sox could be moved — possibly to Washington — if safety continued to be in question.Rioters looted stores and threw rocks and bricks at the Baltimore police about three miles from the park. Gray died after sustaining a spinal injury while in custody.The Orioles announced the postponement about 40 minutes before game time. About 1,000 fans were inside the stadium at the time, and many gates had already been closed.AdvertisementThe team said the game was called off after a consultation with the police. The White Sox were in Baltimore for the start of a three-game series.Advertisement“We feel like we made the decision that would provide us the greatest possible security in terms of protecting the fans, the players, the umpires, everybody involved in the game,” Manfred said. “I don’t know what more I can say about it at this point.”PHILLIES 4, CARDINALS 1 Cole Hamels won for the first time in seven starts dating to September, and Ben Revere’s two-run double in the seventh inning was the go-ahead hit in Philadelphia’s victory at St. Louis.Hamels (1-2) and John Lackey (1-1) both went seven innings. Hamels had a season-best nine strikeouts and allowed just four hits, while the Phillies put just two runners in scoring position before their three-run seventh. CUBS 4, PIRATES 0 The rookie Kris Bryant drove in two runs, Jason Hammel threw eight scoreless innings and Chicago ended Pittsburgh’s five-game winning streak.Bryant had two hits, including a two-run single, as the Cubs won their third in a row. The Cubs rookie Addison Russell got a hit and scored a run in his Wrigley Field debut. He lost control of his bat in the seventh, and it flew into the stands, injuring a fan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The fan was carried from the stands on a stretcher. There was no immediate report on the fan’s condition.TIGERS 5, TWINS 4 Yoenis Cespedes had a homer, a double and three R.B.I. to back David Price in Detroit’s win at Minnesota.The Tigers (14-6) have won three straight after a four-game losing skid.ROYALS 6, INDIANS 2 Alex Gordon and Mike Moustakas helped visiting Kansas City keep the reigning American League Cy Young Award winner, Cleveland’s Corey Kluber, winless this season.AdvertisementGordon drove in two runs, hitting a go-ahead double in the sixth inning. Moustakas had four hits, including a run-scoring single in the seventh.RED SOX 6, BLUE JAYS 5 Mookie Betts hit a game-ending single to lift Boston over visiting Toronto.Pablo Sandoval homered for the second straight day for Boston, hitting a solo shot before leaving with a sore neck. He also had a two-run single.The rookie Devon Travis belted his sixth homer for the Blue Jays.REDS 9, BREWERS 6 Pitcher Jason Marquis ended Cincinnati’s long streak of clutch-hitting futility with a run-scoring single, and the slumping Jay Bruce homered and drove in three runs as the Reds held off visiting Milwaukee.BRAVES 8, NATIONALS 4 Kelly Johnson homered and drove in three runs, Eric Stults pitched six and a third strong innings, and host Atlanta handed Washington its sixth straight loss.SCHERZER TO MISS START Max Scherzer will not make his scheduled start for Washington against Atlanta on Tuesday night because of a sprained right thumb.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Baltimore Rioting Prompts Postponement of Orioles Game.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.