
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 27, 2015
Josh Hamilton returned to the site of his best days Monday, rejoining the Texas Rangers in a trade and saying that he never should have signed with the Los Angeles Angels in the first place.The Angels, clearly, were just as eager to move on, accepting minimal salary relief to shed him.Hamilton, who has a long history of drug and alcohol abuse, had a highly publicized relapse in February, but an arbitrator ruled that Hamilton could not be suspended because he had not violated baseball’s drug agreement with the union. The decision infuriated the Angels’ owner, Arte Moreno, who owed Hamilton more than $80 million from this season through 2017.“He knew what the deal was when he signed me, hands down,” Hamilton said at a news conference in Arlington, Tex. “He knew what he was getting. He knew what the risks were. He knew all those things.”The Angels will continue paying dearly for their faith that Hamilton would continue to thrive in another setting. According to The Los Angeles Times, the team will assume about $60 million of Hamilton’s remaining contract, with the Rangers paying less than $7 million over the three seasons. Because Texas has no state income tax — and California does — Hamilton was also said to be giving some money back to the Angels.AdvertisementHamilton, who turns 34 next month, missed three years in the minors because of drugs. After a year with the Cincinnati Reds, he starred with the Rangers from 2008 through 2012, winning a Most Valuable Player Award in 2010 and helping the team reach two World Series. But the fans booed him during his final game in a wild-card loss, and he left for a five-year, $125 million contract with the Angels.AdvertisementHe played poorly with the Angels, hitting .255 with only 31 homers in 240 games across two seasons. He has not played in 2015 because of off-season shoulder surgery but could be back in the majors next month with Texas, where he had sought to be traded after his relationship with the Angels deteriorated.“Looking back on it now, if I could change the past, I would, but I can’t,” Hamilton said. “I can only learn from it. I probably wouldn’t have gone anywhere. I would have stayed here. I’m happy to be back now. I’ve learned things over the last couple of years, and I’ll take that forward, try to be a better man, father and player on the field.”Hamilton, who filed for divorce in February, has four daughters and lives in Texas in the off-season. He did not always maintain his sobriety with the Rangers, suffering relapses in 2009 and 2012, but he said he was better equipped to cope with challenges in Texas.“Between 2012 and 2015, a lot of my support system was kind of removed or pushed away and other pieces added — not all by my doing,” Hamilton said. “I’m taking it back to 2012, or pre-2012, as far as having the same support group that I want to have, and that I get along with, and that I feel like is the best for me. I’ve put all those pieces back in place to help me, obviously, not drink or use drugs.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hamilton said that he was now tested five times a week for drugs and alcohol, and that Shayne Kelley would be back with him. Kelley was hired by the Rangers as a staff assistant after Hamilton’s relapse in 2012 and followed him to Anaheim, but Hamilton said Kelley was let go after his first Angels season.Jon Daniels, the Rangers’ general manager, said at the news conference that he believed Hamilton would still be productive because he would be surrounded by people who deal with him honestly. Jerry Dipoto, the Angels’ general manager, said in a statement that the team had accommodated Hamilton’s wishes to return to Texas and that the trade was “the right decision for everyone involved.”Hamilton was asked near the end of the news conference if he needed baseball. He deliberated for a moment before answering.“Yes, I need baseball,” he said. “I love baseball. I’ve been playing baseball since I was 3. But baseball’s coming to an end soon. The reason I’m making certain changes in my life is because I want to be O.K. after baseball’s over. So I’ve done a lot of growing and learning and soul-searching the past few weeks. I’m excited about being a Ranger. I’m excited about playing for the fans again and just having fun.”A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Troubled Slugger Welcomes His Latest Chance for a New Start.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »