
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
APRIL 27, 2015
By the time Mets pitcher Jacob deGrom reached Yankee Stadium on Sunday afternoon, he had heard the news that Adam Wainwright, the St. Louis Cardinals’ ace, might be lost for the season. Wainwright injured his ankle and Achilles’ tendon in an at-bat on Saturday night in Milwaukee. He was placed on the disabled list on Sunday, and the team announced on Monday that he would miss the rest of the season.Wainwright’s injury should rekindle much-needed discussion about bringing the designated-hitter rule to the National League. While this is not a debate that keeps me up at night, it is one that is giving N.L. managers nightmares. At least it should.Pitchers are injured all the time, of course. It’s the nature of the beast. Matt Harvey, Yu Darvish, Jose Fernandez and Zack Wheeler have all missed time with arm injuries in recent years. But they were injured performing duties generally related to pitching.Having N.L. pitchers continue to hit is a part of the game whose time has passed.There is risk enough in pitching and fielding the position. Why add to the risk by having the pitcher hit? Last week, Max Scherzer of the Washington Nationals jammed his thumb while batting. He told CBSSports.com that he would have no problem with the National League dropping its rule that pitchers must take their turn at bat.Advertisement“If you look at it from the macro side, who’d people rather see hit — Big Papi or me?” Scherzer said, referring to the Boston Red Sox slugger David Ortiz. “Who would people rather see, a real hitter hitting home runs or a pitcher swinging a wet newspaper? Both leagues need to be on the same set of rules.”AdvertisementDeGrom, a former shortstop, said he would prefer to keep the tradition.“It’s unfortunate what happened,” he said, referring to Wainwright. “But I just feel like that’s been part of the National League.”If baseball ever dies, the cause of death will be complications caused by tradition.The Mets are off to their best start since 1986, and a large part of their success will hinge on the performance of a pitching staff anchored by Harvey and deGrom. Manager Terry Collins needed only one name to make his point about wanting to see the designated hitter in the National League.“Chien-Ming Wang,” Collins said, referring to the former Yankees pitching star who injured his foot in 2008 while running the bases in an interleague game against Houston. Wang was 8-2, and he had won 46 games in the previous three seasons.But the Yankees suspected the injury led to a change in his delivery and then to shoulder problems, which prematurely derailed his career. He won only eight more games in the majors, and he now pitches in the Atlanta Braves’ system.“Here’s one of the, at the time, best pitchers in baseball,” Collins said. “He blew his leg out and never recovered from it.”The battle over the designated hitter has been going on for more than a century. Connie Mack made the suggestion in 1906, and the Oakland A’s owner Charles O. Finley carried the flag for the idea in the 1970s. Finley argued that most pitchers could not hit anyway, so why not replace them with professional hitters who could put punch in the lineup and fans in the seats?The D.H. was adopted in 1973, but only in the American League.Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson, who spent most of his executive career in the American League, would be fine if things stayed that way.“I happen to like pitchers hitting,” he said. “I wish they were better at it, but I don’t see this injury risk as a strong rationale for a D.H. in both leagues.”AdvertisementHe added: “I think it’s foolish to think you could put some of these guys in a cocoon and eliminate injury risk across the board. Our biggest problem with pitching injuries is not with running or swinging, it’s throwing. That’s the biggest problem we have. That’s the one we need to focus on.”Alderson does not feel that an injury here or there justifies a drastic change.“I don’t legislate change on account of one incident,” he said, although there now have been several. “If you’re seeing a pattern — of conduct, or injury or performance of one type or another — then I think that’s something you begin to think about and consider addressing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The injuries to Scherzer and Wainwright may be the catalysts for renewed discussion. Collins, for one, sounded as if he wanted to have that conversation.There is nothing romantic or nostalgic about watching one of your pitchers — especially your ace — be injured while running out of the batter’s box or being nicked by a pitch he could probably not hit anyway.“You can’t tell me that anybody comes out to Citi Field to see Matt Harvey hit,” Collins said. “Not a person there.”Case closed. At least it should be.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: An N.L. Tradition That Should Be Retired.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »