By VICTOR MATHERAPRIL 27, 2015
The field for the Kentucky Derby on Saturday looks unusually strong. The winners of all the major prep races are expected to start, and few top contenders have dropped out with an injury. The draw is Wednesday, but here is an early look at the major players, ranked in approximate order from contender to pretender.Dortmund is a colt who seems to be able to do no wrong. He has won all six of his races, every one of them as a favorite. In his past two starts, he faced the best in the West and ran them off the racetrack with wire-to-wire wins in the San Felipe and California’s biggest prep race, the Santa Anita Derby. His Derby pedigree is also good: He is the son of the Derby winner Big Brown and trained by the three-time Derby winner Bob Baffert. The only concern is that he likes to run in front, and other speedy horses in the big Derby field may hamper that style.There is never a sure thing in the Derby, but there is little fault to be found in Dortmund’s record, and he is deservedly a favorite.American Pharoah comes off a victory in the Arkansas Derby that was even easier than Dortmund’s California wins. Earlier in his career, he liked to run at the front, but in the Arkansas Derby he had no trouble racing behind a long shot until the homestretch. At that point, he effortlessly opened up a six-length margin. It can be hard to compare two horses who win separate races with ease. The Beyer Speed Figures for the two races are close: Dortmund ran a 106, American Pharoah a 105.AdvertisementNormally, when there are two favored front-runners in a race, there would be concern that they would wear each other out and set up the race for a come-from-behind horse. But, like Dortmund, American Pharoah is trained by Baffert, who will no doubt tell his jockeys to avoid that. Another big plus for American Pharoah is that Victor Espinoza, who won last year’s Kentucky Derby winner on California Chrome, will ride.AdvertisementMateriality has the highest speed figure in the field despite the well-justified hype for Dortmund and American Pharoah. That was a 110 in the Florida Derby. In contrast to the two favorites, Materiailty had to work hard in that race to hold off another Derby contender, Upstart.Materiality is undefeated but has raced only three times. For years, it was assumed that such a lightly raced horse could not win the Derby. But in 2008, Big Brown won after just three races; like Materiality, his final race before Kentucky was the Florida Derby.Materiality is another who so far has preferred to run near the front. They all cannot be in the lead at Churchill Downs; the trainers and the jockeys of these contenders will have to make some difficult decisions about where to run.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Upstart entered the Florida Derby as the favorite after some good performances in Florida, but he could not match Materiality. He lost the race by only one and a half lengths and went wider than Materiality throughout, which may have been the difference. The Kentucky Derby has such a big field that avoiding going wide and staying out of traffic are sometimes matters of luck. A little luck for Upstart, and he may reverse the Florida Derby finish.Firing Line won the Sunland Derby in New Mexico, but the 14-length win over a weak field may tell us more about the talent of Dortmund, who beat Firing Line in the two previous races. Firing Line’s rider, Gary Stevens, returned from retirement in 2013 and will try to win the Derby at age 52. (The record is 54 by Bill Shoemaker on Ferdinand in 1986.)Carpe Diem was second in the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile last fall to Texas Red, who is missing the Derby with foot problems. He has won both of his races this year, most recently the Grade I Blue Grass. So why is he not rated higher? The main reason is that, by most measures, his races this year have been slow compared with those of the top contenders. Still, he is four for five lifetime. If you are one of those who believes that in racing simply winning is more important than how fast it happens, Carpe Diem could be your horse.International Star is another who has reeled off wins — three in a row in Louisiana — in ordinary times. A point in his favor is that he likes to come from behind. With all the speedy horses in the race, he could close ground to make the top three, and maybe even win.Frosted’s last race, a win in the Wood Memorial at Aqueduct, was fairly fast, but his record before that is spotty; he is only 2 for 7 in his career. In a field full of winners, that is a black mark.Mubtaahij has some fans excited after he won a $2 million race in Dubai by eight lengths. But the field that day was suspect, and horses shipping from overseas do not have a good record in the Derby.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.