By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 27, 2015
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — The Albuquerque police are searching for the U.F.C. light-heavyweight champion, Jon Jones, in connection with a hit-and-run accident.Officer Simon Drobik, a police spokesman, said Mr. Jones was wanted for questioning about the crash, which occurred Sunday. No charges have been filed, but a pregnant woman driving another vehicle was hospitalized with minor injuries.Mr. Jones ran from the crash but quickly came back to grab “a large handful of cash” from the car, witnesses told the police.”Witnesses stated he shoved the cash into his pants and ran north,” the report said.According to the police, the accident occurred in southeastern Albuquerque just before noon Sunday when the driver of a rental S.U.V., whom an off-duty officer identified as Jones, ran a red light.AdvertisementThe police said they had been unable to reach Mr. Jones, 27, and had not heard back from his lawyer.Mr. Jones (21-1) is scheduled to defend his title against Anthony Johnson in Las Vegas on May 23, headlining one of the promotion’s biggest shows of the year.Advertisement”We are in the process of gathering facts and will reserve further comment until more information is available,” the U.F.C. said in a statement.Although he is widely considered the world’s best pound-for-pound mixed martial artist, Mr. Jones has endured legal problems and questionable behavior during his title reign.Mr. Jones was arrested in 2012 after crashing his Bentley into a telephone pole in Binghamton. He had his driver’s license suspended after being charged with D.W.I., but did no jail time.Last August, Mr. Jones and the challenger Daniel Cormier were involved in a brawl in the lobby of the MGM Grand casino while appearing at a promotional event. Mr. Jones was fined $50,000 and ordered to do community service by the Nevada Athletic Commission.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In early December, Mr. Jones tested positive for metabolites of cocaine while training for his bout. Mr. Jones was allowed to compete because the test was conducted out of competition, and he beat Mr. Cormier.When the failed drug test became public, Mr. Jones publicly apologized for a “mistake,” but spent just one day in a drug rehabilitation center before checking himself out.Mr. Jones has defended his belt eight times since becoming the youngest champion in U.F.C. history in March 2011.Mr. Jones is a native of upstate New York, but lives in New Mexico and works under the prominent local trainer Greg Jackson. He has two brothers who play in the N.F.L., Arthur Jones of the Colts and Chandler Jones of the Patriots.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.