AdvertisementSupported byBy Louie LazarSAN FRANCISCO — Rinaldo Ardizoia sat near a bay window inside his pink San Francisco house, gazing at a bulky wooden television set — a 22-inch Zenith with a slightly rounded screen. Sounds from a ballgame — a cheering crowd, announcers’ banter, fastballs popping into a catcher’s mitt — filled his living room.“Crawford, come on,” Ardizoia, 95, said. San Francisco Giants shortstop Brandon Crawford stood at home plate, awaiting a pitch.It was afternoon, and sunlight passed through a stained-glass window, casting a soft glow onto a shelf of baseballs with a young Ardizoia’s face printed on them. Known as Rugger, Ardizoia is the oldest living former Yankee, according to the Society for American Baseball Research and confirmed by the team.One of the Yankees’ top pitching prospects in the early 1940s before his career was interrupted by World War II, Ardizoia pitched two innings against the St. Louis Browns on the last day of April in 1947. According to SABR, he is the oldest living former player to appear in just one major league game.Ardizoia has lived in the same house since 1940, the year before he first played as a Yankees farmhand and back when he was a “quiet, polite lad,” as The New York Herald Tribune once described him. Today, about 75 years later, he gets around the house with a walker. Yet reminders of his youth are everywhere.The dining room has a rotary phone that Ardizoia said he bought in 1942 and still uses. Down a steep, narrow stairwell and through the garage is a utility room whose walls are covered from floor to ceiling with black and white photos dating from the 1930s, when Ardizoia’s professional career began. One shows him golfing with Phil Rizzuto; in another he is sitting with Joe DiMaggio. Steel spikes and a mitt Ardizoia played with in 1949 rest on the floor.On a recent afternoon — wearing a gold Yankees ring and his TV tuned to baseball — Ardizoia reflected on his career. He spoke about how the game had changed (he abhors facial hair, long pants and pitch counts), shared tales about some of the greats and reminisced about old teammates, nearly all of them dead.Ardizoia was born in Oleggio, in northwest Italy, and is believed to be one of only seven players in league history born in that country. He sailed to the United States with his mother at age 2, joining his father in California. They later settled in San Francisco’s Potrero Hill neighborhood. He was 6 when his mother died.Ardizoia got the nickname Rugger because whenever the older children chased him, he would flee into prickly bushes, which they thought was a rugged thing to do. He took up baseball, became an all-city high school pitcher and was signed at age 16 by the Mission Reds, a local professional team in the Pacific Coast League. The team moved to Los Angeles, becoming the Hollywood Stars. Ardizoia eventually joined its starting rotation.Newspapers described him as a husky right-hander with a good fastball. The Los Angeles Times said in 1939 that Ardizoia possessed a “tricky delivery, ‘hiding’ the ball from the batter on his windup.” It also reported that despite shaky team defense, Ardizoia “made a hit with the older players by never once blowing his topper.”Ardizoia established himself as a workhorse, pitching 264 innings in 1940. The Stars had a celebrity fan base, and Ardizoia became friends with people in show business like Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz. Gail Patrick, the actress, gave Ardizoia a rabbit’s foot as a good-luck charm (the souvenir still hangs in Ardizoia’s basement).“Ronald Reagan — he used to hang out with us,” Ardizoia said.The Yankees bought Ardizoia’s contract in 1940. He played mostly for the Kansas City Blues of the American Association in 1941 and 1942. Chuck Stevens, a first baseman for the Toledo Mud Hens at that time, remembers Ardizoia well. “He was aggressive on the mound and he’d go to work on you,” Stevens, now 96 and the oldest living former St. Louis Brown, said by telephone. “What you got from him, you earned.”In 1943, Ardizoia was drafted into the service. He played baseball on the Seventh Air Force team, which entertained troops in the Pacific. Teammates included DiMaggio and the future Yankee catcher Charlie Silvera, who won six World Series as Yogi Berra’s backup. But before that, Silvera recalled in an interview, a more experienced Ardizoia schooled him in pitching and catching strategy.“He’d tell me the situation — ‘Here’s what you should call’ and ‘You shouldn’t call that,’ ” Silvera, 90, said. “He corrected my mistakes in a nice way. He never embarrassed me. I’ll never forget that.”After the war, Ardizoia spent 1946 with the Class AAA Oakland Oaks, going 15-7 with a 2.83 earned run average under Manager Casey Stengel.Ardizoia made the Yankees’ big league club in 1947. On April 30, with the Yankees trailing by 13-4 in the seventh inning against the Browns at Sportsman’s Park in St. Louis, Manager Bucky Harris summoned Ardizoia from the bullpen. Ardizoia pitched a scoreless seventh, but in the eighth allowed two earned runs, including a homer. About a week later, he was sold back to Hollywood. The Yankees, led by DiMaggio, won the World Series.Ardizoia spent 1947 and 1948 in Hollywood and 1949 in Seattle, before finishing his career in the Texas League with the Dallas Eagles. He retired at age 31 after 12 minor league seasons, compiling a 123-115 record with a 3.63 E.R.A. He pitched 15 complete games in a season at least twice; six times he threw more than 200 innings. He continued to play semiprofessional baseball until he was 61.Ardizoia rejoined his wife, Mary, and two children in San Francisco. He worked as a linen salesman. Wearing a tie, he drove a van around the city, finding success in part, he said, because people remembered him from his playing days.In the 1980s he retired, and he and Mary traveled the world. With “nothing to worry about,” Ardizoia said, “we enjoyed life.” Back home, they maintained a garden in the backyard. Mary grew vegetables, while Ardizoia tended to the flowers. Ardizoia and his baseball friends played poker on Friday nights, and went on hunting and fishing trips.In 2003, Mary died. Ardizoia continued attending old-timers’ affairs, but the number of former teammates dwindled each year. His daughter, Janet, died of cancer in 2010.Ardizoia lives alone and has limited mobility because of a bad leg. A caregiver comes three times a week to assist with household duties. During baseball season, Ardizoia sits by the bay window, on the second floor overlooking a quiet street, and watches the Giants play. He keeps a pocket schedule within reach, and crosses off dates to indicate another game gone by. But when there is nothing good on TV or when friends are not around, he gets lonely.“Not too many old ballplayers left around here,” he said.Last year, Ardizoia was invited to throw out the first pitch at a game between inmates at San Quentin State Prison. In the 1950s, Ardizoia had played semipro games against convicts there, and more than a half-century later, he enthusiastically returned, holding a cane and wearing a baseball cap. Behind the high prison walls, inmates lined up to shake Ardizoia’s hand and get his autograph.The moment was “very special” to Ardizoia, said Mark Macrae, a friend who accompanied him. “It took him back to his playing days,” Macrae said.Ardizoia likes going to the Connecticut Yankee, a bar around the corner from his childhood home — a place where he used to eat in the 1920s, when it was a family-owned saloon. Today, photos of two players are displayed in the entrance: DiMaggio and Ardizoia.Ardizoia also attends meetings of the Old Timers Baseball Association of San Francisco, whose members often gather around and listen to him tell stories.Modern players disappoint him. “Today, players got long hair,” he said recently. “They got tattoos. Long pants.”He added: “When we was playing ball, you had a clean shave and a haircut. And pants right below the knee. But today, everything is the opposite.”Ardizoia usually wakes up at 10 a.m. and eats cereal with sliced fruit and milk. He watches TV and answers fan mail, which arrives regularly. He has a vodka before dinner. He watches the news and makes tea before going to bed.On a recent Sunday, Ardizoia turned on a Giants-Padres game, waiting about 25 seconds for the green-tinted monitor to warm up. Jake Peavy was pitching for the Giants, and the plate umpire called several borderline pitches balls. Peavy was visibly agitated, and so was Ardizoia.“Some of these umpires, boy, I’m telling you, terrible,” Ardizoia groused. “Used to get it from the letters down to the knees. Now if it’s not down the middle, look out.”As a player, Ardizoia was “cool as a cucumber,” said Clint Hufford, 88, a Stars pitcher in 1947. But occasionally, he showed a fiery side. Downstairs, amid all the photos of Ardizoia posing happily in the sun, hangs a 1948 Western Union telegram from the P.C.L. president, Clarence Rowland, scolding Ardizoia for “filthy and vicious language” toward an umpire and for “threatening to punch him in the mouth.” Ardizoia was fined $25.Back in his living room, Ardizoia told stories. He talked about attending DiMaggio’s first wedding and about playing for Stengel, whom he declared “the nuttiest guy I ever met.”And he shared his account of Babe Ruth Day in April 1947, when a hoarse and ailing Ruth stumbled while ascending Yankee Stadium’s dugout steps — and Ardizoia said he helped right his balance.“Geez, thanks a lot, kid,” Ardizoia recalled Ruth telling him.“O.K., Babe,” Ardizoia replied.That November, Ardizoia — to his surprise — received a birthday card from Ruth in the mail. Ruth died the next year.After the Giants lost to the Padres, 6-4, Ardizoia crossed out the game on his pocket schedule and switched over to a Yankees-Red Sox game. He looked pleased. “These guys are all clean-shaven, which is nice,” he said of the Yankees.After a few innings, Ardizoia turned off the TV, rose gingerly and, with the aid of his walker, headed toward the kitchen to prepare tea. He had been planning to go out to dinner, but had not been feeling well enough, which frustrated him.“Sometimes when I go to bed a little early and I’m not sleeping, I just sit there and my mind goes back,” Ardizoia said. He smiled and sighed. “And boy, sure makes me feel happy.”Advertisement