By JOE DRAPEOCT. 18, 2015
The daily fantasy sports website DraftKings accepted entries into its contests for the weekend, apparently defying an order from the Nevada Gaming Control Board to quit operating immediately within the state.Nevada regulators ruled Thursday that daily fantasy sports should be considered gambling, not a game of skill, and ordered the websites to suspend operations until the companies and their employees received state gambling licenses.FanDuel and other smaller rivals did so, but a spokeswoman for DraftKings acknowledged that it made an exception for some of its customers in Nevada. The company, which is valued at more than $1 billion and has the financial backing of Major League Baseball and the N.F.L. owners Robert K. Kraft of the Patriots and Jerry Jones of the Cowboys, allowed contest entries for the postseason baseball games and N.F.L games.“Because our game is nuanced in the fact that we allow late swaps, we allowed players who had already entered games on Thursday to be able to continue their full experience with the product until games close and are paid out on Monday night, regardless of their location,” the spokeswoman said.AdvertisementThe spokeswoman added that while DraftKings disagreed with an opinion handed down this week by the Nevada attorney general, it took the decision seriously.
            In 2006, Congress tried to crack down on illegal online sports betting. Today, Internet wagering is thriving, and a new business that resembles gambling, fantasy sports, is winning millions of players and stoking controversy. The Times, with the PBS series “Frontline,” investigated illegal gambling in the Internet age.        Finding ‘Who’ and ‘Where’ Within the Cyber-Betting UniverseCash Drops and Keystrokes: The Dark Reality of Sports Betting and Daily Fantasy GamesThe Offshore Game of Online Sports BettingDraftKings Leaves Door Unlocked for Barred Fantasy Sports PlayersTo Those With Addiction, Daily Fantasy Sports Looks a Lot Like GamblingN.F.L. Data Deal: A Bet on Gambling?
Sign up to receive an email
			when we publish the next stories in this series.
		
Have a question or anonymous tip?

Terms and conditions
Something went wrong.

				Thank you for your submission.
			“We notified all Nevada customers of the issue and requested that they withdraw all funds and close their accounts,” the spokeswoman said by email. “We also implemented blocking mechanisms for Nevada residents from creating new accounts, depositing money or playing new games.”AdvertisementOn Saturday, the Nevada-based blog Legal Sports Report said that it was able to enter multiple daily fantasy sports contests on DraftKings from a Nevada I.P. address — something it was unable to do on rival sites such as FanDuel.A. G. Burnett, chairman of the Nevada Gaming Control Board, said that he was aware of DraftKings’ stance and that his agency was monitoring the situation.“We have been and will continue to test the D.F.S. operators’ websites and apps to determine if they’ve disengaged from Nevada or not,” he said of the daily fantasy sports sites. “Failure to disengage can constitute a crime; we will work with our counsel on what are the next steps forward, should that be the case.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The daily fantasy sports industry — and especially DraftKings — has come under intense scrutiny for the way it handles sensitive data and its aggressive recruitment of players. A federal grand jury has issued a subpoena to the leading trade group for fantasy sports as part of an investigation into the practices and legality of the booming, unregulated industry, according to two people involved.The grand jury investigation is being conducted under the auspices of the United States attorney’s office in Tampa, Fla., which has declined to comment. The Fantasy Sports Trade Association, the group that lobbies on behalf of leading sites like DraftKings and FanDuel, was asked for board minutes among other things, but a spokeswoman declined to discuss it.The scope of the investigation remained unclear, as did whether it was connected to interviews that F.B.I. agents have been conducting — according to the people contacted by them — with competitors at daily fantasy websites.Lawmakers and state regulators, meanwhile, see the games as a form of gambling that is prohibited by law. The New York attorney general’s office has also announced an inquiry into the sites. And the Illinois Gaming Board said Friday that it believed the daily fantasy sports sites were illegal and that it would ask the state’s attorney general, Lisa Madigan, for an opinion next week.A version of this article appears in print on October 19, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: DraftKings Continues to Operate in Nevada .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.