By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 29, 2015
Dan Uggla drove in five runs, three on a homer in the ninth, to help the Washington Nationals rally from the franchise’s biggest deficit to overcome the Braves in Atlanta, 13-12, on Tuesday night and end a seven-game losing streak.The Nationals twice trailed by eight runs, but they chipped away at the lead as Jose Lobaton hit a three-run homer in a four-run fifth, Denard Span hit a solo homer in the sixth and Uggla had a two-run triple and Reed Johnson a pinch-hit R.B.I. single in the seventh.Uggla, released last year by the Braves and still owed more than $18 million at the time, was booed in every at-bat, but he quieted the crowd with his first homer for Washington, a blast into the seats in left field off closer Jason Grilli (0-1).A. J. Pierzynski went 4 for 4 with four R.B.I., and Freddie Freeman went 4 for 6 for the Braves.CARDINALS 11, PHILLIES 5 Matt Carpenter tripled and doubled, and St. Louis had season highs in runs and hits to help Michael Wacha remain unbeaten with a victory over visiting Philadelphia.AdvertisementMatt Holliday and Matt Adams each added three hits for the Cardinals, who finished with 15. Wacha improved his record to 4-0.AdvertisementREDS 4, BREWERS 2 Johnny Cueto gave up three hits over eight innings during his latest dominant performance against Milwaukee, and Brandon Phillips had a two-run homer to lead host Cincinnati to victory over the majors’ worst team.Joey Votto and Marlon Byrd added solo homers for the Reds.The Brewers fell to 4-17, the worst start by a National League team in 18 years, according to Stats L.L.C. The 1997 Cubs had an identical record. The 2010 Orioles were the last team in the majors to open a season 4-17.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BLUE JAYS 11, RED SOX 8 Jose Bautista had an R.B.I. in Toronto’s five-run third inning, and another in a three-run fourth, then added a homer as the visiting Blue Jays ended a four-game losing streak.Josh Donaldson had three of Toronto’s 17 hits, including a homer.ROYALS 11, INDIANS 5 Kendrys Morales’s three-run homer capped a six-run seventh inning, and visiting Kansas City cruised past Cleveland.Alex Gordon homered and drove in two runs for the Royals, who had a season-high 18 hits.CUBS 6, PIRATES 2  Dexter Fowler had three hits and two R.B.I., Travis Wood tossed seven strong innings and host Chicago beat Pittsburgh for its fourth straight win.MARINERS 2, RANGERS 1 J. A. Happ doubled his season strikeout total with nine in six and two-thirds innings, Rickie Weeks homered, and Seattle topped host Texas.TWINS 3, TIGERS 2 Mike Pelfrey turned in his second consecutive strong start, Kurt Suzuki had two hits and the go-ahead single in the seventh inning, and host Minnesota edged Detroit.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Uggla’s Ninth-Inning Homer Rallies Nationals Past the Braves .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.