
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 28, 2015
The Yankees gave out Masahiro Tanaka bobblehead dolls Tuesday, celebrating the pitcher who electrified the major leagues early last season. The toy Tanaka is striding confidently toward the plate, his elbow cocked behind him, his hand gripping a four-seam fastball. That is the image the team wants to project of its ace.One false move, of course, and the whole thing could crack into pieces. The real Tanaka, who cost the Yankees $175 million, seems just as fragile as the giveaway.Tanaka had been scheduled to pitch against Tampa Bay on Wednesday at Yankee Stadium. Instead he is back on the disabled list, with tendinitis in his right wrist and a forearm strain that General Manager Brian Cashman described as “very mild.”Maybe so. But Cashman also acknowledged that, conservatively, Tanaka would miss a month from the rotation. Added to the time he missed last year with a partially torn ulnar collateral ligament, that makes more than half a season lost to injury — already.AdvertisementWhen Tanaka hurt his elbow last July, after earning a spot on the American League All-Star team, the Yankees followed the doctors’ recommendation against Tommy John surgery. It was the prudent move, the team believed, because the surgery does not always work, and it should be only a last resort.“I can’t remember any time we’ve ever gone against doctors’ orders,” Cashman said. “Like, Why would we? They’re the experts. We follow what they prescribe.” That is reasonable, for sure, and there is always a chance that Tanaka could pitch with the tear and avoid surgery for years, as Adam Wainwright did before needing it in 2011. But the cloud of doom overhead could burst at any time, and while it may not be stormy quite yet, the outlook is gloomy.Tanaka was defiant, insisting he could come back strong and that Tuesday’s magnetic resonance imaging exam found nothing alarming. More than once, he said that these injuries have nothing to do with his elbow.Cashman conceded he did not know if this could be a precursor to Tommy John surgery, but the forearm is clearly a dangerous spot for a pitcher.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.San Diego’s Josh Johnson had a strain in the flexor pronator muscles of his right forearm last March and needed Tommy John surgery (his second) in April. Cincinnati’s Homer Bailey had surgery on his flexor tendon last September, and is down again with elbow trouble after just two starts this season.Tanaka — whose splitter may put him at greater risk of elbow trouble, Cashman suggested — is 2-1 with a 3.22 E.R.A. in four starts. The Yankees had come to rely on him again.Advertisement“I don’t think it was in the back of our minds,” C. C. Sabathia said. “Everything looked good. He was healthy, starting to throw the ball well. It’s discouraging for us, but we’ll move on, keep going.”The best possible case is still in play for Tanaka; the magnetic resonance imaging test, his first since October, showed no change to the U.C.L. injury. But something else is wrong, which means the worst possible case is also still in play: that this elbow problem could bleed into 2016.If the tear had been worse last July, and Tanaka had surgery then, the strong likelihood would be that the Yankees could count on him to be fully healthy by April 2016. Think of the Mets’ Matt Harvey, who had surgery in October 2013 and looks sturdy again now.If Tanaka’s elbow blows out, he could possibly not return until well into the 2016 season. Maybe the team will use its improving farm system to chase Philadelphia’s Cole Hamels in a trade. Maybe Michael Pineda will be the only ace the Yankees need. Maybe they can still win a division without a clear favorite.For now — assuming Tanaka misses the next month — these are his vital statistics since last July’s elbow injury: six starts, more than three months on the disabled list, and a persistently uncertain future.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Troubling Sign as the Yankees’ Ace Is Sidelined Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »