AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaLOUISVILLE, Ky. — If Mubtaahij should become the first horse to journey from Dubai to win the Kentucky Derby, it would not be because everything before the race went according to plan.Mike de Kock, one of the premier trainers in South Africa, has made adjustments almost from the moment Mubtaahij, a 3-year-old colt, arrived at Arlington International Racecourse near Chicago on April 15, ending about 24 hours of travel. Trevor Brown, his assistant, called de Kock to tell him the colt “looked a little tucked up.”That is as bad as it sounds. De Kock explained that “tucked up” meant the horse dropped a significant amount of weight because of a loss of fluids despite the best efforts to cater to him. The initial itinerary called for Mubtaahij to meet the federal requirement by spending two days in quarantine before vanning him to a private training center in Kentucky to prepare for the 141st Kentucky Derby on Saturday.“He just didn’t look like he did when he left home, and so we just went to Plan B,” de Kock said, adding, “As horsemen, we have to be flexible when it comes to these kinds of things. I think the horses talk to us.”Mubtaahij (pronounced MOOB-tah-hizh, Arabic for “elated”) remained at Arlington, where he produced a couple of solid workouts. In the most recent, de Kock’s staff reported that he covered four furlongs in 49.70, with the final three furlongs clocked in a crisp 35.30. He was vanned about eight hours Monday to Churchill Downs. The bay colt stepped out of the van in the early evening, appearing alert as he eagerly surveyed his new surroundings. He was allowed to graze outside Barn 45 before he tore into two rations of hay and settled into his new stall.Mubtaahij earned 100 points, more than enough to qualify for the Kentucky Derby, when he romped by eight lengths in the U.A.E. Derby at Meydan Racecourse on March 28. He is owned by Sheikh Mohammed bin Khalifa Al Maktoum, a first cousin to Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, the ruler of Dubai. The latter began his Derby quest in 1992. He invested millions of dollars in purchasing horses at auction and developed a vast breeding operation in pursuing victory in the Kentucky Derby, among other major races.“With what they’ve spent on Derby prospects, they should have broken up the game by now,” said D. Wayne Lukas, a Hall of Fame trainer who has four victories in the Derby.Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum will be represented in the Derby by Frosted, who was prepped in the United States by one of his primary trainers, Kiaran McLaughlin. But Mubtaahij tends to be more highly regarded; he has four victories in five starts on dirt after faring poorly in his first two career starts on turf.Canonero II, a champion in Venezuela, was the last horse to come from outside North America to win the Derby. He did that in 1971.De Kock, 51, said the challenge of winning the Derby prompted him to enter.“Anybody in any sport wants to participate at the highest level if you’ve got the horse,” he said. “We won’t know if we’ve got the horse until we try.”The taxing travel is not the only disadvantage. Mubtaahij must adjust to a new feed because the special mix he usually receives is not approved here. De Kock also plans to run him without Lasix, an anti-bleeding medication that is expected to be used by every rival.“This horse has never bled, not even a suspicion of any bleeding, and I’m not sure what he’ll do having been given Lasix,” de Kock said, opting not to experiment at this critical stage.If handicappers are drawn to Mubtaahij, it will be because he has demonstrated ability at greater distances than his rivals, many of whom seem likely to struggle with the demanding mile and a quarter the Derby requires.It also will help that the field includes many horses whose past performances indicate a desire to be on, or near, the early lead. That should prompt a hot pace that would lend itself to Mubtaahij’s customary late rush.“I do know we have the ability to get to 10 furlongs, and I do know we have the ability to come on strong the last three or four furlongs,” de Kock said.Randy Moss, an analyst for NBC, said Mubtaahij deserved consideration despite the imposing presence of American Pharoah, the Eclipse Award winner as the leading 2-year-old in North America, who is being compared to previous Triple Crown winners.“I think he is one of seven or eight horses in the field who I would have to categorize as leading contenders,” Moss said of Mubtaahij. “He showed in the U.A.E. Derby that he is the kind of animal you look for in the Kentucky Derby with a 20-horse field. He can hit the holes you’ve got to get through, and he’s shown multiple gears.”De Kock indicated that his first foray into the Derby was something of a fact-finding mission. He said of Mubtaahij: “He’s got a lot of things against him, but this horse has a lot of guts and courage. I hope he runs a good race so we can sit back and say we had a fair shot at it, and this is what we will require for the next time.”Advertisement