By ANDREW KEHAPRIL 29, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  The Nets spilled out of a conference room early Tuesday afternoon, many of them wearing T-shirts and jeans, and most were smiling as they prepared to head to the airport, where a chartered flight to Atlanta awaited.Deron Williams stopped on his way out and eased into a chair amid a group of reporters. Asked what the players had observed while reviewing game footage from their series-tying win Monday, he jokingly said they had not watched film at all; they had merely sat around and shot the breeze.It was silly banter and it got a laugh, but it reflected the mood around the Nets on the eve of Game 5 against the top-seeded Hawks. The Nets find themselves in an unlikely position against a team that won 60 games in the regular season. They seem eager to play spoiler, to subvert other’s low expectations and to maintain their surprising recent surge.“Winning makes everything better,” Williams said.These are the Brooklyn Nets, dichotomous since Day 1. At times, they have turned basketball into a bland exercise, losing games in bunches while underachieving. At other points, their star power has shone. They have made the postseason each of the past three seasons — though this has been characterized as maddening mediocrity.AdvertisementBefore these playoffs, after the Nets’ meager 38 regular-season wins, few had high expectations.“I’m sure everybody probably was thinking they would probably sweep us, maybe we’d get one game out of it,” Alan Anderson said. “Even though our season wasn’t as good as we wanted it to be, we still were capable of beating anybody on any given night when we bring our A game.”AdvertisementAt the moment, they seem to be carrying the momentum, and at the very least, the team has earned the organization another game at Barclays Center on Friday. From a business standpoint, that will be no small thing.After a lukewarm atmosphere in Game 3 at Barclays Center on Saturday, the arena was bubbling with energy Monday. The Nets now get to reconvene another 18,000 fans at least one more time.“It was the best I’ve ever felt in that building,” Coach Lionel Hollins said. “The game was great, our fans were great, and we got the win, so it couldn’t be any better than that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hollins’s comments reflected his blunt, plain-spoken style. Before the start of the series, he said the Nets would not enjoy any natural advantages against the Hawks. Atlanta won 60 games, Hollins noted on numerous occasions, while the Nets only sneaked into the playoffs. Yet Hollins said the playoffs could be an intellectual battle in which planning and adjustments and mental fortitude could overcome athletic prowess.On Tuesday, the players were praising the coaching staff’s tweaks, acknowledging that the team was emphasizing ball movement with a new fervor, hoping to counter the Hawks’ tendency to pack the paint. The Nets had lost six straight games to the Hawks — including the regular season and playoffs — before victories in Games 3 and 4.“He’s made a lot of adjustments — we had to,” said Williams, who scored a game-high 35 points Monday. “The way we played against them in the regular season, that wasn’t going to work, and even the first couple of games, our ball movement wasn’t as good as it’s been the last couple.”The Hawks and Mike Budenholzer, recently named the coach of the year, will make their own adjustments. They have underperformed on offense, partly owing to the Nets’ commitment to hustling.Thaddeus Young said the Nets focused on three problem areas in their meeting Tuesday. They were allowing too many backdoor cuts, partly because of their wariness of Atlanta’s 3-point ability. They were slow at times getting back on defense. And they allowed too many offensive rebounds (18).Still, Young and the Nets were characterizing their situation as a clean slate: a best-of-three series. The Nets were never considered capable of troubling the Hawks. Perhaps the Hawks will be the ones feeling the pressure.Advertisement“We’ve just been going out there and just playing, just hooping, having fun, just moving the ball and playing for one another,” Young said. “We’re not thinking about pressure or anything like that.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.