AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Strauss and Ken BelsonCHICAGO — A pigskin wonderland was being raised in Grant Park early Tuesday ahead of the 80th N.F.L. draft. By Thursday evening, when Tampa Bay is expected to make the first selection, it will include flag football fields for children, a Selection Square where all 32 teams will set up shop and make their picks, and provisional studios for both ESPN and the NFL Network. Draft Town, as it has been named, will also come equipped with a bar and all manner of league merchandise for sale. This year’s draft — the first in Chicago, and the first outside New York since 1964 — is a spectacle, even by the N.F.L.’s standards. For three days, the league will set up shop here, its year-round popularity and marketing power on full display. Chicago has opened its doors willingly. “The N.F.L. absolutely is a sport, and the N.F.L. draft is a sporting event that has a unique space in the American psyche,” Mayor Rahm Emanuel said. “Chicago’s a part of that now. That’s the business plan.”It was the hard-charging Emanuel who lured the draft here. As far back as 2012, Emanuel had suggested Chicago as a Super Bowl host to N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell, but he set his sights on the draft after it was hemmed in by scheduling and space issues at Radio City Music Hall, which had hosted the event the past nine years. Chicago, though, was no lock, with Goodell besieged by calls from civic leaders in Boston and Los Angeles, as well as Cleveland, Houston, New Orleans, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Orlando, Fla., and Green Bay, Wis. The Dallas Cowboys also offered their stadium in Arlington, Tex., as a site.Emanuel was on the phone with Goodell the day the news broke that the draft might move, making a pitch for Chicago in the first of many calls. “His worst nightmare might have been giving me his phone number and email,” Emanuel said in an interview. “Sometimes you can’t put a price on desire.”Emanuel remembered the election night rally at the park in 2008 when Barack Obama was elected president, so when the N.F.L. asked for ways to increase fan engagement in the event, plans for Draft Town were drawn up. C3 Presents, the production company that organized the Obama rally and the park’s annual Lollapalooza summer concert, was hired to arrange logistics for the draft.“Part of our vision is how can we make the event so more fans can enjoy it,” Goodell said last week. Come Thursday, the league hopes the party will be in full swing. Buckingham Fountain will light up in colors to match whichever team is picking, while each team operates its own tent for its fans and the league hosts football clinics for local children and football-themed panel discussions for their parents. Teams will submit their picks in the Selection Center, and they will be walked across Michigan Avenue to the Auditorium Theater, where they will be announced. “Like a mini Olympic torch relay,” said Don Welsh, the chief executive of Choose Chicago, the nonprofit tourist agency helping to organize the draft.Emanuel has promised that no taxpayer money will be used to stage the draft. Several hotels will provide discounted rooms to the N.F.L.; the city will close streets; and Choose Chicago will need to raise an estimated $3 million to $4 million to cover costs. At the league’s request, the city has done its best to scrub the area of non-N.F.L.-sanctioned advertisements. Emanuel is aware that whatever money is spent on food and lodging by visitors — some economists have questioned whether the city will receive much of an economic boost this weekend — the real payoff could be the national exposure for Chicago and the cachet that comes with an association with the N.F.L. Last year, a record 45.7 million viewers watched some or all of the three-day draft on the NFL Network and ESPN, according to the Nielsen Company. Welsh said that Chicago had already netted $29 million in earned media exposure before the draft even started. When the N.F.L. began scouting Chicago as a potential site for the draft, the city offered other sites, including the Chicago Theater and the Frank Gehry-designed band shell in Millennium Park. But the 3,900-seat Auditorium Theater, next to Grant Park, won out. (Radio City has about 6,000 seats.) Designed by Dankmar Adler and Louis Sullivan and opened in 1889 when much of Grant Park was still swampland, it is owned by Roosevelt University. The theater’s usual tenant, the Joffrey Ballet, has temporarily relocated, allowing the N.F.L. to move in. Inside the auditorium on Tuesday, C. J. Dillon, the theater’s chief operating officer, pointed to where television commentators will sit, right below one of Sullivan’s classic arches. A $20 million renovation in 2000 helped modernize the building, and bandwidth has been doubled in recent months to accommodate the N.F.L., Dillon added.Quoting the architect and urban designer Daniel Burnham, Dillon said: “ ‘Make no little plans.’ That’s the city’s motto, and that’s what we’ve done.”The top quarterback prospects Jameis Winston and Marcus Mariota are staying home, but 26 other prospects will be in town, and Chicago expects 100,000 fans for the draft. Welsh said that if Chicago hit the mark, a gentlemen’s bet would lead to some N.F.L. officials taking the Polar Plunge, a dip in Lake Michigan to raise money for charity, next winter.The last time the draft was here came not long after the Beatles made their first trip to the United States. There was no time limit on picks then, and the draft lasted 20 rounds. A Chicago Tribune headline after one day of the draft blared, “N.F.L. Takes 14 Hours for Two Rounds!” It will certainly be shorter this time, perhaps the draft’s only reductions in the last five decades. Goodell has been coy about where the N.F.L. will hold the 2016 draft, but Emanuel hopes his city does not wait another half-century to get it back.“We’re hoping when the N.F.L. leaves, they’re wondering why they didn’t bring this thing here sooner,” he said. “We want them to be repeat customers.”Advertisement