AdvertisementSupported byYankees 4, Rays 2By Zach SchonbrunIt was around 2 p.m. Tuesday, several hours before the Yankees took the field against the Tampa Bay Rays, when an ominous sign emerged from the Yankees’ clubhouse. There stood Masahiro Tanaka, pointing toward his right wrist.He was complaining of tenderness, and immediately alarm bells must have sounded in and around the organization. The prized right arm of Tanaka, the team’s ace, has been the source of sublime delight and commensurate consternation since last July, when he was sent to the disabled list with a partly torn ulnar collateral ligament after starting his Yankees career with a 12-4 record.That injury typically requires Tommy John surgery to repair, and about a year to rehabilitate, but Tanaka pressed to avoid that route. The Yankees, and three doctors, ultimately agreed with him.He arrived at spring training ostensibly healthy and pitched the first four starts of the season without complaint. But on Tuesday night, the Yankees placed Tanaka on the 15-day disabled list after magnetic resonance imaging tests revealed right wrist tendinitis and a slight strain in his forearm. There was no discernible change in the condition of his elbow ligament, according to General Manager Brian Cashman, who delivered the news in the middle of the Yankees’ 4-2 win at Yankee Stadium.Cashman estimated that the Yankees would miss Tanaka for at least a month, and that is a conservative estimate. It could be seven to 10 days until the right-handed Tanaka even begins throwing again. Rehabilitation starts would follow, and the Yankees will proceed cautiously.“We want to make sure this doesn’t lead to the more horrific problems that we’re trying to avoid,” Cashman said.Multiple times, Cashman stressed that the strain in Tanaka’s forearm was small. Yet it was there, and the connectivity of ligaments, tendons and muscles in a pitcher’s arm is a tricky matter. Manager Joe Girardi acknowledged that this latest injury would prompt fans and analysts to speculate whether it was related to Tanaka’s delicate elbow.“No one knows,” Girardi said.Asked whether he regretted not sending Tanaka to surgery to repair his elbow last summer — with a strong chance of ensuring that the arm would be fixed for good — Cashman refused to go that far.“Absolutely no regret,” Cashman said. “We’re following the medical directives.”Already, the Yankees had pushed back Tanaka’s scheduled start for Tuesday to allow him an additional day of rest. Chase Whitley was called up from Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre to take the mound, and he held the Rays to six hits and one run in five innings.Brian McCann continued to swing the bat well, driving in a total of three runs with doubles in the first and the fifth innings. Brett Gardner also added an R.B.I.The Yankees have won seven of their last eight, surging to the front of the American League East in this early stage of the season. Michael Pineda will pitch Wednesday, on regular rest, and the team’s truer strength lies in its bullpen, which has been among the best in baseball this month. McCann expressed confidence that the loss of Tanaka would not devastate the team.“We have deep arms,” McCann said. “We’ve got guys that can step up and fill that role.” But Tanaka’s health from here on out becomes an even more pressing subplot. Speaking through an interpreter outside the Yankees’ clubhouse during Tuesday’s game, Tanaka tried to minimize the injury.“Nothing really big came out of the M.R.I.,” Tanaka said. “I feel that I can come back strong.”He said he first noticed the soreness on Monday, after throwing a bullpen session the day before. He ignored it. But Tuesday morning, the tenderness was still there, and the sensation was stronger, so he took his concern to Steve Donohue, the Yankees’ trainer.The pain was only in the wrist, Tanaka said.“I don’t think this has anything to do with my elbow,” he said.Cashman did not want to speculate how the injury could have occurred. Larry Rothschild, the pitching coach, reported that Tanaka had looked “dynamite” in his bullpen session Sunday, and Cashman suggested that perhaps the torque of Tanaka’s split-finger fastball could have generated the tendinitis. But Tanaka did not say anything until Tuesday.The possibility was raised that maybe Tanaka would need to adjust how he pitches the stress-inducing splitter he favors to avoid further arm damage. But Girardi did not want to entertain that notion.“That’s what made him successful,” Girardi said.For the next month, the Yankees will have to find ways to be successful without him.Advertisement