AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensGREENBURGH, N.Y. — When Ryan McDonagh was named the captain of the Rangers in October, his goal was to remain unchanged as a player, a person and a leader in the dressing room.A stalwart, two-way defenseman from St. Paul, McDonagh had a breakthrough season during the club’s run to the Stanley Cup finals last spring. Many believed it was merely a formality that McDonagh would succeed Ryan Callahan, who was traded last season. Sure enough, on Oct. 6, McDonagh was given the C.But McDonagh acknowledged he was not initially equipped to deal with the changes in his role. “At times, in the beginning of the season, you’re trying to find your game and get your timing right,” McDonagh, 25, said. “Mentally, I wasn’t quite focused the way I needed to going into the game.”It is no coincidence, though, that as McDonagh grew into his captaincy, the Rangers transformed from Eastern Conference also-ran to Presidents’ Trophy winner. “It helps being able to feel like myself mentally, and just focused on the right mind frame going to a game and what I need to do to help this team win,” McDonagh said. “It’s obviously transpiring on the ice with the guys. Everybody is feeling good about their roles.”McDonagh and Dan Girardi, his defensive partner, neutralized the Penguins’ Sidney Crosby during a first-round series against Pittsburgh. In the next round, which begins Thursday, McDonagh will be tasked with shutting down the Washington Capitals’ superstar captain, Alex Ovechkin, who led the N.H.L. in goals with 53.“You have to take ice away from him, try to force him to his backhand,” McDonagh said. “He’s a world-class talent. The strength of their team is their size up front, and they have skating ability.”Although McDonagh has seen growth and change in himself, those close to him find him the same. Among them is Rangers center Derek Stepan, who played with McDonagh at the University of Wisconsin during the 2009-10 college season.“When he was named captain, his biggest thing was he didn’t want to change,” said Stepan, who also grew up in the Twin Cities area. “I think he’s done a good job of not changing who he is. As a captain, he’s stepped up and has made some big-time adjustments to his game.”Stepan has always known McDonagh as a shutdown defenseman, the kind of blueliner whose contributions are unheralded to the casual observer. But McDonagh’s offensive game has grown in leaps, particularly over the last two seasons under Coach Alain Vigneault. Despite missing 11 games with a separated shoulder, McDonagh led Rangers defensemen in points with 33. He is tied for the team lead with 4 points in the playoffs, including the winning goal in Game 1 against the Penguins. “Without the puck, he’s always been, hands down, one of the best in the league,” Stepan said. “And this year, with the puck, he’s grown even better than I expected he could, and he’s going to grow even more with the puck.”McDonagh leads by example, letting his on-ice performances do much of the talking. If a pep talk needs to be given, he defers to some of the team’s outspoken veterans like Martin St. Louis, an alternate captain, or Dan Boyle.“Looking around the room at guys who are former captains of their team, and you’re trying not to step on anyone’s toes, or kind of do too much in the room,” McDonagh said Monday. “They are leaders within themselves. Obviously, Marty is wearing a letter, and Boyler, he doesn’t need to wear a letter to be a leader.”Defenseman Chris Summers, in his first season with the Rangers, noted McDonagh’s willingness to help ease his transition after he arrived in a trade from the Arizona Coyotes in March. McDonagh happened to be one of the few players he knew on the Rangers’ roster. The two played head to head in college, with McDonagh’s Badgers squaring off against Summers’s Michigan team.“I think the biggest thing for any player is just seeing a guy go out of his way during the course of his day and the course of his daily routine,” Summers said. “It wasn’t like a ‘Hey, how’s it going,’ then walk away. He came over, sat down: ‘What’s going on? How’s everything going?’ It’s little things like that, most guys around the league have been through it, so to have somebody take the time out of his day to just give you the few extra seconds means a lot.”Watching closely for the first time, Summers marveled at McDonagh’s ability to stay calm against the world’s best players.“You see him do it against college players, but to see him do it against Ovechkin or Sidney Crosby, that’s pretty impressive,” said Summers, noting that Crosby did not score with McDonagh on the ice in their five-game series. Advertisement