AdvertisementSupported byMarlins 4, Mets 3By Tim RohanMIAMI — Carlos Torres took the mound for the Mets in the eighth inning Tuesday with the score tied and the margin for error particularly thin.The Mets had made a thrilling comeback Monday, erased a three-run deficit in the seventh Tuesday and had another comeback thwarted in the eighth inning. They were running out of energy and luck, it seemed, and now Torres could not find his command.He walked the first Marlin he faced, Martin Prado, on five pitches. He walked the third batter, Marcell Ozuna, on four pitches. Not issuing walks had been a tenet of the Mets’ early season success. Torres threw a fastball down to Michael Morse, and Morse singled in the go-ahead run.The Mets did not have another comeback in them. They went down quietly in the ninth and lost, 4-3, their third defeat in five games.“Those first two walks cost us big,” Torres said, his eyes red.It was a game the Mets could have won, which was a testament to Rafael Montero, who had been called on to make a spot start.Montero was once considered a top prospect. His coaches raved about his perfect mechanics, the way he pounded the strike zone. He rose through the organization so quickly the Mets did not have time to teach him English.Last season, when Montero was first called up, though, he looked timid — nervous almost — nibbling around the edge of the plate. The Mets demoted him, and it soon became clear that he might be lost in the shuffle. Noah Syndergaard and Steven Matz, two prospects who had higher ceilings, seemed poised to surpass him.The Mets gave Montero a chance to compete for the fifth starter’s spot in the spring, and he pitched well but ultimately lost out to Dillon Gee.Montero started the season in the bullpen, an unfamiliar role, and again looked timid. In an appearance against the Atlanta Braves, he threw 40 pitches — 36 fastballs and four intentional balls — and allowed the winning runs. He seemed to have trust issues with his other pitches.He was making this start only because the Mets wanted to temporarily go to a six-man rotation. The idea was to rest Matt Harvey and Jacob deGrom, who have both had Tommy John surgery, and also Bartolo Colon, who is 41.But no matter what the Mets said, it was speculated that this was an audition for Montero to take Gee’s job. Manager Terry Collins appeared agitated when he had to address the topic Monday. He insisted he had no ulterior motive.Montero had a perfect game going for the first three innings, striking out five. He looked poised, mixing in his off-speed pitches and keeping the ball low, as if there were a limbo stick across the plate.Each time Montero needed a strike, he seemed to return to his trusty fastball. He stranded one runner in the fourth and two more in the fifth.But in the sixth, his fastball seemed to lack life.Dee Gordon hit one for a leadoff single and scampered into second when Curtis Granderson bobbled the ball. Prado bunted Gordon to third. Stanton then singled a fastball to left field, scoring Gordon.Montero did not last the inning. He left after five and two-thirds and was eventually charged with three earned runs. Afterward, he was optioned back to Class AAA Las Vegas but seemed cheery in the clubhouse.“He’s going to go down as happy as always,” said his translator, Ricky Bones, the bullpen coach.The Mets will use a six-man rotation again, perhaps multiple times, and Montero will surely be given consideration. But so will Syndergaard and Matz.“That will be up to them,” Collins said.Gee had pitched one of his best games in recent memory on Monday. But he left in the eighth inning trailing, 1-0, only to watch Daniel Murphy hit a go-ahead home run in the ninth.The Mets politely gave Montero similar treatment.In the seventh, three of their first four batters singled. Juan Lagares then hit a bases-clearing double, tying the score.In the eighth, Murphy made another clutch hit, hustling for a leadoff double.But he was thrown out at third when Ruben Tejada made a poor bunt back to the pitcher. The Mets did not get another hit the rest of the game.Advertisement