
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
APRIL 28, 2015
Every game in the history of Major League Baseball has been open to fans. That is what the league said on Tuesday, anyway, and it stands to reason. Baseball is a business, and every business needs paying customers.On Wednesday in Baltimore, that will change. The rioting in the city, which followed the death of a 25-year-old man who was severely injured in police custody, prompted the postponement of the first two games of the Orioles’ series with the Chicago White Sox at Camden Yards this week, and the third game will be played at 2 p.m. Wednesday — with no fans admitted.Baseball’s commissioner, Rob Manfred, was in Baltimore on Monday and will be watching closely from afar.“When we ask a club to do something that hasn’t been done before, particularly given that we were involved in the decision making, we’re going to pay very close attention,” Manfred said.AdvertisementThe other games of the series will be made up in a doubleheader in Baltimore on May 28. The Orioles’ three-game series with the Tampa Bay Rays this weekend has been moved to Tropicana Field in St. Petersburg, Fla. The Orioles will be considered the home team.AdvertisementStarter Chris Archer, the Rays’ union representative, said it would be strange to start a game at his home park and not pitch until the bottom of the first inning. But he emphasized to Tony Clark, the executive director of the players’ association, that the team did not want to be in Baltimore this weekend.“As soon as we saw how severe it was getting there, I texted Tony Clark and said, ‘Hey, we have some guys that were concerned for their safety,’ maybe not for them personally, but wives and children, traveling separately,” Archer said. “There’s no way we were going to allow them to come on the trip alone. That’s a place where we walk to the field, and it’s in the heart of downtown. They said everything was moving downtown.”Manfred said that Peter Angelos, the Orioles’ owner, would take no chances. The schedule changes will cost the Orioles in gate receipts, but Manfred said the decision-making process went smoothly between the league and the teams involved.“Mr. Angelos, from the first minute of the very first conversation we had last night, put the safety and well-being of the Baltimore fans above any other consideration, competitive or monetary,” Manfred said.Two nearby major league stadiums, in Washington and Philadelphia, are not hosting games on Wednesday, and there are several precedents in recent history for neutral-site games. But the logistics of shifting to a different site on such short notice made that option unappealing.In 1992, when Los Angeles erupted in violence after the verdict in the Rodney King trial, the Dodgers postponed games against Philadelphia and Montreal. But those teams returned to Los Angeles later in the season and made up the games then. The White Sox do not return to Baltimore, and rescheduling an entire three-game series was problematic.So the teams will play before no fans for an afternoon, like an instructional league game for newly drafted players on a sweltering back field in Florida. The closest major league equivalent, said the Yankees’ Mark Teixeira, might be Tropicana Field, especially before the Rays became competitive.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Did you ever go to a Rangers-Rays game between 2003 and 2005?” Teixeira said. “I’ve played in games with two or three thousand fans; that’s a little weird. But literally nobody in the stands? I’ve never had that. That’s got to be different.”AdvertisementTeixeira, a Maryland native, said his uncle is a Catholic priest in Baltimore whose church is being protected by the National Guard. Ken Singleton, a Yankees broadcaster, starred for the Orioles in the 1970s and ’80s, and has lived outside Baltimore ever since.“The area I live is out in the country; it’s nice and quiet,” Singleton said. “I ride in a pickup truck, ride back roads. I will say this: The city itself has made great strides. When I first played in Baltimore, nobody ever went downtown. All the players lived in the suburbs. Then the Inner Harbor came along.”The Inner Harbor, with tourist-friendly hotels and restaurants — and Camden Yards as the centerpiece — is all many fans ever see of Baltimore. The images of the riots, Singleton said, could linger for a long time and affect businesses, tourism and the Orioles. He said he hoped the riots would not harm the city’s reputation.“This is not unique to Baltimore, or Ferguson, or the situation in South Carolina not too long ago,” Singleton said. “This is not unique to any one city.”Singleton was an Expos broadcaster in 1992, and remembers the sense of dread he felt while watching Los Angeles burn, knowing his team was due in town next. He did not remember that the games were postponed.“That’s one of those things you want to forget,” Singleton said.The atmosphere will most likely be somber and surreal at Camden Yards on Wednesday, given the circumstances. But it will also be interesting, and apparently unprecedented for the major leagues, though not for sports in general. Playing before no fans sometimes happens in European soccer or basketball, often as punishment for fan misbehavior.It would also fulfill a dream of players who would rather not deal with booing, cheering or crowd noise of any kind.“I wish they’d shut the gates,” the former slugger Dick Allen once said, “and let us play ball with no press and no fans.”The news media will be there on Wednesday, but there will be virtually nobody else without a direct connection to the game on the field. Even if the streets outside are peaceful, the doors will be locked to fans.Advertisement“You hope everything will be fine tomorrow,” Manfred said. “But the situation was just too fluid to take that risk.”A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Reacting to Rioting, M.L.B. and Teams Put Safety First.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »