AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe Detroit Lions were in big trouble before Matthew Stafford and Calvin Johnson rekindled their connection.It was just like old times.Stafford threw one of four touchdown passes to Johnson and found the star receiver on a 57-yard play that set up Matt Prater’s 27-yard field goal with 2 minutes 29 seconds left in overtime, helping the Lions beat the visiting Chicago Bears, 37-34, on Sunday for their first win of the season.“It’s my job to get him the ball, and I probably wasn’t doing a good enough job of that over the first five games,” Stafford said.The Lions (1-5) leaned on Stafford’s arm and Johnson’s ability to earn their first victory since Dec. 21 at Chicago. They were the N.F.L.’s only team without a victory this season.It helped that Stafford bounced back from being benched for the first time in his career.“When his back is against the wall, he comes out firing,” Johnson said.Johnson took advantage of the offensive coordinator Joe Lombardi’s game plan. Lombardi, who called plays from the coaches’ box for the first time this year, opted for more deep passes.“We really put some emphasis on that this week,” Johnson said.Stafford finished 27 of 42 for a season-high 405 yards and an interception. Johnson had six receptions for 166 yards — doubling his season high — and scored for the first time since Week 2. It was his 45th career game with at least 100 yards receiving, breaking a fourth-place tie with the Hall of Famer Jerry Rice.The Bears (2-4) had won consecutive games on go-ahead scores in the final minute of regulation for first time since 1962, and they had chances for another comeback win. They wasted a opportunities inside the Detroit 20, settling for field goals and throwing an interception.“We’ve got to get better in the red zone,” quarterback Jay Cutler said.Lions Coach Jim Caldwell decided on a 32-yard field goal with 2:46 left in regulation instead of going for it on fourth-and-4 from the Bears’ 13, cutting Chicago’s lead to 31-27. The drive was extended with a fake punt when Isa Abdul-Quddus took a direct snap and ran for 30 yards to convert a fourth-and-2 from the Detroit 32.Caldwell put faith in his defense and it delivered, holding Chicago to a three-and-out possession and getting the ball back at the Detroit 34 with 2:23 left, with no timeouts.Stafford threw a go-ahead 6-yard touchdown pass to a leaping Johnson in the end zone with 21 seconds left after a penalty, making it 34-31. Pernell McPhee was called for roughing the passer, hitting Stafford low when he threw an incomplete pass on third-and-12 from the Bears’ 12.Chicago’s Robbie Gould kicked a 29-yard field goal as time expired in regulation, tying the score. It was set up by Darius Slay being called for pass interference after Cutler’s 25- and 24-yard passes to Alshon Jeffery.After turning the ball over on a punt return in the first half, the Lions did it again in the second, and Cutler took advantage, with Detroit leading, 24-16. Cutlet threw an 11-yard touchdown pass to Jeffery, and the Bears were down by a point. Stafford made an errant pass from his 18 that was picked off by linebacker Jonathan Anderson to set up Matt Forte’s 2-yard score midway through the fourth quarter. Forte then caught a 2-point conversion to put Chicago up, 31-24.Cutler finished 26 of 41 for a season-high 353 yards, with a touchdown and an interception. He had three of his top targets — Jeffery, Eddie Royal and Martellus Bennett — in the lineup after each of them was listed as questionable because of injuries. Advertisement