
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 18, 2015
Noah Syndergaard and Jake Arrieta might have had many duels in the American League East, at Rogers Centre in Toronto and Camden Yards in Baltimore, if not for a baseball migration. Both pitchers, who faced each other at Citi Field on Sunday, escaped before reaching their potential — bound, eventually, for this National League Championship Series.Syndergaard started Game 2 against the Arrieta and the Chicago Cubs. Their acquisitions were critical moves for their teams, who traded veteran pitchers for younger versions with dynamic stuff and years of club control.The Mets got Syndergaard and catcher Travis d’Arnaud, neither of whom had played in the majors, from the Blue Jays in the December 2012 trade for R. A. Dickey, who had just won the N.L. Cy Young Award. The next July, the Cubs sent starter Scott Feldman to the Orioles in a deal for Arrieta, whose career earned run average was 5.46.“I think probably every scout that’s ever gone to see him has put a line in his report like, ‘If it all comes together, this could be a top-of-the-rotation guy,’ ” said Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president for baseball operations, who also got reliever Pedro Strop in the trade.Advertisement“That was in all our reports, and back to college. I think that’s the standard based on his stuff, the way his arm works and how live it is. But I can’t sit here and say we thought he was going to become an ace with us. He was a high-ceiling guy who we thought cried out for a change of scenery.”AdvertisementArrieta went 22-6 with a 1.77 E.R.A. this season. He threw a no-hitter in August and a shutout in the wild-card game, and he entered Sunday’s start having lost once in the last four months.His improvement comes partly from mechanical changes, with the Cubs moving Arrieta, a right-hander, closer to the third-base side of the rubber and encouraging his crossfire delivery. But it did not happen immediately. Arrieta averaged fewer than five innings in his seven starts for the Cubs’ Class AAA affiliate after the trade.“It wasn’t without struggles,” said the Cubs’ pitching coach, Chris Bosio. “His first five or six minor league starts were horrible. But once we got him up here, we started working on sequences, the cans and can’ts of the pitching world. We worked on his strengths, tried to tweak the weaknesses, and once he started getting on a roll, we started seeing glimpses.”After a shoulder problem bothered Arrieta in spring training 2014, he recovered to go 10-5 with a 2.53 E.R.A. in 25 starts, overpowering hitters with a dazzling arsenal that included a sharp curveball and a hard slider that can act as a cutter. The Cubs had the makings of an ace.“His stuff got better and better and better,” Bosio said, “and with that came confidence in knowing he can get anybody out with any pitch, which is kind of our mantra: ‘Have the freedom to throw whatever you guys want; if you guys believe in it, throw it.’ And he was able to be himself.”Arrieta had pitched at Texas Christian and was 27 when Baltimore traded him in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to make the playoffs.Syndergaard was only 20 when Toronto traded him, two years after taking him from a Texas high school with the 38th overall pick in the draft.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dickey, who helped the Blue Jays win the A.L. East this season, won 28 games combined in 2013 and ’14 while Syndergaard rose through the Mets’ farm system. Syndergaard had not pitched above low Class A before the trade.Advertisement“When I first saw Syndergaard throw, you see those great big guys and they’ve got good arms; now you want to know if they can corral it,” Manager Terry Collins said of Syndergaard, who is 6 feet 6 inches. “Is this guy just going to be a power arm? Is he going to be able to command his stuff? A lot of times with those big, tall guys, there’s a lot of moving parts.”In that context, Collins said, he has been most impressed by Syndergaard’s exceptional control — just 1.9 walks per nine innings as a rookie this season, when he was 9-7 with a 3.24 E.R.A.D’Arnaud, Collins said, earned his respect by how committed he was to learning the Mets’ pitchers, even at the expense of his offense. D’Arnaud was in Class AAA at the time of the trade, and the Mets sent him back there in mid-May 2014, with a .199 career average. He has taken off since returning, weathering injuries this season to his hand and elbow.“To see him kind of get hurt this year, especially after he got off to a good start, you hate to see that because you know how dangerous he is offensively, especially for a catcher,” third baseman David Wright said.“Usually you have those guys behind the plate and they’re mediocre offensively. But he’s a middle-of-the-order-type hitter that can drive the ball and drive runs in and has a tremendous amount of power.”D’Arnaud showed that in Game 1, launching a drive that bounced off the top of the Home Run Apple submerged behind the center-field wall. When the Mets took batting practice before Game 2, the apple had a giant white bandage where the ball struck, a comic and subtle tribute to a player, and a deal, with lasting impact.A version of this article appears in print on October 19, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: After Trades, Pitchers Find Their Way and Cross Paths.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »