By CHARLES V. BAGLI and ANDREW DASAPRIL 28, 2015
Over the past four years, New York City’s $100 million professional soccer club has bounced from a pier on the Hudson River to a public park in Queens to a factory site in the South Bronx in its relentless search for a permanent home.This being New York, where the real estate market is especially frenetic, team officials for New York City F.C. have looked into two dozen locations. But the latest spot is right back where the club started in 2011: Manhattan.New York City F. C., owned jointly by royalty from the United Arab Emirates and the Yankees, is considering a move to Columbia University’s Baker Athletics Complex, at the northern tip of Manhattan. N.Y.C.F.C. is playing its inaugural season at Yankee Stadium — an imperfect solution for both teams that will continue until a new stadium is built.The proposal is to build a new, larger stadium that could be used by the soccer team and Columbia’s football team.AdvertisementThe move to the already sports crowded complex is in an exploratory stage, and no commitments have been made. But club executives, who continue to look at other sites, said that if it was feasible and the sides could come to terms, it might be the best solution.Advertisement“New York City F. C. is looking at sites all over New York City,” said Risa Heller, a spokeswoman for the team. “We are working with the de Blasio administration to find a world-class site for a soccer-specific stadium.”Columbia had no comment on the talks, said Victoria Benitez, a spokeswoman.While Major League Soccer has had a club in the New York area since 1996, the league had long wanted to establish a franchise in New York City itself, a potentially lucrative market ripe for a team of its own, executives say.In 2011, even though it had yet to establish a second club in the New York region, the league considered building a 25,000-seat stadium on a 14.5-acre pier at the west end of Houston Street in Manhattan.Officials said they would rebuild the dilapidated pier and allow youth soccer teams to use the facilities. But the project, which sits in Hudson River Park, ran into local opposition.Two years later, officials were in discussions with Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg about building a soccer stadium on 10 acres in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens, where a professional tennis complex and a baseball stadium already occupied land.Promises to spend $90 million to replace and upgrade youth soccer fields at Flushing Meadows did little to quell opposition there. That project was also hampered by the owners of the Mets, who demanded a prohibitively high rent for use of parking lots at Citi Field.So the soccer league and the club were off to the Bronx, just south of Yankee Stadium. They obtained an option to buy a factory, where they planned to build a stadium. The factory, in turn, would be moved to a new building. But the option expired before the team could craft a deal with Mayor Bill de Blasio, Mr. Bloomberg’s successor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They also looked at the Aqueduct racetrack in Queens.By then, M.L.S. had awarded the second New York team to a partnership of the Yankees and an investment group led by Sheik Mansour bin Zayed al-Nahyan, which already owned the Manchester City Football Club of England’s Premier League.AdvertisementSheik Mansour, a member of the royal family of Abu Dhabi, is intent on establishing a global soccer brand. In recent years, City Football Group has spent hundreds of millions of dollars to export the City brand around the globe. It also controls Melbourne City of Australia’s A-League.At first sight, the 23-acre Columbia University complex might not look like a suitable candidate.The site’s sloping land, overlooking Spuyten Duyvil Creek, is already crammed with facilities for football, soccer, softball, field hockey and lacrosse. There are also a gymnasium, a tennis center, a boating center and a building housing athletic offices.The plan, according to an executive briefed by the soccer club, would be to demolish the 17,000-seat Robert K. Kraft Field at Lawrence A. Wien Stadium and replace it with a 25,000-seat stadium that could be used by New York City F.C. and Columbia’s Lions. The new stadium could cost $400 million.The franchise would also spend as much as $30 million to rehabilitate the surrounding fields for Columbia.Although the complex sits in the quiet Inwood neighborhood, there are subway stops for the A line and the No. 1 train within a 10-minute walk. The Marble Hill Metro-North Railroad station is also 10 minutes away. Parking, however, could be tight.The sharing arrangement with a college would not be unusual in M.L.S. The Houston Dynamo share their stadium with Texas Southern University’s football team, and the Portland Timbers do the same with Portland State. The San Jose Earthquakes played at Santa Clara University’s Buck Shaw Stadium from 2008 to 2014 before moving into their own soccer-specific stadium in San Jose this year.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: City F.C. Is Considering Move to Columbia Complex.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.