By BEN SHPIGELOCT. 1, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — After landing at Heathrow Airport early Friday morning, the New York Jets will disembark and make a left toward customs, where six lines will be devoted to their delegation of 220 people. To safeguard against any mishaps later, passports will be collected after everyone clears, and then a brigade of Virgin Atlantic representatives will escort the Jets to seven buses waiting outside.This will be the procedure because Aaron Degerness, the Jets’ senior manager of team operations, walked this route in June, when he made his second scouting trip to London in advance of their game Sunday against the Miami Dolphins at Wembley Stadium.Degerness learned which gate the plane would pull into, which door the team would exit and where the jet bridge would deposit the group. He also learned that when the Jets flew home, their walkway would meander past duty-free shops, and that worries him, if only a little.“It’s hard to tell the guys: ‘Don’t stop. Just keep walking,’ ” Degerness said. “Those are the things that keep us up at night — that we get through security, someone stops at duty free, and we leave Ryan Fitzpatrick because we didn’t know he wasn’t there.”AdvertisementIn that unlikely event, the Jets have a solution: As each player boards the plane, a team official will cross off the player’s name with a highlighter.AdvertisementThe Jets learned last November that they would be playing in London, and they have spent the past 11 months planning for about 65 hours overseas, an undertaking that Degerness said involved about 10 times the work that preparing to play at Miami would have required.If the Jets were playing in South Florida, for instance, they would not have needed to pack more than 5,000 items — ranging from cereal and extension cords to gauze pads and wrist bands — onto a ship containing supplies for all six N.F.L. teams playing in London this season.They would not have needed to list the value and country of origin for the contents in every trunk or bag. Or find an industrial launderer to pick up soiled practice clothing at one location and deliver it clean to another. Or fly in the chef at their London hotel to observe how food is cooked and served at team headquarters.Or order 350 rolls of toilet paper to replace the thinner version used in England.“Some may say that’s a little over the top or whatnot, but it didn’t really cost that much, so why not?” Degerness said. “We’re basically trying to replicate everything that we’re doing here over there.”That planning began soon after the game was announced. The process included photographing Wembley Stadium and calling on a sleep specialist who advised players how to minimize jet lag.From the outset, Clay Hampton, the senior director of team operations, started soliciting advice from counterparts with teams that had played in London. A valuable resource was Hamzah Ahmad of the Jacksonville Jaguars, who on Oct. 25 will play at Wembley for a third consecutive season.In a telephone interview, Ahmad, the Jaguars’ director of football logistics and facilities, said that in their initial conversations, Hampton had asked him to consider: “What are the basic things that we don’t think about on a day-to-day basis? That’s what you plan for.”
            Here’s a list of the inventory the New York Jets had shipped to London for their game against the Miami Dolphins on Sunday:        