By NAILA-JEAN MEYERSAPRIL 28, 2015
A Rangers-Capitals playoff matchup has become a rite of spring in recent years. Their second-round N.H.L. playoff series, which begins Thursday, will be the teams’ fifth postseason meeting in seven years. Three of the four previous series have gone seven games. In the regular season, the Rangers had a 3-1 record against the Capitals, including a 4-2 victory in the season finale. Here is a look at the recent postseason history of the Rangers and the Capitals.2013: RANGERS WIN, 4-3, IN THE FIRST ROUNDIn the lockout-shortened season, the third-seeded Capitals were ahead of the sixth-seeded Rangers, two games to none and three games to two. But goalie Henrik Lundqvist had shutouts in Games 6 and 7 as the Rangers won a Game 7 on the road for the first time in franchise history. The Rangers held the Capitals star Alex Ovechkin, who led the N.H.L. in goals and won the Hart Trophy as the league’s most valuable player, to one goal in the series.2012: RANGERS WIN, 4-3,  IN THE SECOND ROUNDMichael Del Zotto scored the game-winning goal in the third period of Game 7 as the Rangers advanced to the Eastern Conference finals for the first time since 1997. The Rangers were the top seed in the East, but were pushed to a seventh game in each of the first two rounds. They lost to the Devils in the conference finals in six games.The series against the Capitals was highlighted by a triple-overtime victory in Game 3 and an overtime win in Game 5, after Brad Richards tied the score in the final seconds of regulation.2011: CAPITALS WIN, 4-1,  IN THE FIRST ROUNDThe Rangers made the playoffs on the final day of the regular season, then had to face the top-seeded Capitals. The turning point of the series was Game 4. The Rangers trailed in the series, two games to one, but led the game by 3-0 after two periods at the Garden. The Capitals scored twice in the first four minutes of the third, then tied the game with about eight minutes left. Jason Chimera’s goal on a fluky play in the second overtime gave Washington the win.AdvertisementThe Rangers — built on grit, not scoring prowess — could not recover. They ended up scoring only eight goals in the series.2009: CAPITALS WIN, 4-3, IN THE FIRST ROUNDSergei Fedorov, then 39, scored the winning goal with 4 minutes 59 seconds left in Game 7 as the second-seeded Capitals became the first team in 28 series to rally from a 3-1 series deficit. The Rangers, the No. 7 seed, blew a 3-1 series lead for the first time in franchise history.Alexander Semin — not Ovechkin — led Washington with five goals. Goalie Semyon Varlamov, who turned 21 during the series, took over for the veteran Jose Theodore after Game 1, even though he had only six games of N.H.L. experience.AdvertisementThe series’ most memorable moment did not happen on the ice. Rangers Coach John Tortorella had a verbal confrontation with a fan behind the bench during Game 5 in Washington, then squirted a fan with water and threw a water bottle over the glass that struck another fan. Tortorella was suspended for Game 6.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: History Says It Could Be Long Series as Rangers and Capitals Meet Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.