AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Before Todd Bowles presided over his first practice as Jets coach, a session held in T-shirts and shorts that later prompted him to quip that the team could probably function in a touch-football league, Darrelle Revis harked back to the most recent successful era in franchise history. In his first stint with the Jets, Revis starred as a shutdown cornerback for the defensive-minded teams that reached the A.F.C. title game in consecutive seasons. Now that he is back, after signing a five-year deal as a free agent, Revis said Tuesday that the defense could be just as good as — if not better than — the formidable units of 2009 and 2010.“We’re very strong in the secondary, we’re very strong at linebacker, and we’re definitely very strong at the D-line position,” Revis said at the voluntary veteran minicamp. “The sky’s the limit.”The secondary is very strong because of Revis, whose ability to dominate in man-to-man coverage affords Bowles opportunities to deploy creative blitzing schemes that he so adores. The centerpiece of the team’s off-season makeover, Revis rejoined the team that drafted him — that he says he never wanted to leave — March 10, agreeing to a free-agent deal that pays him a guaranteed $39 million.Woody Johnson, the owner of the Jets, coveted him so much that he made the mistake of saying so while Revis was still under contract to the New England Patriots. The gaffe violated the N.F.L.’s anti-tampering policy, the league announced Tuesday, and cost the Jets $100,000.Johnson’s remark, which came in response to a question posed at a news conference addressing the firings of John Idzik and Rex Ryan, explained why the Jets chose not to pursue Revis when he was a free agent. Revis’s representatives approached the Jets last off-season about a potential reunion, but the team declined.It was a glib comment by Johnson, and the same day he made it he called the Patriots’ owner, Robert K. Kraft, to apologize. New England went on to file tampering charges anyway, and the Jets, peeved, did the same when Kraft told reporters at the league meetings in March that he wanted to keep Revis. The Patriots will not be fined.Straddling both sides of the rivalry, Revis accompanied the Super Bowl champion Patriots’ contingent to the White House last week. He called his time under Bill Belichick a “great learning experience,” and said he was a better player — far better than he was earlier in his career — for it.“I’m way more intelligent at the game, at the position,” said Revis, who turns 30 in July. He added, “I’ve seen the game a different way.” Bowles, a former N.F.L. safety, is still forming his on-field impressions of Revis. But he said Revis’s value extended beyond his man-to-man coverage, from his tackling to his instincts to his work ethic. “You come in this league on your physical ability and you stay in this league off your mental ability,” Bowles said. “There’s a point in this league where your mental catches up to your physical. That makes you a prime player. And then there’s a point where your physical ability declines, which makes you smart mentally, which grabs you a couple more years. I still feel he’s in his prime.”FRESH LOOK FOR SPRING Ryan Fitzpatrick often sports a beard so impressive that it inspires nicknames like “the Amish Rifle” and “the Lorax,” after the Dr. Seuss character with bushy facial hair. He is now clean-shaven, but by the time he is cleared to face contact again, the beard should be in full bloom. “This was just like a little spring cleaning,” Fitzpatrick said. “It’ll be back, don’t worry.” Fitzpatrick, acquired from the Texans last month to compete for the starting quarterback job, is still recovering from a broken left leg he sustained Dec. 14. He took part in some passing drills Tuesday, but said he expected to be healthy for training camp.Being traded upended his personal life — his family remains in Houston — but Fitzpatrick said he was excited to join the Jets for one prevailing reason: his familiarity with the offensive coordinator Chan Gailey, his head coach from 2010 to 2012 in Buffalo, where Fitzpatrick compiled the best seasons of his career. “He does a great job of utilizing a team’s strengths and putting them in the best possible situation to win,” Fitzpatrick said. “And that sounds funny because you would think everybody does that. But he’s got a knack for finding ways to get your players the ball.” Advertisement