AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonThe N.F.L.’s league office will drop its tax-exempt status, which is decades old, in response to critics, including some members of Congress, who say that the government is losing millions of dollars in potential revenue.As a result, the league will no longer have to publicly disclose its tax returns, which include the salaries of its top executives, including Commissioner Roger Goodell. Major League Baseball took a similar step several years ago. The league offices of the N.H.L., the L.P.G.A. and several other sports organizations still have tax-exempt status.Though the N.F.L.’s 32 teams are for-profit businesses and pay taxes, the league office has operated as a tax-exempt industry association in various forms since the 1940s. Under the tax code, the league office is considered the marketing arm of the teams, creating rules, negotiating sponsorships and television deals and performing other centralized functions. As a tax-exempt organization, the N.F.L. has had to release its Form 990 returns.For years, former Senator Tom Coburn, a Republican from Oklahoma, criticized the league’s status, contending that it deprived the United States Treasury of millions of dollars in taxes. The chorus of critics rose in 2014 when the league office’s filings with the Internal Revenue Service showed that Goodell received $44.2 million in the 2012 fiscal year. Goodell was paid $35 million in 2013.“The owners have decided to eliminate the distraction associated with misunderstanding of the league office’s status, so the league office will in the future file returns as a taxable entity,” Robert McNair, the owner of the Houston Texans and the chairman of the league’s finance committee, said in a statement.In a memo to all 32 teams, Goodell said the league would notify “interested members of Congress” of the change. Goodell said the finance committee had been studying the change for a year. Goodell said the league office would begin filing tax returns as “taxable entities” in the 2015 fiscal year, which began this month. Goodell said that “the effects of the tax-exempt status of the league office have been mischaracterized repeatedly in recent years” and that “every dollar of income generated through television rights fees, licensing agreements, sponsorships, ticket sales and other means is earned by the 32 clubs and is taxable there.”The new tax status for the league office “will make no material difference to our business,” he wrote. “As a result, the committees decided to eliminate this distraction.”The “distraction” included politicians demanding that the league office drop its tax-exempt status. The N.F.L. is a private business that is largely unregulated. The league office’s tax-exempt status, its use of public airwaves to broadcast games and its antitrust exemption are a few of the ways that Congress has leverage over the league. Last year, the Federal Communications Commission, over the N.F.L.’s objections, removed some rules that prevented cable and satellite companies from broadcasting games in markets where the teams’ games did not sell out. The N.F.L. has since scrapped its so-called blackout policy.After Coburn retired, Representative Jason Chaffetz, a Republican from Utah and the chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, became one of the leading critics of the league office’s tax-exempt status. In February, he said that he was considering calling Goodell to Washington to justify the status.In a statement released with Representative Elijah Cummings of Maryland, the ranking Democrat on the committee, Chaffetz said, “It is rewarding to see such an important and positive step toward restoring basic fairness.” Chaffetz and Cummings said they hoped that other professional sports organizations “follow the positive example set by the N.F.L.”In a statement, Bill Daly, the deputy commissioner of the N.H.L., said that league officials were “in the process of evaluating our situation.”It is unclear how much in taxes the N.F.L.’s league office avoided through its tax-exempt status. While the N.F.L. as a whole generates more than $10 billion in revenue annually, the league office ran a $13.5 million deficit in the 2013 fiscal year, which ended in March 2014. In the 2012 fiscal year, the league office showed a profit of $9 million, but it ran a deficit of $77.6 million the year before.The league office has issued bonds that are used to make loans to owners who build or refurbish stadiums. The bonds were issued under the league office’s tax-exempt status, and the league may have to pay taxes on the bonds after it drops its status.The extra tax bill may be worth it, though, if the league office is no longer under scrutiny for its tax-exempt status and for how much it pays its top executives, including Goodell.“They’ve done their own political and financial calculation and determined that while there might be a tax hit, the political hit they were taking was not worth it,” said Jeffrey Tenenbaum, the chairman of the nonprofit organizations practice of Venable, a law firm in Washington. “I’m not at all surprised, but I’m surprised that it didn’t happen sooner.”Advertisement