AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressJames Harden scored 28 points, Terrence Jones had 10 of his 15 in the fourth quarter, and the Houston Rockets beat the Dallas Mavericks, 103-94, on Tuesday night for their first playoff series victory since 2009.Houston won the Western Conference series by four games to one to advance to face the winner of the Clippers-Spurs series in the second round.The host Rockets bounced back from a lackluster performance in a 121-109 loss in Game 4 to head to the West semifinals for the first time since Yao Ming starred for Houston.Dwight Howard had 18 points and 19 rebounds to help the Rockets dominate inside and Josh Smith scored 20 points. The Mavericks could not get going from long range, shooting just 5 of 26 on 3-pointers.Monta Ellis led Dallas with 25 points, and Dirk Nowitzki added 22.The Mavericks did not lead after early in the first quarter, but a 7-0 run, capped by a basket by J. J. Barea, got them to 3 points behind with about five minutes remaining. Then Jones took over, making a 3-point play followed by a corner 3-pointer to push it to 94-85.Dallas scored the next 4 points before Harden swished a 3-pointer under heavy pressure to make it 97-89 with two and a half minutes left.Harden grabbed a steal soon after that and made a no-look pass to Jones, who dunked.LOVE PROBABLY OUT OF PLAYOFFS Cleveland’s Big 3 has been reduced to a twosome for the rest of the playoffs. Cavaliers forward Kevin Love has extensive damage in his left shoulder and will most likely miss the remainder of the postseason.General Manager David Griffin said Tuesday the team was not expecting Love to return in the playoffs.“I think it would be a real surprise if he we were able to participate in the postseason,” Griffin said. “I’ve still got a sliver of hope very late, but highly unlikely.”Love, acquired by the Cavs last summer in a trade to join LeBron James and Kyrie Irving, was injured in Sunday’s series-sweeping win over Boston when he tangled with Celtics center Kelly Olynyk while chasing a loose ball. Olynyk yanked down on Love’s arm, popping it from the socket.James knows the road to a title will be tougher without Love, who was playing in his first N.B.A. postseason.“Obviously, he brings so much to our team offensively and defensively,” he said. “It’s a big blow for us. We’ve got to have guys step up. You never want to have one of your major role players out. Everyone has to pick up not what he was able to do, but they have to pick up what they are capable of doing.”Advertisement