AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaUNIONDALE, N.Y. — The Islanders have just begun processing another heart-wrenching playoff loss, but this forced foray into summer feels different.This time, the Islanders are leaving the only home rink they have known.Outside Nassau Coliseum, which has hosted its final Islanders season, autograph seekers lingered for final glimpses of their favorite skaters.Inside, a pristine sheet of ice was still in place as the players endured one-on-one exit meetings over the last three days before they shared closing thoughts on the season.As quickly as the handshake line dissipated after Monday’s 2-1 Game 7 loss at Washington, musings shifted to Brooklyn, where the Islanders will begin playing in just over five months. But first, proper farewells had to be issued.“I think you carry this forever, really, obviously what this season has meant with the building,” the Islanders’ captain, John Tavares, said Thursday. “The people here deserve more. As fun as the year was and as special as it was, we didn’t get to where we wanted to be.”The Islanders finished with 47 wins and 101 points, their best numbers in more than 30 years. Striving to win their first playoff series in 22 years, they battled the Capitals to the limit despite missing the top defenseman Travis Hamonic all series and losing Lubomir Visnovsky and Calvin de Haan to injuries along the way.The Islanders had chances to win. They took Game 1 and had a two-goal lead in Game 2 on the road but squandered it, just as they frittered away numerous chances in the final week of the regular season to clinch home ice for the first round. The Islanders won Game 3 and lost Game 4, both in overtime, and were tied in Game 7 midway through the third period before the Capitals scored the winning goal.“We’re going to have a good team for a long time,” said defenseman Johnny Boychuk, a particularly bright spot for the Islanders since his acquisition with Nick Leddy before the season opener last October. Boychuk and Leddy, who play together on defense, signed long-term contract extensions during the season.Just about every interview, though, turned into a conversation about the strangeness of next season. The Islanders have played two preseason games at Barclays Center, but concepts of what the move 27 miles west will feel like remain abstract.“It’s definitely going to be tough, but it will be fun at the same time,” center Casey Cizikas said. “It’s an odd feeling.”His linemate Matt Martin said Long Island was “home for a lot of us.”“We don’t really know how it’s going to work,” he added.Still to be determined is where the Islanders will practice next season, not to mention where players will live with the team playing closer to Manhattan than Oyster Bay or Garden City.“It’s odd that we won’t be coming back to play here next year,” said Cal Clutterbuck, who played most of the season on the gritty fourth line with Cizikas and Martin. “That won’t really set in until next year. But it will be a different environment, and a lot of the logistics and stuff haven’t been completely hammered out.”Clutterbuck will be in the record books as scoring the last goal at the Coliseum in Saturday’s 3-1 Game 6 victory over the Capitals. His empty-net goal set off one final round of the loud “Yes! Yes! Yes!” chants that became standard after goals this season.“The fans here are extremely loud and blue collar,” Clutterbuck, who is a fan favorite, said. “It’s a really good atmosphere to play. I hate to use a cliché, but they really don’t make them like this anymore.”At their new home in Brooklyn, the Islanders will have plush locker rooms, and the fans will have all the amenities modern arenas possess.But the convivial community atmosphere of games at the Coliseum, where generations held tickets for decades, will change. Tavares, the first overall pick by the Islanders in 2009 and the face of the franchise, sympathized with the fans.“They were tremendous,” he said. “We certainly felt that and thrived on that.”Whether fans will flock to Brooklyn by train from Long Island in the same numbers in which they routinely drove to Nassau Coliseum is an open question.“Like everyone else next year, we will be making adjustments,” said Tavares, who is a finalist for the Hart Trophy, which goes to the N.H.L.’s most valuable player. “Some will be trial and error.”Also unknown is whether the raucous atmosphere of Nassau Coliseum can be recreated at Barclays Center, which was not built for hockey.“You want to bring that same kind of feel to Brooklyn and make it a tough place to play,” Tavares said. “Our fans will be rambunctious. You want to build on that.”Boychuk said he would reserve judgment on what the future holds in Brooklyn.“I have no idea,” he said. “I don’t know what to expect.”Advertisement