By ROB HUGHESAPRIL 28, 2015
LONDON —  A.F.C. Bournemouth, the team from a small resort town facing the English Channel, is living the dream of a lifetime.Six years ago, it placed 91st among the 92 teams and was a game away from expulsion from the league pyramid and extinction. It could not pay its taxes nor the 4.4 million pounds ($6.7 million) it owed in unpaid bills. It begged for clemency and began the next season at the bottom of the lowest rank of England’s professional leagues, starting the year with a 17-point penalty as punishment for its financial problems.Today, under a manager who once was one of its players, Bournemouth is about to join the 20 teams that make up the Premier League, the richest soccer league on earth.The scenes were intoxicating Monday night as the Cherries beat the Bolton Wanderers, 3-0. Grown men and little children — the bald and the brave — danced the conga up and down the stairways of the stadium after a victory that all but assured the club would go up at the end of this season.AdvertisementIt could still fail. Bournemouth could lose by 20 goals in its final game at Charlton Athletic on Saturday, and Middlesbrough might go up instead. And pigs, or something else, also might fly around Bournemouth.AdvertisementBut in the modern world, every fairy story is laced with cold reality. A few years ago, local residents and the club’s supporters threw money into plastic buckets to help keep the team afloat. But now this minnow of a club will receive about $90 million in television revenue as a member of the Premier League.Just over 10,000 fans watched the victory Monday, among them the now seemingly obligatory Russian investor high up in the stands. Maxim Demin, who made his money in petrochemicals, paid a reported £850,000 for a controlling interest in the club in 2011, and he later persuaded two of his business associates, also Russian, to invest in the club.The coastline near Bournemouth is known as the Jurassic Coast, and the area includes a peninsula known as Sandbanks, which is regarded as the most exclusive — and expensive — stretch of real estate in all of Britain.Demin was attracted there to do as other multimillionaires have done: Pay millions for a house, then demolish it to build a bigger dream home. Something similar to that might happen at his soccer club, but for now, everything is being done on a shoestring budget.Eddie Howe, a local boy who grew up wanting to play for the Cherries, is the down-to-earth inspiration for the team, its coach and its builder. He took up the reins of management when a busted knee ended his playing career at 29. Now 37, he is a man devoted to details, one who logs notes on every practice, every conversation and every idea.“Its been an incredible journey,” Howe said Monday as the Champagne corks popped around him. “I’m the eternal pessimist, but it’ll take an incredible blow to lose it now. This club was heading out of business, heading nowhere . ...” His voice tailed off as the players ambushed him from behind.But this is the team that Eddie built. Monday’s goals came from marvelous finishes from two wingers, Matt Ritchie and Marc Pugh, and from Callum Wilson, the team’s top scorer. Wilson combines speed and upper-body strength with an eye for goals, having scored 23 times for Coventry City last season and 22 times this year for Bournemouth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maybe a month ago, the question was whether “little” Bournemouth could keep talents like these three players.AdvertisementNow the question becomes whether these talents — including the industrious Harry Arter, a midfielder who cost the club just $6,000 to buy from non-league soccer — will be able to keep the club in the promised land of Premiership soccer.It is, as Howe said, the incredible journey. It is the journey that Swansea City made as it rose through four divisions to make it to the Premier League, where it has sustained its top-tier status since 2011. Swansea did that only after it waded through insolvency until someone, mainly the supporters, found the means to let it follow a dream.Other clubs try to find the means, too — especially a Russian oligarch or Middle Eastern prince who can buy a club success, or at least give it a world-class profile or the temporary thrill of winning in the world’s most popular sport.Soccer, however, is not just about spinning the casino wheel, nor is it just about a rich man’s passion. It is about flesh and blood and a hundred or more years of hope that is passed down by local families, expressed through their local teams.Bournemouth has a chairman as well as an owner of undetermined wealth. That chairman, Jeff Mostyn, was one of the first to write a check to hold the creditors at bay when the club almost went under six years back.On Monday, before he was drenched by Champagne in his well-cut suit, Mostyn made a confession on television. “When I first became involved,” he said, “the people here doubted my integrity or that I would stay.“I’m a Manchester man, a City supporter all my life. You know what? I can’t wait for us to play at the Etihad, and take three points.”The Etihad is the name of Manchester City’s stadium since it was bought by the ruling family of Abu Dhabi, who transformed it into one of the biggest-spending and highest-profile clubs around.It isn’t known how much Bournemouth’s owners will pay to put it on a more level playing field with the other clubs in the Premier League.AdvertisementThat is for tomorrow. Today is for living the dream, unless the club, in all the celebration over the hard work achieved under Howe , should indeed lose by 20 goals at Charlton on Saturday.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.