AdvertisementSupported byOn BoxingBy Joe DrapeLAS VEGAS — As far as fights of the century go, Saturday’s bout between Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Manny Pacquiao seemingly has it all, with two fighters with contrasting personalities, considered the best pound-for-pound boxers of their generation, meeting for the first time. Oodles of money is involved, from the $300 million the combatants are projected to split to the $100 million — Super Bowl-size dough — expected to be wagered in Nevada on the outcome.Then there are the hundreds of millions of dollars to be spent on the sold-out hotel rooms, the opulent meals, the copious cocktails and the avalanche of chips yet to bounce on casino tables.So why do aficionados of boxing, the so-called sweet science, seem so sad about what many here believe will be a billion-dollar weekend?“It is a huge economic event,” said Thomas Hauser, a boxing columnist and the author of “Muhammad Ali: His Life And Times.” “But for the business of boxing, it doesn’t mean anything other than a small group of people counting a large amount of money — and then we’ll go back to business as usual.”The epitaph for a sport that once commanded the front pages of the nation’s newspapers and minted heroes and antiheroes — from Jack Dempsey and Rocky Marciano to Ali and Mike Tyson — has been written in larger and larger type over the past decades. It was underlined Saturday when the current heavyweight champion, Wladimir Klitschko, defended his title for the 18th time but failed to produce a sellout at what is widely considered the cradle of boxing, Madison Square Garden.Bob Arum, Pacquiao’s promoter as well as Ali’s, had a front-row seat through some of boxing’s glory days and through its declining ones. He looks at his roster of 70 boxers, who are predominantly Hispanic and African-American, along with a smattering of Eastern European fighters, and he recognizes the sport’s fundamental problem: It is too brutal for all but a few.“Boxing is for poor people who don’t have any other alternative to make their way in life,” Arum said. “We can’t get white middle-class kids into boxing. Let’s be honest: No parent in their right mind is going to let them come to a gym. I wouldn’t let my kid go into boxing.”There are other problems, too, including boxing’s multiple (and dubious) sanctioning organizations, the track record of corruption within its management ranks and a business model that puts the sport’s premier events behind an expensive pay wall. What if the N.F.L. and its broadcast partners demanded $89.95 a household — the suggested price for Saturday’s Mayweather-Pacquiao fight — to watch the Super Bowl?In fact, Arum conceded that the steady decline of pay-per-view buys for both Pacquiao and Mayweather made it now or never for a match that had been sought and scuttled time and again over the past six years. From 2008 to 2011, Pacquiao averaged 1.1 million buys for his seven bouts, but he reached one million only once in his last five. Three of Mayweather’s last four bouts failed to break the one-million mark.“They were trending down significantly,” Arum said. “It had to be now.”Mayweather (47-0) and Pacquiao (57-5-2) are generally regarded as the two best fighters of their generation in any weight class, but their best rounds are perhaps behind them. They are nearing retirement age: Mayweather is 38, Pacquiao 36. “This had more potential five years ago when they could have rematch after rematch,” said Bob Dorfman, executive creative director at Baker Street Advertising in San Francisco and the author of The Sports Marketers’ Scouting Report, a periodic analysis of the marketability of pro athletes. “This seems like a one-off.”The bout also comes at a time of stiffer competition within the niche of combat sports. Both scripted wrestling and mixed martial arts put on lucrative pay-per-view events. In addition, World Wrestling Entertainment, a staple of cable television, has its own online TV network with 1.3 million subscribers, and it drew more than 70,000 people in March to Levi’s Stadium in Santa Clara, Calif., for WrestleMania 31, the latest edition of its marquee event. The Ultimate Fighting Championship has a $100-million-a-year network television deal with Fox.“They’ve done a better job building excitement and personalities,” Dorfman said. “You don’t see any Alis or Fraziers or Mayweathers coming up out there.”To that end, Al Haymon, the promoter of Mayweather and 149 other boxers, has raised more than $400 million, according to Street & Smith’s SportsBusiness Journal, and founded the Premier Boxing Champions in an effort to bring the sport out from behind the pay wall and into the homes of casual sports fans. His biggest partner is the NBC Sports Group, which will broadcast 20 live events, including five in prime time. But P.B.C. bouts will also be presented on CBS and on cable on Spike.It is a huge gamble by the reclusive Haymon, a successful music promoter who is buying the airtime in the hope that boxing can build an audience that sponsors want to reach immediately and for which a network might someday soon want to pay a lucrative broadcast rights fee.Jon Miller, the president for programming for NBC Sports and NBCSN, said the network understood better than most that boxing had been “mismanaged, mispromoted and underappreciated.” Until the creation of P.B.C. and its new venture with Haymon, NBC’s most recent prime-time bout was between Larry Holmes and Carl Williams on May 20, 1985, which drew an 18.5 rating and a 29 share — significant numbers in a far less competitive era.“They are well funded, committed and doing things the right way,” Miller said of Haymon’s group.In turn, NBC has brought in A-list talent like Al Michaels and Sugar Ray Leonard, leaned on its Olympic-style storytelling to build interest and heavily promoted the series. The goal is to provide a prime-time showcase for promising boxers in the hope of making them the pay-per-view stars of tomorrow.“Saturday night is a good idea,” Dorfman said. “You can build personalities and an audience there.”The most recent Saturday night P.B.C. on NBC telecast, on April 11, averaged 2.9 million viewers. That made it the second-most-watched professional boxing broadcast since “Oscar De La Hoya’s Fight Night,” a Fox broadcast on March 23, 1998, that drew 5.9 million viewers. Still, the audience figure was down from NBC’s first P.B.C. event, in March, which drew 3.4 million. No one is ready to declare boxing resurrected, but even the skeptics agree that a series of million-dollar days is better for the long-term health of the sport than one billion-dollar weekend. Advertisement