By ALLAN KREDAAPRIL 28, 2015
COMMACK, N.Y. —  About 26 miles east of an eerily silent Nassau Coliseum, Islanders fans packed Miller’s Ale House on Monday, hoping for another dramatic victory in Game 7 of their team’s first-round playoff series against the Capitals.They watched on dozens of televisions, their garb blue and orange in contrast to the sea of red dominating the images from the game in Washington.Wearing a white John Tavares No. 91 jersey and a blue team cap, Jerome Minerva of Huntington, N.Y., paced as he desperately tried to coax an early goal from his team.“Both teams look nervous, but the Islanders a little more,” Minerva, a dedicated Islanders fan since 1978, said during the first period.AdvertisementHis words proved prophetic: The Islanders mustered only 11 shots on goal en route to a 2-1 loss.The apprehensive fans at the bar — and surely at countless other venues across Long Island — were hoping for a few more playoff games at the Coliseum, with their team set to move to Brooklyn.When the Islanders tied the game at 1-1 early in the third period on a goal by Frans Nielsen, fans broke into a “Yes! Yes! Yes!” chant.AdvertisementBut Washington scored again midway through the period and held on for the victory. The realization set in among the fans that it was not only the season that was over; so was the Islanders’ 43-year-run at the Coliseum.“I’m disappointed they lost,” Jerry Smith, 27, of Smithtown, N.Y., said. “And I’m sad the Coliseum is done.”The sentiment was repeated by many fans who lingered as the postgame show from Verizon Center in Washington continued on the TV screens. Few watched.Islanders fans will now have to travel to Brooklyn for home games and manufacture new methods of gathering beforehand and afterward.As the regular season winds down in the N.H.L., Islanders fans are preparing for the team’s move to Barclays Center next season after 43 years at Nassau Coliseum.“I’m upset they lost, but I feel worse that they won’t be playing any more at Nassau Coliseum,” said Adam Swanson, 38, of Smithtown, who wore a blue Tavares jersey. “I’m really glad I made it to two more games there this season. That place is special and always will be.”Christi Kunzig, a former member of the Islanders’ Ice Girls — a team of women in cheerleaderlike outfits who ensure the playing surface is clean of ice shavings and debris — watched the game at home with friends. The finality of the Islanders’ move to Brooklyn resonated with her even more because of her special bond with the fans and the staff at their longtime arena, she said.Advertisement“I love going there and knowing all the season-ticket holders, the security guards and the ushers,” she said. “It’s been like a family working there, so it’s sad to see that end.”This final season, in which the Islanders won 47 regular-season games and finished with 101 points, essentially became a protracted goodbye to a site that is a part of the fabric of Long Island.A win over the Capitals would have given the Islanders a second-round matchup with the Rangers, a series that would have had New York’s hockey fans on edge. With the defeat comes a long summer off and the question of what games will be like in Brooklyn, where tailgating will be virtually impossible and hundreds of seats in the arena will have an obstructed view of the ice.The veteran fan George Seelig, who has rooted for the Islanders since their inception in 1972, was happy to be among his brethren no matter the outcome.“I wanted to be someplace loud, fun and near home,” said Seelig, a Commack resident.The fans cheered every save by Islanders goaltender Jaroslav Halak — he finished with 24 — and moaned when he strayed from his crease. They fell silent when Washington’s Joel Ward broke the scoreless tie late in the second period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Hofstra senior Jeremy Musella, a die-hard fan since 1997 who is still waiting for a playoff series win, chose a philosophical outlook for the season’s conclusion.“For me, there really isn’t a next year because Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum will always be home,” said Musella, who watched the game from home.But for Minerva, the fan from Huntington at Miller’s Ale House, who shed his jersey after the game for a gray Islanders T-shirt, another pressure-filled playoff matchup evoked a flood of memories of past postseason defeats.Before they won four straight Stanley Cups from 1980 to 1983, the Islanders were upset by the Rangers in 1979. And 13 years ago, they were defeated by Toronto in seven games.“I cried in 1979, I cried in 2002, and I cried tonight,” Minerva said.After another razor-thin defeat for his team — and the official end for the only home rink the Islanders have ever known — a few tears were understandable.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.