

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
OCT. 18, 2015
ANN ARBOR, Mich. — This time last year, there were three undefeated teams in the Power 5 conferences. This year, there are 10.It is difficult to say how meaningful this is. By this time last year, two pairs of teams that play every year had already met — Baylor and Texas Christian, and Florida State and Clemson — eliminating two potential perfect teams.But what the statistic does allow is a reflection on the fact that in college football, a win is not everything.It is a truism that further complicates the always messy business of ranking teams among disparate conferences. College football fans are asked to embrace the chaos even while they follow a sport so committed to control that the coaches wear headsets as if they were directing air traffic.AdvertisementThe notion that victories are overrated should be heresy in a sport that gave us the quotation — commonly attributed to Vince Lombardi — that “winning isn’t everything; it’s the only thing.”But it ought not to be considered a particularly postmodern insight. Not after a game like the one here on Saturday in which Michigan State beat Michigan after recovering a botched punt attempt for a go-ahead touchdown as the clock ticked to zero.AdvertisementOnly an elaborate conspiracy of circumstances — a low snap, an inability to fall on the ball, an extremely unlucky bounce — permitted a Spartans victory. The teams played a close game in which the defenses dominated. Divvying up one win and one loss is less precise than calling it even and perhaps adding the caveat that Michigan State was on the road.Associated Press voters seemed to recognize this: They dropped Michigan only from No. 12 to No. 15 and kept Michigan State at No. 7.In recent years, college football has been rife with teams at the top whose win-loss records did not tell their whole stories. In 2012, Notre Dame received the top Bowl Championship Series seed by virtue of its perfect record, only to be predictably demolished, 42-14, by one-loss Alabama. Last season, 13-0 Florida State secured the No. 3 seed in the final College Football Playoff rankings despite barely beating several so-so teams, and then one-loss Oregon blew them out in the Rose Bowl, 59-20.Such debates will become extremely relevant two weeks from now, when the playoff selection committee will release its first rankings. The 13 members delve deeply into teams’ performances for two days in a conference room near Dallas before releasing their colored smoke (look for purple, green and multiple shades of red).But for all the committee’s talk last year of “the full body of work,” “game control” and other jargon, winning percentage ended up the strongest predictor of final ranking. Among major conference teams, the undefeated team led all but two one-loss teams; all 12-1 teams led 11-1 teams; all one-loss teams led two-loss teams; and all two-loss teams led three-loss teams.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So what to do with this season’s crop, which includes No. 1 Ohio State (7-0, 3-0 Big Ten), No. 2 Baylor (6-0, 3-0 Big 12), No. 3 Utah (6-0, 3-0 Pacific-12), No. 4 Texas Christian (7-0, 4-0 Big 12), No. 5 Louisiana State (6-0, 4-0 Southeastern Conference), No. 6 Clemson (6-0, 3-0 Atlantic Coast Conference), No. 7 Michigan State (7-0, 3-0 Big Ten), No. 9 Florida State (6-0, 4-0 A.C.C.), No. 12 Iowa (7-0, 3-0 Big Ten) and No. 14 Oklahoma State (6-0, 3-0 Big 12)? There is at least one in each conference.AdvertisementJust one of Iowa’s previous and future opponents is currently ranked — No. 25 Pittsburgh. Florida State has played no teams that have been ranked. The combined record of Oklahoma State’s Football Bowl Subdivision adversaries is 12-20.Such quandaries — and not simply the small number of games — are what college football fans find so exasperating about the four-team playoff. Teams spend most of their seasons playing within the closed confines of their conferences and divisions. This will only become more prevalent in coming seasons as Big Ten teams join those in the Big 12 and the Pac-12 in playing nine conference games, not eight.Then they will be measured against teams that, in many cases, they not only did not play but with whom they shared no common opponents.In the end, four conference championship games and the Big 12’s round-robin schedule will ensure that each conference produces a maximum of one undefeated team. This situation should diminish, if not eliminate, the number of fan bases who feel monumentally snubbed come December.Of course, this assumes that midmajor teams in the so-called Group of 5 conferences are unworthy of the playoff. Technically, they may qualify, too. And four are undefeated — three in the competitive American Athletic Conference. Who knew that No. 18 Memphis’s games at No. 21 Houston and at No. 22 Temple in November could have such weighty implications? And, as Vince Lombardi probably never said, Holy (No. 19) Toledo!A version of this article appears in print on October 19, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Winning Isn’t Everything? Neither Is It the Only Thing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »