By BRUCE WEBERAPRIL 29, 2015
Calvin Peete, whose life traced one of sport’s most triumphant arcs — a school dropout with a crooked left arm who did not pick up a golf club until his 20s, did not join the pro tour until his 30s, and still became one of the leading players of his era and the most successful black professional golfer before Tiger Woods — has died. He was 71.The Murray Brothers Funeral Home in Atlanta confirmed the death, giving no other information. The Associated Press reported that Peete died on Wednesday.A self-taught player who never hit especially long, Peete was one of golf’s most accurate drivers and fairway players. He won his first Professional Golfers Association tour event, the Greater Milwaukee Open, in 1979, and from 1982 through 1986 was among the tour’s most prolific champions, winning 11 tournaments, including four in 1982.In 1984, he averaged 70.56 shots per round, winning the Vardon Trophy, given annually to the professional golfer with the lowest per-round score. In 1985, his two wins included the prestigious Tournament Players Championship (now the Players Championship) in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., a victory that Sports Illustrated described as “against the best field that will tee off all the year on one of the most unrelenting, terrorizing courses the pros play.”AdvertisementFrom 1976 to 1995, Peete played in 344 tournaments, winning 12, finishing in the top 10 73 times and earning $2.3 million.His story is Dickensian in its down-and-out beginnings and American in its particular obstacles and eventual rewards. He was born in Detroit on July 18, 1943. According to numerous sources, his parents had nine children, and after they divorced, his father, Dennis, had 10 more.Calvin lived with his father, a vegetable picker in Pahokee, Fla., in the south-central part of the state, and after he dropped out of school in the eighth grade to help feed the family, he, too, worked in the corn and bean fields. He was unable to do heavy work, however; at age 12, he had fallen out of a tree and broken his left elbow, leaving him unable to straighten the arm.AdvertisementIt was perhaps a serendipitous accident. It is a golfing dictum that for right-handed golfers, the left arm remains straight during a swing, but Peete, who never had a golf lesson before he turned pro, developed his own method, compensating for his handicap and developing a stroke uncanny in its accuracy, or, as his onetime caddy Dolphus Hill said in 1986, “He goes flag on you.”Peete was regularly among the tour leaders in driving accuracy and greens hit in regulation.“I get my accuracy from my tempo and rhythm,” he told The New York Times in 1982. “I never really worked for it. It is just something that happened. I just seem to have a good tempo and good control as far as knowing just when to release the club.”But that was long in the future. As a teenager, Peete grew tired of the laborious field work and eventually contrived a different way to earn money, managing to buy a car, traveling to farms and orchards up and down the East Coast and selling clothes and jewelry out of the back of his station wagon to migrant workers. He had no interest in golf.“If I happened to turn the channel and see golf on television, I’d be like most people I knew,” he said in a 1983 interview with The Times. “I’d turn to a basketball game or a war movie.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was in Rochester, in the summer of 1966, that he tried golf for the first time. He was 23. Friends invited him to a fish fry, he recalled in a 1986 interview with Boys’ Life magazine, but they took him to a golf course instead.“I couldn’t get a ride home,” he said, “so I went along with the fool idea.”Quickly bitten by the bug, and with his selling done at night, he began spending days on the golf course, teaching himself by reading books. He took advice on his grip from the man who sold him his golf gloves, practiced on a baseball field, made films of his stroke and studied them. It took him nine years and three trips to the PGA qualifying school before he earned the right to join the tour, at 32, in 1975.At the time, blacks were rare in professional golf, a sport that had a history of exclusion. A “Caucasian-only” clause was not rescinded by the PGA until 1961, and only a handful of black golfers — among them Charlie Sifford (who died in February), Lee Elder and Jim Dent — preceded Peete on the pro tour.In 1975, Elder became the first black golfer to play in the Masters in Augusta, Ga. In 1980, Peete was the second.He never played especially well at the Masters; in 1986, his best finish, he tied for 11th. After the 1983 tournament — during which he had one of his worst rounds, an 87 on the third day — he was asked his opinion of the traditions at the Masters.Advertisement“Until Lee Elder, the only blacks at the Masters were caddies or waiters,” he said. “To ask a black man what he feels about the traditions of the Masters is like asking him how he feels about his forefathers who were slaves.”Peete’s first marriage, to Christine Sears, ended in divorce. A complete list of survivors was unavailable, but they include his second wife, Pepper, and seven children.In 1982, Peete took — and passed — a high school equivalency test; a high school diploma or its equivalent was required for membership on the American Ryder Cup team, which represents the United States in a competition against a team of Europeans. Peete played on two Ryder Cup teams. On the 1983 squad with Jack Nicklaus, Tom Watson, Ben Crenshaw, Curtis Strange and other stars, he helped the United States to a narrow victory.“Calvin Peete was a remarkable golfer; he overcame a lot of adversity, including a physical limitation, to become a very, very good golfer,” Nicklaus wrote on his website on Wednesday. “Over the years, we played a lot of golf together, and I was amazed at what he could get out of his game.”Nicklaus added, “He was an extremely straight driver of the golf ball; a very smart golfer; and, you might say, he was very much an overachiever.”A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page A28 of the New York edition with the headline: Calvin Peete, 71, a Pioneer on the PGA Tour, Is Dead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.