AdvertisementSupported byMarlins 7, Mets 3By Tim RohanMIAMI — Jack Leathersich landed here Wednesday morning on a redeye flight from Las Vegas, slept for maybe an hour or two at the team hotel, then went to Marlins Park for his first day as a major league reliever. His new manager, Terry Collins, and pitching coach, Dan Warthen, stopped by his locker.“They just said welcome, congratulations, be ready,” Leathersich said.Rookie or not, the Mets would most likely be relying on him soon enough. One of the more remarkable aspects of the Mets’ early success this season has been the performance of their misfit bullpen, a group of eight pitchers that now includes a first-time closer, four rookies, a journeyman and no clear-cut setup men. But in recent days, the group has regressed to what might become the norm. On Tuesday, Carlos Torres walked two batters and then allowed a go-ahead run in the eighth inning. On Wednesday, Hansel Robles and Alex Torres combined to allow three runs in the eighth inning to put another game out of reach for good as the Mets lost to the Marlins, 7-3. The Mets headed home having lost their last two series. Their record dropped to 15-7, which was respectable, given the circumstances. The Mets had been forced, starting in spring training, to essentially rebuild their bullpen. They were already missing Bobby Parnell when Vic Black and Josh Edgin went down with injuries, and Jenrry Mejia was suspended after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs. Then Jerry Blevins was hit by a line drive, breaking his arm. In all, the Mets had to replace two closers, a setup man, and two left-handers.Still, when Leathersich arrived, their bullpen had the sixth-lowest earned run average in baseball (2.42) and had walked the fourth-fewest batters (17, in 52 innings). “I’m absolutely thrilled to death with it,” Collins said. He credited Ricky Bones, the bullpen coach, for being a mentor for many of the relievers. When the Mets asked Sean Gilmartin to work as a reliever, a new role for him, Bones helped him develop a warm-up routine. Bones has also spent more time reviewing game plans with the younger pitchers. Bones offers each pitcher simple, general directives: attack the strike zone, rely on your talent, pitch to contact. He wants his relievers to avoid walking batters, the opposite of the Mets’ offensive philosophy. That way, the young pitchers don’t back themselves into stressful situations. Collins tries his best to help them avoid that, too. “You try not to put them in a position where they’re destined to fail,” he said. “You try not to bring them in with the bases loaded. You try to let them have clean innings, and try to give them a matchup where they have an advantage.“Once their confidence starts to soar, they get better.”If the Mets need a big out, they call on Jeurys Familia, a hard-throwing right-hander who is settling in as the closer. After Mejia was suspended, Familia recorded nine saves in the first 21 games. Beyond Familia, though, Collins has few relievers he can truly trust in tight situations. The Mets trailed by only 4-3 on Wednesday when Robles walked the leadoff batter, Marcell Ozuna, in the eighth inning. Two batters later, J. T. Realmuto reached on an infield single, with one out. Collins brought on Torres, a veteran, to restore order, and Ichiro Suzuki promptly smacked a three-run homer to end the Mets’ hopes.Later in the inning, Leathersich quietly made his major league debut. He allowed a long single to Justin Bour, who hustled to second but was caught straying off the base to finally end the inning. Advertisement