AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressMichael Lorenzen learned something about pitching to Ryan Braun: Do not make a mistake.Braun hit his fourth career grand slam as well as a solo home run on Wednesday to power the Milwaukee Brewers to an 8-3 victory over the Reds in Cincinnati.Braun, Adam Lind and Khris Davis had solo shots off Lorenzen (0-1), a 23-year-old making his major league debut. Lorenzen was trying to get Braun to chase a bad pitch, but he made it too good.“I wanted to miss on that pitch to Braun and I didn’t, and he let the whole stadium know it,” Lorenzen said. “My misses have to be a little better than they were today.”Lorenzen had trouble with his off-speed pitches and relied too much on his fastball. All three home runs came off fastballs.Lorenzen went five innings, giving up eight hits and throwing 107 pitches.Braun connected with the bases loaded in the eighth off Jumbo Diaz for his third home run in the last two games.Matt Garza (2-3) allowed five hits in six and two-thirds innings, including solo shots by Todd Frazier and Tucker Barnhart.The Brewers loaded the bases in the eighth against Diaz, who hit Logan Schafer to drive in a run. Braun followed with his first grand slam since June 14, 2010, against the Angels, making the score 8-2.Jay Bruce hit his second homer of the series in the ninth inning.ASTROS 7, PADRES 2  Dallas Keuchel held host San Diego to three hits in eight innings, and Colby Rasmus hit a two-run homer to power Houston to its sixth straight win. Keuchel (3-0) allowed two hits in the first, when Wil Myers hit a leadoff single and scored on Matt Kemp’s one-out double to right. The left-handed Keuchel then retired 23 of his final 24 batters, including 14 straight from the first inning until pitcher Andrew Cashner singled to right leading off the sixth.Cashner (1-4) struck out a season-high 10 in seven innings, including the first six batters of the game to set a team record. He allowed three runs, two earned, on six hits, and walked one.NATIONALS 13, BRAVES 4 Jordan Zimmermann won for the first time in four starts and hit a three-run single to help visiting Washington beat Atlanta.Denard Span, who had five hits the previous night, added a three-run homer in the ninth. The Nationals banged out 15 hits again, giving them 30 hits and 26 runs scored over the last two games.The biggest swing in this game belonged to their starting pitcher. In 264 career at-bats over seven seasons, Zimmermann had just 12 R.B.I., but his bases-loaded single in the four-run fourth inning gave Washington the lead for good.Zimmermann (2-2) gave up eight hits, one walk and four runs — three earned — with seven strikeouts in seven innings.Braves starter Alex Wood (1-1) allowed six hits and five runs, striking out eight in five innings.CARDINALS 5, PHILLIES 2 Peter Bourjos hit a game-tying R.B.I. triple, then scored the go-ahead run by beating the throw home on an infield tapper to fuel a four-run fifth inning for host St. Louis.Carlos Martinez (3-0) allowed two runs in six innings and Matt Adams doubled twice with an R.B.I.PIRATES 8, CUBS 1  Gerrit Cole allowed three hits over six innings, and Andrew McCutchen had a two-run triple as visiting Pittsburgh ended Chicago’s four-game winning streak.McCutchen, who went 2 for 5, recorded the 1,000th hit of his career with an eighth-inning single.TIGERS 10, TWINS 7 Miguel Cabrera hit two of Detroit’s four home runs during a powerful rally in the Tigers’ victory in Minnesota.James McCann’s first career homer came on an inside-the-park, two-run drive that tied the score in the sixth inning for the Tigers, who trailed Phil Hughes and the Twins by 7-3 after a seven-run burst against Shane Greene over the fourth and the fifth.RED SOX 4, BLUE JAYS 1  Hanley Ramirez hit a two-run homer and Rick Porcello held Toronto to one run over seven innings as Boston won at home.Porcello (2-2) held the Blue Jays down just one night after they put up 17 hits in an 11-8 win. He allowed two hits, struck out six and walked two.R. A. Dickey (0-3) allowed four runs and nine hits, striking out four without walking a batter in seven innings for the Blue Jays. Koji Uehara struck out all three batters in the ninth for his fourth save. INDIANS 7, ROYALS 5 Jason Kipnis homered and drove in four runs to help host Cleveland snap a four-game losing streak.Kipnis hit a three-run homer — his first since July 31 of last season — in the third and then capped another three-run rally in the sixth with an R.B.I. grounder.Michael Bourn’s double gave Cleveland the lead.Danny Salazar (3-0) allowed four runs in six innings for Cleveland.Advertisement