AdvertisementSupported byHawks 107, Nets 97By Andrew KehA ferocious late comeback could not undo a tepid beginning for the Nets, who were debilitatingly unassertive for three quarters against the Hawks and paid the price with a 107-97 loss Wednesday night at Philips Arena in Atlanta.It was a letdown for the Nets, who had tied this first-round playoff series with an exciting overtime win two nights before in Game 4 in Brooklyn. But the momentum did not carry to Atlanta, where the Nets’ goal of becoming just the sixth No. 8 seed in the N.B.A. to upset a No. 1 seed in the postseason took a major blow.The teams will meet for Game 6 on Friday night at Barclays Center, where the Nets will try to defy long odds. In the previous 178 best-of-seven series tied at 2-2, teams that won Game 5 went on to win the series 146 times, according to ESPN.As the game raced to its conclusion, it seemed as if the Nets could steal a win. They started the final period on a 7-0 run, cutting the Atlanta lead to 5 points and forcing the Hawks to take a timeout to regroup. Nets Coach Lionel Hollins’s talk to his players was captured on television network microphones.“We’ve got to get over the hump,” he said. “We’ve got to play perfect.”Jarrett Jack, who finished with 18 points, caught fire for the Nets and at one point scored 12 of the team’s points in a row. With less than five minutes remaining, Jack sank a runner in the lane to trim the gap to 1 point, at 90-89. Joe Johnson (18 points and 9 rebounds) then took over, draining two 3-pointers within a 40-second span to keep the Nets close, at 97-95, with 2 minutes 20 seconds left to play.When Paul Millsap was called for traveling with 2:05 left, things looked ominous for the Hawks, who had cruised to 60 wins in the regular season. But Johnson’s ensuing reverse layup attempt clattered off the rim. Then, on the other end, Al Horford nailed a deep jumper to stretch the Hawks’ lead to 4 points, and the Nets never got any closer.Two days after scoring 35 points for the Nets in Game 4, Deron Williams fell back to earth, shooting 2 of 8 from the field and scoring 5 points. Instead, the veteran reserve Alan Anderson became an unlikely catalyst for the Nets, contributing a team-high 23 points.The Hawks attacked the paint early and got off to a hot start, sinking seven of their first 10 shots. The Nets took a timeout 5:36 seconds into the game after falling behind, 16-8. After one quarter, the Hawks were ahead, 33-16, with eight different players contributing at least one field goal in the period.The Nets were sloppy at the start, and they committed their fifth turnover on their first possession of the second quarter with a 24-second violation. But they proceeded to go on an 11-0 run, cutting away at Atlanta’s advantage.Anderson paced the Nets, almost single-handedly keeping them competitive through the first two quarters with 16 points. He was shooting sharply from a distance, and with just seconds remaining in the first half, he got inside and finished a baseline drive with a thunderous two-handed dunk.DeMarre Carroll was carrying the Hawks, contributing 19 points in the first half, which the Hawks finished with a 53-44 lead. Carroll finished the game with a game-high 24 points. Horford overcame obvious discomfort in his injured right pinkie finger to add 20 points and 15 rebounds.Advertisement