AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard GoldsteinGene Fullmer, the middleweight boxing champion known for a brawling style and an ability to shake off punches and remembered for his title fights with Sugar Ray Robinson and Carmen Basilio, died on Monday in Taylorsville, Utah. He was 83.His death was confirmed by his nephew Larry Fullmer, who told The Associated Press that his uncle had dementia and, most recently, a bacterial infection.Fullmer was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in Canastota, N.Y., in 1991. At his death, he was cited by its executive director, Edward Brophy, as “one of the shining stars of the Golden ’50s boxing scene.”Fullmer reigned when fight clubs abounded and Friday night fights were a television staple.One of three brothers who fought professionally, he won the middleweight championship at Madison Square Garden in January 1957 by unanimous decision over Robinson, often cited as boxing’s most brilliant pound-for-pound fighter. In a bout described by The New York Times as a “bitter, savage fight,” Fullmer kept moving forward, battering Robinson with both hands, and knocked him down in the seventh round. Robinson sought to tie up Fullmer in clinches, biding his time for a knockout blow that never came.Robinson won the title back by knocking out Fullmer in the fifth round of their May 1957 bout.“Robinson’s best punch was any punch he could hit you with,” the website Boxing.com once quoted Fullmer as saying. “But I felt without doubt that if I could beat him once, I could surely beat him again. I felt that if I put more pressure on him, I could maybe knock him out.“In the fifth, I moved in with my left hand maybe six inches lower than it should have been, and he slipped that left hook over the top and caught me right on the chin. All at once the lights went out. I had never been knocked out.” There was more to come in the battle for middleweight supremacy among Fullmer, Robinson and Basilio. Fullmer became a champion again when he stopped Basilio in the 14th round in August 1959 to capture the vacant National Boxing Association crown, Robinson having been stripped of the title for failing to defend it. Fullmer stopped Basilio in the 12th round in a June 1960 title defense.Fullmer retained his title on a draw with Robinson in December 1960 and won a unanimous decision over him in March 1961 in their fourth and final fight. He lost the title to Dick Tiger in 1962 and retired after losing to him in August 1963.Fullmer won 55 bouts (24 by knockout), lost six times and fought three draws.He was born on July 21, 1931, in West Jordan, Utah. His father, Lawrence, known as Tuff, who did some amateur boxing, and his mother, Mary, named him for the heavyweight champion Gene Tunney.When Gene was 6, his father gave him a pair of boxing gloves, and he was fighting in youth exhibitions at 8. After boxing as an amateur, he turned pro in 1951.Aside from his boxing career, Fullmer operated a mink-breeding ranch in Utah. He also joined his brothers — Don, a middleweight, and Jay, a lightweight and welterweight — in operating a boxing gym.Don Fullmer died in 2012, and Jay died five days before Gene. Information on Gene Fullmer’s survivors was not immediately available.Fullmer once told The Deseret News of Salt Lake City that he “wouldn’t change a minute” if he had to do everything over again.But, he added, “I might have ducked Robinson’s punch in that second fight.”Advertisement