AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerIf one game can symbolize the state of modern baseball, consider Wednesday’s matinee in the Bronx between the Yankees and the Tampa Bay Rays. Eleven relief pitchers combined for 141/3 innings, allowing only four hits and striking out 14. The winning run scored when a second baseman slid on the grass in right field to gobble up a ground-ball single.The Rays won, 3-2, in 13 innings, and James Loney’s go-ahead grounder was the Rays’ only hit off six Yankees relievers. Stephen Drew, the second baseman, was positioned well into the outfield and raced over to stop the ball. But Drew had no play at first and no chance to get Steven Souza Jr., who was running with two outs and a full count, at the plate.For the Yankees, it was a long day of work without a victory to show for it, but they are playing well and leading the American League East. They have lost their ace, Masahiro Tanaka, for at least a month with wrist and forearm problems, but their bullpen (1.75 earned run average) is among the best in baseball.“We’ve got so many weapons,” said Dellin Betances, who, like closer Andrew Miller, has not allowed an earned run. “We’ve got three lefties, four righties, all of us have different pitches and we’re pounding the strike zone, which is the important thing out of the bullpen.”The problem Wednesday was that the Yankees’ hitters looked just as helpless as the Rays’ hitters. They struck out 15 times among their first 23 outs, against starter Drew Smyly and reliever Steve Geltz. They made better contact after that, but nothing for extra bases.Alex Rodriguez went 0 for 6 for the first time in his career, comprising an awful lot of games — 2,588, to be exact, tied with Willie McCovey for 40th on the career list. Matching another revered San Francisco Giant in a different category is proving much more difficult.Rodriguez hit two homers on April 17 to bring his career total to 658, two shy of Willie Mays’s 660. Reaching that mark triggers a $6 million marketing bonus the Yankees do not intend to pay, believing Rodriguez ruined his marketability by using performance-enhancing drugs.In the 10 games since he reached 658, Rodriguez is 5 for 37 (.135), a stretch that included homer No. 659 on Sunday against the Mets. Joe Girardi, the Yankees’ manager, sounded agitated when asked what he had seen in Rodriguez’s recent rough stretch.“He just had a really good game on Sunday night,” Girardi said. “I mean, we forgot that one already? If I had to answer every time a guy had a bad game at the plate, golly, we’d be here a long time, and we’d be talking about every hitter that we have. A lot of times it’s just pitch selection.”Girardi, of course, is entitled to his positive spin; no player could ever accuse him of betrayal. But, golly, Rodriguez is not like every hitter Girardi has. He is one of the most productive hitters in major league history, and he just had the worst game, statistically, of his career.Rodriguez was more candid. For all of his past lies — and there have been so many — he is not denying what everyone sees. He acknowledged he might be pressing.“Maybe a little bit,” said Rodriguez, who grounded into a double play to end Wednesday’s game. “I don’t know. I know I stood on 600 for a long time. It’s only been a few games here. But it would have been nice to do it today.”In 2010, Rodriguez went 46 at-bats between homers No. 599 and 600. With Seattle in 1998, he went 47 at-bats between his 39th and 40th home run. He eventually got it — he said his mother had gone to church and prayed for him to shake his slump — and joined Jose Canseco and Barry Bonds as the only players, at the time, to hit 40 homers and steal 40 bases in the same season.Rodriguez’s steroid use would put him in a category with Canseco and Bonds for another reason. The Yankees’ fans seem to have forgiven his misdeeds; they want the team to win and Rodriguez is again a vital player. Fenway Park will be another matter.The Boston fans have razzed Rodriguez for more than a decade, and now they simply have another reason. Wednesday’s clunker by Rodriguez — which also included four strikeouts, three against Smyly — just raised the drama for this weekend’s series on Yawkey Way.“I think his reception will probably be more notable than mine,” said Miller, the former Boston left-hander. “He’s handled everything so well so far; that’s the least of my concerns. He’s on our side and he’s done a great job.”Pitchers fear Rodriguez again. Even in his 10-game slump, he has drawn 11 walks. He chased some bad pitches on Wednesday, but in general, Rodriguez said, that had not been a problem.“I’ve been feeling O.K.,” he said. “Today I didn’t feel very comfortable. Press delete and move on to Friday.”Rodriguez added: “I definitely chased today. I often talked, going back to spring training, about one of the keys for our offense and me specifically is swing at strikes and take your ‘A’ swing, and today I didn’t do that.”For the season, Rodriguez’s average has plunged to .232. He is not expected to contend for batting titles, of course, but that hot start is over.One month into Rodriguez’s latest comeback from disgrace, we have seen equal stretches of good and bad. In victory or defeat, he is, as always, quite a show.Advertisement