AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe DrapeLOUISVILLE, Ky. — No one here was surprised on Wednesday when two colts trained by Bob Baffert were made the morning-line favorites for Saturday’s 141st running of the Kentucky Derby. The colts, American Pharoah (5-2) and Dortmund (3-1), have been the most-talked-about horses on the  Triple Crown trail.There was some suspense, however, surrounding the post-position draw. All week Baffert, the Hall of Fame trainer, had worried that one of his horses might draw an inside gate, as his colt Lookin at Lucky did in 2010 when he pulled the No. 1 hole. Lookin at Lucky’s chances were compromised as soon as the gate opened, as he was bumped and then pinballed among the 20-horse field before finishing sixth. Two weeks later, he won the Preakness Stakes.Halfway through the draw on Wednesday, Baffert was having a flashback. The Nos. 1, 2 and 3 holes were still empty, and all but two outside posts were spoken for.“My stents were getting a workout,” Baffert said with a chortle, referring to the souvenirs left from a heart attack he had in 2012 while getting ready for a horse race in Dubai.Fortunately, for horses and trainer, Baffert’s colts avoided calamity. American Pharoah, last year’s 2-year-old champion, will break from the No. 18 post, and his stablemate, the undefeated Dortmund, from the No. 8.How strong of a hand is Baffert holding? Mike Battaglia, the Churchill Downs oddsmaker, evoked the names of Citation and Coaltown, who finished first and second in the 1948 Derby. Another Hall of Fame trainer, D. Wayne Lukas, said he would win his fifth Derby on Saturday if either American Pharoah or Dortmund were in his barn.“I’m glad I have them both on my roster,” Baffert said.Baffert is looking for his fourth victory in the Derby, America’s signature race, having previously won with Silver Charm (1997), Real Quiet (1998) and War Emblem (2002). Each of those horses went on to win the Preakness but saw his Triple Crown hopes ended in the Belmont Stakes.Victor Espinoza, who was on War Emblem as well as last year’s winner, California Chrome, will ride American Pharoah, who has not let a challenger get close to him in his four wins, most recently an eight-length romp in the Arkansas Derby. Martin Garcia rides Dortmund, a strapping horse who has won all six of his races.Baffert knows better than most how hard it is to win the Derby. Six times he has saddled the Derby favorite and three times he has finished second: with Cavonnier (1996), Pioneerof the Nile (2009) and Bodemeister (2012).There are other serious horses in the field. But two of them — the Blue Grass Stakes champion Carpe Diem and the Florida Derby winner Materiality — pulled posts that are going to complicate, if not compromise, their chances to finish the mile-and-a-quarter race ahead of their competitors.Carpe Diem, the third choice at 8-1, has won four of five starts but will break from the No. 2 hole with John Velazquez aboard. Materiality (12-1) is next door in the No. 3 hole, and his rider, Javier Castellano, will have to gun the front-running colt early and hope to avoid trouble.“This doesn’t change my confidence in the horses at all,” said Todd Pletcher, the trainer of both colts. “You have to work out good trips from any post. It’s part of it. We’ll be fine.”The Sunland Derby winner Firing Line (12-1) has finished second to Dortmund twice by a head and will start in the No. 10 post with the three-time Derby-winning jockey Gary Stevens in the irons.But Baffert knows much is expected from his barn, and especially from American Pharoah, a swift, sleek athlete who has wowed horsemen here  with the way he appears to float effortlessly over the track.“Right now we just have to contain ourselves,” Baffert said. “It’s exciting to be here with two good horses, him and Dortmund. In a stampede like the Derby, it’s all about the break, so whichever one of them gets out first, I’ll focus on. But there’s more ways to lose this than win it.”Advertisement