By PATRICK REEVELLAPRIL 29, 2015
MOSCOW — Russia’s government has said it will impose tough limits on the number of foreign players in the country’s top soccer league, hoping that the measure can revive Russia’s languishing domestic talent before the country hosts the World Cup in 2018.On Monday, Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s sports minister, promised he would “cut back on foreign players in a very tough way” after the adoption of a law last week empowering the ministry to regulate the number of foreign players on teams in the country’s top division, the Russian Premier League. The law did not set a specific limit, but the Football Union of Russia, the country’s governing body for soccer, has recommended that clubs be compelled to field at least six Russians in every match, a formula Mutko has said he supports.Mutko said limits were necessary to improve the quality of homegrown Russian players, whose performance, he said, was suffering because they were being crowded out by expensive foreign talent.“Our current limit only has four Russians on each match team sheet, and we have 16 teams in the league,” Mutko said. “Do the math — you can see how many Russians are playing.”AdvertisementRussia’s top clubs have grumbled loudly about the proposal but acknowledged that they would have to accept the new rules when they came. The suggestion was first floated by President Vladimir V. Putin.AdvertisementWith authorities currently promoting a heady brand of Russian patriotism, the changes may reflect an official preference for all things Russian. But they also appear to reflect mounting concern among Russian authorities that the national soccer team might be headed for a poor showing at the 2018 World Cup. Russia flopped at the last World Cup, in 2014 in Brazil, being ousted in the group stage. The national team has not progressed beyond the group stage of a major international competition since 2008.Preparations for the World Cup have been pocked with worries about racist behavior by fans and the possibility that the political crisis with the West over Ukraine could result in boycotts of the event or in its being stripped from Russia altogether. A failure to advance at Russia’s own World Cup would puncture an event being personally overseen by Putin.“It wouldn’t just be an embarrassment; it would be a national disgrace,” said Marc Bennetts, the author of a book on Russian soccer, “Football Dynamo.” “Questions would be asked why the Kremlin has pumped so much money into this if they can’t get out of the group stage.”To avoid this, authorities are hoping to relieve clubs of their dependence on foreign talent. The level of play in Russia remains middling, hamstrung by the absence of strong youth programs. Teams have turned to good, if unspectacular, foreign players to raise their game.Russian clubs began enthusiastically importing foreign players — called legionnaires here — immediately after the Soviet Union collapsed. But only relatively recently have Russian teams, flush with money from state-company sponsors, been able to afford more major talent.Most coaches and agents felt higher quotas would improve Russian players. The current quota has had the perverse effect of making Russian players more expensive even if they are less talented.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“These players know the club has to keep four players,” said Oliver Wendt, an agent who has brokered dozens of deals in Russia. “So they are very, very expensive.”Russia is not the only country that has considered limits on foreign players. England’s Premier League, which has arguably profited the most from foreign transfers, has called for quotas for English players. As in Russia, most top clubs oppose the move.AdvertisementMEXICAN CLUB WINS TITLE Dario Benedetto scored three goals, and Club America of Mexico beat the Montreal Impact, 4-2, on Wednesday night in Montreal to win the Concacaf Champions League title.Club America won the two-game series by 5-3 after tying Montreal, 1-1, last week in Mexico City.  (AP)RED BULLS STAY UNBEATEN Bradley Wright-Phillips scored on a penalty kick in the first half, and the Red Bulls tied the visiting Colorado Rapids, 1-1, to remain the only undefeated team in M.L.S.Wright-Phillips headed a cross wide in stoppage time, and the Red Bulls settled for their second straight draw. (AP)CHELSEA STRENGTHENS LEAD Chelsea staged a second-half comeback to win, 3-1, at Leicester and move to within 3 points of capturing England’s Premier League trophy.Chelsea holds a 13-point lead and can clinch its first league title in five years by beating Crystal Palace at home on Sunday.Leicester stayed 1 point clear of the relegation zone. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Law Aims to Help Russians Develop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.