AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseSAN FRANCISCO — On the par-4 10th hole at TPC Harding Park on Wednesday, Marc Leishman missed the fairway with his drive. To reach the green, he had a gap of less than a yard between two Monterey Cypress trees.Leishman was opposing Justin Rose on the first day of round-robin play at the World Golf Championships match-play event. The format, in which players exchange shots like punches until someone is eventually knocked out, rewards an aggressive, go-for-broke mind-set, which Leishman did not possess before his wife, Audrey, nearly died this month after a series of infections tore through her body like a tornado.In the span of 48 hours, Leishman, 31, went from preparing for the Masters to mentally preparing to raise the couple’s two young sons as a widower. Before his wife fell ill, Leishman most likely would have played it safe on the 10th and hit his ball out sideways. The trauma from what he described as his “worst nightmare” had an upside, as it turned out. It disabused Leishman, No. 60 in the world, of the notion that he has anything to lose on a golf course.He hit his ball through the gap and salvaged a bogey to halve the hole with the sixth-ranked Rose, whom he handed a 3-and-2 defeat. “A lot of people look at golf as life or death,” Leishman said. “But I’ve just been through one of those.”His ordeal started March 31, with flulike symptoms that sent Audrey Leishman to bed for the day. It was nine days before the start of the Masters, and Leishman’s plan was to fly from Virginia Beach, where the couple lives, to Augusta, Ga., for a few practice rounds at Augusta National Golf Club.His wife, a recreational runner, had squeezed in four cardio workouts between caring for their sons the week before, so her sudden lethargy gave Leishman pause. Accompanied by his father, Paul, who was visiting from Australia, Leishman went ahead with the trip. He had spent more than half of 2014 on the road playing in America and Australia, and the one constant in his crazy schedule was Audrey’s steadfastness and strength.She ended up at an after-hours medical center that night, at the insistence of a friend who recognizes serious symptoms when she sees them because her job involves analyzing medical records.Despite receiving treatment overnight, Audrey continued to deteriorate, and she was transported the next morning to the Sentara Princess Anne Hospital in Virginia Beach. Placed in the intensive-care unit under the care of a pulmonary specialist, she was found to have acute respiratory distress and toxic shock syndrome.Leishman cut short his trip to Augusta to return home. By the time he reached Audrey’s side that Wednesday, she was breathing with the help of a ventilator. Her kidneys and liver had begun to shut down and her blood pressure was dangerously low. Doctors met with Leishman and Audrey’s parents and two brothers and informed them that the prognosis was not good.Over the next two days, Leishman’s bedside vigil was interrupted by doctors waving consent forms at him for procedures they said were necessary to save his wife’s life. He frantically wrote down everything they said and looked up unfamiliar terms on the Internet using his smartphone to make some sense of the incomprehensible.“Google was a good friend of mine,” said Leishman, who added, “You can’t help but think things are not going to turn out very well, but I kept telling myself I’ve got to keep it together here.”On Thursday, three days before Easter, the doctors made the decision to put Audrey Leishman in a medically induced coma. “They said, ‘If we don’t do this in the next two hours, we’re going to lose her,’ ” Leishman said.He was terrified. Leishman told Audrey he loved her. He said her last words before drifting into unconsciousness were, “Make sure you take the boys to get their photos taken with the Easter Bunny.”The next day, he took a photograph of the boys on their way to their date with the Easter Bunny. He shared the picture with his wife when he visited her later. He tried to pull her out of death’s clutches by talking to her and playing video greetings from their sons. He held her hand and struggled to keep his emotions in check.“I had to be strong for my boys and for Audrey,” Leishman said. “I didn’t want her to hear me bawling.” Leishman consulted with specialists around the country to get second and third opinions on the best course of treatment. He did so, he said, with the blessing of Audrey’s pulmonary specialist, Nadeem Inayet, who gained Leishman’s trust with his willingness to confer by phone with the doctors summoned by Leishman and his manager, Bud Martin. Martin could not contain his skepticism when Inayet proposed flipping Leishman’s wife over on her stomach to ameliorate the fluid buildup in her lungs. Martin talked to a doctor he knew, who spoke to Inayet about the procedure before handing the phone back to Martin. His friend was not finished talking. Martin said, “He told me: ‘You don’t have to call me anymore. Audrey’s in the right hands.’ ”The flip was the turning point. Audrey Leishman began to show signs of improvement. Two days before the start of the Masters, she regained consciousness and was taken off the ventilator. It didn’t matter that she was too weak to lift her smartphone or speak. “One of the greatest moments of my life was seeing her breathe on her own,” Leishman said.He experienced another one when Inayet sat down beside him and shared how slim the odds really had been that Audrey would survive. “I’m a happy man right now,” he told Leishman, whose eyes welled up as he recalled the scene.“There’s no doubt he saved my wife’s life,” he said, adding, “We’re brothers for life.”The next day, Leishman officially withdrew from the Masters, where he had posted his best finish in a major, a tie for fourth in 2013. He was weak after losing 10 pounds from his 6-foot-2 frame because he had no appetite. A blood-clot scare soon sent Audrey back to the hospital, where she turned on the television in the waiting room to the Masters telecast so they could follow the rounds of their friends who had sent texts, emails, flowers and food.Leishman’s clubs were gathering dust in the garage, where he dropped them before taking up his vigil at the hospital. “For a good solid week I was thinking I wouldn’t be playing golf on the tour again,” he said. Nearly two weeks after Audrey left the hospital, Leishman played one nine-hole round and followed it up with 18 holes. He entered last week’s Zurich Classic of New Orleans at his wife’s urging. Though too weak to drive or travel, she could read the signs. The road back to normalcy cut through the PGA Tour.Firing at pins with aplomb, Leishman shot a 63 in the second round on his way to a tie for 28th. Playing it safe no longer makes sense. “If I don’t pull a shot off, it doesn’t matter,” he said.It may affect his livelihood, he added, but “it’s not going to affect my life.” “Hopefully my perspective stays like this forever.”Advertisement