AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonOn Thursday night in Chicago, N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell will welcome to the stage the best new members of his league as they are selected in the first round of the draft. Yet some of the first-round picks from 25 years ago would struggle to walk the same distance.Extensive interviews with nearly all 25 players drafted in the first round in 1990 revealed the challenges that professional football players face once their playing careers end. Many of them were ill equipped for life away from the game. They described a debilitating physical toll that left them hobbled. A lack of marketable skills outside football made it difficult for some of them to find work. Taught to be stoic warriors, they said they were unprepared for the loss of identity and structure that had defined their lives.“We signed up for those things as professional players,” said Eric Green, the only tight end selected in the first round in 1990. He said he had had nine knee operations and experienced chronic back pain, numbness on his left side and memory problems.Junior Seau, chosen fifth in 1990, is perhaps the grimmest case study from the 1990 draft. He committed suicide in 2012, less than three years after he retired, and was later found to have had chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head trauma.Profiles of each player drafted in the first round in 1990, and videos of some ​of them discussing challenges they faced once their N.F.L. careers ended.But many others contend with arthritic knees, shattered shoulders and rickety hips, and some players have endured a dozen or more operations. Tony Bennett, a former linebacker, has had both hips replaced. Dexter Carter has had 17 operations, including a knee replacement when he was 35. Blair Thomas had a heart attack and now has an implanted defibrillator.In some cases, the medical procedures have drained bank accounts and derailed searches for work.Chris Singleton, a linebacker selected eighth over all out of Arizona, made more than $6 million during his seven-year career, had steady work as a salesman and helped raise two children. But for years after he left the league in 1996, he struggled with injuries and strained finances and the loss of the camaraderie of his teammates and the chance for glory on Sundays.To cope, he drank, cheated on his wife, got a divorce, spent his savings, declared bankruptcy and gained weight. Then, last August, he tried to kill himself.“Fans really need to understand that we’re human beings,” said Singleton, who sought counseling and is now healthier. “We can be depressed or have a fight with a wife. We can wake up angry and have the flu.”A handful of the players drafted in the first round of the 1990 draft have avoided some of these problems. Emmitt Smith, the N.F.L.’s career leading rusher, is a businessman and a winner of “Dancing With the Stars.” Cortez Kennedy, Richmond Webb and Bern Brostek said they lived comfortably, having saved much of their money. Eight first-round picks from 1990 coach football, six are entrepreneurs, and three — Kennedy, Seau and Smith — have been elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.While the experiences of the 1990 draft class are by no means definitive, they are in many ways distinctive. The players were the first group chosen after the N.F.L. let college underclassmen enter the draft, yet they arrived when there was only limited free agency, curbing their potential pay. As a group, they each played an average of 8.8 years in the N.F.L. and earned about $15 million, according to Spotrac, a database for sports salaries.Their transition out of the N.F.L. was more challenging than for players today because they had access to fewer medical, psychological and financial services. Half of the N.F.L.’s retiree benefits were added only in the last decade; the Trust, a union-funded group that provides players with counseling, job training and other resources, is less than two years old.The N.F.L. and the players’ union said they had difficulty reaching retired players. Troy Vincent, who played for 15 years and is now the league’s executive vice president for football operations, said the N.F.L. had improved its resources for retirees partly by studying how the military helped troops return to civilian life. But ultimately, players must step forward if they want assistance.“I understand their pride, but how do I know you are looking for help?” Vincent said. “How do you expect someone to assist you if you don’t tell anyone?”The most challenging problems are often invisible. Ben Smith, a cornerback chosen by the Philadelphia Eagles, played six injury-hampered seasons and has struggled to wean himself off painkillers. About half of the first-round picks have sued the N.F.L., accusing the league of hiding from them the dangers of concussions.The emotional anguish can be acute for players unable to adjust to life without the routine offered by the football calendar. In the first years after leaving the game, many in the 1990 draft class became listless and depressed. After years of jarring hits and exhausting training, some simply wanted to rest.“There’s a tremendous amount of loss when someone’s cut or released,” said Eric Hipple, a former quarterback with the Detroit Lions who now helps players cope with life away from the game. “You can call it a traumatic event. The losses are huge. I just lost my income, lost my relationships, lost my identity.”Steve Broussard, a running back who played nine seasons on three teams, returned to his native California after he left the N.F.L. He finished his college degree, he said, but went through “a state of withdrawal” from football. He gained about 50 pounds and snapped out of his two-year gloom only after he could no longer fit into his golf pants and was short of breath.“The depression of missing the camaraderie, that goes with the separation part of it,” said Broussard, who spent all the money he earned in the N.F.L. and now works as an assistant college coach, most recently at Southern Methodist.The players who made the smoothest transitions out of the N.F.L. began planning during their playing days. Andre Ware, a Heisman Trophy winner who spent four years in the N.F.L., networked relentlessly as a player and is now a radio and television analyst. Renaldo Turnbull, who was chosen by the New Orleans Saints, was a stockbroker during his off-seasons.Most players, though, did not expand their contacts beyond the locker room and found themselves searching for new careers almost from scratch after they left the N.F.L. Even the players who saved money and returned to college found it hard to gain a foothold in the business world, sometimes because employers assumed they did not need the work because they had been in the N.F.L.“If I had to do it over again, I would create relationships with companies while I was playing,” said Carter, who was picked by the San Francisco 49ers and earned a graduate degree in business management.The injuries and the difficulty finding a new career, on top of the shock of being separated from friends and the lack of familiar routines, can lead players to erode their savings. At least four first-round picks from 1990 have declared bankruptcy, a rate in line with findings about N.F.L. players that were recently published by the National Bureau of Economic Research.Annamaria Lusardi, a co-author of the study and a professor at George Washington University, said the surprise was not that N.F.L. players declared bankruptcy, but that they did so regardless of how much money they had earned.“It means they didn’t have a plan for the future,” she said. “Earning a lot doesn’t provide protection from going bankrupt. It’s a sad fact because irrespective of the reason, they have complex lives and complex issues to consider.”Jack Begg and Alain Delaquérière contributed research.Advertisement