

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

UPDATED May 1, 2015

It is simply the biggest sports Saturday in years. Titles will be decided, teams eliminated, bragging rights gained, and it will all be capped by a championship fight many thought would never happen. No matter where you are, here is a road map to what to watch and what to eat and drink during 24 hours of sports nirvana. (All times Eastern.)
A young Western team is off to a 3-1 start, but faces a stern challenge against Sydney, last year’s runner-up.It has been said that the best scrambled eggs in the world can be found at Bill’s Cafe in Sydney. Read halfway down here for instructions on how to make them. Brekkie, yes, but also suitable for a midnight snack, and a strong way to start this particular day. It’s the grueling 33-frame semifinals wrap-up, though neither the charismatic Ronnie O’Sullivan nor the defending champion, Mark Selby, will be participating after being knocked out earlier.It’s 5 a.m. You could assemble and indulge in a full English breakfast. Or you could go straight for the rarebit.The second tier of English soccer finishes up, with Watford a point ahead of Bournemouth and trying to clinch the most important title in its history.The Scotch egg is pub food, but it is also a hand-held sausage-and-egg bomb, and not a bad idea for the morning hours.The women’s singles final: the last 10 winners have come from China.Longevity noodles are served during birthdays and Chinese New Year for luck. If you’re pulling for continued Chinese table tennis dominance, eat them now, too.First-placed Chennai has the New Zealand slugger Brendon McCullum, who belted 100 runs without being out in a game earlier this month.Indian butter chicken, like cricket, can be found throughout the empire. It would also make an excellent midday feast.The first leg of the English Triple Crown, with last year’s 2-year-old champion, Gleneagles, the favorite.The Horse’s Neck: Bourbon or brandy, bitters and ginger ale. James Bond orders one at a first-class airport lounge in “On Her Majesty’s Secret Service.” You could just have one on the couch.The big names will be gone, but sleepers remain: Tom Brady, Terrell Davis, Donald Driver and Shannon Sharpe were all taken in these rounds.Your best choice is an enormous platter of nachos with shredded pork shoulder, Cheddar and lime-laced sour cream.Juventus can clinch its fourth straight Italian Serie A title with a win.Sampdoria supporters can have their pesto. Juventus supporters win with a bicerin, Turin’s espresso-chocolate-cream specialty. Toulon goes for its third straight European title.Cade toulonnaise (called socca in Nice, and farinata in Italy) is a thick savory pancake made with chickpea flour, and it is an exceptional snack. Eat it piping hot. The teams are playing their fifth postseason series in seven years.This game is at Madison Square Garden. Are you really going to eat something that’s not thin-crust New York pizza? This one is from Roberta’s in Brooklyn.The traditional rivals meet in the second game of a three-game series, with both near the top of the American League East standings.Here’s a lobster roll for Red Sox Nation. For Yankees fans, a diner burger. The event began with most of the world’s top golfers, but it tends to bring upsets, so who knows who will still be alive by the quarterfinals.Light and relatively low-alcohol, the High Five — a combination of beer, amaro and lime juice — is good for the slow burn of a sunny afternoon.A strong field includes five horses coming off Grade I wins. Bob Baffert trains the two favorites, American Pharoah and Dortmund.The mint julep is the classic Derby pairing, but the lesser known specialty (at least to Yankees) is Derby pie. Here’s our version. The Red Bulls are unbeaten and a point behind the Revolution in the East in Major League Soccer, with a game in hand.It rarely gets easier than this two-ingredient cocktail, and it will help get you all the way to midnight: Red Bull and Bacardi Limón. Many fans had pegged the Spurs-Clippers series as the best of the first round, and it has lived up to the hype. Game 7 should be epic.These subs are all you need.It is the second running of this new annual event. Last year, Jamaica won; the United States failed to make the final after passing the baton out of the zone.You’ve almost reached the end. Until then, sip Planter’s Punch, the Caribbean in a glass.The day is capped by the most anticipated fight of the decade. Whew!High rollers will have their steak. The rest of us can just pop some Champagne.Victor Mather, Emily Weinstein, Margaux Laskey and Sara Bonisteel.Advertisement