AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Somebody might one day explain to Alexis Sánchez the meaning of fatigue and burnout. Right now, he just doesn’t get it.Over the past two weeks, on different continents, he has played and scored in two Premier League games for Arsenal and played and scored in two World Cup qualifiers for Chile.While diminutive in stature at 5 foot 6 and 136 pounds, he is immense in spirit and skills. It is the size of his heart and the depth of his desire that persuade managers to be reckless with his health.“Alexis is relentless going forward,” Arsenal Manager Arsène Wenger said on Saturday after his winger returned from South America with just enough time to take part in one short practice before the game against Watford.“I worried about him because he has a hip rotator muscle problem,” Wenger said. “But there are periods when a player is in a scoring moment — and to interrupt this can sometimes disturb the flow.”Wenger, who has managed Arsenal since 1996, struggled to think of any other player with such contagious enthusiasm as Sánchez. To give you a sense of his exhaustive schedule, here is Sánchez’s output since the beginning of the month: Oct. 4: Sánchez sparks a 3-0 win at home over Manchester United, scoring twice and looking peeved when Wenger substituted him because of clear signs of that hip injury. Oct. 9: Scores for Chile in a 2-0 World Cup qualifier over Brazil in Santiago, Chile. Oct. 14: Scores twice and sets up another goal for Eduardo Vargas in Chile’s 4-3 win over Peru in another World Cup qualifier in Lima, Peru. Oct. 17: Scores the opening goal to break Watford’s resistance in a 3-0 away win that keeps Arsenal in second place in the Premier League.We won’t dwell on the 17,000 frequent flier miles he has accrued, the changes in time zones and climates he has endured, or the time he has spent on the treatment table between training sessions. We also won’t dwell on Arsenal’s concern over a player who has spent the last two summers playing in major international tournaments in South America, first the World Cup in Brazil in 2014 and then the Copa América this year, which Chile won on home soil. And maybe, if nobody tells him there are physical and mental limits to how many games a body can take, Sánchez won’t pause to consider what his breaking point is. There is, after all, a must-win game for Arsenal this Tuesday in the Champions League as it takes on Bayern Munich.“I don’t know if there is any reason to change the team,” Wenger mused Saturday night. “Maybe Alexis or Mesut Ozil could take a rest.”Maybe not, in the case of the relentless Chilean. The danger of interrupting the flow — as Wenger put it — is that he could tamper with someone who has proved to be a true game winner, someone whose running almost embarrasses his teammates into playing at his same level. Years back, the Germans referred to an Englishman, Kevin Keegan, as “Mighty Mouse” because of his small stature and huge running skills. Sánchez is the Chilean version of Keegan, and his club and national team need every ounce that he is willing to give. On Saturday evening, Arsenal was merely trying to match what the two Manchester teams did earlier in the day. City — playing without Sergio Agüero, David Silva and Vincent Kompany, who proved that there is a breaking point when it comes to nonstop games for club and country — overwhelmed Bournemouth, 5-1.City Coach Manuel Pellegrini — also a Chilean — improvised. He replaced Agüero with Wilfried Bony. He invited winger Raheem Sterling to occupy Silva’s place just behind the main striker. And he deployed Kevin De Bruyne wide left.“We talked a lot through the week,” Bony told reporters. “I know Raheem is very fast, and I had to show myself for him.“I told him, if I jump, you have to run, whether I win the ball or not.”Bony scored twice, while Sterling topped that with a hat trick. And afterward, Bony concluded, “We are on fire; we just need to continue. It’s a very important week for us, with Sevilla on Wednesday in the Champions League and the Manchester derby at the weekend.”Relentless, as someone said.The Manchester derby will be between two neighbors who both are chasing the English league title, and United prepared for it by winning, 3-0, at Everton. “I am very happy with the response of my players and very proud of the performance,” said United Manager Louis van Gaal, who has been champing at the bit the last two weeks. A coach who cannot have access to his players while they are scattered here and there has to live and fret alone as he tries to figure out why a team suffered as big a loss as it did on Oct. 4. It was the same for everyone chasing the big prizes. Even Chelsea, the seemingly already deposed champion, mustered a 2-0 win over struggling Aston Villa.Advertisement