AdvertisementSupported byClippers 102, Spurs 96By Scott CacciolaSAN ANTONIO — The Los Angeles Clippers were under duress, on the brink of elimination against the defending champions. So their 102-96 victory over the San Antonio Spurs on Thursday night was something to savor, at least until they began the process of focusing all over again.The Clippers stretched their first-round series against the Spurs to the limit at AT&T Center, forcing a Game 7 that is scheduled for Saturday in Los Angeles. Blake Griffin finished with 26 points and 12 rebounds, and Chris Paul overcame a sluggish start to collect 19 points and 15 assists as the Clippers fought back every rally the Spurs could muster.The Clippers were able to buck some recent history in the process. Since 2006, the Spurs had won all seven of their opportunities to close out opponents at home in the playoffs.Marco Belinelli scored 23 points and made seven 3-pointers for the Spurs, who were just 12 of 21 from the free-throw line. Boris Diaw added 17 points off the bench in the loss.Paul, after laboring early, played the entire second half — and played well, his 3-pointer midway through the fourth quarter giving the Clippers an 85-78 lead. Whenever the Spurs threatened, the Clippers had an answer. Duncan escapes for a layup? Redick hits a 3-pointer. Diaw backs his defender down for a bucket? Jamal Crawford drains a midrange jumper.In the final minute, after Paul hit a layup over the Spurs’ Patty Mills, Belinelli responded with a 3-pointer to cut the deficit to 98-96 with 14.5 seconds remaining. But Crawford made two free throws to effectively seal the win.The Clippers could have collapsed after their loss in Game 5, a defeat that hinged on a goaltending violation by DeAndre Jordan. Instead, they approached Game 6 with a great deal of energy, building an early lead thanks to J. J. Redick, who was scoring from the outside, and the Spurs, who failed to take care of the ball.The Spurs’ sixth turnover resulted in a fast-break dunk by Jordan and a 19-12 lead. Diaw later fouled Redick on a 3-point attempt, and that was how things went in the opening moments.San Antonio eventually settled into a rhythm, and its offense was explosive at times. Belinelli came off the bench to make four 3-pointers in the second quarter, lifting the Spurs to a 41-32 lead. By then, Coach Gregg Popovich was engaged in his strategy of having his players intentionally send Jordan, a poor free-throw shooter, to the line.But Jordan went 7 of 13 from the line in the first half, and Duncan was banished to the bench with three fouls as Hack-a-DeAndre backfired. Jordan helped the Clippers produce just enough offense to counteract a dismal first half by Paul, who trudged to the locker room after missing all seven of his shots, the score tied at 51-51.The Clippers started the second half with an 11-2 run. The Spurs turned to their bench to keep them involved, as Diaw and Belinelli made 3-pointers. Paul connected on his first field goal with less than five minutes left in the third quarter, and the Clippers still led by 7 — an accurate indication that the Spurs were in trouble.Advertisement