AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaThe Rangers again found themselves in a tight game on Thursday night as the third period wound down and overtime loomed in their series opener against Washington at Madison Square Garden.This was no surprise for a team that had beaten Pittsburgh, 2-1, four times in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs. But this time, the Capitals stunned the Rangers with a goal by Joel Ward with 1.3 seconds remaining, capping a physical contest that perhaps established a tone for the series, the fourth time in five years the teams are meeting in the playoffs.The sequence leading to the winning goal enraged Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault, who appeared to want a penalty called when Washington’s Nicklas Backstrom hammered Rangers defenseman Dan Boyle into the boards. Alex Ovechkin then corralled the puck and sent it to Ward alone in front of the Rangers’ net.“I’m not going to comment on the referees,” Vigneault said after the game. “Don’t ask me about it.”The Rangers expected another overtime, having twice defeated the Penguins in extra sessions. But after Ward stuffed the puck past Henrik Lundqvist, the Rangers were left wondering exactly what had transpired.“I don’t really remember, to be honest,” defenseman Ryan McDonagh said. Referring to Boyle, he added, “Off the top, I saw Boyler get hit, go down, and I kind of hesitated just to kind of see.”Like Vigneault, McDonagh seemed to think the officials were about to whistle the play dead and call a penalty.“I knew he was down; I thought they were going to blow it,” McDonagh said. “It’s a little shellshocked right now.”Lundqvist stood in his crease and hung his head in frustration as the puck was dropped at center ice so the final bit of time could tick off.The Rangers dropped a series opener at home for the first time since 1996.“It’s a tough one; it stinks,” Lundqvist said. “Obviously the last few seconds there, I feel like we all just kind of stopped when Boyle went down.”The Rangers had not played their best for the better part of the game. Maybe it was because they had not played since eliminating the Penguins last Friday. Maybe they were feeling out the Capitals, who had to be somewhat weary after their seven-game series with the Islanders finished Monday.Capitals goaltender Braden Holtby played well, making 31 saves. But the Rangers finally scored late in the third when Jesper Fast tipped home a Kevin Hayes shot through traffic, and they seemed primed for a chance to prevail in overtime.Martin St. Louis said the team’s best approach would be to forget about the series opener and focus on Saturday’s Game 2, which will start at 12:30 p.m. at the Garden.“This time of year, you have to shake it off,” St. Louis said. “If you don’t play well, you get beat. We played hard; both teams played hard. We’re going to wake up tomorrow and get back to work.”The Capitals were coming off a grueling battle with the Islanders, including three one-goal victories of their own. Vigneault was curt in his postgame remarks when asked how the Capitals had managed to score such a bizarre late goal.“What can you say at the end?” he said. “There are a couple of mistakes. After that, the puck ended up in the back of our net.” Lundqvist preferred to simply focus on the next game.“You just have to put it behind you; you have to move on,” he said. “We will regroup and come back. It’s going to come fast, an early one on Saturday.”Advertisement