AdvertisementSupported byBulls 120, Bucks 66By The Associated Press and Scott CacciolaLed by Mike Dunleavy’s 20 points, the Chicago Bulls came close to an N.B.A. playoff record in defeating the Milwaukee Bucks, 120-66, in Game 6 and clinching their first-round series Thursday night.The Bulls, who will face the Cleveland Cavaliers in the second round, finished 4 points shy of a playoff record for largest margin of victory. Minnesota beat St. Louis, 133-75, on March 19, 1956.The game was all but over early, but it still included plenty of the intensity and bad blood that had characterized the first five games of the series, and Dunleavy was in the middle of much of the action. He drew a foul that led to the ejection of Milwaukee’s Giannis Antetokounmpo for a flagrant-2 foul just before halftime.Pau Gasol scored 19 points for the Bulls, who started the series with a 3-0 lead before two wins by the Bucks put them back in position to tie the series. In an indication of Milwaukee’s misery on offense, no Bucks starter scored more than ZaZa Pachulia’s 8 points. It was by far the most one-sided loss in team playoff history. The Bucks lost by 36 points to the Knicks in 1970.It was a rough end to a successful season for the Bucks, who were the league’s worst team in 2013-14 but turned it around to earn the Eastern Conference’s No. 6 seed under Jason Kidd, their new coach.DONOVAN TO COACH THUNDER Billy Donovan, who coached the University of Florida to two national championships and four Final Fours in 19 seasons, resigned to become the coach of the Oklahoma City Thunder, the N.B.A. team announced.Donovan, 49, who has flirted with making the leap to the N.B.A. several times, going so far as to accept an offer to coach the Orlando Magic in 2007 before backing out and returning to Florida days later, will be tasked with coaching one of the league’s most talented teams, albeit one that missed the playoffs after an injury-plagued season.Donovan, who led the Gators to a record of 467-186, replaces Scott Brooks, who was fired after seven seasons. Oklahoma City finished this season 45-37, narrowly falling short of the final spot in the Western Conference playoffs. Kevin Durant missed 55 games because of injuries.  SCOTT CACCIOLAWIGGINS IS TOP ROOKIE Andrew Wiggins became the first rookie of the year in Minnesota Timberwolves history. He received 110 of 130 first-place votes and had 604 points. Chicago’s Nikola Mirotic finished second with 335 points, and Philadelphia’s Nerlens Noel was third.Wiggins, a 20-year-old Canadian, went to the Timberwolves last summer in a trade that sent the disgruntled Kevin Love to Cleveland. Wiggins averaged 16.9 points and 4.6 rebounds while playing all 82 games. The Wolves went an N.B.A.-worst 16-66 this season. (AP)Advertisement