By BILL PENNINGTONAPRIL 30, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  Perhaps no unit on the Giants has been a greater liability in recent seasons than the offensive line. The Giants have struggled to run the ball effectively and have failed to protect quarterback Eli Manning, a combination that has contributed mightily to the team’s 13-19 record in the last two seasons.Not surprisingly, for the second time in three years, the Giants on Thursday used their first pick of the draft to select an offensive lineman, a move that should bolster a glaring deficiency.But this year’s choice, Miami tackle Ereck Flowers, is also likely to shake up the composition of the line immediately. He may even be team’s featured lineman of the future.The Giants on Thursday were expected to take the top-rated offensive lineman of the draft, Iowa’s Brandon Scherff. But Scherff was taken by the Washington Redskins with the fifth overall pick — four choices before the Giants selected.AdvertisementIf the Giants at that point did some soul searching, they did not appear to show it afterward. General Manager Jerry Reese said the team’s talent evaluators had both Scherff and the 6-foot-6, 329-pound Flowers rated at the top of the lineman class. The Giants made a quick decision.Advertisement“Obviously, he’s a gigantic human being, and he played at a high level of competition,” Reese said. “We think this can help solidify the offensive line, so hopefully this will settle the offensive line down and we don’t have to keep talking about the offensive line as much.“He’s a big, tough, good football player, and he’s got a nasty streak.”While Reese said Flowers could play either guard or tackle, Coach Tom Coughlin spoke to reporters after Reese did and said unequivocally that Flowers was a tackle. Flowers played on the left and the right sides at Miami, although he spent the last two seasons at left tackle, the most prominent position on the line because it protects the blind side of a right-handed quarterback like Manning.If Flowers is going to play tackle — and the Giants have insisted that any player chosen with the ninth pick should contribute as a rookie — that means that the current right tackle Justin Pugh, the team’s 2013 first-round pick, may have to move to guard.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Or, Flowers could compete with the Giants’ current left tackle, Will Beatty, who has largely had no rivals for his position for multiple seasons. Coughlin did not rule out the possibility that Flowers would challenge Beatty. Even if Flowers does not unseat Beatty in 2015, he may be the team’s left tackle of the future.Asked if Flowers was viewed as an eventual left tackle, Reese answered, “Yeah, you would think so.”In a conference call with reporters late Thursday night, Flowers said he would play wherever the coaches put him.“I see myself anywhere on the line,” Flowers said.The Giants on Thursday also coveted wide receiver Amari Cooper, but he went to the Oakland Raiders with the fourth selection. Kevin White, perceived as the next best receiver, was selected by the Chicago Bears with the seventh pick. And the Giants wondered if Southern California defensive lineman Leonard Williams would fall to their ninth draft choice, but that did not happen, either, as the Jets took Williams with the sixth pick. The versatile Clemson linebacker Vic Beasley might have bolstered a defense that faltered last year, but he went to the Atlanta Falcons with the eighth pick.Coughlin said the Giants were not thunderstruck when the Redskins took Scherff.“For him to go there is not a shock,” a smiling Coughlin said.Added Reese, speaking of Scherff and Flowers, “We thought they would both be terrific players.”A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants Take Offensive Tackle Who Wasn’t Necessarily Their First Choice .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.