By SETH BERKMANAPRIL 30, 2015
Despite an 8-2 loss to the Washington Nationals on Thursday at Citi Field, the Mets turned the page from April in first place in the National League East.The opening month of the season was a memorable chapter for the club, which set a franchise record with 10 straight wins at home to start the season and tied another mark with a 12-game home winning streak dating to last season.These accomplishments came while the Mets sustained a string of injuries.But Thursday’s loss, when set beside pregame comments by General Manager Sandy Alderson, put a spotlight on problems that could vex the team.To maintain their success, the Mets (15-8) will need to improve their infield defense, and the players they expected to become valuable assets will need to return to health.AdvertisementEarlier in the day, Manager Terry Collins indicated that Wilmer Flores was starting at shortstop because of his offense and that the Mets expected him to make only routine plays in the field. But even that has proved troublesome of late.AdvertisementIn the second inning, Flores displayed his improving bat with a double off Nationals starter Stephen Strasburg. He later scored the first run of the game, only to effectively give the run back, plus more, with his glove in the fourth.After Denard Span walked to lead off the inning, Yunel Escobar hit a soft ground ball that Flores bobbled, negating a potential double play. Jayson Werth followed by singling in Span, and the Nationals scored three runs in the inning, two unearned because of Flores’s error.“It changed the tide, no question about it,” Collins said.Despite a shaky month in the field, Flores said his confidence had not wavered. Collins understood that there could be rough spots defensively when Flores was named the team’s starting shortstop.“I think you’ve got to be a little patient and continue to tell Wilmer, ‘Listen, you’ve just got to slow down, relax, make the plays,’ ” Collins said.But after the error, starter Jacob deGrom was unable to regain the form that had allowed him to retire the Nationals’ lineup in order the first time around.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Nationals added two runs in the sixth, chasing deGrom, and Bryce Harper hit a bases-clearing double in the ninth. During deGrom’s start on April 24, against the Yankees, he allowed three home runs in a 6-1 loss.DeGrom kept the ball in the park on Thursday, but he allowed five runs, three earned, and five hits.Despite consecutive uneven starts by deGrom, there is little worry that he will not contribute throughout the season. But it could be a while before reinforcements arrive. In fact, the list of the injured got longer when Alderson announced that Rafael Montero, who was called up to make a spot start on Tuesday in Miami, had inflammation in his rotator cuff and was put on the disabled list, retroactive to April 29.The Mets will most likely be without David Wright, out with a hamstring injury since April 14, for at least another week. Alderson said that although Wright had begun swinging a bat and fielding ground balls, he would probably need to make a rehab start before rejoining the Mets.AdvertisementAfter the game, the Mets announced on Twitter that they planned to recall second baseman Dilson Herrera from Class AAA Las Vegas. The team will have to send a player down on Friday to compensate.Two relievers expected to be late-inning cogs out of the bullpen are not as close to returning. On Thursday, Bobby Parnell began throwing from 60 feet, and Vic Black began throwing from 90 feet, but Alderson said “it could be a while” before they rejoined the Mets.While Alderson said players like third baseman Eric Campbell and catcher Kevin Plawecki have filled in admirably for Wright and Travis d’Arnaud, who has a fractured finger, the Mets will need consistent contributions from players who are now injured.“Our guys have done a nice job,” Alderson said. “But we started the season with David Wright and Travis, and it’d be nice to have them back.”After Thursday’s loss, their first at home this season, Collins tried to maintain his perspective. “This is a blip,” he said, “and we’ve got to get through it.”A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Lose Game, but Not Their Patience, as the Calendar Turns .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.