AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurWEST WINDSOR, N.J. — Minutes after a soupy fog had evaporated into a clear blue sky one recent morning, members of the United States women’s rowing team climbed into their sculling boats and went out for a post-world championships paddle.About two dozen women in either doubles or singles were here on Mercer Lake, one of the national team training centers. Each of their shells cut through the water like a giant, delicate water bug, and the athletes barely broke a sweat in a training session that amounted to rowing’s version of a jog.There certainly did not seem to be any magic at work, no evidence why this rowing program, over the last decade, has become one of the great dynasties in the sport. Yet last month, at Lake Aiguebelette in France, the United States women’s eight won the world championship for its 10th consecutive victory in either the world championships or the Olympics, a phenomenal streak of superiority in any sport.Until this women’s crew came around, no other national rowing team had won 10 major titles in a row in any discipline, much less the eight, the sport’s marquee event. The team with the next-best record was the East German quadruple sculls of the 1970s and ’80s, with nine consecutive victories in an era of rampant steroid abuse in that Eastern bloc nation.8 PhotosView Slide Show ›Mark Makela for The New York TimesTo find out why, exactly, this rowing program has dominated, I went to see Tom Terhaar, the women’s national team coach since 2001. I wanted to know if he could share his secrets. Then it dawned on me: Could Terhaar be the secret? He is, after all, the common denominator: Over the last decade, every one of those winning crews had a different lineup.“Oh, no, it’s not me, it’s the talent pool,” Terhaar said as we sat in the coach’s motorboat watching his rowers glide by. “The sport is exploding. It’s just incredible how big it is now and how many great athletes we’re getting.”Long gone are the days when rowers came exclusively from the Ivy League or traditional rowing powers like the century-old programs at Washington and Cal. Now national team members hail from far and wide, including from relatively unheralded rowing programs like the one at Ithaca, whose women’s team — founded in 1975 — produced Meghan Musnicki, who has won four world titles and an Olympic gold medal in Terhaar’s women’s eight.During the weekend, about 11,000 rowers clogged the Charles River, which separates Boston and Cambridge, Mass., for the annual Head of the Charles Regatta — many of them benefiting from an explosion in opportunities created by universities seeking to satisfy Title IX requirements. But winning the world championships and the Olympics for 10 years in a row did not happen just because there are a lot more American rowers. Deny it all he wants, it happened because of key contributions from Terhaar.Terhaar, 46, grew up in Buffalo and rowed in high school at St. Joseph’s Collegiate Institute. Then, all 142 pounds of him ended up on the lightweight squad at Rutgers. He went on to coach Columbia’s lightweight men, leading the varsity eight to its first victory in the 55 years of the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges championship.“He really changed the approach to training and used a much more scientific approach,” said Mike Zimmer, who was the Columbia heavyweight coach and director of rowing at the time and who now works as the national team programs manager at U.S. Rowing. “Tom’s attention to detail was really, really high, and he was just so professional. Always reserved. Never yelled, unless it was at me, but I’m sure I deserved it.”When Terhaar started coaching the United States women in 2001, the improvement was immediate. A new philosophy was in play: Sweep rowers (those who row with one oar) were commingled with scullers (who row with two oars). Smaller boats were not constantly or suddenly raided to suit the needs of the higher-profile eight.Rowers felt validated, but they also became interchangeable: One day, a rower might train in a pair (two rowers, one oar each), the next, she might work in a double (two rowers, two oars each). The goal was to teach the athletes to become comfortable rowing with anyone, in any boat.That year, the eight finished fourth at the world championships. The next year, it won.At Terhaar’s first Olympics, in 2004 in Athens, the women’s eight narrowly lost to a Romanian team that won its third straight Olympic gold, and a year later, the United States women lost again, at the world championships.The United States women’s eight has not lost since.The streak is now its own era — Terhaar and his wife, the former Olympic rower Jen Dore, have had four children since just before it began, and dozens of rowers have cycled in and out of the women’s eight and then on with their lives. But no matter the combination, the Americans keep winning.“I showed up and was big and young and strong and saw a group of women who were so amazing, so much better than me, that I was like, I want to be like them, so I pushed myself farther than I ever thought was possible,” said Eleanor Logan, who won a bronze in the pair last month and is also a two-time Olympic champion and three-time world champion in the eight.When asked about Terhaar’s role in this dynasty, Logan said his success was rooted in the fact that he is not a micromanager. He realizes his rowers are self-motivated, and has let the program evolve organically. In this Olympic cycle, though, the pressure to succeed is higher than usual because of the streak.The team has had a brief break since winning the world championship, but now Terhaar is evaluating every rower, every day, as the Rio Olympics approach. He will not name his team for the eight until next summer.“He is patient and likes to see how things play out before changing things,” Logan said. “He laid the foundation and knows that he can now say whatever he wants, do whatever he wants, but that it’s up to us to make it happen.”There is a system to winning now. The success, though, is clicking away with such power that other nations cannot keep up. With the Olympics less than a year away, a third straight Summer Games gold seems to hang just beyond the finish line, right there for the taking.No magic needed. Just a freight train at top speed, rolling through.Email: juliet@nytimes.comAdvertisement