By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 30, 2015
Matt Carpenter doubled, singled and walked twice, and the Cardinals overcame a short outing by Tim Cooney in his major league debut to defeat Philadelphia, 9-3, in St. Louis for their third straight win.Carpenter scored each of his first three times on base and has 21 runs in 21 games. Matt Adams had three hits and drove in three runs, two on a tiebreaking homer.Cooney, a 24-year-old left-hander brought up from Class AAA Memphis before the game, was given a 3-0 lead but lasted only two and a third innings, allowing three runs and seven hits. Carlos Villanueva (2-1) followed and retired all 10 batters he faced.REDS 5, BRAVES 1  Mike Leake pitched eight strong innings and hit his fifth career home run to help visiting Cincinnati subdue Atlanta.AdvertisementTodd Frazier, Tucker Barnhart and Billy Hamilton also had solo homers as the Reds won their third straight. Joey Votto had two hits and drove in a run.AdvertisementLeake (1-1) allowed four base runners on two hits and two walks, and retired the last 12 batters he faced.The Braves have dropped three in a row and eight of 10.TWINS 12, WHITE SOX 2 Brian Dozier had a homer and four R.B.I., and Minnesota roughed up the White Sox ace Chris Sale in Chicago.Trevor May (2-1) gave up two runs on 10 hits and struck out four in five and two-thirds innings, and the Twins knocked Sale out of the game with a seven-run third inning.Sale (2-1) gave up a career-high nine runs, eight earned.ANGELS 6, ATHLETICS 5 Kole Calhoun had two hits and three R.B.I., Garrett Richards took a shutout into the seventh inning, and Los Angeles held on for a win at Oakland.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Erick Aybar, Johnny Giavotella and David Freese also drove in runs for the Angels, who ended April with a .500 record by winning five of seven.Mark Canha drove in three runs, two on a homer, as the A’s lost for the sixth time in seven games, matching their worst start in Oakland history at 9-14.Calhoun batted cleanup in the absence of Albert Pujols, who had a sore hamstring after being hurt Wednesday night in a victory over the A’s.BLUE JAYS 5, INDIANS 1  Kevin Pillar drove in two runs with a double, and Toronto did all its scoring in the fourth, off starter T. J. House (0-4), in a victory at Cleveland.AdvertisementASTROS 3, MARINERS 2 Jose Altuve’s R.B.I. single in the 10th inning lifted Houston to its seventh straight victory, at Seattle.Luke Gregerson (2-0) pitched a scoreless 10th to pick up the win.ROYALS 8, TIGERS 1 Danny Duffy pitched shutout ball into the eighth, and Eric Hosmer hit a two-run homer as host Kansas City trounced Detroit.WAINWRIGHT HAS OPERATION The Cardinals’ ace, Adam Wainwright, had surgery to repair a torn left Achilles’ tendon, an injury that will sideline him for the rest of the season.A version of this article appears in print on May 1, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Cardinals Overwhelm the Phillies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.