AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe Drape and Melissa HoppertThe horses for the 141st running of the Kentucky Derby are listed in order of post position, with comments by Joe Drape and Melissa Hoppert of The New York Times. The morning-line odds were set by Mike Battaglia of Churchill Downs. (Note: International Star, who was to start from the No. 12 post, was scratched Saturday morning with a hoof issue. Frammento, an alternate entry who will wear saddle No. 21, was added to the field after the scratch of Stanford, who was to start from the No. 11 post. The horses will keep their program numbers but the first hole in the gate will be left open and each will move down a gate. For example, No. 1 Ocho Ocho Ocho will break from the second post but still be considered as breaking from Post 1.)Purse: $2 million guaranteed minimumDistance: 1¼ milesTrack record: 1:59 2/5 (Secretariat, 1973)Weight: 126 poundsPost time: 6:24 p.m. EasternTelevision: NBCJoe Drape’s picks: Dortmund, Firing Line, American PharoahMelissa Hoppert’s picks: Dortmund, Firing Line, MaterialityTrainer: James Cassidy Jockey: Elvis Trujillo Odds: 50-1JD: The smallest horse in the field has grit, but this water is too deep.MH: The third-place finisher behind Carpe Diem and Danzig Moon in the Blue Grass, this little guy is out of his league here.Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: John Velazquez Odds: 8-1JD: This colt is classy and accomplished, but he has to overcome a terrible post. Affirmed, in 1978, was the last to win from here.MH: Even though his highest Beyer speed figure is under 100, he deserves to be in the conversation. Worried about him coming out of the No. 2 hole, though.Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: Javier Castellano Odds: 12-1JD: He’s unbeaten but lightly raced. The last Derby winner without a race at 2 was Apollo in 1882.MH: This still-developing colt hasn’t disappointed since he’s been at Churchill. But that grim statistic — no races last year — hovers over him like a storm cloud.Trainer: George Weaver Jockey: Manuel Franco Odds: 30-1JD: The Wood Memorial runner-up is training like a real horse in the morning. Still, this is a big task.MH: One of eight horses in the field to register a Beyer of 100 or more. But he struggles with switching leads and has been inconsistent.Trainer: Mark Casse Jockey: Julien Leparoux Odds: 30-1JD: His owner, John Oxley, won the 2001 Derby with Monarchos. This is no Monarchos.MH: He has been generating a lot of buzz after some stellar training sessions. But he hasn’t flashed that potential yet on race day, with one win in five starts.Trainer: Mike de Kock Jockey: Christophe Soumillon Odds: 20-1JD: This Irish-bred, Dubai-owned colt is trained by a South African and ridden by a Frenchman. It would be an interesting winner’s circle.MH: The U.A.E. Derby winner is trying to become the first horse from Dubai to win the Kentucky Derby, and many think he can. But how much did his journey take out of him?Trainer: Bob Baffert Jockey: Martin Garcia Odds: 3-1JD: He’s 6 for 6. He can lead or pounce. He has shown huge heart when tested in the stretch. The pick.MH: This towering Big Brown colt is all business when he steps on the track, and he’s looked like a man among boys here.Trainer: Carla Gaines Jockey: Rafael Bejarano Odds: 30-1JD: Both wins have been on turf. He will be running late.MH: He ran against Dortmund in his last two races and finished third both times. He’s not a bad horse, but I don’t expect him to be a factor.Trainer: Simon Callaghan Jockey: Gary Stevens Odds: 12-1JD: This colt has lost to Dortmund twice by less than a head. If you like that one, you must like this one.MH: The Sunland Derby winner has been training lights out.Trainer: Todd Pletcher Jockey: Luis Saez Odds: 30-1JD: He has shown promise, but he doesn’t scream, or whisper, “Bet me.”MH: The most buzz around him here has been about his Mayweather-Pacquiao sponsorship. But if you throw out his fourth-place effort in the Florida Derby, run over a tiring surface, he finished in the money in three of four races.Trainer: Dale Romans Jockey: Kent Desormeaux Odds: 50-1JD: His only victory was in September.MH: He was outclassed by International Star in two races in Louisiana, and nothing makes him stand out among this deep field.Trainer: Kiaran McLaughlin Jockey: Joel Rosario Odds: 15-1JD: Which horse will show up? The one who won the Wood, or the one who quit in the Fountain of Youth?MH: After his flop, the colt had a throat procedure and won the Wood by two lengths. He’s a bit of a question mark, but he looks as if he’s relishing the Churchill track.Trainer: Tom Amoss Jockey: Joe Talamo Odds: 50-1JD: This colt has been outfinished three times by International Star.MH: He always comes out on the wrong side of his battles, and the same will be true on Saturday.Trainer: D. Wayne Lukas Jockey: Ramon Vazquez Odds: 50-1JD: In 12 starts, he has one win. Next.MH: The worst Zayat horse in the race. He’s the veteran of this group, but he’s finished first only once.Trainer: Bob Baffert Jockey: Victor Espinoza Odds: 5-2JD: There’s a buzz around this horse that he’s the next Seattle Slew. I’m betting he’s not.MH: There’s little doubt that he and Dortmund are the best horses in the Derby. But those horses don’t always win.Trainer: Rick Violette Jockey: Jose Ortiz Odds: 15-1JD: He’s never run a bad race, but he missed some training because of illness.MH: The New York-bred colt posted a career-best 108 Beyer in finishing second in the Florida Derby. He is training well and has shown an ability to close.Trainer: Ron Moquett Jockey: Mike Smith Odds: 30-1JD: An accomplished late runner who needs a wicked pace to run into. Use underneath in exotics.MH: Has hit the board in all three of his races this year, and he has Mike Smith aboard. Still, he is a cut below the big players.Trainer: Nick Zito Jockey: Corey Nakatani Odds: 50-1JD: He drew in when Stanford scratched. This one is way overmatched.MH: Would love to see Nick Zito return to prominence on the Triple Crown trail. But this is not the horse to take him there.Advertisement