AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard SandomirThe N.F.L. draft should feel like Christmas for Adam Schefter of ESPN, who has established himself as the pro football reporter whose immense social media following is a testament to his ability to break news. Schefter, one could assume, might be relishing the chance to reveal what is going on in the draft before a league official announces it.But as the draft commenced on Thursday night in Chicago with the first round — a television event that last year commanded an audience of more than 12 million on ESPN and NFL Network — Schefter’s Twitter feed was not brimming with draft scoops that preceded the official announcement of selections by Commissioner Roger Goodell.In fact, it was quiet, as it was last year, reflecting an agreement initiated by ESPN with the league and NFL Network that fans overwhelmingly disliked knowing the selections in advance.“We just got ridiculously negative feedback, and it was taking the air out of our show,” said Seth Markman, ESPN’s lead producer for the draft. “It was bad business.”And last week, the league used its clout to secure the added agreement of CBS, Fox and NBC that their reporters would not report who was being drafted in advance.“Please have your reporters and other personnel refrain from revealing picks on social media or other platforms,” read a letter from the league, first reported by The Big Lead website.Schefter and Markman conceded that not reporting the selections in advance was antithetical to good journalism. But Schefter, whose reporting on the league on Twitter is prodigious, said that during the first round of the draft last year, he enjoyed a “three-hour vacation from Twitter.” And, he said, the loss of Twitter’s immediacy did not delay his reporting very much.“We’re in your living room for three hours, and if there’s a news story, I’m going to get it,” he said. “We’re not going to bury it. It’ll go right on TV.” His 3.7 million followers, some of whom depended on him as a source of advance news, “will get the news 40 seconds later on ESPN.” Some followers, he said, complained he was wrecking their draft experience by tweeting picks before they were official.The league considers the draft an entertainment event that galvanizes its fans during the off-season with information that it wants to control.“We want to present a compelling experience that keeps people coming back — the fans in the theater and the millions watching,” said Brian McCarthy, a league spokesman. Reporting on draft picks minutes or seconds in advance by insiders like Schefter, Jason La Canfora of CBS Sports and others “detracted from the overall viewing experience.”He said that fans interviewed by the league in focus groups had also voiced their displeasure at learning of the picks in advance. Asked whether the N.F.L.’s action amounted to directly managing reporters’ journalistic work, McCarthy said: “Underscore ‘network partners,’ which is part of being associated with the N.F.L. We have language in our contracts that protects against this type of activity.”The N.F.L. is not the only league that has seen itself lose some control of a rigid draft narrative. A pick is transmitted from a team to the league, and a commissioner, or some other official, announces it. But Twitter has short-circuited that system by letting reporters with strong sources post their news almost instantaneously. Adrian Wojnarowski of Yahoo Sports has made the N.B.A. draft his Twitter playground, routinely beating other league reporters to name picks before Commissioner Adam Silver reads them to the audience watching on ESPN.“I don’t care about anybody’s television show,” Wojnarowski said. “My job is to report and break news when I have the news, and who a team is drafting is news. The draft and the announcement is a ceremony. I don’t care about anybody’s ceremony. I don’t wait for things to be announced. I would never accept any edict not to report the news.” He added, “I see it as an extension of free agency and the trade deadline. If your information is accurate, you want to report it.”The N.B.A. restricts its network partners and announcers involved in its draft production from revealing picks in advance, but it does not prohibit its reporters working independently from doing so.Networks play two distinct roles in televised sports: as a partner to the leagues, to whom they pay billions of dollars, and as a journalistic entity that, to various extents, reports on the leagues. Because of its enormous collection of rights and numerous channels and websites, ESPN has often found itself the focus of criticism about inherent conflicts between its business obligations and its journalistic interests.Robert Lipsyte, a former ESPN ombudsman and New York Times sports columnist, said he was not surprised that networks had agreed to embargo news at the N.F.L.’s request.“What do you expect from a business partner?” he said. “It’s the power of the N.F.L. If ESPN were indeed able to separate out its journalism from its business partnership, there’d be no question that you’d go with the story. Isn’t that what it’s all about — if you believe in the stuff, you’re the first with the most you’ve got? If you’re listening to your source dictate the terms, this really gives us a sense of the relationship between ESPN and the N.F.L.” Maybe, he added, “ESPN and the other networks are willing accomplices in selling the story.”Markman, the senior coordinating producer of ESPN’s N.F.L. studio shows, said that he was willing to sacrifice the journalism that yielded the identities of the draft picks in advance for a better television show.“Adam and Mort,” he said, referring to Chris Mortensen, another ESPN pro football reporter, “are so good that if I told them to get every pick in advance they would.”But, he said, “The bigger deal is that it’s a TV show that 10 million people watched last year. They love the drama of it. It’s good business to do it this way.”Mike Florio’s ProFootball Talk, which has an agreement to be part of the NBC Sports Group, stopped providing picks before they were official in 2013 because, he said, many of his readers asked him to stop. But he said that a “short-circuit” in the league’s draft process was responsible for the leaks that allowed reporters to tweet picks before they were announced: Each pick is transmitted to every team, which allows team officials to inform reporters. “That’s just the way it’s always been,” he said. “I’ve gotten texts from people in draft rooms who know what the next pick is.”He said that the league should fix the system that generates the leaks rather than “telling others what to do with the information leaked by the N.F.L. and the teams.”Florio is not the only N.F.L. reporter who did not try to scoop Goodell. La Canfora was on CBSSports.com offering insight but not advance picks. It was the same with ESPN’s Mortensen and Ian Rapoport of NFL Network.Jay Glazer of Fox Sports was on a radio show during the draft, as he has been for 10 or more years; he said that he has rarely used Twitter to reach his audience with news of advance picks. He is more satisfied by reporting on team machinations in the days or hours before the draft. “I work for Fox,” he said. “I don’t work for Twitter. I’m not watching Twitter. I’m constantly texting to 32 teams.”Still, Glazer predicted picks on the show, which he said did not violate the league’s wishes. In a text, he wrote, “I said who I thought would be picked and why, but no, I never once said someone would be the pick.” If nothing else, the taming of the draft’s journalism by the league’s network partners reflects the peculiarity of the relationship between sports and television.“If it were election results, you’d have an obligation to put your journalistic interests in front of your business interests,” said Kelly McBride, a media ethicist at the Poynter Institute and a former ESPN ombudsman. “But it’s the N.F.L. draft, which I know is a really, really big deal. But it’s not democracy.”Advertisement