AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinFenway Park was the stage on which Alex Rodriguez was first introduced to Major League Baseball. It was a cool, rainy evening in Boston on July 8, 1994, and the gathering specter of a players’ strike threatened to shut down the sport.Rodriguez was 18 and nervous, but the moment hardly registered with Red Sox fans, who years later would come to regard that skinny youngster batting ninth as a villainous character.Fans in Baltimore; St. Petersburg, Fla.; and Detroit, the three cities the Yankees have visited this season, have given Rodriguez relatively painless receptions after his yearlong suspension for his role in the Biogenesis doping scandal. It was much the same on the spring training circuit, too.But on Friday, Rodriguez and the Yankees will return to Boston, the site of so much Rodriguez-inspired drama over the years. His recent suspension could supply Red Sox fans with fresh ammunition in their tempestuous relationship with Rodriguez, who has always seemed to relish the passion and intensity that his visits to Fenway inspire.“I’m excited,” Rodriguez said Wednesday. “I love playing in Fenway. Fun place to play, great fans, and obviously I have a lot of respect for everyone with the Red Sox.”Rodriguez was not that well known to Red Sox fans in his debut 21 years ago. He was hitless while playing shortstop for the Seattle Mariners in a 4-3 Red Sox win, and for the next nine or so years, he was mostly given a pass by fans at Fenway, respected for his talent and rarely accorded a second thought.That all changed in 2004 when, after the Red Sox had tried and failed to acquire him, Rodriguez joined the rival Yankees. The relationship exploded. He was suddenly their worst enemy and the focal point of their ire.Since then, Rodriguez has been a part of several tumultuous incidents at Fenway, among them his fight with Jason Varitek in 2004, the taunting blond wigs worn by fans a few years later and a showdown with Ryan Dempster in 2013. This weekend could bring a new round of theatrics.The animosity directed at Rodriguez in Fenway sprouted soon after he joined the Yankees. In July 2004, Rodriguez was hit on the elbow by a pitch from Bronson Arroyo. Rodriguez’s anger at Arroyo soon diverted to the catcher, Varitek, who shoved Rodriguez in the face with both hands, leading to a benches-clearing fracas.Rodriguez returned to Boston that autumn for the American League Championship Series and hit a tremendous home run off Arroyo in Game 3 as the Yankees routed Boston, 19-8. But as Boston staged an unprecedented comeback, winning the next four games, and the series, Rodriguez was 2 for 17. Even away from Fenway, Rodriguez enraged Red Sox fans, especially in Game 6, in the Bronx, when he slapped the ball out of Arroyo’s glove in the eighth inning. He was called out for interference in a play that underscored the Yankees’ growing desperation.The next April, with the Yankees in town for Boston’s home opener and flag-raising ceremony, most fans in attendance dressed in regalia to celebrate the first Red Sox championship in 86 years. But a few, including a group of men in the stands down the right-field line, took the opportunity to impugn Rodriguez with an anti-gay slur written across their faces.That was not the only masquerade directed at Rodriguez. Two years later, after tabloid reports linked Rodriguez to a blond woman, some fans at Fenway mocked Rodriguez by wearing cartoonish masks depicting a blond woman’s face. Others pranced about wearing blond wigs.Some of the incidents were less strident. In 2005, on his way to the stadium, Rodriguez reportedly saved a boy on Newbury Street from being hit by a truck. Even when things happen at Fenway that do not involve Rodriguez, sometimes they seem to anyway. In 2008, a red-tailed hawk nesting at Fenway attacked an eighth-grade girl on a tour of the stadium, drawing blood from her scalp. The girl’s name was Alexa Rodriguez.Two years ago, real hostility swooped back, and this time a lot of it was internal. Aug. 18, 2013, was one of the more bizarre days in recent Yankees history, and it, too, unfolded at Fenway Park.Before that game, General Manager Brian Cashman and Randy Levine, the team president, stood on the field during batting practice and vigorously defended the Yankees against inflammatory accusations by the legal team then representing Rodriguez, essentially calling their own player a liar. It had been 11 days since Rodriguez’s return to the Yankees after a long rehabilitation for hip surgery, and the only reason he was playing was that he was contesting the huge drug suspension baseball had just levied against him.As Cashman said then, they were unique times.Rodriguez has since fired those lawyers, dropped the lawsuits and all but admitted that he used performance-enhancing drugs. But at the time, he was embroiled in full legal combat with the Yankees, Major League Baseball and the players’ union. Cashman said he was worried that anything he said to Rodriguez would be used against him in a legal proceeding.“A hello, goodbye, and that’s it,” Cashman said of his interactions with Rodriguez, “because anything else, I don’t want to be distorted, to be quite honest.”Then the game started. In the second inning, Dempster, the Red Sox pitcher and a former union representative, hit Rodriguez with a pitch in the rib cage. It was the 10th and last time Rodriguez was hit by a pitch at Fenway Park. Manager Joe Girardi stormed out of the dugout in a rage, but it was Rodriguez who struck back most decisively. He hit a home run off Dempster four innings later to touch off the Yankees’ come-from-behind win.The sound that emanated from Fenway Park as he crossed home plate was a clamorous combination of boos, cheers, whistles and hoots — a Rodriguez-inspired ruckus.Today, the battle between Rodriguez and the Yankees has mostly come to détente, although there is still a dispute over a contract matter regarding his 660th career home run. Twenty-four of his 659 homers have come at Fenway Park in 119 games there, including memorable ninth-inning shots off Curt Schilling and Jonathan Papelbon.Given Rodriguez’s history at Fenway, would it be any surprise if the park were the site for his 660th home run to tie Willie Mays for fourth on the career list?“Our goal continues to be the same,” Rodriguez said Wednesday. “Go to Boston and win a series.”And if there is some drama along the way, well, it is just Alex Rodriguez at Fenway Park.Advertisement