AdvertisementSupported byBy Chris GordonARLINGTON, Va. — When the Washington Capitals faced off against the Rangers in the first game of their playoff series on Thursday night, their fate rested on Braden Holtby, an idiosyncratic goaltender who played in more than 70 games this season and is known for his elaborate pregame visualizations.The Rangers have a tandem of top-rated goalies: the formidable Henrik Lundqvist and his talented backup, Cam Talbot.For the Capitals, Holtby is Plan A and Plan B.Justin Peters, the team’s nominal backup, made only 12 appearances this season. He is not a goaltender the Capitals are willing to rely on in serious game action. They have instead summoned Philipp Grubauer from the minor leagues when they need to spell their No. 1 in the past two seasons.Holtby, 25, will need to be in top form if the Capitals hope to stop Rick Nash, the league’s third-leading goal scorer in the regular season, and the rest of the Rangers’ speedy offense.“I have a lot of confidence,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said when he was asked if he thought Holtby was up to the challenge. “I mean, I played him about 100 times.”Trotz’s trust in Holtby is well placed. Holtby played more games, 73, than any other goalie in the N.H.L. He finished with 41 wins, tied for second most in the league, and had the fifth-lowest goals against average and was tied for the seventh-highest save percentage.A Canadian farm boy from a provincial border town in Saskatchewan, Holtby played forward before turning into a goaltender full time as a teenager, a change he would later credit for his strong puck-handling skills. As a youth, he would shoot pucks off the basement wall for hours while waiting for his father to get home.Pressing his stick up against his face, Holtby steps out onto the players’ bench before every game, visualizing saves he might have to make. During the game, he engages in an elaborate, choreographed series of movements after every whistle, spitting water through his teeth and whacking his stick against the goal post four times. When he allows a goal, Holtby displays a look of disgust, even if there was nothing he could have done to stop the puck.While Holtby’s 2014-15 season has been masterly, the preceding season was a tough one. In a game in Minnesota in January 2014, Holtby gave up five goals on 11 shots.In the locker room after that game, Holtby bit his lip and shook his head as he tried to explain his performance. He had lost his starting spot to Grubauer and would not appear in net for another 13 days. He finished the season with the worst numbers of his four-year N.H.L. career.“The city was looking for a goalie to come in and kind of take the reins and be the guy,” Holtby’s longtime teammate Karl Alzner said of last season. “We were all expecting Holts to do it. Whenever you see anyone struggle, then you start doubting.”But this year, Holtby has turned his game around, largely thanks to the goalie coach Mitch Korn, who, like Trotz, is in his first year with Washington after leaving the Nashville Predators.Washington’s previous coach, Adam Oates, wanted his goalies to play deep in the net, allowing them more time to make saves. Holtby has always been a risk-taker, relying more on his athletic abilities than careful body positioning. Last season, he frequently looked uncomfortable in the net.Korn allowed Holtby more freedom to make plays. Holtby had shown flashes of brilliance as a minor league call-up, but this year, he turned those moments into a full season of success. In one year, Holtby has gone from a shaken benchwarmer to one of the league’s elite goaltenders.By late winter, it was clear that Holtby was in the midst of a special season. In early February, he shut out the defending Stanley Cup champion, the Los Angeles Kings, capping a three-game span in which he allowed just one goal on 84 shots.Since then, Holtby has continued to improve. By the end of the season, he had set Washington’s franchise record for consecutive starts, beginning 23 straight games between February and April.Holtby is now facing his most formidable challenge, but with the confidence of a player whose stature is rising.“Are you at the top of your game right now?” a reporter asked Holtby after he shut out the Kings.Holtby cracked a wry smile.“I hope I never reach the top of my game,” he said.Advertisement