AdvertisementSupported byBy John EligonLAS VEGAS — The playbook on fighting Floyd Mayweather Jr. usually goes something like this: Apply relentless pressure. Throw combinations. Cut off the ring. Make him fight every minute of every round.The key to success against Manny Pacquiao, boxing experts often say, is luring him into reckless flourishes and then punishing him with quick, precise counterpunches.They are tactics that look promising and doable on paper. In practice, against two of the best boxers of this generation, they rarely go according to plan.But what has boxing enthusiasts buzzing about Saturday night’s fight is this: Perhaps more than any of their contemporaries, the two men stepping into the ring at the MGM Grand here have the skill, athleticism and smarts to execute those tactics.The most lucrative fight in boxing history pits a stealthy, counterpunching mastermind in Mayweather against a spry, enigmatic predator in Pacquiao. In a matchup of first-class defense against first-class offense, which one will give?“When you deal with skill level this high, it’s the adaptability that takes over,” said Todd duBoef, the president of Top Rank Boxing, which promotes Pacquiao. “They’re both going to be confronted with very top-level styles that are difficult. But it’s how do they adapt from that style.”Pacquiao is known for coming at his opponents from awkward angles, springing from side to side, with his body landing in one place but the punches seemingly coming from elsewhere. Mayweather can bend and twist and turn to make opponents feel as if they are fighting a ghost, while his quick hands land stinging blows before a challenger blinks.What remains to be seen is how the action will play out in the ring. Will the bout resemble a chess match, with each fighter carefully choosing his spots and looking for openings? Will Mayweather tap dance around the ring to stay out of Pacquiao’s wheelhouse? Or will they stand toe-to-toe and trade punches?“The thing is, if he comes out running, it’s going to be more like a chess match,” Freddie Roach, Pacquiao’s trainer, said of Mayweather. “If he comes out aggressive like I think he will and he tries to trade with Manny, I think it’s going to be a hell of a fight.”The trick to putting pressure on Mayweather, Roach said, is to not walk straight into him. Mayweather often lures fighters in as he backs up, then times them with a quick left hook, or a straight right down the middle, before tiptoeing out of the way. What Pacquiao has to do, Roach said, is move side to side, up and down, and get in and out quickly, throwing a flurry of punches in the process. When Mayweather steps back, Pacquiao should step to the right.Mayweather’s last fierce challenge against a fighter who, like Pacquiao, used a southpaw stance came against Zab Judah in 2006. Judah smothered Mayweather during the first four rounds, but then seemed to tire and did not throw as many punches in the second half of the fight, when Mayweather took over.“One thing about Manny Pacquiao, he won’t get tired,” Roach said.Mayweather won’t, either. And as someone who can contort his body to avoid punches with Gumby-like flexibility, Mayweather makes his opponents work to get to him.“When you’re throwing punches and hitting wind, it tires you out and it frustrates you,” said Oscar De La Hoya, the boxer turned promoter who lost fights against both Mayweather and Pacquiao. “If you don’t have that mentality, if you crack under pressure, the Mayweather defense is kind of like a kryptonite. You have to be mentally strong. You have to not get frustrated and, most importantly, you have to be in great shape.”De La Hoya, like other boxing insiders, said the pace of the fight would really be up to Pacquiao.“If Pacquiao goes in there relentless for the first three, four rounds and wins those first few rounds, he’s going to have Mayweather trying to catch up from behind,” De La Hoya said. “And that’s where Mayweather can leave himself vulnerable.”While the flying fists and snapping heads are what capture the attention of most fight watchers, this fight could well be decided in the legs. Both men are known for their tremendous footwork, and whoever gets to his spots quickly and dictates the angles that they fight from could have the most success.Mayweather has shown a penchant — as seen in his victory against Judah — to spring toward his opponents with a straight right hand, then slip to the side after he connects, to avoid a counter. But Roach said that if Mayweather leaned into the right hand against Pacquiao, his fighter could slide to his right, setting up a furious straight left to Mayweather’s chin.Yet Pacquiao also likes to lunge toward his opponents with a straight left, and that could play into Mayweather’s check hook, in which he twists his body to the right for a forceful left hook while sliding to the left to get out of the way.Mayweather’s camp has been coy about its strategy.“I’m a trainer,” Mayweather’s father and trainer, Floyd Sr., said about his camp’s strategy for the fight. “I’m a trainer. I know what’s going on. He ain’t got it.”He added: “He can’t punch. We ain’t worried about it.”He then set down the microphone, stood up and did a five-second punching flurry. He sat down, picked up the mike and said: “I’m 63 years old. I’m faster than Pacman.”John Branch contributed reporting.Advertisement