AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensFamiliarity will be the theme of the second round: Three of the N.H.L.’s four second-round matchups are rematches from the last two postseasons.The other series features two of the league’s most resilient clubs.EASTERN CONFERENCE SEMIFINALSAtlantic DivisionNo. 1 Montreal Canadiens (50-22-10, 110 points) vs. No. 2 Tampa Bay Lightning (50-24-8, 108)The Lightning survived a seven-game series with the Detroit Red Wings, claiming the deciding game, 2-0, on Wednesday night. Tampa Bay was swept by the Canadiens in last spring’s first round, but the Lightning dominated Montreal during the regular season, winning all five head-to-head contests.Tampa Bay is led by the dynamic and diminutive center Tyler Johnson, who posted a first-round-high six goals. The Lightning survived a goal-less first round from Steven Stamkos, but he scored five of his 43 regular-season goals against Montreal.The Canadiens are led by the Vezina and Hart Trophy candidate Carey Price, who posted a shutout in Montreal’s series-clinching 2-0 win. Price boasts a .939 save percentage and 1.94 goals-against average this playoff year.Metropolitan Division No. 1 Rangers (53-22-7, 113 points) vs. No. 2 Washington Capitals (45-26-11, 101)These teams will meet in the postseason for the fifth time in the last seven seasons. Each side has won two of the previous four series, with three of those going the distance.The Rangers are well rested: They will have had six days off when the series begins Thursday night at Madison Square Garden. The extra rest provided by the Rangers’ elimination of the Pittsburgh Penguins in five games has allowed defenseman Kevin Klein to return to health. He has been out since March 11 with a broken arm. Still, the dynamic forward Mats Zuccarello is out indefinitely with an upper-body injury.The Capitals dispatched the Islanders on Monday night in their Game 7, and advanced despite just two goals in seven games from Alexander Ovechkin. After a 53-goal regular season, he had 5 points in the series, including an assist in the finale.Against the Isles, Ovechkin played with Joel Ward and Nicklas Backstrom — who posted a team-high 6 points in seven games — and that line should see a lot of the Rangers’ shutdown defensemen, Ryan McDonagh and Dan Girardi.WESTERN CONFERENCE SEMIFINALSCentral Division No. 3 Chicago Blackhawks (48-28-6, 102 points) vs. No. 4 Minnesota Wild (46-28-8, 100)The Blackhawks and the Wild will meet in the postseason for the third year in a row. Chicago has ended Minnesota’s season in each of the last two — with Patrick Kane’s overtime goal in Game 6 lifting the Blackhawks to the conference finals in 2014.In a change from past seasons, the Wild are considered to be on the same level as the Hawks. Last year, injuries and illness forced Minnesota to play Ilya Bryzgalov — the team’s fourth goalie of the season — in goal in the series.This year, the Wild will have with the Vezina Trophy candidate Devan Dubnyk in net beginning with Game 1 on Friday night. Dubnyk has started 45 straight games for the Wild and posted a .962 save percentage in Minnesota’s four wins against the St. Louis Blues.The Blackhawks, however, have a goaltending controversy. Corey Crawford was pulled twice in the first two games of Chicago’s first-round series against the Nashville Predators, but Crawford twice replaced Scott Darling later in the series. Crawford, who backstopped the Hawks to the Stanley Cup in 2013, is expected to get the start in Game 1 on Friday, despite his .850 save percentage and 4.19 goals-against averageThe Hawks still have two superstars in Kane and Jonathan Toews, who leads all remaining playoff players in points, with 8.Pacific Division No. 1 Anaheim Ducks (51-24-7, 109 points) vs. No. 3 Calgary Flames (45-30-7, 97)This series will resemble an N.B.A. playoff in that it will probably be most rewarding to tune in for the final period. The Ducks scored 10 goals after the second intermission in their four-game sweep of the Winnipeg Jets, and they have scored 94 in the third period thus far this season.The Flames finished tied for the N.H.L. lead in third-period goals, with 99 during the regular season. Calgary scored nine goals in the third period in their six-game first-round victory over the Vancouver Canucks, including four in their 7-4 series-clinching win.Anaheim will be led by its top line, with its two-headed tandem of Ryan Getzlaf and Corey Perry taking on the short-handed Calgary defense. Getzlaf and Perry combined for 11 points in routing Winnipeg, with Perry posting 7 in the sweep.This series will also serve as a homecoming for Flames goalie Jonas Hiller, who spent his first seven seasons in Anaheim. He signed a two-year contract with Calgary in July after he was replaced last postseason by the Ducks current goaltender, Frederik Andersen — and then by John Gibson in the second round after Andersen was injured.Hiller was pulled after allowing two goals on three shots in Game 6 against Vancouver, but Calgary Coach Bob Hartley said that Hiller would be in goal for the series opener Thursday night in Anaheim.Advertisement