By TOM PEDULLAMAY 2, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  Lovely Maria won the 141st Kentucky Oaks by two and three-quarters lengths against Shook Up on Friday at Churchill Downs in an emotional finish for Kerwin Clark, her 56-year-old jockey, and Larry Jones, the filly’s trainer, who nearly lost his life in a riding accident in April 2014.Clark’s fortunes once soured so badly that he went to Saudi Arabia in an attempt to revive his career. He had never won a Grade I race in four decades of competition until Lovely Maria rolled by three and a quarter lengths in the Ashland Stakes at Keeneland in Lexington, Ky., in her final tuneup for the Oaks. And now Boo-Boo, as Clark is affectionately known here, is the oldest rider to win the Oaks.  Clark used his gloved hands to wipe tears from his face after the finish. When he finally composed himself, he said during an NBC interview: “This is unbelievable. I didn’t think it would ever happen to me. I thought my opportunity was gone.”Jones swept the Oaks, arguably the most prestigious race for 3-year-old fillies, for the third time, after victories with Proud Spell (2008) and Believe You Can (2012). All came for the owner Brereton Jones, a former governor of Kentucky. The trainer Woody Stephens, who died in 1998, holds the record for Oaks wins, with five.AdvertisementJones, who gallops many of the horses he trains, was involved in a horrific riding accident in April 2014 when a 2-year-old he was aboard became spooked and threw him. Jones was rushed to a hospital, where doctors found two areas of bleeding in his brain.According to Jones’s wife, Cindy, he stopped breathing as he was being prepared for surgery but was revived. He was placed in a medically induced coma, and the bleeding in his brain stopped in two days, leading to a gradual recovery for Jones, 58.AdvertisementEarlier, the field for the Kentucky Derby was reduced to 19 starters when Zayat Stables scratched El Kabeir with an injury to his left front foot. The trainer John Terranova said El Kabeir, a gray colt, appeared to be gimpy when he left his stall and was unable to go to the track for his usual morning gallop.El Kabeir was to be ridden by Calvin Borel, who would have been aiming for his fourth Derby triumph. The horse was a standout in prep races at Aqueduct Racetrack leading to the Derby, the opening leg of the Triple Crown. He won the Jerome Stakes and the Gotham Stakes, both Grade III contests, and finished third in the Wood Memorial in his most recent start.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.