By MELISSA HOPPERTMAY 2, 2015
Inside a Manhattan office, perched high above Broadway, two passions intersect.The first, theater, was passed down from Philip S. Birsh’s father, Arthur, who worked his way up from printing plant manager at Playbill to become the company’s owner.Another, horse racing, was entirely his own doing. When Birsh was 9, he was watching a race on television and told his mother, Judith, that when he was older and successful, he would own a racehorse.“For a family living in a two-bedroom apartment in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, that was really highfalutin talk,” Birsh, 57, said. “We were not exactly participants in the sport of kings. So my mother was quite surprised at that declaration. But I held to it.”Birsh is now the president and chief executive of Playbill, and he does not own just any old racehorse: In Tencendur, the Wood Memorial runner-up, he has a competitor in Saturday’s Kentucky Derby.AdvertisementScattered about Birsh’s office are framed Playbills, books about Broadway, a framed print of Secretariat, winner’s circles photos and a hand-drawn Father’s Day card from his daughter, Abby — a Playbill for “The Producers.” On his desk sits a recent addition: a Tencendur hat that features his yellow and black silks, a nod to the Playbill banner and Birsh’s father.Advertisement“The people of racing are a lot like people in theater,” Birsh said. “They all chose this profession because they love it, and they all could make a lot more money doing something else. But they chose to devote themselves to their passions.”Tencendur, whom Birsh affectionately calls “my horse,” was born on the family’s 85-acre farm in Saratoga County, which was purchased in 2005 and converted from a dairy farm. Tencendur is one of three New York-bred horses in the Derby; last year, there were two, pointing to the growth of the state’s breeding program.“We didn’t try for a national horse,” Birsh said of Tencendur. “We were breeding solid, New York-bred horses, but our program is really more about loving horses and loving racing. If it does happen, like a Tencendur, it’s just luck. It wasn’t a master plan — I don’t want to ever come across as somebody who is taking credit for it.”Birsh prefers to give credit to his team, which includes the trainer George Weaver, who worked under the racing titans D. Wayne Lukas and Todd Pletcher, both of whom have horses in the Derby. This is Weaver’s first entry in the Derby.“He told me to enjoy it and that it’s just one race in his career,” Weaver, 44, said of Birsh. “It’s just a thrill to be able to have a horse good enough for the Derby. I’m from Louisville, so that just makes it extra special.”Birsh’s team at Playbill is well aware of Tencendur, who was named after the war horse of King Charlemagne in the French epic “The Song of Roland.” Birsh passed out hats to his employees before he left for Louisville.“It’s very hard to hide one’s enthusiasm for this,” he said.In fact, Birsh treats his horses as he does his four children with his wife, Odile. He even shows off their photos like a proud parent. “That’s him in all his wet glory,” he said as he pointed to a picture of Tencendur receiving a bath.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Phil treats everyone like that. He’s even that way with his dog,” said John Halvey, the former general counsel for the New York Stock Exchange who owns a horse with Birsh. “It’s part of his charm, part of why people are attracted to him and always like to be around him.”AdvertisementHalvey, who has known Birsh since they were children, added: “Playbill is his vocation, but racing has been his avocation. It’s nice to see someone doing it for all the right reasons get some reward for it.”When Birsh sent Tencendur, a still-developing colt, to Louisville to begin training for the Derby, he was reminded of the time he brought his son Alex to college.“He was 18, and he’s 6 feet 4, 200 pounds, a big athlete, and as I’m watching this young man walk sadly away, I thought, ‘Oh my God, I just dropped off at college the world’s largest toddler,’ because he wasn’t ready,” Birsh said. “Well, I thought he wasn’t, but he was. It was the same way with my horse.”He added with a chuckle: “He is this massive, beautiful horse, but he’s a toddler. He’s so young in his mind, but he’s physically gifted. I like him a lot, I do, but sometimes he just makes up ways to lose.”Tencendur, whose morning odds on Friday were 30-1, has always been a bit of a baby. When he was weaned from his mother, he cried for days.“He was a real big colt, but kind of a mama’s boy,” said Michael Tobin, the farm manager. “My No. 1 memory of him was that he took weaning worse than anybody I’ve ever raised here. I mean, every horse, the worst day of their life is when you take them away from his mother, but this guy turned it into a three-day event.”But in racing, what matters most is that 3-year-olds pointed toward the Derby demonstrate maturity come May. And Tencendur is certainly progressing, as he showed in the Wood in April.“He’s growing, and I’m very proud of him for what he is,” Birsh said. “And I’m very happy and proud to be a part of the Derby. I believe he belongs. The best horse doesn’t always win the Derby, which is actually quite comforting.”A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Going From Broadway to Racing’s Biggest Stage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.