AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen CrouseSAN FRANCISCO — The World Golf Championships match-play event was tweaked this year to guard against the early exits of marquee players. The single-elimination format was replaced by round-robin play, which guaranteed that each player in the 64-man field would be around for at least three matches. So what happened? Eight of the top 10 players in the world — and 11 of the top 16 — did not advance to play a fourth match, on Saturday. The tournament nearly lost its headliner, the world No. 1 Rory McIlroy, who was 2-down with three holes left in his match against Billy Horschel on Friday. After making a birdie to halve the 16th, McIlroy won the 17th and 18th with birdies to force extra holes, then won with a par on the second hole of sudden death. “I played solid; I wouldn’t say I played good,” McIlroy said. “I dug deep when I needed to.” He added, “I’m very proud of myself with how I came back.” Jordan Spieth, the world No. 2, made four birdies against one bogey in his match against Lee Westwood and was 16 under par in his first three matches. He was pleased with how he played, but in the end he had only a free weekend to show for it. Westwood chipped in to halve the 16th hole and won the last two holes with birdies to secure a 2-up win. Spieth said that Westwood played better when it mattered.“It came down to those last two holes, who was going to hit the more clutch shots, and he did,” he said, adding: “Just had a tough opponent. No complaints.” But NBC might have a few grievances. If the goal is to show weekend duels between the marquee players, McIlroy versus Hideki Matsuyama, ranked 16th in the world, is as good as it will get. “I don’t think there’s any other sport in the world where you get the top 64 guys and the margins are so fine, are so small,” McIlroy said. McIlroy and Horschel have a history dating to the 2007 Walker Cup, when they irritated each other. But they have become friends, and their match Friday took place without incident. The same could not be said of the one between Keegan Bradley and Miguel Ángel Jiménez. The two players, who had identical 0-2 records, argued after Bradley took umbrage at words Jiménez spoke to Bradley’s caddie while Bradley was conferring with an official over a ruling on a drop after his errant drive on the 18th. “I felt like he was being disrespectful not only to me but my caddie,” Bradley said in the players’ parking lot. “I was kind of standing up for my boy.” Jiménez, who notched a 2-up victory, said in the clubhouse, “Whatever happened is finished and done.”Advertisement