By ALLAN KREDAMAY 2, 2015
GREENBURGH, N.Y. —  The physical tone adopted by the Washington Capitals against the Islanders in the first round of the playoffs has continued against the Rangers in the second.After the Capitals won Game 1, 2-1, on Thursday night on a goal by Joel Ward with 1.3 seconds left, the Rangers, a team built on speed and the transition game, were mulling how to combat the bruising style that ultimately wore down the Islanders.“For us as a team, we have to try to match them with their style of play,” Rangers forward Tanner Glass, who tussled with Washington’s Tom Wilson at the Game 1 buzzer, said Friday. “We have guys who are physical and ones who are less physical. We all have to play our style.”The Capitals have burly defensemen like Brooks Orpik, John Carlson and Tim Gleason and big, hard-hitting forwards like Troy Brouwer, Jason Chimera and Wilson, who led the team with 172 penalty minutes in the regular season. Wilson ran amok against the Islanders, leveling defenseman Lubomir Visnovsky with a brutal hit in Game 4 that knocked him from the series, which the Capitals went on to win in seven games.Advertisement“I never intend to hurt anyone; I just want to finish hard and finish as clean as possible,” the 6-foot-4 Wilson said before the opener at Madison Square Garden when asked about his hard check on Visnovsky, who is six inches shorter. “I hope he makes a good recovery.”AdvertisementEven Washington’s top players, Alex Ovechkin and Nicklas Backstrom, have been delivering hard checks. Ovechkin hit numerous Islanders from behind, including John Tavares late in Game 6, a play that was not penalized.“It’s the way it goes; the refs are good at their jobs,” Glass said. “That’s playoff hockey.”At the end of Thursday’s game, Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault was upset that a penalty was not assessed when Backstrom slammed defenseman Dan Boyle into the boards seconds before Ward’s winning goal. Boyle crumpled to the ice, and Ward was left unmarked in front of the Rangers’ net as he beat goaltender Henrik Lundqvist. Some of the Rangers acknowledged that they had been expecting a whistle.Washington Coach Barry Trotz defended Backstrom, who did not seem to slow down before ramming Boyle.“It wasn’t much of a hit,” Trotz said. “There was no elbow, nothing. Their defenseman saw him coming. It was the right call.”On Friday, Vigneault declined to assess the officials. “I said last night I wasn’t going to comment on the refereeing, and I’m not going to do that,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But he did refer to another unpenalized hit from behind, by Ovechkin on Islanders defenseman Thomas Hickey during Game 7 on Monday.“The standards have been set for what’s allowed as far as hitting from behind,” Vigneault said. “Ovechkin on Hickey. Last night on Boyle. We know what the standards are.”He said he expected Boyle to play in Game 2 on Saturday afternoon at the Garden. Boyle practiced with the team Friday.Advertisement“I was pretty dazed and confused,” Boyle said. “I got my bell rung pretty well.”Vigneault sought to shift the Rangers’ focus to Game 2, but he also wanted his club to take away a lesson from not playing hard for a full 60 minutes in the opener.“You’ve got to learn from the games that we’ve played,” Vigneault said. “You can’t stop playing on a play. That’s what happened.”Rick Nash, who led the team with 42 goals in the regular season but has only one goal in six playoff games, said the Rangers needed to achieve more in their offensive zone.“We have to work on our shots and get more traffic in front of their net,” said Nash, who had three goals in 25 playoff games last spring and has just six goals in 47 career playoff contests. “It’s matter of winning those battles.”Vigneault took exception to comments by the analyst Mike Milbury, who called Nash “marshmallow soft” during Thursday’s broadcast on NBC Sports Network.Vigneault said: “The only thing that should be important to Rick Nash is what his teammates think about him, what his parents think about him and his close friends; other than that, it shouldn’t matter. But like anybody wearing a Ranger uniform right now, he’s got to step it up.”A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Try to Match Toughness of Capitals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.