AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerBOSTON — Hours before he matched Willie Mays’s career home run total with a laser into the seats above the Green Monster on Friday, Alex Rodriguez tried to distinguish himself from the Hall of Famer in his sights.“There’s absolutely no comparisons to me or anyone else to Willie Mays,” Rodriguez said, basking in the attention he commands wherever he goes. “Willie Mays, he’s the greatest baseball player of all time.”Rodriguez is something else, a towering figure in a gallery of tainted titans. There is no denying his repeated use of steroids anymore; even Rodriguez admits his regret. But there also is no denying his greatness, even if it cannot be marketed as the Yankees once hoped.Home run No. 660 was Rodriguez’s first ever as a pinch-hitter, and just the third he has ever hit on a 3-0 count. It lifted the Yankees to a 3-2 victory over the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park, and came on a 95-mile-per-hour from Junichi Tazawa, in the same ballpark where Rodriguez made his major league debut.It was here in July 1994, as an 18-year-old for the Seattle Mariners, that Rodriguez began one of baseball’s most compelling and confounding journeys. He nearly joined the Red Sox in a trade after the 2003 season, then became Fenway’s favorite villain when he went to the Yankees instead. The fans stood and howled as Rodriguez strode to the plate as a pinch-hitter in the eighth inning. He said he absorbed their scorn.From when Alex Rodriguez broke into the majors in 1996 to his retirement in 2016, he has been unable to escape the bizarre and controversial stories that seem to follow him on and off the field.“I’ve got to tell you, I usually don’t hear the difference,” Rodriguez said later, at the first news conference the Yankees have arranged for him since he reported to spring training. “But that boo was pretty intense. It was pretty passionate.”Rodriguez always stirs emotions, like the larger steroids debate that will forever cloud his era. Like Barry Bonds, Roger Clemens, Mark McGwire and others, he seems destined to reside in Hall of Fame purgatory after retirement. Rodriguez will have the numbers, but most fans will view his totals differently from Mays’s.“The only thing I can control is what I do from here on out and how I conduct myself both on and off the field,” Rodriguez said. “I can’t really decide for other people what to think.”Asked if he had any regrets about that, Rodriguez said, “You know I have regrets, and I’m trying to do the best to finish my career on a high note.”Mays himself issued a statement of congratulations through the San Francisco Giants, saying that milestones were meant to be surpassed and wishing Rodriguez continued success. Rodriguez said it left him speechless. Rodriguez sounded humble on Friday, as he has for months, and his handlers deserve credit for keeping a notoriously erratic client on message. If he wanted to defend his legacy — or at least put into perspective the degree to which he disgraced the game — the best way might be to point out that worse characters are held up as baseball royalty.Fenway Park sits on Yawkey Way, so named for Thomas Yawkey, the Hall of Famer who owned the Red Sox from 1933 to 1976. Yawkey did a lot of good things, but he also presided over the last major league team to integrate — and he refused to add Mays to his roster.Mays was 17 in 1949 and playing for the Birmingham Black Barons. The scout George Digby, who would later sign Wade Boggs for the Red Sox, recommended that the team sign Mays.Digby, who died last year, told the story to the writer Gordon Edes in 2005.“Eddie Glennon, the G.M. of our club in Birmingham, called Cronin,” Digby said, referring to Red Sox General Manager Joe Cronin, another Hall of Famer. “The owner of the Black Barons had told us we could have Mays for $4,500. I said, ‘I’ll be back to you by tomorrow.’ Glennon had asked me, ‘What do you think?’ I said, ‘I think he’s a big leaguer.’ We could have had Mays in center and Williams in left.“Cronin sent another scout down to look at him, but Yawkey and Cronin already had made up their minds they weren’t going to take any black players.”Which is worse: taking illegal drugs to play better, or trying to hold back an entire race of people from playing in the major leagues? If you think steroids mutated the record books, what about the impact of the racial barrier that Yawkey and other Hall of Fame executives never had the courage to break down? The questions are rhetorical, of course, and long-ago sins are irrelevant to Rodriguez’s misdeeds — except to underscore that there have been worse villains who got a better deal from history. Rodriguez may always be on the outside of Cooperstown, but his impact on this era is indelible.Rodriguez’s comeback from a yearlong drug suspension — he said Friday that he spent it “in a cave in Miami, serving my time” — will be part of his huge historical footprint. The season is still new, but Rodriguez has six home runs and has helped the Yankees to the top of the American League East.The future is uncertain. Rodriguez turns 40 in July, is still prone to injury, and can never be fully trusted to resist the temptation to cheat. The Yankees do not plan to pay him the $6 million contract bonus for the 660th home run, but he deflected questions about whether that matters to him, or how he plans to handle it.Rodriguez, who broke down in tears in a postgame radio interview, was too reflective for that. The number is tainted, but the moment was magic.“It’s been quite a ride,” he said. “I’m just happy I’m in a good place right now.”Advertisement