AdvertisementSupported byMets 4, Nationals 0By Tim RohanGiving a professional athlete a nickname can be a fruitless endeavor if it is done hastily or without any serious thought. Only the ones that speak to an athlete’s character or persona ever seem to stick. And it helps if the name plays off pop culture.Matt Harvey, the Mets’ ace pitcher, goes by the Dark Knight, another name for Batman. He takes it so seriously that he has his own logo, with his silhouette set against the iconic symbol of a bat, on his locker. Some might consider it vain, but the nickname fits. When the Mets are in a rut — when they have lost five of seven games, as they had — they can turn to Harvey and expect him to bully the other team into submission.Harvey did just that Friday. He threw seven scoreless innings and outpitched Max Scherzer, the Nationals’ $210 million acquisition, and led the Mets to a 4-0 win over Washington at Citi Field. Harvey became the first Mets pitcher since Pedro Martinez, in 2006, to win his first five starts.“That’s what the definition of an ace is,” said Michael Cuddyer, the Mets’ left fielder. The Mets had started the day on a three-game losing streak, and it seemed as if they had spoiled the momentum they built during their 11-game winning streak in April. Reality was setting in. Their bullpen was still decimated by injuries; they were missing two starting position players; and their middle infield defense was becoming more alarming.Wilmer Flores has made seven errors in 21 games, including two in his last two games, and Daniel Murphy has committed four errors in 22 games.Manager Terry Collins had met with Flores sometime Friday — for at least the second time this season — and told him to relax.“He’s had a couple bad games and everybody wants to write him off,” Collins said before the game. “I understand that, due to the way we’re playing. But you have to give him a chance — you’ve got to give him a legitimate chance.”General Manager Sandy Alderson pointed out that Flores has more errors now than he did last year with the Mets, indicating that his issue was partly mental.“The important thing right now is to make sure he understands that we have confidence is his ability to catch the ball,” Alderson said.The Mets called up second baseman Dilson Herrera from Class AAA Las Vegas, partly to give them a jolt and partly, it seemed, to give Flores some relief. The idea was to shift Murphy to third until David Wright returned from his hamstring injury.Still, the Mets could do only so much to help Flores. He fielded seven ground balls Friday night, and the crowd held its collective breath on each one.The first ball hit was, fittingly, a grounder to Flores, and he bounced his throw to first base, causing Lucas Duda to drop the ball. The official scorer, perhaps taking pity, ruled it a single. But on the next ball, Flores helped turn a double play.When Flores made a throwing error in the fifth, Harvey later induced a ground ball to him, and Flores made the throw, without incident, to end the inning.The way Harvey was pitching, he looked poised enough to erase any mistakes Flores might make. He seemed to enjoy settling back into his role as the Mets’ enforcer.After the Phillies hit two Met batters earlier this season, Harvey hit Chase Utley square in the back in what seemed like retaliation. After the Yankees tagged Jacob deGrom for six runs on April 24, Harvey silenced them the next day, nearly throwing a complete game. Collins described Harvey at one point as “the big block bully.”Scherzer lasted seven innings and struck out 10 on Friday, but he made one critical mistake, leaving a fastball where Cuddyer could smack a solo homer over the right-center-field wall. In the eighth, with Scherzer out, Murphy delivered a bases-loaded over the head of left fielder Jayson Werth, who misjudged the line drive.Harvey was not at his best, and Collins pulled him after 93 pitches because he looked fatigued. He allowed at least one base runner in each inning. But he bore down and forced the Nationals to keep hitting ground balls. “He kept me busy out there,” Flores said. “That’s good. That’s good.”Advertisement