By ANDREW KEHMAY 1, 2015
The last big Barclays Center cheer of the 2014-15 season occurred between the third and fourth quarters on Friday night, when the Nets’ troupe of older dancers, the NETSational seniors, joined forces with their adolescent counterparts, the Brooklyn Nets Kids, to perform a spirited number at midcourt.Laughing fans stood and clapped and pulled out their phones to take pictures. Nothing in the final period could possibly match that excitement.There were 12 minutes left to play, but the game — and the Nets’ season — had essentially come to an end. After returning from intermission with a delicate, 6-point lead, the Atlanta Hawks put together a 23-3 run before the third quarter was halfway done, and the Nets withered before their fans’ eyes.Awaiting only the final buzzer, the Hawks cruised through the fourth to post a 111-87 win, capturing this first-round series in six games and returning some order to the N.B.A. universe.AdvertisementFor about a week and a half, the Nets had subverted outside expectations, making the series — a matchup of the top and bottom seeds in the Eastern Conference — closer than anticipated. It was a hard-fought and competitive series, if not aesthetically pleasing, until the final game, with each team winning on its home court through the first five.Advertisement“They’re a better team than us right now,” Deron Williams, who had 13 points and 4 assists, said after the game.With that, the Nets, who have the highest payroll in the league, concluded another bewildering season in which they alternated between periods of proficiency and apparent incompetence. They tried and discarded offensive systems like party outfits. They played through injuries, trades and some seemingly dysfunctional parts.The Nets said they were looking forward to a relatively stable summer — Coach Lionel Hollins is set to return for a second season — though some questions hung in the air of their locker room. Brook Lopez, who can opt out of the final year of his contract, declined to comment on his future with the team. Thaddeus Young and Alan Anderson also have player options.“I’m thankful for the players and what they gave and how they stuck with it and stayed with it,” Hollins said. “We were able to secure a playoff spot. Some people will say, Hey, we didn’t deserve it. That’s their problem.”Lopez led the Nets with 19 points and 7 rebounds. Paul Millsap scored a game-high 25 points, with DeMarre Carroll and Kyle Korver each contributing 20.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was a game in which the Hawks, who won 60 games during the regular season, finally displayed their full superiority over the Nets, who had just 38 wins. The Nets shot just 36.5 percent from the field, and the Hawks shot 50.6. The Nets had 20 assists, while the Hawks had 34. The Nets had 44 rebounds, and the Hawks had 45.It took less than five minutes of the third quarter for the Hawks to secure control. The Nets committed 4 of their 15 turnovers in that span and could not contain the Hawks, who poured in points from all corners of the court. When the Nets called a desperate timeout with 7 minutes 22 seconds left in the period, the players looked up at the scoreboard and saw that the Hawks had a 21-point lead.“If every game the coach is telling us to take care of the ball, and we still turn it over, that’s on us players,” said Joe Johnson, who had 12 points, 6 assists and no turnovers. “We’re not doing our job.”AdvertisementThe deficit grew as big as 28 points, while the soul was slowly sapped from the arena. Fans yelled angrily at the court. Soon they disengaged altogether.When Kent Bazemore of the Hawks made a wide-open 3-pointer with under three minutes to play in the third, the sound of his handclap celebration reverberated around the quiet arena. When Lopez made a layup about two minutes later, he slumped his shoulders and shook his head as he ran back to play defense.The Nets were outscored by 41-21 in the third quarter. The Hawks had 15 assists as a team in that one period alone.Anderson said the Nets had competed with the Hawks in every game of the series — except the last one: “To end it like this is nothing to hang your hat on,” he said.And yet, in a perplexing season of sudden ups and downs and multiple identity changes, one in which the Nets’ true identity was continually hard to discern, it was an oddly appropriate way to end it. A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Hawks’ Run Deflates Nets and Ends Their Season .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.