By KEN BELSON and BEN STRAUSSMAY 2, 2015
CHICAGO — The fireworks of the first night of the N.F.L. draft, with its red-carpet treatment for top prospects and a prime-time television audience, gave way to the more mundane rhythms of wheeling and dealing.As the second and third rounds got underway, the Cleveland Browns, the Houston Texans, the St. Louis Rams and several other teams swapped picks. Out of the juggling emerged some trends: Teams continued to emphasize the passing game and defending it, and they preferred players from the five most powerful college conferences.The best wide receivers were quickly scooped up. After six were chosen in the first round, three were picked early in the second, highlighted by Devin Smith of Ohio State, who went to the Jets, and Dorial Green-Beckham of Oklahoma, who was drafted by the Tennessee Titans. Ten offensive tackles were chosen in the first two rounds.Teams also took 10 linebackers and 11 cornerbacks and safeties in the first and second rounds.Randy Gregory, an outside linebacker from Nebraska, was one of the more notable picks. Considered one of the top talents in the draft, he dropped to the 60th selection because of off-the-field questions. He tested positive for marijuana twice while in college and then again during the combine earlier this year.AdvertisementGregory was the last player selected from the Green Room in Chicago, but after the Dallas Cowboys picked him, he walked across the stage with a smile. “Obviously, a lot,” he said when asked about how the drug test affected his stock. “It’s in the past."AdvertisementNot surprisingly, players from the Southeastern Conference and Pacific-12 were among the most valued. Teams took 15 players from each conference, as well as 13 players from A.C.C. and 11 from the Big Ten.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Five players were picked in the first two rounds from Florida State, which won the national championship in 2013, and four players were chosen from Washington. Three players each were taken from Alabama and Oregon.The loudest cheers of the night went to some of the older players who introduced the N.F.L.’s newest players.The Hall of Famer Dick Butkus, Chicago’s fearsome middle linebacker, received a standing ovation before he announced that the Bears had chosen Eddie Goldman, a defensive tackle from Florida State. Not long after, the crowd at the Auditorium Theater gave Jim Kelly, the Hall of Fame Buffalo Bills quarterback who has been battling cancer, a standing ovation as well. The crowd yelled “Kel-ly, Kel-ly” before he said that the Bills had taken Ronald Darby, a cornerback also from Florida State. Rick Upchurch, a wide receiver who played for the Broncos, brought the crowd to their feet when he said he was fighting leukemia.In a lighter note, Ickey Woods, the former Cincinnati Bengals running back, got the crowd to its feet when he did his patented shuffle. He then said the Bengals had chosen Jake Fisher, a tackle from Oregon.A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pass Offense and Defense Are Valued.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.