By BILL PENNINGTONMAY 1, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  A prized football recruit in high school and an all-American safety at Alabama, Landon Collins always dreamed of being a first-round selection in the N.F.L. draft. Collins attended the N.F.L.’s nationally broadcast first-round extravaganza on Thursday, eager to leap on the stage when his name was called.The night ended and the television cameras were turned off with Collins’s dream still unrealized.Though invited to stay for Friday’s second and third rounds in Chicago, Collins instead chose to fly home to Louisiana to be with his family.“I was hurt more than anything,” Collins said. “It was tough, but I walked out with my head up.”In their New Jersey headquarters, the Giants, desperately needing a safety, were stunned to see that Collins was still available. As Collins was leaving Chicago, the Giants began calling other N.F.L. teams to see if they could improve their second-round draft position, enhancing their chances to acquire Collins.AdvertisementFriday night, in a bold and surprising move, the Giants traded three draft picks to move up to the first choice of the second round so they could select Collins, a player they project to be a future leader of the defense and a starter this season. In Thursday’s first round, the Giants wanted to draft an offensive lineman, and their top choice was Iowa’s Brandon Scherff. But Scherff was selected before the Giants could make their pick. Friday, they contrived to make sure they were not outmaneuvered again.AdvertisementThe Giants gave the Tennessee Titans their second-round, fourth-round and one of two seventh-round picks to obtain the Titans’ 33rd pick, which was seven spots ahead of the Giants’ original second-round position.In an odd bit of theater, the Giants said that Collins’s snub during the first round made him especially attractive as a draft selection.“I think we’re going to get a very, very motivated player coming in here to prove some people wrong that didn’t take him,” said Jerry Reese, the Giants’ general manager. “They missed out on a good player.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Giants Coach Tom Coughlin was giddy at the prospect of having a player who would play as if he had a point to prove.“He thought he would go in the first round,” Coughlin said with a smile. “That is a good situation. Any time we’ve have had that one, it has turned out pretty well for us.”Coughlin may have been referring to at least one obvious example. Chris Snee, who is Coughlin’s son-in-law, was a second-round pick who became a four-time Pro Bowl guard.“I will play with a chip on my shoulder,” said Collins, who is 6 feet and 228 pounds.For all the talk of Collins’s mental motivation, he has the chance to have a significant impact on the Giants’ defense, which was one of the league’s worst against the run last year. Collins is a hard hitter who led the Crimson Tide in tackles last season, which is hard for a safety to do on a team with as many talented defenders as Alabama has on its roster. Since the Giants lost multiple safeties to free agency in the off-season, Collins will be expected to start immediately.Marc Ross, the Giants’ vice president of player evaluation, said of Collins: “This guy will be a leader for us. He was that for Alabama and we think he can do the same thing for us.”In the third round Friday night, the Giants again sought help defensively, taking U.C.L.A. defensive end Owamagbe Odighizuwa, whose strength is also stopping the run. Odighizuwa missed the 2013 football season with surgery on both hips.A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants Trade Up and Make Alabama Safety Top Choice in Second Round.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.