By BEN SHPIGELMAY 1, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — One of the seminal moments of Leonard Williams’s life occurred when he was 13.It was the day he had been waiting for — sign-ups for youth football. He lingered in a long line until it was his turn to weigh in. He stepped on the scale. It read 200 pounds — 20 over the maximum. He was barred from participating. He left the field, crying.“I felt it kind of pushed me even harder to be the best that I could be when I could finally play,” Williams said.When he could finally play, Williams dominated on the defensive line. In high school, at Mainland in Daytona Beach, Fla., he emerged as an elite national recruit. In college, at Southern California, he tormented offensive linemen, running backs and quarterbacks.AdvertisementOn Thursday night, after selecting Williams with the sixth pick in the draft, the Jets marveled at their good fortune. Three separate times, Mike Maccagnan, their general manager, said he was surprised that Williams was still available.AdvertisementThe five teams that passed on Williams had other priorities. The teams that never had the chance to draft him noticed that he had slipped. Doug Whaley, the Bills’ general manager, told reporters that they rated the 20-year-old Williams, listed at 6 feet 5 inches and 300 pounds, as the best defensive player, and perhaps the best player over all, in the draft.“Wish he didn’t go to the Jets in the division,” Whaley said, “but it’s good for them.”It is good for the Jets, whose stockpiling at the position furnishes them with yet another imposing option for their fearsome front but also flexibility in this salary-cap era as they decide which of those superb defensive linemen to retain. And it is good for Williams, who said he was eager to learn from Sheldon Richardson, Muhammad Wilkerson and Damon Harrison.“I feel like everybody can learn from each other,” Williams said.Growing up, Williams learned from his mother, Aviva Russek, who raised him and his four siblings. She would tell him, “Whatever makes you happy, as long as it’s something good, you can do it.”They did not have much money. They moved a lot: California, Michigan, Arizona, Florida. Bouncing around helped him meet friends easier — “A lot of people like me,” he said — even as he endured difficult circumstances at home.His father, Clenon Williams, battled drug addiction, abandoning the family for days at a time, and is now imprisoned in Florida, serving time for offenses, including robbery with a deadly weapon. Williams said he had a “great” relationship with his father.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“What kept me going was just my passion and love for football,” Williams said. “That’s really all I play the game for. It was never to go to the N.F.L. and get a paycheck or anything like that.”Clenon loved the Cowboys, so Williams would watch along with him, devoting special attention to Dallas’s star defensive end, DeMarcus Ware, who now plays for Denver. Williams came to pattern his style more after the Texans’ J. J. Watt, whose versatility allows him to move around the line, creating mismatches.Williams acknowledged that despite 21 sacks at Southern Cal, he was still raw as a pass rusher, a little slow off the snap, sometimes reading instead of reacting. But he is still an excellent tutor to his youngest brother, Andrew, who, at 9 years old, already weighs about 140 pounds, Williams said, and is bound to encounter the same resistance to playing football as he did.Advertisement“At the time, I thought it was a bad thing,” Williams said. “But I guess it was kind of a blessing in disguise.”EXTRA POINTSWith their second-round pick, the Jets drafted receiver Devin Smith from Ohio State on Friday, continuing their overhaul of the N.F.L.’s worst passing offense. The Jets had added Brandon Marshall in a trade with Chicago to complement Eric Decker, but Smith’s arrival added an element of stretch-the-field explosiveness that they were missing. It also fulfilled the owner Woody Johnson’s prediction this week that the team would surround Geno Smith and Ryan Fitzpatrick with more playmakers. Last season, Devin Smith, who is listed at 6-foot-1 and 199 pounds, averaged 28.2 yards on his 33 catches for the national champion Buckeyes, scoring 10 touchdowns. He finished his collegiate career with 121 receptions for 2,503 yards and 30 touchdowns, averaging 37.9 yards per score.Infusing an aging position group with youth, the Jetsconcluded their second day of drafting by selecting defensive end Lorenzo Mauldin from Louisville.The Jets addressed their pass rush off the edge with Maudlin, who likely projects as an outside linebacker in the N.F.L. Mauldin, who recorded 20 and a half sacks in four seasons, was a college teammate of safety Calvin Pryor.The Jets moved back 12 spots in the third round to select Mauldin at No. 82, swapping third-round picks with Houston and also acquiring a fifth-rounder (No. 152), a seventh-rounder (No. 229) and receiver DeVier Posey.A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: A New Jet Once Wished He Were Smaller. Now Opponents Do.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.