
On Horse Racing By                     
 JOE DRAPE
 
MAY 1, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. — This is an altogether different Kentucky Derby. It hasn’t been hijacked by bombastic owners. There has been no need to manufacture story lines. No, for the first time since I have been coming here, the horses are the genuine stars and there is a sense that the 141st running of America’s signature race is going to be one for the ages.Much of it has to do with the two colts trained by Bob Baffert, American Pharoah and Dortmund. All week, horsemen and -women have been trekking to his barn as if it were the Louvre to take a look at what they consider to be the Mona Lisa and the Venus de Milo of a deep and talented crop of 3-year-olds.These are hard boots who know that even the great horses lose, and who declare it often, but they have fallen like schoolboys for American Pharoah, the 5-2 morning-line favorite. The loquacious D. Wayne Lukas, 79, a trainer who has won four of these things, usually is the first to tamp down high hopes by grumbling, “Don’t bronze him yet.”But Lukas has predicted American Pharoah will sweep the Triple Crown.“He’s special,” Lukas, who will saddle Mr. Z, said.American Pharoah was last year’s 2-year-old champion and has won four of his five races in effortless fashion. But it is the way the colt has floated like a cloud around this racetrack each morning that has burnished him with an aura of invincibility.Advertisement“He is a notch above everybody — he glides along so easily, like there isn’t any effort,” said Elliott Walden, president and chief executive of WinStar Farm, which is an owner of Carpe Diem.AdvertisementHis colt has also won four of his five starts, and $1.5 million in purses. Like American Pharoah, Carpe Diem has decimated the fields he has faced. Unlike the favorite, Carpe Diem is a son of Giant’s Causeway and bred to go the mile and a quarter.“In any of the last 10 years, we would be the favorite,” Walden said. Instead, Carpe Diem is the third betting choice at a generous 8-1.Even more perplexing is how the strapping and accomplished colt Dortmund (3-1) has been totally eclipsed by his stablemate. At 6 for 6, he is one of two undefeated horses in the field. His sire, Big Brown, captured the 2008 Derby, and Dortmund has won on this track before, blitzing 11 rivals by nearly eight lengths in November in a mile race.
                A fan’s guide on what to watch and what to eat and drink on the biggest sports Saturday in years.            Better, Dortmund is the only contender who has been challenged in the stretch when the race was on the line — twice — by a colt here named Firing Line.“We know that Dortmund is probably more battle-tested,” Baffert conceded. “He’s been in a fight.”Gary Stevens, 52, rides Firing Line. He first rode in the Derby in 1986, and has won it three times — with Winning Colors in 1988, Thunder Gulch in 1995 and Silver Charm in 1997. After Firing Line lost those head-to-head duels with Dortmund, he was shipped to New Mexico for the Sunland Derby, which he won by 14 lengths.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stevens likes his colt — a lot. He also understands why Firing Line is 12-1.“This is the best bunch of horses assembled for this race since I’ve been coming here,” he said. “What’s even better is most of them haven’t seen each other before.”He’s right. There are others, too, who cannot be thrown out.Materiality (12-1) is 3 for 3 and bested a tough Florida Derby field. Frosted (15-1) won the Wood Memorial by two lengths. Mubtaahij (20-1) is here from Dubai, where he ran away with four of his five starts on the dirt.“I am very impressed by what I see, and I probably picked one of the worst years to try to come to the Derby from another country,” Mubtaahij’s South African trainer, Mike de Kock, said. “There’s some very serious horses. There’s not only American Pharoah, there’s some proper horses there, so, you know, a healthy respect for them, there’s no doubt.”AdvertisementBetween the star power of American Pharoah and the depth and talent of his challengers, even the most practical horsemen and cynical horseplayers are finding it hard to shake the feeling that something magical is about to happen along this year’s Triple Crown trail.“Some Derbys, horses that win, no one thought they could,” John Moynihan, a longtime bloodstock agent, said. “That isn’t going to happen this year. I don’t know if it will be American Pharoah, but a very good horse is going to win. And hopefully, when we get done with the Triple Crown, there’s going to be three or four horses that are considered warriors.”It would be thrilling, of course, if this year’s winner was fast and strong enough to become just the 12th Triple Crown champion and the first since Affirmed in 1978. It would be great if like Silver Charm, Real Quiet, Charismatic, War Emblem, Funny Cide, Smarty Jones, Big Brown and California Chrome, the winner got to the Belmont Stakes with a chance at history.What’s nice now, however, is that horses are front and center for the right reasons in an industry in which that is not often the case. Let’s get them around the track safely on Saturday and perhaps see most of them again two weeks from now in Baltimore.A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Even Before the Gate, This Field Is Loaded.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »