AdvertisementSupported byBy Richard WhittallTORONTO — After eight years in Major League Soccer without a playoff berth, Toronto F.C. fans might be forgiven for feeling a familiar sense of futility as their club kicked off this season with two wins, four losses and more goals against than for.The uneven start comes despite another ambitious (and expensive) off-season in which the team spent millions to acquire the former Juventus forward Sebastian Giovinco and the American striker Jozy Altidore. But there is a key difference this spring: A month and a half into the season, Toronto F.C. has yet to play a match at home.The reason is that renovations underway to expand the capacity at BMO Field, Toronto F.C.’s stadium, to 30,000 stretched into the start of the season and will not be completed until the first week of May. That forced M.L.S. to schedule a nine-week, seven-game away stretch for the Reds to start the season.This may help explain the team’s slow start, and also why its players are preaching patience.“It’s still very early,” midfielder Michael Bradley cautioned before last weekend’s 2-0 victory at Orlando gave Toronto its second win.The team started so slowly, in fact, that reports began to surface before the Orlando trip that Coach Greg Vanney would be fired if the results did not improve. That, too, felt familiar to fans of Toronto, which has employed nine coaches in its first eight seasons in M.L.S.Vanney called the situation “unfortunate.” Playing in front of a friendly home crowd, he said, “would be great energy for us as a group, and we could use that in the course of these matches.”While it is tempting to dismiss such remarks as excuse-making, they are backed by statistical science. Several analysts have determined that home advantage is very real, including Chris Anderson, author of “The Numbers Game.”“Home-field advantage is a statistical fact,” Anderson wrote on his website in 2011. “Across the big leagues of Europe, more matches end with the home team winning than end with any other outcome.”That effect may play an even more outsize role in M.L.S., which is far more competitively balanced than European leagues like those in England and Spain. The good news for Toronto F.C. is that history may be on its side. In 2006, the Chicago Fire were forced to play their first nine games away from home while work was completed on Toyota Park. In 2011, with their new stadium, Sporting Park, under construction, Sporting Kansas City endured a 10-game road stretch from mid-March to early June.Crucially, however, neither stretch seemed to affect the clubs’ postseason ambitions. The 2006 Fire won only two of those nine road games but finished in third place in the Eastern Conference. Sporting K.C. did even better in 2011; after posting only one win in its first 10 games, the team finished first over all in the East and eventually reached the Eastern Conference finals.This historical reversal of fortune for both clubs was not lost on Bradley. M.L.S., he said, “is still a league, right or wrong, where history shows that the teams that start well don’t always finish well.”“So it doesn’t mean that you can’t,” Bradley said. “It just means it doesn’t guarantee anything.”Even so, T.F.C. players are reluctant to complain about the travel. Fullback Justin Morrow laughed off the idea that the away schedule was taking a toll.“I mean, everyone makes a big deal of the road stretch, but the funny part is after the road stretch we still have to play road games,” he said. “It’s not something that we’re never going to see again, a challenge we’re never going to face again.”Altidore agreed, saying: “Obviously it’s not fun, but you know what to expect. It’s not an excuse. Everybody has to deal with it. So in that regard, it’s not a real big deal.”What most other M.L.S. players do not have to deal with, however, is the pressure that comes with eight seasons of failure in Toronto. A year after spending big to acquire Bradley and the English striker Jermain Defoe to try to end a franchise-long player drought, General Manager Tim Bezbatchenko and Tim Leiweke, the chief executive of the team’s corporate owner-investors Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment, tried the same method again in this year’s preseason.In addition to signing Altidore and Giovinco, who came aboard on a four-year contract reportedly worth $7 million per year, Toronto acquired the deep-lying playmaker Benoit Cheyrou from Marseille and the Polish defender Damien Perquis.With expectations raised again, particularly after the failure of Bradley and the departed Defoe to lift the club’s fortunes last season, it is not certain that the front office will wait until Toronto’s first home game, on May 10, before making any changes.For now though, Bradley said he believed the team’s homelessness might yet work in its favor.“We’re going through a stretch where we’re having to learn a lot about ourselves and ask ourselves real questions,” he said. “But there’s a general feeling among us that we’re going to come out much better, much stronger for it.”Advertisement