AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe Chicago Bulls of recent years have risen or fallen with Derrick Rose. A seeming championship trajectory earlier in this decade went wrong primarily because of his injuries. Now he is healthy again, and the Bulls have advanced to the N.B.A.’s Eastern Conference semifinals to face the Cleveland Cavaliers, who have a serious injury issue of their own.Rose played every playoff game for the Bulls from 2009, his rookie year, to 2011, when the team was 62-20 and advanced to the conference finals and Rose won the N.B.A.’s Most Valuable Player Award.The next season, the Bulls tied for the best record in the league and seemed poised for a championship. That dream ended in their first playoff game, against the Philadelphia 76ers on April 28, 2012. With 1 minute 20 seconds left and the Bulls heading for a victory, Rose landed awkwardly after driving the lane and fell to the court in pain. He had torn the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee. Without him, the Bulls dropped four of the next five games and were eliminated by the eighth-seeded Sixers.Rose’s injury was bad enough that he missed all of 2012-13. Late that season, with Rose back practicing, feverish speculation began that he would return for the end of the season or the playoffs. When he did not, many fans and news media members were sharply critical. It was a low point for a player who was recently a league M.V.P.Few would have picked that Bulls team to fare well in the playoffs, but Chicago overachieved, beating the favored Nets in a hard-fought seven-game series.Next up was LeBron James and the defending champion Heat, who were 66-16 in the regular season. In a memorable Game 1, the Bulls — without Rose, the All-Star Luol Deng or Kirk Hinrich, Rose’s backup — beat the Heat behind a career-high 27 from 5-foot-9 Nate Robinson. That was the high-water mark, though, as the Heat won the next four games.Rose returned for 2013-14, but after 10 so-so games, he missed the rest of the season with a meniscus tear in his right knee. This season, he missed 20 straight games from late February to early April with the same injury.After easing back into the last five games of the regular season, Rose cranked it up for the playoffs, including a 34-point effort in a Game 3 win over the Milwaukee Bucks in the first round.His teammates seem to appreciate his return. “He makes everything easier for everybody,” his backcourt partner, Jimmy Butler, told The Associated Press after Game 3.Although he is only 26, his many injuries have meant that Rose has never returned to the statistical heights of his first few seasons. He acknowledged feeling winded at times in the Bucks series, and he has had a few poor performances, including a 5-for-20 shooting effort in Game 5.The good news for the Bulls is that in his absence over the past few years they have developed into a strong team with or without him. Butler averaged 25 points in the Milwaukee series, and he and Pau Gasol were All-Stars.Now, as in 2013, the Bulls face a second-round series against a team led by James. And it is his Cavaliers who are now missing key players.Power forward Kevin Love, the team’s top rebounder, is out for the season after dislocating his shoulder in the final game of a first-round sweep of the Boston Celtics. Starting guard J.R. Smith is suspended for the first two games of the series after committing a flagrant foul.In the absence of Love, the Cavs will need more from Tristan Thompson, a solid sixth man whose high in the Celtics series was 12 points. There will also be more pressure on the two remaining members of Cleveland’s big three, Kyrie Irving and James.The loss of Smith for two games is also a blow, as his backup, Iman Shumpert, does not have the same touch from 3-point territory.Despite these setbacks, Cleveland remains favored in the series, perhaps because of home-court advantage and the never-to-be-underestimated James factor.But with Chicago looking stronger than the team that won 50 games in the regular season and Cleveland looking weaker than its 53 wins, the result is far from certain. Advertisement