AdvertisementSupported byBy Sarah LyallLAS VEGAS — By now, even people who do not follow boxing know that two men named Manny Pacquiao and Floyd Mayweather Jr. are due to fight an important match here on Saturday. But does anyone — boxing fans included — know what they are fighting for?“Um, I saw the big belt, so I know it’s a championship fight,” said Mike Behner, a 66-year-old construction company owner, referring to the emerald-encrusted championship belt displayed here this week by the World Boxing Council. “But I don’t know if it’s the world championship or the U.S. championship, or even if there is such a thing. I just know that whoever wins gets the belt.”As big as a Frisbee in a dollar store and a million times as expensive, the belt is a thing of gaudy wonder, even by boxing’s inflated standards. The World Boxing Council sounds pretty impressive, too, with its fancy, authoritative name.But its authority is limited. The W.B.C. is just one ingredient in an overstuffed alphabet soup of several competing bodies in boxing that each do virtually the same thing. For a fee, they sanction, or give their imprimatur to, different sets of matches in dizzying arrays of weight classes — ones you have heard of (middleweight) and ones you probably haven’t (superfeatherweight).Mayweather and Pacquiao’s fight is in the welterweight class. That means they must weigh more than 140 pounds but no more than 147 pounds. They were to publicly step on a scale Friday to prove their welterweightness.“All I know is that they look pretty small, so they’re not heavyweight,” Behner said.Each of the four major sanctioning bodies has its own idiosyncratic ranking system. Each gives belts — they are called belts, though they are too big and heavy to thread through the loops on anyone’s pants or even to serve as superbelt-like cummerbunds — to each of its champions in each of the weight classes. These champions are not always the same people.“They all declare champions,” the boxing promoter Lou DiBella said. “They all rank fighters, and their rankings can be totally different from each other’s. One champion will be fighting one day in one place; another will be fighting another day in another place.”Robert Bennett, executive director of the Nevada State Athletic Commission, also tried to explain.“What you have here is that currently Floyd Mayweather is the World Boxing Council champion, and he is also the World Boxing Association champion,” Bennett said. “Manny Pacquiao is the World Boxing Organization champion.”A fan’s guide on what to watch and what to eat and drink on the biggest sports Saturday in years.Oh, dear. That means that those three groups are all sanctioning the Pacquiao-Mayweather fight but that the International Boxing Federation, the fourth group in the quartet, is not. This is because the I.B.F. already has its own welterweight champion, an English fellow by the name of Kell Brook, who is feeling pretty left out now. (“I am the other world champion,” Brook told The Mirror newspaper recently.)“The fight is for the W.B.A. and the W.B.O. and the W.B.C. titles,” said Jeanette Salazar, a spokeswoman for the I.B.F. (Try to keep up here.) Referring to Mayweather and Pacquiao, she said, “We don’t recognize them as the I.B.F. champions because they are not our champions.”The only way either of them could also become the I.B.F. champion, she said, would be if they fought Brook and thus “unified” all the titles.Even though the fight here on Saturday is not connected to her group, she acknowledged its significance, calling Mayweather and Pacquiao “the top boxers today,” which also seemed confusing, given that the I.B.F. apparently thinks that the top boxer, at least in the welterweight category, is Brook.This is all so annoying and complicated that HBO, for one, simply does not discuss it on the air. HBO and Showtime are sharing the telecast Saturday night.“We decided many years ago that identifying or referring to boxing’s sanctioning bodies in our telecasts would not service our viewers,” said Rick Bernstein, executive producer of HBO Sports. “Fans identify with the fighters, and discussing sanctioning bodies and their policies is like going down a rabbit hole and not knowing when you’ll come out the other side.”That certainly seemed to be the case among the people in the food court in the enormous mall, casino and dining pavilion that passes for the lobby of the MGM Grand hotel, where Saturday’s fight is to take place. None of them knew anything more than that there was going to be a fight between Mayweather and Pacquiao.“You have the W.B.A. and the W.B.O.,” Kyle Warren, 28, began to say.“But I think this one’s the W.B.C.,” said his friend Mark Plumlee, 49. “Actually, I don’t have a clue what the different organizations are.”Because this is not HBO, we are allowed to address these issues and ask the big questions. Like, which of the sanctioning groups is boxing’s acknowledged organizing body?Er, none of them. Boxing does not have an acknowledged organizing body.“It’s botch city,” DiBella said. “This is a five-hour conversation. There’s no commissioner; there’s no regulator; there’s no ultimate authority.”He continued: “Everyone’s better off with one champion and one body you can count on. But that is not how boxing works. This is how it is and how it’s been for generations.”Some boxing experts say that all the different belts and titles have little purpose except to make more money for boxers and promoters by generating more fights and spraying titles around like champagne.“Belts are a dime a dozen, meaningless straps churned out by meaningless sanctioning bodies in order to collect a portion of each paper champion’s purse,” Connor Ruebusch wrote on the website SB Nation this week. “There are 111 of these belts spread out across 17 weight classes. It’s ridiculous.”More relevant in this particular fight, people in boxing say, is that the competitors are objectively superior to everyone else — Mayweather with his unblemished record, Pacquiao with his many years of victories in different weight categories — and that a half-billion or so dollars is at stake.“This title fight has zero to do with titles,” DiBella said. “It has to do with the two biggest names in boxing fighting this weekend.”Still, spectators should be prepared to see three belts — given by the W.B.O., the W.B.A. and the W.B.C. — handed to the winner of Saturday’s fight. Actually, that could be four. According to Bennett, The Ring magazine, which has its own special boxing ranking system, might also give out a title belt.Why does it have to be so complicated? Asked why boxing could not have just one sanctioning body, one set of rankings, one set of championship fights, and one belt at a time, Mauricio Sulaiman, president of the World Boxing Council, said that the system did not work that way.“The W.B.C. cannot control what others do,” he said in an email. “Any day a new organization could be formed, and we simply cannot do anything about it.”Which all went right over the head of P. J. Williams, 34, an investment adviser from Ohio, who was struggling to beat his way through the thick forest of acronyms he had unwittingly waded into.“The W.B.O.,” he began, and then trailed off. “I don’t know. All I know is that this is a big deal.”John Branch contributed reporting.Advertisement