
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
MAY 1, 2015
Months before Jameis Winston became the top pick in the N.F.L. draft, a man named Bill Miller was sitting at his breakfast table in Texas thinking about the problem of sexual assaults in sports.Miller, an influential political consultant in Austin, had opened the newspaper on Christmas Eve and read a column about Winston, about the rape accusation against him, and about how Winston had considered his accuser’s moaning to mean that she had consented to sex.“Moaning, that was it?” Miller said. “It just stunned me. He’s either grossly uninformed or is a bad person. But this kid was 20 years old. He has already missed the boat on how you behave or how to recognize the signals of consent.”Miller thought about his three college-age children — two daughters and a son — who were home that day, snoozing away in their childhood beds. What if their lives had been changed by someone who didn’t know the definition of consent? His stomach turned. And then Miller, a longtime power broker in Texas politics, went to work.AdvertisementMonths later, his efforts to address one of the most important issues playing out in sports — violence against women — have a chance to make a significant impact.AdvertisementHis idea was simple. Miller, 64, led an initiative to take an educational video about sexual assault and respecting women into Texas public high schools, and then he persuaded state officials to make viewing it mandatory for every student-athlete. (In 2013-14, that was about 805,200 athletes, according to the University Interscholastic League.)Miller’s efforts were announced Friday by Michael Williams, the Texas commissioner of education, at the state Capitol. This week, Williams called it the first program of its kind in the nation.“Our moms and dads and grandmas and grandpas should be teaching their kids about healthy relationships, but when that doesn’t work, there’s nothing wrong with the schools augmenting or complementing those lessons, and I think this video will do that,” Williams told me. “I think what we’re doing is fairly extraordinary, and you look at the headlines that are filled with domestic violence, especially among athletes, and you know it’s necessary.”Great timing. This week, preening in the spotlight, are two athletes with a history of treating women poorly: Winston — the former Florida State quarterback who, after a botched investigation, avoided charges in a rape case — and the boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr., who has a documented history of battering women. Each is an example of an athlete who either never learned how to treat a woman with respect or never bothered to follow through.They might have benefited from the Texas video had they been required to watch it in their teens. The video has yet to be produced but is on its way to becoming a reality. Students are expected to begin viewing it in the 2015-16 school year.The bones of what is being called the ProtectHer Project are in place. The video, titled “A Gentleman’s Playbook,” will feature Alexis Jones, a Texas-born star of the CBS show “Survivor,” who helped develop the project and who has given speeches to athletes about redefining manhood. The video is also expected to include big-name Texas athletes and coaches addressing high school players about how boys can better treat girls and women, and how they can play a part in protecting the girls and women in their lives.Texas lawmakers have asked that the cost for the video’s production — about $250,000 — be raised privately. So now the Texas High School Coaches Education Foundation, a nonprofit arm of the Texas High School Coaches Association, is trying to raise that money. It has already received $25,000 from the Houston Rockets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I can think of a few more owners who can afford to send in a gift that size or, frankly, much more.Just off the top of my head, Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, might be interested in contributing after recently signing Greg Hardy, the defensive end whom a judge ruled guilty of assaulting and threatening to kill his ex-girlfriend. (Hardy later asked for a jury trial, and all charges were dropped when his ex-girlfriend did not cooperate with prosecutors. The N.F.L. has suspended him for most of next season.)AdvertisementMaybe the N.F.L. can kick in some cash, too. Or Under Armour, whose logo was splashed behind Ray Rice, the former Baltimore Ravens running back, when he apologized for knocking out the woman who became his wife. Or the W.N.B.A., which has two star players who were arrested after a domestic dispute last week.In fact, all of the leagues and companies with a hand in sports should open their wallets, and wide, because the issue of sexual assault and domestic violence has probably touched every one of them in some way.All of those entities should expect a letter soon, if they haven’t received it already, from D. W. Rutledge, the executive director of the Texas High School Coaches Association. And coaches and C.E.O.s, please read it, break out your checkbook and donate to the cause. Because the video can change lives, and maybe even save lives.In a more practical sense, it may help you from having to clean up a messy public relations disaster when an athlete you employ or sponsor runs off the rails.“High school age — or, let’s say, 12 to 21 — is a critical time for kids because it’s when they make decisions that can send them on a path of success or destruction,” Rutledge said. “That age is the perfect time to introduce this discussion, and we’ve been thinking about a way to address it for years and years now. Now we’ve found it.”Rutledge is right. When high school coaches show their athletes Miller’s video, it could start a conversation that might not be broached very comfortably any other way. If the players — often leaders in their schools — talk about the message with their teammates, it can ripple out of the locker room and into the hallways and classrooms.It’s a chain reaction that can cause a sea change. It won’t solve the problem, but — as Miller told me — you’ve got to start somewhere.“You can’t change the world overnight,” Miller said. “You can only change parts of it over time.”All that because one man got angry over breakfast. More of us should have what he’s having.Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: A Father Confronts Violence Against Women.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »