By HUW RICHARDSMAY 1, 2015
LONDON — Toulon is making a bid for greatness as it pursues a third consecutive European club rugby union championship Saturday.Nobody has ever won more than two in a row, but Toulon will try to go one better in the European Rugby Champions Cup final against another French club, Clermont Auvergne, at Twickenham, England’s national stadium in the London suburbs.“Talk of a hat trick is more for the papers,” said Drew Mitchell, Toulon’s Australian winger, in the past week. “We’ve put ourselves in this position, but we need to approach the match in isolation and give Clermont the respect they deserve.”Saturday’s match is a contest between two teams that are clearly the best in both France and Europe. They hold the top two places (with Toulon ahead) in the regular season standings of France’s Top 14 national championship and met in the European final two years ago, when Toulon won what was then called the Heineken Cup, 16-15.AdvertisementThey share a fierce rivalry, much of it centering on Toulon’s owner and president Mourad Boudjellal. A comic book magnate of Algerian descent, Boudjellal is charismatic, abrasive, feisty and self-aware. The title of his 2013 autobiography translates as “My Bad Reputation.”Advertisement“I make no difference between my dreams and my ambitions,” says the main quote on the back cover. His dream has been to create a rugby juggernaut for his home town, a rugged naval base on France’s south coast of which he says, “I have always been Toulonnais before I am French.”Clermont, which is owned by the Michelin tire company, has been a frequent target for Boudjellal’s sharper asides. He has called the club “the Trolls of the Massif Central” — the district from which it comes. In 2012, comments about the refereeing in a defeat to Clermont earned him a 130-day ban.In the past week, Boudjellal labeled Clermont’s owners “moralizers,” saying that while rugby is a “rock ’n’ roll sport,” their conception of the game was more “harps and clavichords.”The team he has built, which is coached by Bernard Laporte — previously both French national coach and sports minister — inspires both fear and admiration. As well as winning those two European cups it is reigning champion of France, a title that French teams prize as least as much as the continental trophy.“Toulon have a very long list of very good players,” said Clermont’s Australian flyhalf Brock James on Monday. “It does not matter what team they put out, it will be strong because they have three or four good players in each position.”Toulon has recruited globally. Carl Hayman, its captain, is a New Zealander. Matt Giteau, a utility back who is reigning European player of the year, is an Australian and Bryan Habana, who scored the winning try in the semifinal against Leinster, is South African.Fullback Leigh Halfpenny, a Welshman who like Habana has been world player of the year, kicks the goals while the Englishman Steffon Armitage is a force of nature in the back row.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A high turnover rate, a strong ball-carrier, a good running game and someone who links well with backs and forwards,” was Mitchell’s summation of Armitage’s qualities this week as he argued that England should make his teammate an exception to its rule of not picking players who play their club rugby abroad.AdvertisementThere are also several current French internationals, Argentines, Georgians and Italians making up what Mitchell calls “A real collective based on respect.”Clermont has more reasons than Boudjellal’s jibes not to love Toulon. It looked set in 2013 to become the dominant force in Europe, coming to the final as favorite for a victory that would also have made it the first team to complete a perfect season in the competition.Instead defeat by Toulon added to an extraordinary history of big match losses. Clermont lost 10 French championship finals, starting in 1936 and concluding with successive losses from 2007 to 2009, before finally taking the trophy in 2010.“We’ve learned a lot from the finals we’ve played in,” said James, who has been with Clermont since 2006. “But this year is a new adventure, with quite a few new players and a new coaching team.”“We’re where we wanted to be, in another European final,” he added. “Our supporters waited 99 years for their first French title; we hope they won’t have to wait as long for a European one.”Each club has fans capable of generating an extraordinary atmosphere on its home field, but the length and cost of the journey to London may dilute their impact. Close to 45,000 tickets, a little over half of Twickenham’s 82,000 capacity, had been sold by last Monday afternoon.Nor has any of the four previous all-French finals been much of a spectacle. This one may be little different, but at least it has every chance of making some history.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.