AdvertisementSupported byClippers 111, Spurs 109By Scott CacciolaLOS ANGELES — Seconds after Chris Paul grabbed at the back of his left hamstring while dribbling the ball up the court late in the first quarter, he left for the bench and buried his head in his hands as a trainer tended to him. Paul soon departed for the Clippers’ locker room at Staples Center on Saturday night, his steps slow and tentative, his face contorted in a grimace.Paul eventually returned to the game, and as he dragged his left leg up and down the court, he managed to pull his teammates along, too. It was a determined effort by Paul, whose leaning, improbable bank shot with a second remaining lifted the Clippers to a 111-109 victory over the San Antonio Spurs in a thrilling finale to their first-round playoff series.“That’s a series for the ages,” Clippers Coach Doc Rivers said.Paul was pure magic in Game 7, finishing with 27 points and 6 assists as the Clippers ousted the defending champion Spurs. Blake Griffin added 24 points, 13 rebounds and 10 assists as the Clippers secured a spot in the Western Conference semifinals against the Houston Rockets.“When I came back, Blake kept asking me if I was all right,” Paul said. “I thought about our team and all we’ve been through. I know if it was any other guy on our team, in that situation, they wouldn’t have laid down. Just try to find a way.”After Tim Duncan made two free throws to tie the score at 109-109 with 8.8 seconds left, Paul — strained hamstring and all — came off a screen near the 3-point line and wriggled free as he sought an angle to the right baseline. Met by two defenders, Paul rose from the floor and kissed the ball off the glass as the crowd went into a frenzy.“He was incredible,” said Duncan, who had 27 points and 11 rebounds. “I mean, just an unbelievable shot over two of us. It was amazing to watch.”It was only the first round, but the series felt like so much more. More because these teams had combined to win 111 games during the regular season, finishing with nearly identical records — and the Spurs, despite going 55-27, slipped to the sixth seed as a result of the power of the West.More because the Clippers, four seasons into the partnership between Paul and Griffin, two players in their prime, have yet to advance past the conference semifinals, and there is a finite number of opportunities for championship runs.More because the Spurs, having collected five titles in the Duncan era, are proud but aging and facing an uncertain summer, with most members of the roster due for various forms of free agency — Duncan and Manu Ginobili among them — and changes all but assured as they seek to sustain their position as a perennial contender.“People ask me about Tim and Manu and myself for the last five years, and what we’re going to do,” Coach Gregg Popovich said. “It’s all psychobabble. I have no clue. We’ll probably come back. Paycheck is pretty good. You think I’m lying.”After the Clippers won in San Antonio on Thursday to push the series to its limit, Rivers opted for rest and self-preservation instead of practice time ahead of Game 7, saying his players were well aware of what they needed to do by now. The same could have been said of the Spurs, who had squandered a chance to close things out in Game 6.After that loss, Popovich used words like “embarrassed” and “soft” as he prodded his team to do more, his words suffused with urgency. On Saturday, though, the Spurs were locked in from the start, sinking six of their first eight shots. The Clippers countered by finding Matt Barnes, who made two 3-pointers, and took a 20-19 lead when Glen Davis, who had sprained his left ankle in Game 6, made a jumper.Still, it was an enormous problem for the Clippers when Paul left with his injury. The Clippers are not a deep team but managed to hold things together in Paul’s brief absence thanks in part to Jamal Crawford, who came off the bench to score 12 points in a 12-minute stretch.The Spurs were ahead by 39-38 when Paul returned to game midway through the second quarter, and he turned from part-time scorer to full-time facilitator, aware that he lacked the necessary explosion in his legs to consistently attack the basket. Also problematic for the Clippers: Griffin accumulated three fouls before halftime.But behind Davis, who kept grabbing rebounds, and Crawford, who kept hitting jumpers, and Paul, who kept everyone involved, the Clippers went into the second half with a 57-55 lead.Paul drilled two 3-pointers early in the third quarter, pushing the Clippers to a 6-point lead. At the other end, frustration mounted for the Spurs, who called timeouts and searched for their rhythm. With his team teetering on the edge, the Spurs’ Tony Parker knifed through the lane for a layup that tied the score.The game remained a twisting, back-and-forth affair, with neither team finding much separation in the fourth. With about two minutes left, Duncan turned to Rivers near the Clippers’ bench and said, “This is the first round?” Paul and Duncan each made two free throws in the final 13.3 seconds, preserving the drama until the end. Paul made every last moment count.Advertisement