By TIM ROHANMAY 2, 2015
Martin Prado homered and drove in four runs, leading Dan Haren and Miami over visiting Philadelphia.The Marlins won for the ninth time in 10 games and sent Philadelphia to its fifth straight loss.Prado hit a three-run homer off Cole Hamels (1-3) in the second inning and added a run-scoring double in the sixth. (AP)ASTROS 11, MARINERS 4 Houston Astros matched its longest winning streak in nine years by posting its ninth straight victory, over visiting Seattle, behind Collin McHugh and a lot of home run support.The Astros, who went 70-92 last year after three straight seasons of at least 106 losses, have their best winning string since a nine-game streak in 2006. This victory gave them the best record in the American League.AdvertisementHouston hit five homers, including a three-run shot by Jose Altuve and a two-run drive by Evan Gattis. (AP)AdvertisementCARDINALS 2, PIRATES 1 Matt Carpenter hit a sacrifice fly in the 11th inning, and St. Louis once again beat visiting Pittsburgh in extra innings.The Cardinals have won five in a row. They defeated the Pirates, 2-1, Friday night on Matt Adams’s single in the 10th.Pittsburgh left a season-high 18 runners on base, and the Cardinals stranded just four. (AP)GIANTS 5, ANGELS 4 Buster Posey and Brandon Crawford homered, Tim Hudson pitched into the ninth and San Francisco beat visiting Los Angeles.Nori Aoki drove in two runs and Casey McGehee had three hits and drove in a run for the Giants, who won their fourth straight at home and eighth of 12 over all. (AP)TWINS 5, WHITE SOX 3 Trevor Plouffe and Torii Hunter homered, helping Ricky Nolasco return to the rotation with a win as Minnesota beat visiting Chicago.The White Sox lost their fourth in a row and have been outscored by 35-8 in that span.Plouffe also lined a run-scoring single with the bases loaded in the fifth that broke a 3-all tie. Minnesota won for the seventh time in 10 games. (AP)BLUE JAYS 11, INDIANS 4 Jose Bautista drove in four runs, and Toronto kept Corey Kluber winless on the season with a victory over visiting Cleveland.AdvertisementKluber (0-4) allowed five runs and eight hits in five-plus innings. The Indians have lost all of his six starts this season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.(AP)BREWERS 6, CUBS 1 Mike Fiers struck out 12 in six innings and Ryan Braun homered as Milwaukee won at Chicago.The Cubs were sloppy, too. Logan Schafer hit a grounder in the ninth and wound up circling the bases when shortstop Starlin Castro made a throwing error, and then Anthony Rizzo threw to third base, where no one covered.Fiers (1-3) and three relievers combined for 18 strikeouts. The rookie Kris Bryant fanned all four times up. (AP)ORIOLES 4, RAYS 0 Miguel Gonzalez pitched four-hit ball into the eighth inning, Steve Pearce drove in two runs and Baltimore beat Tampa Bay in a relocated Orioles home game.It was the second game of a three-game series that was moved from Camden Yards to Tropicana Field after rioting broke out in Baltimore following the funeral of Freddie Gray, who died after suffering a spinal cord injury in police custody.After Chris Davis had a run-scoring single with two outs in the third, Pearce made it 3-0 on his two-run double off Chris Archer (3-3). (AP)REDS 8, BRAVES 4 Jay Bruce hit two long triples, Marlon Byrd broke out of his slump and Zack Cozart had three hits to lead Cincinnati to a victory at Atlanta.Jason Marquis (3-1) pitched effectively against the Braves, who drafted him in 1996, going six and a third innings, giving up three runs and striking out four. (AP)AdvertisementRANGERS 8, ATHLETICS 7 Shin-Soo Choo hit a tying three-run homer in the seventh inning and scored the winning run in the 10th to lift Texas to victory over visiting Oakland.Choo led off the 10th with a double down the right-field line against Ryan Cook (0-2), moved to third following two walks and scored on Rougned Odor’s hit off R. J. Alvarez.  (AP)PADRES 4, ROCKIES 2 Brandon Morrow pitched six strong innings and Justin Upton drove in two runs as San Diego handed visiting Colorado its fourth straight loss.Morrow (2-0) wriggled out of a jam in the sixth, getting Nick Hundley to ground out with two on. Morrow was charged with two runs and seven hits. He struck out four.  (AP)A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Done In by Mistakes in the Field and on the Bases.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.