By KEN BELSON and BEN STRAUSSMAY 2, 2015
CHICAGO —  When N.F.L. executives chose last year to move the draft for the first time in a half-century, the decision was based as much on issues in New York as opportunities elsewhere.But the three-day event in Chicago went so well that the league now faces a new choice: whether to return here next year or move the draft to yet another city.On Thursday and Friday, 110,000 people visited Draft Town, the free fan festival in Grant Park across the street from the theater where the draft was held. On Saturday, larger crowds were expected when selections in the fourth through seventh rounds were announced at the festival. The crowds far exceeded the league’s original estimates.Many fans who came to Chicago were from N.F.L. cities within driving distance — Cincinnati, Cleveland, Detroit, Green Bay, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Minneapolis and St. Louis — giving the draft a Midwestern feel.Advertisement“How could we not come?” said Alex Paszkowski, a Packers fan who drove 90 minutes from Milwaukee with two friends.AdvertisementPlenty of the visitors were local, too. “It’s free, it’s interactive and the weather’s great,” Jeannine Owens, from Chicago’s South Side, said as she watched her two 8-year-old grandsons test their vertical jumps.Despite the success of this year’s event, the N.F.L. has been noncommittal about whether it will hold the event here again next year.“We will take five minutes on Monday morning to celebrate the success of the draft and then get back to work, including beginning to evaluate what we do next year with this event,” said Brian McCarthy, a league spokesman.Some analysts surmised that if Los Angeles were awarded an N.F.L. franchise for the 2016 season, the draft would move there next year to drum up support.The response in Chicago, though, has changed that thinking. Now that the N.F.L. has introduced a format that includes a fan festival outdoors, the event has generated interest from other cities, including Dallas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Before this week, the expectation was about where else to put it,” said Marc Ganis, a consultant to several N.F.L. teams. “Chicago has so outperformed expectations that it wouldn’t surprise me to see the league look at Chicago again next year.”The league loses money on the draft, but the ever-expanding format has helped raise interest during a part of the year when many fans are tuned into baseball, basketball and hockey. Though N.F.L. games will not be played for months, jerseys of Jameis Winston and Marcus Mariota, the top two picks, were the best sellers at Fanatics.com, which runs the largest online sports merchandise company.The league attracted sponsors for its fan festival and persuaded the host city, Chicago, to contribute. The success of the event this year could give the N.F.L. leverage in negotiations with other cities.Advertisement“When you negotiate with the N.F.L., you usually lose,” said Allen Sanderson, an economist at the University of Chicago, who added that while the draft helped market the city, it did not provide many economic benefits. “It’s a monopoly seller, so if Chicago doesn’t continue to give them what they want, they’ll go off to Los Angeles or somewhere else.”On Saturday, anyway, the center of the N.F.L. universe was in Grant Park, where the draft was held outdoors for the first time. In Selection Square, a big stage with an enormous screen behind it, fans watched picks being announced at team facilities around the country.What they saw was a continuation of the emphasis on offense. Over the last three years, 15 teams threw the ball at least 60 percent of the time. In the fourth, fifth and sixth rounds Saturday, teams chose 15 wide receivers, nine tight ends, 12 guards and 11 running backs.“People are skewing offense when they are making decisions,” said Charles Davis, an analyst on NFL Network. “In the college football world, coaches put stud kids on offense. In the good old days, you put him on defense.”He added: “We always fall back on an easy term — it’s a copycat league. But if it worked, you have more confidence to try it again.”A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: City for Next Year’s Draft? N.F.L. Could Have Its Pick.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.