By PAT PICKENSMAY 2, 2015
Three years ago, Chris Kreider burst on the scene as a 20-year-old forward just out of Boston College and boosted the Rangers’ run to the Eastern Conference finals.After a stretch in which he had been largely absent during the 2015 postseason, Kreider showed up big for the Rangers on Saturday in Game 2 of their second-round series against the Washington Capitals.He scored 38 seconds into the game as the Rangers defeated the Capitals, 3-2, and tied the best-of-seven series at 1-1. The Rangers never trailed.For the second straight game, the Rangers started fast, recording 18 of the game’s first 23 shots. In Game 1 on Thursday, goalie Braden Holtby kept the Capitals in the game, making 12 of his 31 stops in the first period, allowing Washington to rebound and take the lead.AdvertisementBut led by the line of Kreider, Derek Stepan and Jesper Fast — a line Coach Alain Vigneault cobbled together on the team’s second shift — the Rangers took over early. Fast, who scored the Rangers’ lone goal Thursday, had another strong game and picked up an assist on Kreider’s goal.Advertisement“Obviously, he had an incredible game,” Kreider said of Fast. “Jesper is just a workhorse, and he never stopped moving.”Still, it was Kreider who set the tone — both physically and on the scoreboard.After he did not score a point for three straight games — then watched Joel Ward score the winning goal right in front of him with 1.3 seconds remaining in Game 1 — Kreider drove to the net early Saturday, beating the Capitals’ Nicklas Backstrom and John Carlson to the puck. Kreider picked up a rebound created by Fast’s shot and scored for the Rangers’ quick lead.“I think if I didn’t score the goal, it probably would have been a tie game, so I liked the goal a lot,” Kreider said.“I think we put a lot of focus on our starts,” he said. “It’s been something we’ve been able to concentrate on and take advantage of, so it’s something we want to continue to work on and get better.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The goal was Kreider’s 13th in the postseason and the most on the club since he was called up during the Rangers’ seven-game series win against the Ottawa Senators in 2012.Though Kreider, who turned 24 on Thursday, has had a flair for coming through at important times, this was his first full season in the N.H.L. Vigneault kept him in Hartford at the start of the 2013-14 season, but said he has seen Kreider improve since he was recalled.“He’s a young player that’s developing and going through the process and establishing himself as a good N.H.L. hockey player,” Vigneault said during the Rangers’ first-round series with the Pittsburgh Penguins. “Everyone sees Kreid’s upside, and as he gets more games in and plays in these playoff games, he becomes a better player. We need him.”Vigneault leaned on Kreider on Saturday. Kreider and Fast were double-shifted at points, playing with both Stepan and the fourth-line center Dominic Moore.AdvertisementKreider posted three shots on goal and attempted a team-high eight in 18 minutes 27 seconds — the most playing time of any of the Rangers’ forwards. He used his speed to create scoring chances for himself and his linemates.“He’s the fastest player I’ve ever played with, by far, and I’ve played with some pretty fast players,” defenseman Dan Boyle said of Kreider. “You like to see him bury a couple of those, but he certainly had his chances.”Although he is best known for his speed and ability to create goals, Kreider is also learning how to take over a game physically. The 6-foot-3, 226-pound Kreider registered four hits as the Rangers pushed back against the Capitals in Game 2. Kreider laid a pair of thunderous checks on two of the Capitals’ most physical players, Alex Ovechkin and Brooks Orpik.“He has a huge influence on the game for us, the way he can skate, the way he can hit and shoot, the physicality,” the Rangers’ captain, Ryan McDonagh, said. “When he’s putting all three of those together, it’s a tough combo to defend for anyone.”A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Kreider Makes Presence Felt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.