AdvertisementSupported byBy John BranchLAS VEGAS — Two prominent female journalists, each of whom has detailed the domestic-violence history of Floyd Mayweather Jr., wrote on Twitter on Saturday morning that they had been denied credentials to the evening’s fight between Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao. Rachel Nichols, a reporter with CNN, said that she and Michelle Beadle, who works for ESPN and HBO, would not be able to cover the fight.“Mayweather’s team told my producer the camp was blocking my credential,” Nichols said on Twitter after Beadle posted a message saying the two had been “banned from the MGM Grand Arena.”Mayweather Promotions, which controlled distribution of the media credentials, denied the reports. It noted that being credentialed was different from having a seat inside the arena. Media seating was not confirmed until late Friday. Media requests for credentials far outstripped the number of seats available for the news media inside the arena. As is common at major sporting events, an overflow media center was created. Some reporters for many news organizations were assigned to that auxiliary area. CNN, a Mayweather spokeswoman said, had multiple credentials but just one allocated seat inside the arena. “Rachel Nichols is indeed credentialed and always has been,” Kelly Swanson, a spokeswoman for Mayweather Promotions, said on Saturday. “And CNN is deciding what correspondent they will have in the arena. It’s their choice.”In dispute by the reporters, however, is whether the credentials were pulled and reinstated only as the controversy began. In a statement released Saturday evening, Nichols said that she was told in an email message that she “would only be credentialed for the run-up events through the week, but in bold, italic letters the email stated ‘you do not have any access Saturday to any services or events.’” Nichols went on to say in the statement that the Mayweather camp eventually reversed its position on Saturday. “But despite this, and other outside parties generously offering me their seats, I will not attend the fight,” she said. “I will also not let fear of retaliation prevent me from asking the tough questions the public deserves answers to in the future.”Beadle wrote on Twitter: “After hearing my credential was pulled, I went home. Told this morning that HBO was able to get it re-approved last night.”A spokesman for Showtime, which has a multifight contract with Mayweather and was co-producer of the pay-per-view broadcast with HBO, said HBO had asked for permission to record its show “The Fight Game,” for which Beadle is a correspondent, from inside the arena during the pay-per-view broadcast. Showtime denied the request. “She has a credential through HBO,” the Showtime spokesman Chris DeBlasio said. Beadle has been openly critical of Mayweather, who has been arrested several times for domestic violence and spent two months in jail in 2012 for beating the mother of three of his children. Nichols interviewed Mayweather last year on CNN’s “Unguarded,” asking repeated questions about his violent past. Advertisement