AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Ereck Flowers, the Giants’ 2015 first-round draft pick, arrived for his first news conference with New York-area reporters Saturday morning and stepped onto an auditorium stage.Watching intently from the back row of the room was Flowers’s father, Everald. He was flanked by two of his son’s uncles.That was the extent of the Flowers entourage. There was no agent because Flowers has chosen to go without one. His only official adviser is his father, who raised him as a single parent after Flowers’s mother died when he was 6 years old.Flowers, a 6-foot-6, 329-pound tackle from Miami, also plans to negotiate his own contract with the Giants.“I won’t be in the room,” Everald Flowers said later.It will be the rare moment when father and son are apart.“There will be a lawyer in the room to check the contract language,” Everald said. “But Ereck is smart. He can sit down, look you face to face and tell you what he expects. And he’s not unreasonable. He can speak his own mind about what’s fair.”The Giants knew the family combination they were drafting when they made Flowers their first selection Thursday.“He is very, very close with his dad,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said. “His dad is with him all the time. At his workout, his dad was there. I think that is a very strong relationship, and I think that points to a very solid young man.”Everald Flowers was raised in the Miami area but left to play linebacker at Division II Washburn University in Topeka, Kan., where he met Tanya Stokes. A few years later, the couple had Ereck, who was raised by his mother and her family in Topeka while his parents finished their studies, which included master’s degrees for Tanya in social work and for Everald in public administration.A wedding was planned until Tanya was found to have stomach cancer and died less than a year later, in 2000, when Everald was 28.Father and son ended up in South Florida, and Everald threw himself into caring for Ereck. Sports became a natural bonding point.“He was always a good kid,” Everald said. “He was never in trouble. A quiet kid.”And he was big for his age.“He was always tall — the doctors thought he’d be 6-2 or 6-4,” recalled Everald, who said he worked for the federal government in social services. “When he was a junior in high school, he became serious about football, and he really worked hard in the weight room and started eating.”Ereck and Everald, who is a sturdy 6-0 and 240 pounds, have worked out together for years. But as Ereck, who recently turned 21, added more bulk in college, his father saw the writing on the wall.“Now he’s bench-pressing over 400 pounds, and I’m thinking that I might need to get someone else to spot him,” Everald said, chuckling.The Giants said Thursday that one of the attributes that drew them to Flowers was a “nasty streak” on the field. In football parlance, it means that he is a tough guy who plays with a certain intimidating zeal. Or as Coughlin put it, Flowers arrives at a pile of bodies “in bad humor.”Everald traced this trait to Ereck’s quiet demeanor.“Sometimes because you’re quiet, people think they can take advantage — maybe throw a cheap shot,” Everald said. “Ereck is not going to back down.”It might be a useful disposition during the coming contract negotiations, although because of the collective bargaining agreement in pro football, rookies salaries are defined by how high they were drafted. Each pick — Flowers was the ninth over all — must fit in a certain range, or slot. The haggling is limited.Flowers can expect a contract valued in excess of $12 million. Not having an agent could save him hundreds of thousands of dollars.“If something happens, Ereck could still sign with an agent,” Everald said. “But we’ve done our due diligence. We’ve studied it. We understand the collective bargaining agreement and the changes in it. His situation is not that unique. We don’t see a need for an agent.”Everald acknowledged that at the start of the draft process, the phone calls from N.F.L. teams and agents made life somewhat hectic.“There might have been some missed phone calls in the beginning,” Everald said. “But we worked it out.”Ereck said: “It’s not hard. We’ve been working on things together for a long time. He can represent me.”Everald added: “If teams wanted to talk to Ereck on the phone to get to know him, I just had them call him directly. If they wanted to talk about scheduling a meeting or setting something up, then they had to go through me.”On Saturday, Ereck Flowers was asked how he thought everything had worked out so far.“Everything is good,” Ereck said, stealing a glance at his father.From the back of the room, Everald Flowers nodded and smiled.Extra PointsIn the fifth round Saturday, the Giants chose Mykkele Thompson, a defensive back from Texas whom the team projects as a free safety. The 6-foot, 200-pound Thompson said he was surprised when the Giants called him and said he had been prepared to sign as an undrafted free agent. In the sixth round, the Giants drafted Connecticut wide receiver Geremy Davis. The Giants have been trying to find tall receiving targets, and Davis is 6-3 and 216 pounds. In the seventh round, the Giants took Florida State tackle Bobby Hart. The Giants want the 6-4, 320-pound Hart to play guard.Advertisement