By TIM ROHANMAY 2, 2015
In the corner of Juan Lagares’s locker hangs a pair of gold-colored boxing gloves. The Mets presented them to Lagares during a team meeting in spring training, a gesture after he won the Gold Glove award last year.A month into the season, the gloves seem a fitting gift. Not only has Lagares reinforced the idea that he is the best defensive center fielder in baseball, he is rounding out his game, maturing at the plate. He leads the Mets in spectacular defensive plays and in hits. He exudes the swagger of a champion, and is becoming the best everyday player on the team.“He knows he’s a good player,” General Manager Sandy Alderson said.The signs are all around Lagares. This spring, the Mets gave him a four-year, $23 million contract extension. Then, once David Wright and Travis d’Arnaud were injured, the Mets promoted Lagares to the No. 2 spot in the lineup, reserved for the most reliable hitters.The Mets openly talk about the kind of player he can be.One player he often draws comparison to is Carlos Gomez, the Brewers’ two-time All-Star and a former Met. They have similar body types. They both hail from the Dominican Republic. Both have reputations for chasing pitches. Both play center field with flair. Gomez seems brash, though, whereas Lagares has a calm presence.AdvertisementThe two met years ago, when both were Mets prospects. They spent time together at the team’s Dominican Academy. They played on the same Winter League team. They hung out during spring training.AdvertisementThe night Lagares won the Gold Glove, Gomez called and congratulated him.“He’s a good friend of mine,” Lagares said of Gomez. “We talk a lot. About everything.”Gomez has perhaps provided a blueprint for what Lagares could become. In his sixth full year in the majors, at 27 years old, he had 61 extra-base hits, drove in 73 runs, and made his first All-Star team. He matched those same numbers the year after.Lagares turns 27 next March.But the Mets acknowledge that there are still relapses when his bad habits resurface. For the first week or so of the season, Lagares was chasing pitches out of the strike zone. He looked as if he had forgotten everything he had been taught.Kevin Long, the Mets’ new hitting coach, has worked with Lagares extensively. He has had Lagares stand closer to the plate, to make his stroke more powerful and compact. And he has had Lagares use a leg kick to help with his timing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before almost every game, Pat Roessler, the assistant hitting coach, does a drill with Lagares that trains his eyes. Roessler throws baseballs that are marked with a color, symbol or number. Lagares stands in the batter’s box and tracks them, without swinging, calling out what he sees on the ball as it comes toward him.As the young season has progressed, so has Lagares. He has had a 10-game hitting streak and eight multihit games. He went 4 for 4 in one game against the Yankees. He isn’t drawing many walks, but advanced metrics show that he is chasing less. He is still swinging freely, but he has been smarter about it, driving the ball to all fields.He is so confident now that he has played his best in the game’s tensest moments. He entered Saturday’s game against the Nationals batting .304 with runners in scoring position, and .255 when facing two-strike counts — both numbers are at least 40 points above the league average.“He has the ability to make contact,” Alderson said. “Sometimes it’s a blessing, sometimes it’s a curse. If you’re chasing pitches and still making contact, it doesn’t feel like you should lay off those pitches. When he gets two strikes, part of it is mechanics. He has a very level swing; his bat stays through the zone a long time.”AdvertisementLagares’s success on defense only fuels that confidence. His coaches notice how he is more assertive in the field, directing the other outfielders for their alignments. Tom Goodwin, who coaches the outfielders, often encourages Lagares like a corner man in boxing.“I tell him, You’re going to struggle on the offensive end, everybody does,” Goodwin said. “But you don’t have to struggle on defense, if you keep that type of attitude.”On Friday night, Lagares briefly relapsed. He struck out swinging on a Max Scherzer curveball and was so fooled that he nearly went down on one knee.Two innings later, Lagares made a spectacular diving catch, scooping the ball just before it hit the grass. Matt Harvey, the starter that day, applauded him, looking awe-struck. Lagares then finished the game with hits in his last two at-bats.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: At 26, the Mets’ Lagares Appears to Be on the Fast Track to Stardom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.