AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Harvey AratonWith some reluctance, and with his Atlanta Hawks scheduled to begin an N.B.A. playoff series against Washington on Sunday, Coach Mike Budenholzer conceded that he would sneak a look at Saturday night’s biggest sports showdown.Forget the pugilists in Las Vegas. In his Atlanta household, that would be the San Antonio Spurs falling in Los Angeles to Chris Paul and the Clippers, 111-109, eliminated from defending their title and facing possible dynasty extinction.“We may take a break and watch a few minutes of it, the end of it,” Budenholzer said late Friday night. “When the Spurs play, I’m a fan, obviously, so I’m just hoping for the best.”With that, Budenholzer, a longtime assistant coaching cog in the South Texas dominion of the Spurs’ Gregg Popovich, headed down the corridor of the Barclays Center, leaving behind the season’s remains of the Brooklyn Nets.Had he walked out onto the corner of Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues, Budenholzer would most likely have gone unnoticed in the cool Brooklyn night.Who is this 45-year-old with the unfamiliar face of a quintessential assistant? In his second season as the Hawks’ head coach, his team became, in effect, the anti-Nets, a group of mostly underpaid overachievers, the Eastern Conference’s top-seeded team, shaped and strategized in the democratically utilitarian image of the Spurs.Except the Hawks have risen without one transcendent player, while San Antonio — the legend of Popovich notwithstanding — has long had its foundational talent undervalued. For most of their run, the Spurs have been blessed with three almost certain Hall of Famers in Tony Parker, Manu Ginobili and, above all, Tim Duncan (not to mention the inducted David Robinson, who played on the first two of the Spurs’ five title teams).If there was one ominous takeaway from the six-game series in which the Nets hung with the Hawks until Friday night’s 111-87 blowout, it was that Budenholzer’s team can struggle offensively late in close games. Lacking that out-of-my-way chosen one, the Hawks could not even get a shot off in the final 6.5 seconds of regulation in a deadlocked Game 4.But as with Popovich’s Spurs, bodies and ball move purposefully and persistently. As the impressive free-agent-to-be (and the potential target of the Knicks’ president, Phil Jackson) DeMarre Carroll said: “Biggest thing for us is we play team basketball. On any given night, anyone can step up.”Added Kyle Korver, the veteran 3-point marksman: “We’re kind of like a puzzle, we really are; a bunch of people that fit really well together. We have to play hard, play well, but I feel that when we do that, we’re a really good team.”For a 22-game swing in victories since last season, to 60 from 38, Budenholzer was deservedly named coach of the year. He also finished third in the Executive of the Year voting after being nominated by the Hawks in an apparent attempt to paper over the Danny Ferry fiasco.The Executive of the Year votes for Budenholzer were believed to be in proxy for Ferry, the Hawks’ general manager, who has experienced a purgatorial season and is not expected to return after he made a remark about Luol Deng’s African heritage while reading to colleagues from a free-agent scouting report not written by Ferry.Beyond his own tone deafness, Ferry has probably suffered a more punitive fate than he deserved because of the more-charged email ravings by the team’s controlling owner, Bruce Levenson, who is in the process of selling the team to a group led by Antony Ressler.Ferry has not publicly explained the intended context of the scouting report. Was he trying to make a point about the perceived habits or work ethics of African-born players? Stereotypes about foreign basketball players are nothing new. European imports — especially white players — have routinely been disparaged by people in the league, including players, and by the news media as soft or as not aggressive enough, compared with Americans.The Hawks have the right to employ, or dismiss, whomever they choose. But they should not be trying so hard to rewrite history. Being morally righteous is admirable. Being politically or socially craven is not.The Hawks and, by extension, the league would have looked less obsequious had they just nominated Ferry. He deserved the award far more than the actual winner, Golden State’s Bob Myers, who was an assistant general manager for the Warriors when their core was assembled.“Absolutely, Danny did a great job putting it together,” Korver said when asked about Ferry.“No question about it — I don’t think people realize what a good job the front office did,” said Al Horford, the Hawks’ veteran frontcourt hub, not mentioning Ferry by name but clearly referring to him. “If you look at all of our players, one through 15, it’s really solid.”Solid, not spectacular. Without the benefit of a prize lottery pick, like what Popovich lucked into with Duncan in 1997 and what Jackson is hoping for next month with the Knicks, and without the spending spree that Billy King, the Nets’ general manager, was allowed by his Russian ownership, Ferry assembled the season’s best team that wasn’t supposed to be.Ferry, too, had spent time in the San Antonio organization, and he reached back to hire Budenholzer, another smart personnel move.There are great pro basketball coaches, and those coaches are handsomely and deservedly paid. But without judicious evaluators of talent and character, they are nowhere. They are Derek Fisher, mouthing worthless Knicks platitudes, or the Nets’ Lionel Hollins, sadly watching the confounding Deron Williams twice cough the ball up to Jeff Teague early in the third quarter on Friday night, helping Atlanta turn a 6-point lead into a 14-point cushion with startling quickness.End of story. End of season. On that note, Budenholzer went home to prepare for the Wizards with an eye on Duncan, 39, and the potential conclusion of an 18-year lesson in fundamental purism.Budenholzer and Ferry paid attention in class. This season’s Hawks are a tribute to that class.Advertisement