AdvertisementSupported byBy Melissa HoppertLOUISVILLE, Ky. — As the owners of the Kentucky Derby contenders picked at a buffet, sipped on cocktails and placed bets from their seats in the shadow of the winner’s circle, the people responsible for the enhanced hospitality were nowhere to be found.The owners of last year’s Derby winner, California Chrome — Perry and Denise Martin and Steve and Carolyn Coburn — were upset with Churchill Downs after their experience here in 2014, so much so that the Martins decided to skip the Preakness.Perry Martin’s mother, Catherine, was in a wheelchair, and the group had trouble getting her from their suite in the clubhouse to the winner’s circle after the race. (She died in September at age 84.) “Churchill did not go out of their way to get her to where she needed to be and to assist us,” Carolyn Coburn said last year. “Steve and Perry did everything, got her in her seat, then we had to get her to the rail so she could watch the race, then get her to the winner’s circle.”Churchill Downs worked to correct the problems by building 20 boxes behind the winner’s circle that feature a roof, couches, betting machines and other amenities. Each owner receives 18 free tickets for the suites, up from six last year. Each box is marked by a poster of the owners’ silks and has a staff of waiters. (Owners of the Kentucky Oaks contenders receive the same treatment.)In another new effort, organizers provided cars and drivers to each owner for Derby week. Hosts are assigned to each team.Before he arrived in Louisville, Philip S. Birsh, the owner of the 17th-place Derby finisher, Tencendur, received a phone call from the president of Churchill Downs, Kevin Flanery, who asked if Birsh was pleased with his experience so far. Birsh planned to take his parents, who are in their 80s, to the race, and he was worried about accessibility.“All the people in the horsemen’s department, they’ve done a wonderful job,” Birsh said Saturday as he mingled in his box. “We’re really overwhelmingly pleased with our experience, especially with the driver, because that’s a huge help.”Owners also received an information package on what to expect. There was a dinner for owners and trainers during the week and a party in the exclusive Mansion area after the draw. “We’ve found that the most vocal owners are the first-timers, like California Chrome’s connections, because it can be overwhelming,” said John Asher, the vice president for racing communications for Churchill Downs. “We’re working hard to be receptive to what they have to say. It wasn’t horrible before, but there were definitely some spots we needed to work on.”He added, “We’re all very anxious for the feedback after this year.”The feedback began almost immediately after the race, when Ahmed Zayat, the owner of the Derby winner, American Pharoah, thanked Churchill Downs in his news conference for an “unbelievably fun week.”“In the past there has been a lot of criticism about Churchill,” he said. “As a person who has been coming here and had more than one Derby runner, I have seen a 180 percent change in all attitudes.”Before last year’s Derby, Ron Turcotte, who rode Secretariat to the Triple Crown in 1973 and was paralyzed in a riding accident in 1978, said he had been denied an accessible parking space for the 2013 race. He did not attend the Derby last year, he said, because “I didn’t want to go through the hassle again.”Ken Ramsey, who owns International Star, who was scratched, has the most victories at Churchill. He knows how difficult it can be to navigate the grounds on Derby day, especially because his wife, Sarah, is in a wheelchair.“I met California Chrome’s owners and Martin’s mother,” Ramsey said. “That was her last Derby, and they had to physically lift her up into one of those boxes because she’s not totally mobile. I guess they didn’t get treated as well as they should. But they treat me nice, so I’m not complaining.”Advertisement