AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro FootballBy Ben ShpigelFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Beyond their personalities and pedigrees, there seems to be another significant difference between Mike Maccagnan and his predecessor as the Jets’ general manager, John Idzik.Maccagnan has a strategy to restore the Jets to prominence and has a keen sense of how to execute it.Aggressive in free agency, when he upgraded the secondary by luring Darrelle Revis and Antonio Cromartie back to One Jets Drive, Maccagnan approached the draft with equal decisiveness.He said the Jets would take the best player available, and they did, snatching defensive end Leonard Williams of Southern California, even if it meant buttressing what was already the strongest part of the team.Maccagnan said he wanted to trade back to add more picks, and he did, swapping third-rounders with Houston to gain two extra selections on Saturday.He said he would mine the draft for value, and he did, choosing the hybrid defensive end Lorenzo Mauldin of Louisville, a potentially chaos-causing edge rusher, in the third round and, on Saturday, trading up a spot to select quarterback Bryce Petty of Baylor in the fourth. “You find a point in the draft where you feel like the risk is worth it,” Maccagnan said.Idzik was averse to risk in his two drafts, making only one trade — for the veteran running back Chris Ivory — and keeping all 12 of his picks last season. The Jets have not received much production from their recent drafted players — one Pro Bowl selection, Sheldon Richardson, since 2007 — and Idzik’s missteps in that area precipitated his departure in December and prompted Woody Johnson, the team’s owner, to hire Maccagnan, a longtime scout, as his replacement. After taking over in January, Maccagnan met with the new coach, Todd Bowles, and his staff to gauge what kind of players they needed to run their systems. That guided him as he overhauled the scouting department. He and the scouts discussed the player-evaluation process, with Maccagnan wanting to know what Bowles and his staff looked for and what they prioritized. They watched hours of film together to make sure they viewed prospects the same way.From his time working in Houston, where he conducted studies on projecting the success of 3-4 outside linebackers, Maccagnan recognized the importance of adding not just talented players, but also players who fit the scheme. Bowles said Mauldin was a prime example.“The tenacity this guy plays with and the toughness he brings,” Bowles said, “he was perfect for us right at the time we took him.”The Jets are still determining whether quarterback Geno Smith, Idzik’s most prominent pick, remains a part of their future, and whether this draft is eventually considered a success could hinge on Petty. The Jets liked him so much — and were so fearful that another team might leap them — that they moved up one spot with Jacksonville to secure him. Across his last two seasons, Petty threw for 61 touchdowns and 8,055 yards, but at this stage he resembles Smith when Smith came out of West Virginia — a prospect who needs time to learn progressions and reads after playing in a spread system. At Baylor, Petty never once called a play in the huddle.“It’s all about the person,” Petty said. He added: “Being in another offense is part of the game. I want to master that system, just like I mastered what we did in college.”The Jets have been impatient with Smith, but there is no urgency, perceived or otherwise, for Petty to make an immediate transition to an N.F.L. offense. He can afford to study the playbook and listen to Chan Gailey, the offensive coordinator, and watch Smith and Ryan Fitzpatrick, who will compete in training camp for the starting job.Smith opens as the favorite, and if he does start Sept. 13 against Cleveland, he will be throwing to the best collection of receivers a Jets quarterback has had in some time, a group that gained a dose of serious speed with the arrival of Devin Smith. Drafted 37th over all, he averaged 37.9 yards on his 30 touchdown catches for Ohio State — “the productivity was kind of rare,” Maccagnan said — and his ability to stretch the field has earned comparisons to the Vikings’ Mike Wallace. Complemented by the new acquisition Brandon Marshall and the incumbents Eric Decker and Jeremy Kerley, Devin Smith should improve a passing offense that has finished 30th or lower the last three seasons.The last time the Jets selected a fleet receiver in the second round, in 2012, that player, Stephen Hill, proved little more than a one-dimensional downfield threat who did not even catch the passes thrown his way. By the time he was released last summer, Hill was little more than a decoy.To succeed in the N.F.L., Devin Smith must run every route. He cannot always rely on his speed. From scouting him in workouts and at the Senior Bowl, Maccagnan came away impressed by his hands and his physical skills, and he said he was satisfied with the routes Smith ran at Ohio State.After the draft ended, Maccagnan said he was glad it was over but pleased with his haul: six players, and two more — running back Zac Stacy (St. Louis) and receiver DeVier Posey (Houston) — acquired in trades. Whenever people praise Maccagnan for how he has transformed the Jets so far, he thanks them. He also reminds them that the Jets are undefeated, but also winless. “It doesn’t mean a lot right now,” he said recently, but it is a promising start.Advertisement