By BILLY WITZMAY 2, 2015
BOSTON —  After watching Dellin Betances strike out all four batters he faced to close out the Yankees’ 4-2 victory Saturday over the Boston Red Sox, catcher Brian McCann was asked a simple question:How would he approach hitting against Betances?“I’d ask for a pinch-hitter,” McCann said.The wisecrack answer to the softball question followed the first save of the season for Betances, and may have raised another: Will there be more save chances in the near future?Andrew Miller has been dominant since opening day, a left-hander with a fastball in the upper 90s and a devastating slider. He has converted all nine of his save opportunities, allowing three hits in 121/3 innings and striking out 21.Betances, a right-hander with an upper-90s fastball and a sharp breaking curveball, has gotten better in the last month after struggling during spring training. He has struck out 25 in 142/3 innings.Neither Miller nor Betances has given up a run.“I don’t mind getting a first-pitch out, but if I have two strikes I’m going to go for the strikeouts,” Betances said.AdvertisementThe way Nathan Eovaldi pitched at Fenway Park, allowing one run into the seventh, the Yankees did not need much offense. Most of it revolved around Brett Gardner, who drove in the first three runs with a double and a single.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Red Sox closed within 3-2 on Mookie Betts’s two-out double off the Green Monster. Chris Young gave the Yankees a greater margin to work with by hitting his sixth home run of the season in the eighth.Justin Wilson, after walking Hanley Ramirez, came back from a 3-1 count to strike out Pablo Sandoval before Manager Joe Girardi turned to Betances. The game was not over, but it soon would be.Advertisement“That’s the environment we’re trying to create,” McCann said. “We’ve got arm after arm coming out of that bullpen. There’s a lot of uncomfortable at-bats.”A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Betances Gives Yankees Another Bullpen Option .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.