AdvertisementSupported byRangers 3, Capitals 2By Allan KredaThe Rangers needed contributions from fresh sources against the Washington Capitals in a Game 2 Saturday matinee at Madison Square Garden. They got them from Chris Kreider, Jesper Fast and Dan Boyle — plus just enough stellar goaltending from Henrik Lundqvist — to escape with a 3-2 victory that tied the teams’ second-round series at one game apiece.Lundqvist made 30 saves, including a point-blank stop on Washington’s Troy Brouwer in the closing seconds, to preserve the victory, the Rangers’ first in a Game 2 at home since the 1994 Stanley Cup finals.Game 3 will be Monday at Washington.The Rangers went at the Capitals in waves early, getting first-period goals from Kreider and Boyle. They added another at 6 minutes 7 seconds of the third from Derick Brassard, who leads them with four this postseason, and thus they had — for the second time in the game — what has become a rarity for them: a two-goal lead.Brassard’s goal — in which his shot was slowed by Washington goaltender Braden Holtby but still managed to slither into the net — proved vital. It came 10 seconds after Brassard left the penalty box after serving two minutes for interference on Alex Ovechkin.“I was really nervous in the penalty box, to be honest,” said Brassard, who leads the Rangers with 29 playoff points since the start of the 2013 postseason. “When I came back on the ice, I had some energy.”The two-goal cushion was short-lived, coming to an end at 10:29 of the third when Ovechkin split the Rangers’ top defensive pair of Dan Girardi and Ryan McDonagh for one of his classic one-man-show goals. It was Ovechkin’s second goal of this series and his fourth of the postseason.Once again, the Rangers faced another apprehensive race to the finish. Predictably, the Capitals staged a final flurry.“Intense. You have to expect it,” Lundqvist said of the frenzied conclusion. “We have to leave everything out there, and you don’t want any regrets this time of year. We came up with some big plays at the right time.”Shaking off their last-second loss in Game 1, the Rangers scored only 38 seconds after the opening face-off when Kreider registered his second goal of the playoffs on a rebound of a Fast shot.Fast, a rookie, played dynamically on a newly formed line with Kreider and Derek Stepan.“I thought it might be a good thing to do,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said after the game about using that combination.Later in the period, Boyle contributed a power-play goal — the first permitted by the Capitals this postseason — that found its way through traffic from the left point at 15:40 to give the Rangers a 2-0 advantage.“There’s a lot of dissecting goals and assists, but I just want to win, man,” said Boyle, who has struggled in his first season with the Rangers.Kreider played like a man on a mission all afternoon. He banged home that first-period rebound, to the delight of fans just settling into their seats. He yapped at Ovechkin and grabbed him in a bearhug during a shoving match outside the Rangers’ crease, and he was part of a dominating first-period effort in which the home team outshot the Capitals, 15-4.“The team that loses Game 1 has a desperation level that’s going to be really, really high,” Capitals Coach Barry Trotz said. “We knew the Rangers were going to come with a really high level of desperation, and they did.”In addition to their dynamic top line of Ovechkin, Nicklas Backstrom and Joel Ward, the Capitals are loaded with size and muscle, particularly among their defenders. The Rangers need Kreider, a physical forward, to counteract them.Saturday’s game had the usual array of playoff-style physicality. Washington defenseman Brooks Orpik collided knee-on-knee with Rangers forward James Sheppard. Tom Wilson, the Capitals’ resident tough guy, ran at everything in sight. Marc Staal shoved Ovechkin to the ice.And then there was Lundqvist, who made his usual assortment of acrobatic saves. He denied Ovechkin with a sliding pad save in the first, then stopped Evgeny Kuznetsov with a whirling-dervish carnival save midway through the second.Lundqvist is 18-10 with a 1.79 goals against average in 28 playoff games following losses in the past four postseasons.“He was the best player on the ice, same guy we see every game,” Brassard said. “This team always has answers when we lose a big game.”But when Kuznetsov scored at 13:59 of the second, his fourth of the playoffs, the momentum swung to the Capitals.They were helped by steady play from Holtby, who made 32 saves. He made his best stops on successive shots by Rick Nash and Brassard in the last minute of the second period. Holtby twice stymied Kreider, denying backhand shots with his left pad.But he couldn’t fully stop Brassard’s shot from skittering past.“I was a split-second too late,” Holtby said.Ovechkin, who had nine hits to go with his highlight-reel goal, could only look ahead to Monday’s contest at Verizon Center.“The next game is going to be huge,” he said. “We go home, get some rest and get ready for Game 3.” Advertisement