
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
MAY 2, 2015
The world welterweight title bout on Saturday between Manny Pacquiao and Floyd Mayweather Jr. had two links to the storied boxing announcer Don Dunphy. His son Bob directed the joint HBO-Showtime pay-per-view broadcast. And HBO’s Jim Lampley, who credits Dunphy with inspiring his ringside work, delivered the blow-by-blow call.“Not only do I believe that I was influenced by listening to him, I believe he is the only influence on my play-by-play style and approach,” Lampley said Thursday by telephone. “In 1985 and 1986, when I was getting introduced to the idea of calling fights at ABC — and was being schooled by Alex Wallau on how to see fights — the only voice in my head was Don Dunphy’s.”That voice, Lampley recalled, was “clear, precise, impersonal in the sense that there wasn’t personal gratification in it, and there was no shtick or personal signature that he used to call attention to himself.”He added, “It was all about the fighters, not him.”From 1941 to 1981, Dunphy called about 2,000 fights on radio and television in a slightly nasal but strong voice that cut through the clamor of a crowded arena. Well before Howard Cosell was closely identified with boxing, especially with Muhammad Ali, Dunphy was the sport’s pre-eminent voice. Dunphy and Cosell parodied their on-air styles in scenes in Woody Allen’s film “Bananas,” about a Latin American dictatorship.AdvertisementLampley was introduced to Dunphy’s “Friday Night Fights” radio calls as a child.“My father died when I was 5, and my mother’s method of being a mother and father to me in Hendersonville, N.C., was to immerse me in all the sports and experiences my father would have wanted me to have,” Lampley said. “In 1955, she walked me in front of a TV set at a party and said, ‘Sit here; you’ll watch Sugar Ray Robinson and Bobo Olson because if your father were alive, he’d want you to watch this.’ ”Bob Dunphy and his older brother, Don Jr., had a different perspective on their father, who died in 1998. He was the baseball-loving dad (who called the Yankees on radio in 1944) who spent hours coaching his sons’ baseball teams and taking them to fights at Madison Square Garden and at arenas in other cities. If they were not with him at fights, they regularly tuned into his broadcasts from their home in Manhasset on Long Island.“We’d turn the sound down on the television and listen to him on radio,” Bob Dunphy said from Las Vegas the other day.AdvertisementDon Jr., a retired ABC News executive, offered more detail.“I remember a lot of times being at parties at other people’s houses and turning down the sound of Jimmy Powers on TV so we could listen to my dad,” he said. “Radio was such a presence then, but I don’t think there was anything like listening to a fight.”In 1960, Dunphy moved to television, and in 1971, he called the closed-circuit broadcast of the first fight between Ali and Joe Frazier — a spectacular bookend to a highlight from his early career, the Joe Louis-Billy Conn title bout 30 years earlier.His partners on the Ali-Frazier fight were the actor Burt Lancaster and Archie Moore. Dunphy was supposed to be the only voice heard during the action — unless he invited his inexperienced analysts to comment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“During one round, Lancaster started to speak,” Bob Dunphy said. “My father hadn’t brought him. And my father put a hand over his mike.”Bob Dunphy has directed boxing since the late 1980s, first for CBS Sports, but mainly for Showtime. And he applies a simple lesson from his father to directing every bout, whether they are mundane events or extravaganzas like Mayweather-Pacquiao.“He used to say that you can never hype a fight,” he said. “If it’s a bad fight, you’re not going to make it any better by trying to hype the action. It won’t do any good. It was his job to describe the action in the ring at all times. I keep that it in mind. I try to give the viewer the best view, the best angle of what’s going on at all times.”Dunphy said that his approach to directing the fight was unchanged from any other Showtime bout — with the exception of two new cameras, including one to capture the celebrities at the MGM Grand Garden Arena.“Every show is important,” he said. “There are more things to be aware of on this show, but the approach is similar, as far as preparation, to any other.”He agreed that directing a fight was less complex than a baseball game or golf.“I guess you could say it’s harder to miss anything because we have two cameras on the apron and two cameras about 100 feet from the ring and an overhead camera that details what happens with slips and knockdowns,” Dunphy said. “It’s fair to say that since the territory is that much smaller, it doesn’t make your life any more difficult.”Lampley worked on Saturday beside his HBO partner, Roy Jones Jr., and Al Bernstein of Showtime. He had never worked with Bernstein but said he was unconcerned about any problems adapting.Advertisement“I cut my teeth doing crazy events on ‘Wide World of Sports’ — barrel jumping, wrist wrestling — with a different expert commentator every week,” he said. “Nothing is more second nature to me than to work with someone new.”Email: sandor@nytimes.com We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »