AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KnollANAHEIM, Calif. — Last April, goalie Jonas Hiller sat at his stall in the Anaheim Ducks’ dressing room, staring into the distance and breathing heavily, the loneliest man in a crowded room.No teammate, coach, trainer or reporter approached Hiller, not even to confirm who would start in the Ducks’ critical game against the Los Angeles Kings. His countenance and demeanor spoke a million words.Despite the team’s success, Hiller had lost his starting job, first to Frederik Andersen, then to the rookie John Gibson for a pair of vital divisional games. As Anaheim headed into the postseason as the Western Conference’s top seed, Andersen was anointed the starter. Hiller briefly regained the starting job after Andersen was injured, then lost it again, to Gibson, as the Ducks were eliminated in the second round by the Kings, the eventual champions.“It was a little bit of a mess, I guess,” Andersen said. “It’s never really a great sign if you have three goalies going.” A free agent, Hiller left the Ducks in the off-season to join the Calgary Flames. He now finds himself facing Anaheim in the second round and in another messy goaltending situation. “Sometimes you don’t feel like you got treated the way you wanted,” Hiller said before Game 1 on Thursday. “That’s part of the business; at some point I just kind of checked it off and looked forward.” But optimism did not last long. The Ducks routed the Flames, 6-1, chasing Hiller from the game unceremoniously with three early goals.Hiller’s backup, Karri Ramo, fared no better, allowing three goals as well. But Calgary Coach Bob Hartley said Ramo would start Game 2 on Sunday. The Ducks were able to get pucks deep and move them around typically congested areas of the ice — below the goal line and in front of the net — with ease. Hiller said the Flames would have to compete much harder as a group in those areas to reverse their fortunes.“That was our staple, to outwork our opponent,” said Hiller, whose Flames led the N.H.L. in blocked shots this season but were beaten in that category Thursday. “We just don’t have the skill to let them outwork us and still think we’re going to be able to win,” Anaheim has more top-end talent and overall size, both of which were evident in Game 1. Anaheim’s leading scorers Ryan Getzlaf and Corey Perry combined for eight points. Perry’s 11 points lead the N.H.L. in postseason scoring entering the weekend. The Flames’ top-line right wing, Jiri Hudler, and the sparkplug forward Michael Ferland left Game 1 with apparent injuries and did not return. Both were listed as day to day but may play Sunday. The Flames are no strangers to defying expectations, rallying or protecting themselves. Few experts picked the Flames to make the playoffs, so few that Hartley called TSN’s Aaron Ward to thank him for being what he said was the only national analyst to predict Calgary’s berth before the season.The Flames stood up to the Vancouver Canucks in the first round, including a line brawl for which Hartley was fined $50,000 by the league. In that series, they also had two come-from-behind victories when trailing after two periods. Anaheim had three such victories in a four-game sweep of the Winnipeg Jets. The Ducks and the Flames finished first and second during the regular season in wins after facing a deficit through 40 minutes.The two teams were also excellent protecting leads, with Anaheim owning the fourth-best win percentage when leading after two periods and Calgary finishing right behind.“If you give them one little inch, they find a way to come back; they’ve been doing it all year,” Anaheim Coach Bruce Boudreau said after Game 1.He added, “We know what they’re made of, and this was an anomaly.”The Flames have had a puzzling lack of success at Honda Center dating to February 1999. Since then, Calgary has won only one of 30 regular-season meetings at Honda Center, including 20 straight losses since February 2004. Their most recent victory in Anaheim came during the 2006 playoffs in a series the Ducks won in seven games.“If we want to advance, we have no choice — we have to at least win one here,” Hartley said after Game 1, adding, “They gave us a real good idea of the price that we will have to pay if we want to leave this building with a win.”But the Ducks are not taking Game 1 or the Flames’ lack of success in Anaheim for granted. The Ducks, the top seed in the West, were upset in the playoffs in each of the last two seasons by lower-seeded teams.“There’s an aura around them that they’ve been disappointed the last couple years,” Boudreau said of his team. “The people that follow us sense that there’s a more serious group this year, and I agree with them.”Advertisement