AdvertisementSupported byExtra BasesBy Tyler KepnerThe transformation of Pedro Martinez — from ferocious competitor to baseball sage — is now complete. In the last few months, Martinez, the former star pitcher for the Boston Red Sox and four other teams, has analyzed the postseason for TBS, been elected to the Hall of Fame on his first try, joined MLB Network and, this week, become an author. The intellect behind the fire is on regular display.“A lot of people, when they saw me competing, they never saw the human being behind it,” Martinez said in a recent interview. “I’m totally different than they think, and I don’t know if they took the time to notice that I was totally different when I wasn’t pitching. Some people now are starting to put the pieces together.”Martinez and his co-author, Michael Silverman of The Boston Herald, assemble those pieces for more than 300 pages in “Pedro,” published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt and set to be released Tuesday. From his boyhood in the Dominican Republic — where he used the heads of his sister’s dolls for baseballs and lived in a home with no refrigerator, TV or closets — to his final game, for Philadelphia in the 2009 World Series, Martinez chronicles a wild ride.“I think it’s important for kids to understand that there’s going to be adversity, and that even if you’re not looking for adversity, it will show up,” Martinez said, explaining why he wrote the book. “It’s important that they see hope, and they see that they belong and there’s no need to believe anybody that tells them, ‘No, you can’t.’ ”When the Los Angeles Dodgers told Martinez he was too frail to start and traded him to Montreal, Martinez won a Cy Young Award. When the Expos could not afford him — and sent him to Boston, where he did not want to go — Martinez won two more.When the Red Sox waited too long to offer a three-year contract after their 2004 championship, the Mets gave Martinez four years. His first New York season was mostly successful — until, he said, Jeff Wilpon forced him to pitch in a game in late September when the Mets were far out of the race.Martinez writes that his toe was hurt and that Manager Willie Randolph had told him he was done for the season. But, he said, Wilpon, now the Mets’ chief operating officer, wanted to sell tickets for a matchup against the star Marlins left-hander Dontrelle Willis. Martinez said he protested the order and offered to give back the rest of his contract.“While I’m the boss here, you’re going to have to do what I say,” Wilpon said, according to Martinez, who gave in and pitched. He lost the game, which drew 25,093 fans, and said the injury prolonged the toe problem. Other parts of his body broke down the next season, and Martinez was inactive for the Mets’ run to Game 7 of the 2006 National League Championship Series.“I couldn’t help but think about how when I was healthy in 2005, our team wasn’t that good,” Martinez writes. “But as my health declined, I was urged to pitch a meaningless game at the end of 2005 that wound up shortening my recovery time for 2006 and led me to a hospital where doctors performed a three-hour arthroscopic procedure to repair my shoulder.”In a statement through a spokesman, Wilpon denied that he told Martinez to pitch hurt.“Pedro was always a great competitor and deserving of being in the Hall of Fame,” the statement said. “This particular excerpt in the book is false as those kinds of decisions have always been put in the hands of our baseball people.”Martinez said in the interview that he did not blame Wilpon.“When you’re going to get hurt, you’re going to get hurt,” he said. “I don’t have anybody to blame but probably myself for not listening to my body. I think I was brave to pitch games, but I think I took it to extremes that day.”Martinez was 32-23 with a 3.88 earned run average in 79 starts for the Mets over four seasons. He stressed that he enjoyed “every aspect” of playing for the Mets.“I was paid to pitch, so I went and did that,” he said. “I did it whenever you asked me, whenever I could. I wanted to do it for as long as I could, and that was my limit.”His actual limit, it turned out, came the next season with the Phillies, and ended, appropriately, at the new Yankee Stadium. Martinez had some of his most memorable moments in the Bronx, including the seventh game of the 2003 American League Championship Series, a few days after he had tossed the Yankees coach Don Zimmer to the ground in a brawl.Although Zimmer, then 73, tearfully took the blame, Martinez writes that the incident is his only regret. Fans sent him death threats, he writes, and it was not safe for his family to travel to New York for Game 7.“I don’t think I ever faced a game where my mind was so distressed by everything that was going on,” Martinez said in the interview. “The game, actually, got me more relaxed than anything, to get to the game and know that I was able to pitch and not have anything happen to me. After having bodyguards in the room and everywhere I walked — and my food had to be pretty much checked out by everybody — that was a sense of relief.”Of course, the Red Sox lost Game 7 after Manager Grady Little let Martinez give up the lead in the fateful eighth inning. That story is recounted in the book, a feisty memoir of a career that, at its peak — and without the help of performance-enhancing drugs, Martinez says — was among the best ever.“During those five or maybe six years, I didn’t feel intimidated by anybody regardless of what they were using or how they were doing it,” Martinez said. “I felt like I belonged and I could get you out.” Rays Start With a Surprise The Houston Astros went 15-7 in April, their best record in the season’s first month since 1986, when they won their division. They are leading the American League West now, after six consecutive losing seasons, but they already seemed to be rising before this season. The Astros improved by 19 wins from 2013 to 2014, and added veterans in the off-season.The Tampa Bay Rays seemed to be trending the opposite way, after losing 85 games last season, then losing their general manager and manager. They scored the fewest runs in the league last season, then traded Matt Joyce, Wil Myers and Ben Zobrist over the winter.Yet the Rays have started well, with a winning record heading into the weekend. After a month, they are a factor in the jumbled A.L. East, and that was more than most people expected. The grim forecast was understandable.“It’s easy to overlook us, because there’s not a whole lot of name recognition on the roster, not a whole lot of guys that have made a name for themselves yet or are well known in the public,” said Evan Longoria, the Rays’ veteran third baseman. “So on paper we don’t look that great, and we’re young. Those two factors usually make for a rough going early on, and we’ve found ways to be productive as a group.”The Rays have managed about a league-average offense. But their starting rotation, led by Chris Archer and Jake Odorizzi, has been among the majors’ best, and easily the best in the A.L. East. And they have done it without Alex Cobb and Matt Moore.“As far as the injuries we’ve had, you’re not going to replace those guys, the type of pitchers they are,” said Manager Kevin Cash, who replaced Joe Maddon last winter. “The guys that we’ve called on to help have definitely given us opportunities to win, so it’s a credit to the front office and development people for getting those guys in position to be available.”Drew Smyly, who was sidelined early with shoulder trouble, has started twice and now has a 2.01 earned run average in nine starts for the Rays since coming over from Detroit in the David Price deal last July. Cobb, who is recovering from forearm tendinitis, and Moore, who had Tommy John surgery last April, were scheduled to throw live batting practice this weekend.Longoria, the only remaining player from the Rays’ 2008 World Series roster, said he trusted that the front office would continue to find ways to compete.“Certainly now it doesn’t seem like we’re in what you would call a rebuilding phase,” Longoria said. “It seems like we’re putting a pretty competitive team out there and trying to win now.” When an M.V.P. Returns When the Texas Rangers reacquired the troubled outfielder Josh Hamilton from the Los Angeles Angels last week, it was only the latest example of a former most valuable player returning to the team for which he had won the award. The Rangers have to hope this reunion turns out better than most.Over the last 25 years, six other former M.V.P.s left their teams and returned later in their careers: Rickey Henderson (who won in 1990 for Oakland), Terry Pendleton (1991, Atlanta), Juan Gonzalez (1996 and 1998, Texas), Ken Griffey Jr. (1997, Seattle), Ivan Rodriguez (1999, Texas) and Jason Giambi (2000, Oakland).Henderson actually returned to the A’s twice and led the A.L. in steals and walks the second time, in 1998. The others had minimal success, including the two Rangers. Gonzalez slugged 35 homers and drove in 140 runs for Cleveland in 2001 but failed to match those totals, combined, over the next two seasons in Texas. Rodriguez finished up the 2009 season with the Rangers, at age 37, and hit .245 in 28 games.Giambi batted .193 for Oakland in 2009. Griffey hit 19 homers for Seattle that year, but none the next season, his last. Pendleton, who had helped carry the Braves to two World Series, missed their title season in 1995 after signing with the also-ran Marlins. He was traded back in August 1996, hit .204 and retired two years later.Advertisement