AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThey call the Kentucky Derby the most exciting two minutes in sports, and it is hard to argue. The gate opens, and after 120 seconds or so of thundering hooves in front of 150,000 fans, a horse and jockey have become immortal, while some bettors have won or lost a small fortune.But though two minutes is spoken for, there are many other time frames whose most exciting sports moment is undefined. Let’s redress that.The most exciting four seconds in sports?It’s Top Fuel drag racing. Hit the gas, rev it up to about 330 miles an hour, then 300 yards and 3.7 seconds later, pop the parachute.The most exciting eight seconds?Bull riding. Over a time period immortalized by the Luke Perry movie of the same name, men sit on 1,600-pound animals who really, really do not want them there.Here is a subjective list of the other most exciting durations in sports.10 seconds: The Olympic 100-meter dash. The world’s fastest man or woman is decided in the time it takes a basketball player to greet his teammates after a missed free throw.20 seconds: The Olympic 50-meter freestyle. No flip turns, no pacing … some elite swimmers do not even breathe. They just go from the gun, reach for the wall, then look at the scoreboard to see how they did.Two minutes: The Derby has the title by acclamation, although a good case could be made for a thrilling downhill run, like Kitzbuhel.Four minutes: The running of the bulls at Pamplona. Locals and tourists, some of them fueled by liquid courage, try to avoid being trampled or worse by annoyed bulls. That’s entertainment!4 minutes 30 seconds: The free skate in the men’s Olympic final. Double jumps; triple jumps; quadruple jumps. One fall and it could be over.15 minutes: The Oxford-Cambridge boat race. No athletes look more knackered than elite rowers after a race; they have been contesting this one since 1829.25 minutes: A U.F.C. championship bout. Five 5-minute rounds of mayhem. Boxing not brutal enough for you? In the U.F.C., after you knock the guy down, you can keep pounding on him.Three hours: Game 7 of the Stanley Cup playoffs. Even those mostly indifferent to hockey find it hard to look away when the whole season is on the line for both teams.Two days: The round of 64 of the N.C.A.A. tournament. The Final Four gets the headlines, but college basketball nuts know there’s nothing like clutching your bracket as you watch four games go down to the wire simultaneously.Three days: The Ryder Cup. Americans and European golfers alike will tell you that not even the Masters can match the pressure of playing for your country or continent. For the spectator, high drama is a guarantee.Five days: An Ashes cricket test. To the outsider, cricket may seem stultifying. To the aficionado, every move in an England-Australia match is like a chess gambit by a grandmaster.Two weeks: The Olympic Games. It just never stops. Badminton? BMX biking? Beach volleyball? How about all three, and a dozen more events, going on at once?One month: The Tour de France. They ride their bikes up the side of a mountain. And then do it again the next day.Six weeks: The World Cup. The only sporting event that virtually shuts the world down.What did we miss? Let us know in the comments.Advertisement