By TOM PEDULLAMAY 2, 2015
LOUISVILLE, Ky. — The Kentucky Derby lost its third starter in as many days when International Star, the Louisiana Derby winner, was scratched Saturday morning. According to the owner Ken Ramsey, the colt appears to have an abscess or bruise in his left front foot.“The state vet got there this morning and did not like the way he jogged down the shedrow,” Ramsey said in a statement released by Churchill Downs. “Our blacksmith took the left front shoe off and there was definitely some heat on the inside quarter of the left front foot. Something’s brewing in there, probably an abscess.”International Star, a New York-bred, is undefeated through three starts as a 3-year-old, with all of those coming at the Fair Grounds in New Orleans, for earnings of $810,000. His closing style appeared to make him a threat because the Derby field included a number of horses that boast high early speed.The latest scratch left the Derby with 18 starters. Stanford was pulled from the race Thursday after his trainer, Todd Pletcher, decided it was best to point him toward a different race. Stanford was replaced by Frammento, the first of two horses on the also-eligible list.AdvertisementEl Kabeir, winner of the Jerome and Gotham Stakes at Aqueduct Racetrack, was scratched Friday afternoon with an injury to his left front hoof. The last two scratches occurred after Friday’s 9 a.m. deadline. That prevented lightly regarded Tale of Verve, the remaining horse on the also-eligible list, from being included.AdvertisementRamsey expects International Star to recover quickly.“We think we’ll probably have him ready for the Preakness, but time will tell,” he said of the May 16 race in Baltimore.Qualifying System Criticized Some trainers are voicing displeasure with Churchill Downs’ decision two years ago to use a points system to determine which horses qualify for the 20-horse Derby field rather than earnings in graded stakes races. Under the new system, points awarded to various prep races increase as the Derby nears.D. Wayne Lukas, a Hall of Fame trainer, said the push for points could take precedence over what might be in a horse’s best interest.“The points system forces you to do things you wouldn’t ordinarily do,” he said. “That’s the fly in the ointment right there. I don’t want to run my horse when I don’t want to, and it will force you to if you want to be here.”Bob Baffert, also a Hall of Fame trainer, said adjustments should be made.“I’d like to see the points carry more weight,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He suggested that horses with the most points should be given some advantage when it comes to what is now a random draw for post positions. He said it would be more fair for trainers of leading point-getters to be able to select their posts.Eight Belles Remembered Even as the trainer Larry Jones continued his success here when Lovely Maria presented him Friday with his third Kentucky Oaks triumph, which is two shy of the record held by Woody Stephens, he will never forget Eight Belles.The filly sustained catastrophic injuries after a runner-up finish in the 2008 Kentucky Derby and had to be euthanized.Advertisement“Do we still remember? Oh, yeah,” Jones said. “The way it ended just kind of tore a hole in our heart, but we’re okay.”Greater Calling Jesse Schmitt typically lends a hand in the communications department at Churchill Downs on Derby Day. He had more important business this year.Schmitt was a four-year starter as a long snapper at Purdue. Although N.F.L. teams do not typically draft players at that position, they vie for their services as free agents as soon as the draft ends. Schmitt (6 feet 2 and 247 pounds) wanted to be certain that he could be reached, and that was a concern with the gigantic crowd expected at the track.“The cellphone service can be a little iffy, so I decided the best thing was to stay at home,” Schmitt said. “As much as the Derby is a tremendous event, they are going to run it again next year, I’m pretty sure.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.