By DAVID GOLDBLATTMAY 2, 2015
BLACKPOOL, England —  Judge us at the end of the season, not now, Karl Oyston wrote to the supporters of Blackpool F.C. last August. A week before the season, Blackpool had only eight players on its books and no goalkeepers, and Oyston, the club’s embattled chairman, had some explaining to do.The squad that was eventually assembled, full of trainees and players in on trial, opened the season by going 11 games without a win. It has closed it just as poorly, without a victory since January.Now, the end of the season — one characterized by protests, libel lawsuits and, as of last week, the mysterious disappearance of a statue — has arrived. Blackpool was relegated a month ago from the League Championship, the second tier of English soccer, and the club’s fans had declared Saturday’s season finale against Huddersfield Town their “day of judgment.”Ninety minutes before the game began, a crowd of more than 4,000 Blackpool fans and supporters from other clubs across England gathered a short distance from Blackpool’s Bloomfield Road stadium. Some fans dressed as judges, grim reapers and Owen Oyston (the majority owner), and some threw tangerine smoke bombs. Fans chanted “Oyston Out” and “We want our club back” and marched toward the stadium. Outside the directors’ entrance, the crowd heard speeches and laid their shirts and memorabilia as if it were a funeral. One fan laid down his scarf, saying he did not want it back until the Oystons had gone.AdvertisementIt all looked so different in 2010, when Blackpool earned promotion to the Premier League — the club’s first visit to the top division in 40 years. Blackpool celebrated with the biggest parade — 80,000 strong — it had ever seen, and Karl Oyston promised a “lasting commitment” to a declining Victorian seaside town that had been a 19th-century sin city for the industrial working class of northern England.AdvertisementBlackpool’s year in the Premier League sun was a glorious cavalry charge. In its vivid tangerine shirts, Manager Ian Holloway’s team, unlike almost every other newly promoted side, played with a relentless attacking style, winning games and friends — only to be relegated on the final day of the season.The real trick had been pulled off in the boardroom, where Oyston has run the club since 1999, after his father, Owen, a local real estate agent turned minor media magnate, went to prison for rape.Under Karl Oyston’s leadership, the club’s dilapidated Bloomfield Road stadium was rebuilt and the team rose from the lower reaches of English soccer to the second-tier Championship and then, for that one fleeting season, to its pinnacle: the Premier League.The ability of Blackpool F.C. to make the jump from the Championship was even more impressive for the fact that the team and its salary bill were substantially unchanged from the previous year despite an increase in revenue of £42 million (about $63.5 million).Unfortunately for the fans, and for the club, the Oystons then tried to repeat the formula on the way down. Despite the parachute payments from the Premier League still rolling in, more than $70 million over the last four years, Blackpool spent less and less on wages and transfers.As a result, the club turned a healthy profit, but after losing a playoff for promotion back to the Premier League in 2012, Blackpool disintegrated: 15th place in the Championship in 2013; 20th in 2014; and this year relegated with six games to play. The club has known for weeks that it will finish the season in last place.The supporters’ grumbling grew as the money from the parachute payments, which might have reversed the decline if invested in the club, was instead routinely diverted to Oyston-owned companies and large directors’ fees. The protest movement went public in April 2014, when Blackpool’s game against Burnley was stopped in the 53rd minute (a nod to the club’s F.A. Cup victory of 1953) after thousands of fans threw a mixture of tennis balls and tangerines onto the field.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since then there have been boycotts and walkouts, flash mobs and smoke bombs in the Oystons’ village, as well as sabotage of the signage of Oyston real estate agencies. After relegation was assured, thousands of supporters protested inside and outside the stadium during a game against Reading. Flares and fireworks were set off, and eggs were thrown at the directors’ box.AdvertisementWhat comes next is anyone’s guess. Multiple challenges to the Oystons have emerged. One, the Blackpool Supporters Trust, aims to take the club into fan ownership and has endorsed a Blackpool fan, Andy Higgins, to run in Britain’s general election on Thursday on a “Football First, Oystons Out” ticket. Another, a loose group of activists leading the demonstrations and known as the Tangerine Knights, said through a spokesman, Stephen Smith, that they formed because they wanted protest to be “a bit more hands on.”If they intend to fight for Blackpool F.C., the Oystons have not made things easy for themselves. In August, the owners refused to allow fans to collect money for a charity supporting an ailing former Blackpool coach. In December, Karl Oyston was accused of using a slur toward a fan in an exchange of unpleasant messages — a case still being investigated by the football authorities.On and on it went. Karl’s son Sam taunted fans on social media with pictures of his expensive cars, and the Oystons’ lawyers have relentlessly pursued others with libel cases for comments made on social media. In one such case, Frank Knight, a 67-year-old who is a lifelong Blackpool fan, was required to pay £20,000 (just over $30,000) and publish a humiliating retraction of his online comments about the Oystons. A crowd-sourced campaign raised the money for him in three days.For some, judgment had already come. The local newspaper dropped a column written by Karl Oyston. The minority owner who bankrolled the Premier League drive has begun to agitate for change. Even Wonga, a disgraced payday loan company with its own legal problems, announced it would no longer sponsor the club’s jerseys.The fans’ judgment has been even more unequivocal. Recently, supporters put out a call for fans to place memorabilia, scarves and shirts at the statue of Stan Mortensen, the hero of Blackpool’s 1953 F.A. Cup triumph, at Saturday’s final home game.But the Oystons managed to have their say first. On Tuesday, most likely to thwart the protest, the club had the statue removed.“I can’t say I’m surprised,” Christine Seddon of the Blackpool Supporters Trust told the BBC. “We don’t know why it has gone, but I suspect it has something to do with our demonstration.”While many fans chose to stay outside and protest during Saturday’s game, Bloomfield Road was more full than usual, but many in the crowd clearly knew something was coming. Minutes into the second half, with the score 0-0, a siren sounded behind the Blackpool goal. Hundreds of fans stormed onto the pitch and occupied the center circle, refusing to move.Fifty minutes later, they still had not moved, and it was announced that the game had been abandoned. The crowd then surged toward the main stand, and a few fans climbed up to the Oyston Estate Agents sky box and rattled the doors, though the Oystons appeared to have left by then.AdvertisementIt is not clear whether the Oystons will be back for next season, but Blackpool’s fans made it clear they would be. The judgment has been made; it just remains to see what the sentence will be.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: As a Club’s Failures Grow, So Does Fans’ Displeasure .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.