By BRENDAN PRUNTYMAY 2, 2015
On the first day of practice with her new team, Shannon Smith had an idea. Barely into her tenure as the women’s lacrosse coach at Hofstra, Smith saw a sophomore midfielder with the athleticism and ability to have a greater impact. All she had to do was persuade the player, Brittain Altomare, that making a major change would make her a major player.Three years later, Altomare laughs at ever having doubted her coach.“Where I came from, it was always assumed that the best players on the field played midfield,” Altomare said. “So when I got switched to attack, that was a little bit in my mind. But the switch to attack really let me focus on my attacking skills. There was a little period of hesitation, but after a week I got it.”The results have been nothing but positive for Hofstra. Altomare is now the program’s career leader in points (247), assists (129) and draw-controls (200), and seventh in goals (118).A senior from Wolfsville, Md., Altomare is even reaching elite levels nationally.After Hofstra concluded the regular season last weekend, Altomare, who helped transform the Pride into one of the nation’s top teams for much of the season, was second in points per game (4.88), was fifth in assists (39) and assists per game (2.44) and was tied for sixth in points (78).AdvertisementOn Friday, she had three assists in the Pride’s 7-3 overtime loss to Towson in the Colonial Athletic Association tournament. Hofstra (11-6) still has faint hopes of returning to the N.C.A.A. tournament this week for the first time in eight years — and only the third time ever.AdvertisementAll because of a switch from midfield to attack.“I thought it was what this team needed,” Smith said. “It’s also what this team hasn’t had. It hasn’t had a person leading them on the attacking side of the field. For me, when I first took the job and I saw Brittain out there, I knew she could be our leader and our quarterback — and I told her that.”There was an adjustment period. Altomare had played the midfield position her entire career, from youth leagues through high school and during her freshman year at Hofstra.“She’s probably one of a handful of our first breakout stars at the college level,” said Bill Sardella, director of the Frederick Stars Lacrosse Club, where Altomare played as a teenager and now is a volunteer youth coach in the off-season.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After Smith was hired in the summer of 2012, she immediately could tell that Altomare’s skills were being underused.“Our second practice with Shannon as head coach, I was on the attacking end,” Altomare said. “I don’t think that I ever went through a full practice under her at midfield. I love it. I’m so glad I made that transition.”To help smooth the crossover from midfield to attack, Altomare immersed herself in watching tapes of some of the nation’s best attackers, past and present. One of those was Smith. As an attack, Smith graduated from Northwestern in 2012 as the program’s career leading goal scorer, a three-time national champion and an all-American.“Watching her made it so much more clear and so much more concrete in my mind,” Altomare said.Her freshman year, Altomare scored 31 points in 17 games as a midfielder. In her first season under Smith’s tutelage, she scored 69 points in 19 games. Another 66 points last season reinforced the notion that she was becoming one of the top point-scorers in the country. Before the start of Altomare’s senior season, the coach told her pupil this spring would be her best year yet.Altomare once again was a bit dubious.“I ended my junior year extremely frustrated, because I was face-guarded in every single C.A.A. game,” Altomare said. “So when Shannon said, ‘You’re going to have the best year of your career in your senior year,’ I was skeptical. I thought it was going to be really hard to have the best season of your career being face-guarded all the time.”Smith knew better. She knew that Altomare’s preparation and practice skills had been unparalleled, allowing her make the necessary adjustments. So far, through 17 games, her 81 points are a single-season Hofstra record.Advertisement“I have always believed from Day 1 that she had the potential to do this,” Smith said. “Having seen her play and knowing the potential that she had — I don’t know if she fully believed it, but I think she believes it now, that all her hard work is starting to pay off.”A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Star Player’s Move From Midfielder to Attacker Raises Her Profile, and Hofstra’s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.