AdvertisementSupported byLightning 6, Canadiens 2By The Associated PressSteven Stamkos scored his first goal of the playoffs, and the Tampa Bay Lightning beat the Canadiens, 6-2, on Sunday night in Montreal to take a two-games-to-none lead in their Eastern Conference semifinal series.Nikita Kucherov scored twice on power plays, Valtteri Filppula, Victor Hedman and J. T. Brown added goals, and Ben Bishop made 27 saves for the Lightning.Jeff Petry and Tom Gilbert scored for Montreal. Carey Price allowed the most goals he has all season, finishing with 18 saves.Game 3 is Wednesday night at Tampa Bay.Tampa Bay went 4 for 7 on the power play, and Montreal was 0 for 3.Filppula and Hedman also scored on power plays, which were Tampa Bay’s first power-play goals since Game 2 of its seven-game opening series against Detroit.Montreal is 1 for 26 on power plays in the playoffs.The Canadiens scored the first goal of a game for only the second time in eight postseason contests when Petry took a pass from Torrey Mitchell and beat Bishop with a wrist shot from the blue line at 7 minutes 20 seconds.Montreal let it slip away with undisciplined penalties. Brandon Prust got an extra two minutes for yapping at a referee, and P. K. Subban was sent off for crosschecking. Filppula tied it with Subban off on a shot from the right circle with 24 seconds left in the period.Stamkos used a fortunate bounce to go on a breakaway and deke Price for a goal 8:06 into the second. It was his first goal in nine postseason games this year. He also had two assists.The Lightning had a four-on-three man advantage when Tyler Johnson slipped a cross-ice pass to Kucherov for a shot into an open side at 12:29. Then Price had no chance when Hedman finished a backdoor play with Alex Killorn on a power play at 19:46.BLACKHAWKS 4, WILD 1 Patrick Kane scored two goals, Corey Crawford made 30 saves, and Chicago beat visiting Minnesota to take a 2-0 lead in a Western Conference semifinal series.Patrick Sharp had a goal and an assist as Chicago improved to 5-0 at home in this year’s playoffs. Jonathan Toews also scored in the second period after a big play by Marian Hossa.Game 3 is Tuesday night in Minnesota.Defenseman Matt Dumba scored for the Wild, who are winless in eight postseason games at Chicago.Advertisement