AdvertisementSupported byYankees 8, Red Sox 5By Billy WitzBOSTON — If, as David Ortiz suggested earlier this season, the Red Sox-Yankees series are not as salty as they used to be, then a little spice was added back to the rivalry Sunday night. With the Yankees busily battering Boston, a seemingly innocuous pitch that strayed too far inside reinvigorated the Fenway Park crowd, the Red Sox and eventually the game, which the Yankees hung on to win, 8-5, a victory that was not secure until Ortiz lined out to center field with the bases loaded in the ninth. The win was the Yankees’ 13th in 16 games, and it completed their first sweep of a three-game series here since 2006. If that was enough to leave them exhilarated, so did the finish, which came after they endured the prospect of another Yankee-killing swing from Ortiz in a game they once led by eight runs.Instead, with the remnants of the crowd on its feet at midnight, Ortiz stroked Andrew Miller’s pitch to center, where it hung up long enough for Jacoby Ellsbury to glove it.“He’s got a flair for the dramatic,” Miller said of Ortiz, his former teammate with the Red Sox. “He lives for that situation; he’s thrived in it. Probably the most impressive part of his career is what he’s done in those situations.”The game’s U-turn from a blowout came in the bottom of the sixth, when Adam Warren, who was cruising with a one-hit shutout, hit Hanley Ramirez in the thigh after the Red Sox had closed to within 8-1.Ramirez was immediately upset, gesticulating as he was escorted to first base by the home-plate umpire, Jeff Nelson. The fans showed their displeasure, taking their cue from Ramirez, and they roared further when Pablo Sandoval singled in a run and Mike Napoli followed with a three-run homer off Esmil Rogers, who had relieved Warren, cutting the Red Sox’ deficit to 8-5.“We were trying to run a two-seamer in on him, and it just ran away from me a little bit,” Warren said of the pitch that hit Ramirez.All seemed copacetic until Red Sox reliever Edward Mujica hit Ellsbury in the eighth inning. Ellsbury, the former Red Sox leadoff man who signed as a free agent with the Yankees before last season, has been the Yankees’ best player of late. He reached base a career-best six times on Sunday. The Yankees were mystified why he was hit and irked that Mujica threw two pitches inside before hitting him with a 3-0 pitch.Manager Joe Girardi called it “fishy” and worked to make sure nobody in his dugout escalated the situation, which might have led to fines or suspensions. To do so, he stepped in front of one of the largest Yankees, C. C. Sabathia, who had stepped to the top of the dugout steps.“I just wanted to figure out what was going on,” Sabathia said. “I think they hit Jacoby on purpose, yes. I just don’t understand what happened.”Ellsbury took first base matter-of-factly. Normally an understated presence with reporters, Ellsbury was unusually animated, even after taking time to dress and shower before he spoke Sunday night. “Maybe they didn’t want me to get another hit,” said Ellsbury, who is 14 for his last 26. “If I was 0-fer, I don’t think they’d throw at me.”He added: “I just took my base and let them know I didn’t appreciate it. I don’t need to get thrown at. It didn’t hurt, anyway.”The Yankees had given the game of the appearance of a runaway when they knocked around starter Joe Kelly, who had beaten them three times since he had come from St. Louis last season, including the opening Saturday of the season, when he allowed one hit in seven shutout innings, retiring the final 17 batters he faced.But Mark Teixeira hit a two-run homer in the first, and the Yankees built a 5-0 lead after Brian McCann and Carlos Beltran hit back-to-back doubles in the third. Brett Gardner added a three-run homer in the sixth. But then the spirit returned to the Red Sox — and soon the game.With Miller on the mound in the ninth, he walked Allen Craig, but then struck out Xander Bogaerts and Blake Swihart. Mookie Betts fouled off some tough two-strike pitches and walked. Miller got Dustin Pedroia to hit a slow roller to third baseman Chase Headley, but he bobbled the ball, and his throw to first pulled Teixeira off first, loading the bases for Ortiz.“It’s not how I drew it up, but give them some credit,” said Miller, who has not allowed a run this season and who collected his 10th save.Miller acknowledged that the Red Sox and Yankees might not be as they were once for Ortiz. Baltimore, Toronto and Tampa Bay are no longer fodder for them, and the American League East, — if it not the best division in baseball, may be its most competitive.“But when you play at other places in the division, it’s not like this,” Miller said. “There’s a little extra to it when you play here, and that’s what these games are all about.”INSIDE PITCHALEX RODRIGUEZ shrugged off comments by General Manager BRIAN CASHMAN on Saturday that the Yankees had no intention of paying him a $6 million bonus for tying Willie Mays for fourth on baseball’s career home run list. “That’s nowhere near where my energy is these days,” Rodriguez said before Sunday night’s game. Advertisement