AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrouseSAN FRANCISCO — On a raw Sunday morning at TPC Harding Park, a voice cut through the marine layer like a foghorn after Rory McIlroy dispatched his opponent, Paul Casey. It was their first hole of the day and the 22nd of their suspended quarterfinal.“Better than the fight, guys,” shouted a fan, one of a few dozen bundled up like ice fishermen to catch the anticlimactic ending of the most exciting match of an uneven week of golf.The World Golf Championships match-play tournament ended Sunday with Rory McIlroy dispatching Jim Furyk in the semifinals and then handing Gary Woodland a 4 and 2 defeat in the final to become the first No. 1 seed to win the event since Tiger Woods in 2008.It was not the telegenic dream final of McIlroy versus Jordan Spieth in a battle of No. 1 versus No. 2, which would have blazed with enough wattage to cut through a socked-in sports weekend. But it was no less entertaining than Floyd Mayweather Jr.’s 12-round decision over Manny Pacquiao in the previous night’s welterweight title bout.McIlroy was 1 down to Furyk after 15 holes before trading birdies with him on the 16th, squaring the match with a birdie on the 17th and draining a 43-foot eagle putt at the par-5 18th for the 1-up victory. McIlroy’s last shot of that round was as jaw-dropping as the one Chris Paul banked in Saturday night to lead the Clippers past the Spurs in the decisive game of their first-round playoff series.Against Woodland, McIlroy won four holes in succession, including three in a row with birdies, to build a 4-up lead. Woodland won the 11th and 12th holes, then missed a four footer for par at 13 to whittle McIlroy’s lead to 1 up. “After that he definitely flipped another switch,” Woodland said. “He didn’t miss a shot coming in.”McIlroy’s first victory of 2015 in the United States was hard-earned. He had to close out three opponents, starting with Casey, in 11 hours.“I’d say the toughest thing was standing on the first tee this morning at 6:45 and thinking if I’ve just got up to come all this way to play one hole,” said McIlroy, who interrupted his trail of thought with a laugh. “So I was putting a lot of pressure on myself. I don’t want to have to do this just for one hole. I want to be here all day.”The magic of sport is that the endings are not scripted, they are not manipulated to create a pleasing narrative.The mundanity of sport is that the endings are not scripted, they are not manipulated to create a pleasing narrative. Round-robin play was introduced this year so that everyone in the 64-man field was guaranteed three matches. The headliners were cut down like blighted Monterey cypress trees, anyway. McIlroy and the fifth-ranked Furyk were the only golfers from the world top 10 to advance to the weekend, which raised the question: Did the format require more tinkering?The second-ranked Spieth, who played well but exited with a 2-1 group record, believed so. Perhaps not surprisingly, given that he was 16-under over all in his three matches, Spieth proposed three days of stroke play, followed by two days of match play. Furyk, who lost to Danny Willett in the consolation match, suggested that a half-point be awarded to players who were all square after 18 holes. “But I like the format better than in the past,” said Furyk, the only one of the semifinalists to have lost a match in group play.The mano a mano nature of match play can cause headaches for television officials and ticket brokers because there is always the possibility that the show will go on with all understudies. While that was not the case this week, Woodland was asked Saturday why America should tune in to watch a match between him and McIlroy.“Because I’m in it,” Woodland said, laughing.He was half joking. Woodland is the Mike Trout of golf, a player whose 300-plus yard drives inspire awe. The fans at TPC Harding Park strained to see his drives on the four par 5s and the drivable par-4 12th. But Woodland credited a 40-yard shot with his run to the final.On the first day, his match against Jimmy Walker went extra holes after Woodland lost his 1-up lead at 18. On the first playoff hole, Woodland’s second shot landed in a bunker. This was his moment of truth. Would he dig in or bail out?Woodland had been working hard on his sand shots. “And to pull it off under pressure was huge,” said Woodland, who hit it close and made the birdie putt to close Walker out.For all the detail offered by high-definition telecasts, they do not capture all the color. In Furyk’s quarterfinal match against Louis Oosthuizen, he heard fans behind one green placing bets on which player would win the hole.Twenty-two golfers teed up Friday, the last day of group play, with nothing riding on the outcome but pride and professionalism. Lost in the replay loop of Keegan Bradley’s verbal altercation with opponent Miguel Ángel Jiménez was that both men brought 0-2 records into the match. They could have played as if they did not care, but golfers generally are not wired that way. Consider all those who grind to make birdies on their 36th hole in stroke-play events when they have no chance of making the cut.“They duked it out and they figured it out and they’ve moved on,” Woodland said, referring to Jiménez and Bradley. “I don’t have a problem with it. It spices up the game a little bit. It’s a long week. It’s nice to talk about something else besides golf.”At the end of a long week, it was nice to hear people talking about something besides what is wrong with the format. McIlroy’s title was a victory for match play. For all its quirks, the format separated the best player in the world from everybody else.Advertisement