AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressEvan Gattis homered twice, and the Houston Astros won their 10th straight game, improving the best record in the American League by beating the visiting Seattle Mariners, 7-6, on Sunday.The Astros extended their best winning streak since a 12-game run in 2004. At 18-7, Houston set a team record for its best record through 25 games. The Astros are coming off a 70-92 season, which followed three straight years of at least 106 losses.Gattis, one of several Astros newcomers, hit a go-ahead solo shot in the eighth inning. It was his fifth homer in six games. Gattis connected off Carson Smith to break a 6-6 tie. Smith made his big league debut last season. He had not allowed a run in 191/3 innings until Gattis homered. Gattis also hit a three-run homer in the first.BREWERS FIRE MANAGER Milwaukee, at a league-worst 7-18, announced the firing of Manager Ron Roenicke after a 5-3 victory over the Cubs in Chicago.Doug Melvin, the team’s president and general manager, said the team would name a replacement Monday. The Brewers opened the season with 13 losses in 15 games. In four-plus seasons, Roenicke was 342-331.In the win over the Cubs, Aramis Ramirez homered and broke an eighth-inning tie with a two-run single. The Brewers won a second straight game for the first time this season.TIGERS 6, ROYALS 4 Miguel Cabrera hit a two-run homer, Anibal Sanchez carried a perfect game into the sixth inning, and visiting Detroit held on to beat Kansas City and salvage a split of their four-game series. Alex Avila also drove in three runs for the Tigers.Sanchez allowed three runs and four hits in seven and a third innings.CARDINALS 3, PIRATES 2 Kolten Wong homered in the 14th inning, and host St. Louis defeated Pittsburgh in extra innings for the third straight time. Pedro Alvarez homered for the Pirates in the 12th inning before the Cardinals tied it on a bases-loaded single by Peter Bourjos. St. Louis left the bases loaded in the 11th and the 12th. The finale of a three-game series that totaled 35 innings lasted 4 hours 28 minutes. TWINS 13, WHITE SOX 3 Trevor Plouffe hit his first grand slam in the majors and drove in a career-high five runs, powering host Minnesota past Chicago for a four-game sweep. Brian Dozier added a career-high four hits as the Twins won for the seventh time in nine games.DODGERS 1, DIAMONDBACKS 0 Yasmani Grandal threw out a runner at the plate after an errant pitch in the top of the 13th inning, then homered leading off the bottom half to lead host Los Angeles past Arizona for its fourth straight win.GIANTS 5, ANGELS 0 Tim Lincecum pitched three-hit ball over eight innings, and host San Francisco routed Los Angeles for a three-game sweep. Nori Aoki and Joe Panik hit consecutive first-inning home runs off Jered Weaver for the Giants. San Francisco has won eight of 11 after a 4-10 start. BRAVES 5, REDS 0 Julio Teheran gave up just three singles in six innings, and host Atlanta trounced Cincinnati for a split of their four-game series. Kelly Johnson and Jonny Gomes each homered for the Braves off Johnny Cueto. Teheran struck out five in a row at one point and finished with a season-high six over all.ATHLETICS 7, RANGERS 1 Stephen Vogt homered twice, Sonny Gray took a shutout into the seventh inning while mixing 10 strikeouts with a career-high seven walks, and visiting Oakland crushed Texas. Vogt hit a solo shot in the sixth. He added his sixth homer of the season, a three-run drive, in the seventh.INDIANS 10, BLUE JAYS 7 Pinch-hitter Ryan Raburn’s tiebreaking two-run double capped a six-run fifth, Jason Kipnis had four hits, and host Cleveland overcame a five-run deficit to top Toronto. Kipnis homered and drove in two runs for the Indians, who trailed, 6-1, after a six-run fourth that included Devon Travis’s first grand slam.PADRES 8, ROCKIES 6 Jedd Gyorko drove a two-run homer an estimated 438 feet, and Justin Upton and Derek Norris also hit two-run shots for host San Diego, which topped Colorado for a three-game sweep. Gyorko, whose .145 average relegated him to a platoon situation at second base, connected while pinch-hitting in the pitcher’s spot in the sixth inning. ORIOLES 4, RAYS 2 Adam Jones got four hits, including a tiebreaking single in the seventh inning, and the Orioles defeated Tampa Bay to win a series that was shifted to Tropicana Field from Camden Yards because of protests in Baltimore.Jimmy Paredes’s run-scoring double with two outs made it 2-all in the bottom of the seventh. Jones then delivered a two-run single, tying his career high for hits in a game.PHILLIES 6, MARLINS 2 Ryan Howard had two run-scoring hits, and the rookie Severino Gonzalez earned his first career victory to help visiting Philadelphia end a five-game losing streak by knocking off Miami. Howard drove in a run with his first triple since April 2014. He also had a run-scoring single and improved his average to .193.Advertisement