By PAT PICKENSMAY 3, 2015
It was hard enough for the Rangers to deal with Sidney Crosby in the first round of the postseason. They turned back Crosby and his Pittsburgh Penguins teammates in five games, but all four of the Rangers’ victories were by the same, taut 2-1 score, and two of them came in overtime. Crosby was a constant nemesis, and the Rangers were glad to say goodbye to him in the handshake line after Game 5 and move on.Except now, in the second round, the Rangers are dealing with someone who is just as dangerous as Crosby, but who is also bigger and tougher and, at times, almost seems like a cartoon character as he barrels through Rangers players trying to stop him somehow.In other words, Washington’s Alex Ovechkin is loudly making his presence known in this series, now tied at 1-1, and how the Rangers deal with him in the games ahead may very well determine if they can move past the Capitals to the Eastern Conference finals.Already, Ovechkin has two stunning goals, along with a final-seconds assist that enabled Washington to steal Game 1 at Madison Square Garden. When Ovechkin split through the Rangers’ top defensive duo, Ryan McDonagh and Dan Girardi, in the third period of Game 2 on Saturday afternoon and then, from his knees, rifled a top-corner shot past Henrik Lundqvist to narrow the Rangers’ lead to one goal, the Garden became quiet and a little nervous.AdvertisementWith nearly 10 minutes left in the game and while the Rangers were holding on, Ovechkin loomed in his No. 8 jersey, the way he will on Monday night when the series resumes in Washington.AdvertisementThe 29-year-old Ovechkin, who is listed at 6 feet 3 inches and 230 pounds, led the N.H.L. in goals this season with 53, the fifth time in his 10-year career that he has been the top scorer. Still, his first-year coach, Barry Trotz, said after Game 1 that for all the individual honors bestowed on Ovechkin over the years, he had developed “too much glide in his game” in past seasons, a diplomatic way of saying that Ovechkin, for all his size and power, wasn’t always going all out on the ice.“He’s won virtually every award you can win individually,” Trotz noted in his impromptu critique. “We’re going to benefit from it, because he’s done everything individually and now he wants to win something team-wise.”After relatively quick playoff exits for Ovechkin and Washington teammates every year from 2008 to 2013, and then after the Capitals missed the playoffs in 2014, Ovechkin has shown a desire to succeed this postseason. Entering Sunday, he led all players in shots through nine playoff games, with 38, and his 8 postseason points are tied for fourth. In Game 2 alone, he leveled nine hits on Rangers players, five of them in the first period.“Ovi is a big-time player, and sometimes it’s not what you get, it’s what you leave,” Trotz said after Game 2. “He’s leaving an impression on them physically and also with his skill level. He’s a force.”Trotz added, “He’s very similar to Mark Messier,” referring to the fearsome former Ranger captain who willed the Rangers to a Stanley Cup championship 21 years ago. “With his rare talents for playing a very heavy game, he can intimidate you with his speed, his skill and his talent.”All of those were on display in Game 1, which appeared to be headed to overtime, tied at a goal apiece. But Ovechkin took possession of the puck in the corner, skated toward the back of the Rangers’ goal and threw a blind pass to Joel Ward, who beat Lundqvist with just 1.3 seconds to go in regulation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Earlier in that game, Ovechkin had fired a laser shot past Rangers defenseman Dan Boyle and Lundqvist to give the Capitals a 1-0 lead. That margin held up for most of the game, but when the Rangers tied the score with under five minutes to go, Ovechkin found a way to answer.Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said that his club had been trying to take Ovechkin’s space away, to cramp his overwhelming style, but that it was “a real hard thing” to do.Advertisement“Obviously, he’s an elite player and he’s going to get some good looks,” Vigneault said. “We’re trying to limit the number he gets.”Trotz, speaking to reporters Sunday after Washington’s practice in Virginia, said: “The great thing about Ovi is even if you take his space away, he’s still going to make — obviously, the second goal yesterday, they took as much space away from him as they wanted, and he still got it done. Great players will do that.”Vigneault has been using the Girardi-McDonagh pair against Ovechkin and will no doubt continue to do so. If he scores another goal from his knees while they are doing their best to stop him — maybe next time, they will try to steal his stick — so be it.Trotz has tried to counter whatever Vigneault has been devising by occasionally double-shifting Ovechkin on other lines.And with the Capitals having the last line change during Games 3 and 4 in Washington, Trotz should find it easier to get Ovechkin away from some of the defenders that Vigneault wants to stalk him.“You got to see what they’re looking for in matchups,” Trotz said. “You see what they’re setting up. We may counter lineup-wise, or maybe in tactically what we’re trying to do. That’s sort of the chess match that goes on during the playoffs.”And Ovechkin is the biggest piece on the board.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Have Their Hands Full With Ovechkin .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.