By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 3, 2015
Obafemi Martins scored twice, Clint Dempsey had a goal and an assist, and the Seattle Sounders beat New York City F.C., 3-1, at Yankee Stadium on Sunday night.Seattle (5-2-1) won its third straight game, while N.Y.C.F.C. (1-5-3), in its first M.L.S. season, is winless in seven straight.Martins ran down a through ball and slotted a breakaway goal in the 23rd minute. He won another one-on-one battle with goalkeeper Josh Saunders in the 66th when he rolled in a goal after Dempsey’s clever back-heel pass.Seattle led, 1-0, at halftime. N.Y.C.F.C. has scored just one first-half goal this season.“First half, they were tough to break down,” Dempsey said. “They were pressing well; they were creating a lot of chances. But they were probably unlucky not to score.”AdvertisementN.Y.C.F.C.’s Mehdi Ballouchy tied the score in the 54th minute. After a Seattle turnover in its attacking end, N.Y.C.F.C. worked the ball ahead to Patrick Mullins on a counterattack. Mullins passed it back to the top of the 18-yard box, and Ballouchy found the upper left corner of the net.AdvertisementDempsey gave Seattle a 2-1 lead four minutes later. Martins’s individual effort on the left baseline gave him enough space to cross the ball to Marco Pappa, who drew the defense and found Dempsey for a slow rolling goal inside the far post.Late in the game, N.Y.C.F.C.’s Kwame Watson-Siriboe was given his second yellow card, for a high challenge with Martins. It was N.Y.C.F.C.’s second straight game with a red card.CHELSEA WINS LEAGUE TITLE Ending a five-year drought, Chelsea clinched the Premier League title with three games to spare, earning a 1-0 home victory over Crystal Palace.With only two losses in 35 games, Chelsea was rarely troubled in its pursuit of a fourth league title in 11 seasons, and the fifth in its 110-year history.“This is unbelievable,” the team’s captain, John Terry, said as blue and white streamers descended on the Stamford Bridge field. “We’ve worked so hard this year to get over the line. Today was a tough match, a little bit nervous, but we got over the line.”The title-winning goal came from the Belgian winger Eden Hazard, a week after he was honored by his fellow professionals with the Player of the Year Award.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The victory established an insurmountable 13-point lead and dethroned Manchester City, which has now failed in both of its title defenses since 2012 despite heavy investment from its Abu Dhabi ownership.Manchester City took sole possession of second place by beating host Tottenham, 1-0, on Sergio Agüero’s goal, which raised his league-leading total to 22.AdvertisementKEY WIN FOR VALENCIA Valencia eased to a 3-1 victory over visiting Eibar to strengthen its hold on Spain’s last Champions League berth. Center back Nicolás Otamendi was left unmarked and sent home José Gayà’s cross in the 25th minute to open the scoring.P.S.G. BACK IN FIRST Edinson Cavani scored his fourth goal in four games as P.S.G. won, 2-0, at Nantes to move 3 points clear of Lyon in the French title race.ROMA MOVES UP Roma overtook Lazio for the second spot in Italy’s Serie A with a 2-0 home win over Genoa. Lazio drew, 1-1, at relegation-threatened Atalanta.Fourth-place Napoli moved to 4 points behind Lazio and the final Champions League berth after it won, 3-0, at home against A.C. Milan.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page D9 of the New York edition with the headline: New York City F.C., Winless in 7 Straight, Falls to Seattle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.