AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzBOSTON — The day after General Manager Brian Cashman stated that the Yankees had no intention of paying Alex Rodriguez a $6 million bonus for tying Willie Mays for fourth place on the career home run list, Rodriguez did little more than shrug.“Family business,” he said. “Just happy to be playing baseball.”Cashman told reporters Saturday that the team’s contract with Rodriguez states that the Yankees “have the right but not the obligation to do something.”This was not a surprise for Rodriguez, since the Yankees had given him the same message in a February meeting and, in various ways, had let their position regarding the bonus be known before Cashman’s public pronouncement Saturday made it official.Still, Cashman’s statements raised the notion that the public détente that existed between Rodriguez and the Yankees in recent months might now begin to fray. On the other hand, Rodriguez clearly does not seem interested in any renewed verbal battles with team executives, the kind that became an almost daily occurrence two years ago.“That’s nowhere near where my energy is these days,” Rodriguez said before Sunday night’s game against the Red Sox, the first time he had spoken to the news media since Cashman’s comments.He added: “I’m just happy to be playing baseball, honestly. I’m in a good place. A year ago, I wouldn’t be dreaming to be talking to you guys about playing baseball and enjoying the game so much.”Since he arrived in spring training, Rodriguez has effortlessly deflected nearly every potential controversy with just-happy-to-be-here responses to many questions.When it was pointed out that this was a different approach from the past, Rodriguez concurred.“A hundred percent,” he said. “I’ve learned my lesson.”As he excused himself to prepare for the game, he was asked if “the old you” would have learned that lesson.“The old you is gone,” Rodriguez said. And then he was, too.BELTRAN IN, YOUNG OUT Chris Young had two more hits Saturday, including his sixth home run, and his batting average was up to .317, complementing his strong defense. But he found himself back on the bench at the start of Sunday’s game.In his place was Carlos Beltran, who has struggled to return to form after an injury-plagued 2014. Beltran is batting .181, though he did have two hits Friday night.“A lot of it has to do with pitch selection, which is the case a lot of times when hitters are struggling,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “I think there’s frustration — maybe he’s trying a little too hard. But I thought he was pretty relaxed the other day.”Girardi said it was not easy to keep Young in the lineup and against the right-hander Joe Kelly. Girardi was not going to sit Jacoby Ellsbury or Brett Gardner, who are the Yankees’ batting average leaders.“It’s difficult,” Girardi said. “We believe Carlos is a big part of our offense. Chris swung the bat — he had two hits yesterday again. But Carlos had two hits Friday night, too. I hope they get two hits every other day the rest of the year.”LAS VEGAS LETDOWN The Yankees gathered en masse at their hotel here Saturday night to watch the fight between Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Manny Pacquiao. If there were some boxing fans among the Yankees, there were not many fans of the fight, which Mayweather won in a unanimous 12-round decision.“It was terrible,” reliever Esmil Rogers said. “I thought they were going to fight a little more. I didn’t see any blood or anything.”“The fight itself was kind of boring,” added another reliever, Chasen Shreve, who grew up in Las Vegas, the site of the fight.Manager Joe Girardi was riveted by the preamble to the fight: the Los Angeles Clippers’ last-second Game 7 win over San Antonio Spurs. “Unbelievable,” Girardi said.Girardi did not watch the fight. It was past his bedtime.EXTRA BASESIVAN NOVA and CHRIS CAPUANO, recovering from injuries, pitched in extended spring training games Saturday in Tampa. Shortstop BRENDAN RYAN, who was in Tampa recovering from a calf injury, injured his hamstring Saturday.Advertisement