
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
MAY 3, 2015
BOSTON — When the baseball season ended at Fenway Park two Octobers ago, Koji Uehara threw the final pitch to David Ross. The winning pitcher was John Lackey, and the most valuable player of that World Series was David Ortiz. All of them were at least 35 years old.“I’ll take every single one of those guys, every time out,” said the Yankees’ Andrew Miller, a reliever for those champion Boston Red Sox. “Everybody wants to go so young, but young players generally have a long ways to go, a lot of things to figure out. Experience certainly has value. I think, right now, there’s a tendency to overlook that.”The Yankees got younger around the margins this off-season, but they remain, fundamentally, a team of players past their primes. That was enough for most analysts to dismiss them from serious consideration as a favorite in the American League East.Yet the Yankees hold a three-game division lead and have won five series in a row, including a weekend sweep of the Red Sox that ended with an 8-5 victory Sunday night. There are no great truths to be found in a sample of just 25 games, and baseball players, in the era of steroid testing, rarely play better in their 30s than they did in their 20s. But that might be missing the point.AdvertisementWhat if the Yankees’ older players still play well enough to win? Even if they never quite recapture who they were in their primes, could they at least be better than last season? Maybe. And that is a big reason the team is winning.Advertisement“Health is No. 1,” first baseman Mark Teixeira said. “I know if I can stay healthy throughout a long year that I’ll still be productive, and last year I wasn’t healthy much at all. That’s what I’m aiming for this year.”Teixeira, 35, said his swing was back to normal after two years of wrist problems, and he ripped his ninth home run of the season in the top of the first inning Sunday. He entered the game with one hit in his last 21 at-bats, but as with Alex Rodriguez, who entered Sunday with six homers, a low batting average could be forgiven because of his run production.The Yankees (16-9) have hit 33 home runs; only one A.L. team, the surging Houston Astros, have hit more. The batters at the top of the order, Jacoby Ellsbury and Brett Gardner, each have an on-base percentage of .400 or better.“Jacoby and Gardner have set the table for the middle of their lineup really well,” Red Sox Manager John Farrell said. “They’ve really made them go, those two.”Before that, Farrell cited the Yankees’ relievers, who entered the game leading the majors in strikeouts and opponents’ batting average. Miller and Dellin Betances had not allowed an earned run across 27 innings.“The pitching staff is probably the biggest deal,” Yankees outfielder Chris Young said. “The back-end bullpen guys, I think that plays a big part in how you feel as the game’s progressing. If you’re up or down a couple of runs, do you feel like you’re still in the game? If you’re up by three runs but you’re still not really sure if you have a hold on the game yet, you start to press, and things happen.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Young was an All-Star for Arizona in 2010, when he was 26. He may never reach that level again, but he has hit well for the Yankees and is almost an everyday player. Manager Joe Girardi has found a way to get 10 players at least 70 plate appearances each, an important skill with a veteran roster.Young was out of Sunday’s starting lineup, but even after a pinch-hit strikeout, he was hitting .313 with six homers and 12 runs batted in. He offered no reason for his improvement from recent seasons other than the comfort of playing for the Yankees, with whom he enjoys the daily grind.Advertisement“I have no clue who’s pitching tomorrow,” Young said. “I’m really just trying to stay in the moment.”The moments have mostly been fun since a listless 1-4 beginning. The Yankees recovered before their bad start could bury them. Girardi said the elements for success were always there.“With the way our bullpen is, if we get in close games, you feel pretty good,” Girardi said. “You score a few runs, you’re going to win.”The Baltimore Orioles ran away with the East last season, and there is plenty of time for some team to do the same this year. But no division is as tightly packed from top to bottom so far.Miller, 29, who has pitched for three A.L. East teams, insists it is still the most competitive division. He signed with the Yankees largely because they gave him the contract he sought (four years, $36 million) but also because he believed in their construction.Yes, the Yankees were outscored in each of the last two seasons. But could it be that all they needed was better luck?All has not gone well, of course. Masahiro Tanaka is on the disabled list, Didi Gregorius has been unsteady at shortstop, and Carlos Beltran has shown few signs of life. The bullpen has been heavily taxed, too; entering Sunday, only the Texas Rangers had used their relievers for more innings than the Yankees.But so far, Miller’s reasoning seems sound.“Last year it seemed like they battled through a lot of stuff, and they still had a good team,” he said. “You figured if things don’t go like last year — if things just go normal — the pieces were here to win a lot of games.”A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Behind the Yanks: Their Best Days, and A.L. East Foes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »