By SCOTT CACCIOLAMAY 3, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  On Saturday night, after nearly three hours of unscripted theater, Chris Paul wore an unconventional ensemble to his news conference.From the waist up, Paul was business casual: black jacket over a white shirt, which he accented with a black hat. Carmelo Anthony, a friend and fellow headwear aficionado, would have been proud.But from the waist down, Paul revealed what he had endured against the San Antonio Spurs. He was still wearing basketball shorts, and ice packs encased his left leg. An epic first-round series was over, the Clippers having prevailed in seven games thanks to Paul’s game-winning shot with a second left, and he had nothing to hide.“I’m going to get with my training staff,” he said, “and I know my grandmother back in North Carolina is praying right now. She’s praying, and she’ll let my Mom pray over it, too.”AdvertisementIt was a victory worth celebrating. But Paul, after playing with a strained left hamstring for the final three quarters, was already acknowledging the hard truth — that he and the Clippers had about 48 hours to recover for Monday’s opener against the Houston Rockets in the Western Conference semifinals.AdvertisementThe playoffs are ruthless, especially in the high-octane West — and most especially for the Clippers, whose reward for finishing the regular season with 56 victories was two weeks on a trapeze against the defending champion Spurs. The cumulative score after seven games? Spurs 724, Clippers 721.“Both teams competed their butts off,” said Gregg Popovich, the coach of the Spurs.The Clippers did more than survive. Led by Paul, they showed toughness and resolve, and after decades of futility as the N.B.A.’s resident laughingstock, the Clippers made a statement on Saturday about their future. Ousting the Spurs, long the league’s standard for excellence, only underscored the significance of their 111-109 victory.“I think if we had won this series against someone else, we probably would have been happy, obviously,” said Doc Rivers, the coach of the Clippers. “But playing against them, it’s like being taught during a competition on how to act, how to play and how to trust.”That trust was apparent when Paul left for the locker room late in the first quarter after he felt a pull in his left hamstring dribbling the ball up the court. In his absence, role players like Jamal Crawford and Glen Davis (who had sprained his left ankle in Game 6) were able to sustain the Clippers and prevent the Spurs from building a lead.Once Paul returned, he was magnificent. Despite playing with a noticeable limp, he struck a balance between creating opportunities for teammates and taking advantage of scoring chances when they presented themselves. He finished with 27 points and 6 assists, and shot 9 of 13 from the field in 37 minutes. He was 5 of 6 from the 3-point line.In the afterglow of his game-winner, a runner over the outstretched arm of Tim Duncan that caromed off the glass, Paul moved from hug to hug. He started by hugging the actor Billy Crystal, a longtime fan who had stuck with the team through its many struggles. He hugged Steve Ballmer, the team’s effervescent owner. He also hugged his brother, C. J.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That’s my ace, my road dog,” Chris Paul said. “He’s the guy who, when I’m missing shots, is on the baseline talking junk to me.”Then again, motivation was not terribly difficult for Paul to find in this series. He is one of the league’s top point guards, his bona fides unquestioned by now. But the playoffs have been a consistent nemesis. Since turning pro in 2007, Paul has made seven trips to the postseason but has never advanced beyond the conference semifinals.AdvertisementThe Spurs were a familiar obstacle. San Antonio bounced Paul from the playoffs in 2008, when he was a member of the New Orleans Hornets, and again in 2012, when he was in his first season with the Clippers. Last season, the Oklahoma City Thunder eliminated the Clippers in the conference semifinals.At the time, the Clippers were coping with the fallout from the removal of Donald Sterling as the team’s owner, after Sterling was found to have made racist statements. The team’s premature exit was particularly hard on Paul.But the Clippers were able to approach this season free of distractions, with a new owner in place. They just wanted to play basketball, and Paul appeared in all 82 regular-season games.Paul said he had trouble sleeping Friday night, and then his body betrayed him in Game 7. When he returned in the second quarter, he left an impression on everyone.“I don’t really know what to say to be honest,” the Clippers’ Blake Griffin said. “There’s not really a good word that comes to mind. To be injured like that — when he came back, I was like: ‘Man, what can you do? Can you do anything? And he’s like, ‘We’ll see.’ ”On Sunday, the Clippers listed Paul as questionable for Game 1 against the Rockets. The Clippers are not a deep team even when Paul has two functional legs. But these Clippers are not the same as the old Clippers, and while Paul has made sure of that, they also have the Spurs to thank.“Just the grind of this series, it has to make you better,” Rivers said. “I don’t know how, but it has to when you go through something like this.”A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Clippers and Paul Survive the Spurs With Trust, Toughness and Resolve .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.