By HOWARD MEGDALMAY 3, 2015
Ali Krieger has a lot on her plate this year. As a defender for the United States women’s national team, she is weeks away from the start of her second World Cup. And as one of the most prominent members of the National Women’s Soccer League, she is helping build an audience for her team and the fledgling league.On April 10, though, those roles were jeopardized when Krieger, playing for the Washington Spirit in an N.W.S.L. game at Houston, sustained a concussion after rising for a header.“Right when it happened, I had no idea why I was lying on the ground and why people were standing over me,” Krieger said by telephone last week. “And people were talking to me — I couldn’t really open my eyes at first. I was like, ‘Is this a dream?’ ”Krieger said that she lost consciousness before hitting the ground and that when she woke up, even as she lay on the grass, she quickly tried to diagnose the injury.AdvertisementKrieger said she believed the concussion was minor — certainly less serious than one she sustained in 2013 that took her a couple of months to recover from. But injuries like hers and the ones sustained by several other players in high-profile cases have troubled concussion activists. They say that despite clear progress in the recognition and treatment of head injuries in soccer, it is often up to the injured athlete or that athlete’s coach to determine when an injury requires removal from play. In the worst cases, the time remaining in a match and the score play a role in the decision.AdvertisementThe ESPN analyst Taylor Twellman, a former striker whose playing career was ended by head injuries, has been a vocal advocate on television and social media for better treatment of head injuries. But given the pressure to succeed at the game’s top levels, he said in an email, “I’m scared of what I still hear in 2015.”Mandatory stoppages and temporary substitutions have been proposed and discussed by FIFA, soccer’s world governing body. But in the absence of strict rules throughout the sport, treatment continues to vary widely.In Krieger’s case, the Spirit’s medical staff followed the N.W.S.L.’s return-to-play protocol, and in the weeks since, her doctors have worked with those from the Spirit and U.S. Soccer to track her recovery.“Every single year, we take a baseline test,” Krieger said. “So when I came back to D.C., we did an impact test and compared it to the baseline test I’d taken this year. And I did really well on it. So I figured once the pressure’s gone — I had no headaches — in a week or two, I figured I should be O.K. and be able to start training again.”Krieger did resume training last week with the Spirit, wearing a red shirt to remind her teammates to avoid making contact with her, but she said was still not ready for game action. She has since left the Spirit to join the national team as it prepares for the World Cup, where she is expected to be a starter when the tournament begins in June.Still, even a month after her injury, Krieger knows she cannot be certain that there will be no setbacks. She has spoken with Twellman and other players who had to retire because of head injuries but acknowledged, “No one really knows how to deal with a concussion.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She added: “The only way I can explain it is, it’s kind of like a snow globe you shake up. You have to wait until all the stuff falls and just rests. At the start, it’s a mess, and you have to wait. And right now, I’m feeling like the pieces are all settled and I can get back to training.”Soccer and other sports continue to rely on injured athletes to convey their conditions to trainers and doctors, even as their competitive instincts push them to return the field. A stage like the World Cup can be tough to leave.Advertisement“If you took M.R.I.s of our bodies,” Krieger said, “I’m sure you’d find little fractures, things we don’t even realize because we’re conditioned to just push through it. We grow up like that. We figure out a way to just tape it up. We’re so used to it, and so competitive, that we don’t want to sit out.”But even when players are willing and able to assess their health truthfully, the system is not perfect. Asked if he remembered whether a coach or a doctor ever told him to play when he should not have, Twellman said, “Of course I do.”Still, he added, “I have to ask myself, ‘Was I completely honest with the trainers during the process, too?’ ”The former national team star Michelle Akers, who had to leave the 1999 World Cup final with a head injury, said in an email, “I had many ‘small’ concussions that I played through not knowing they were concussions, and the team docs and staff would never have been able to know either based on symptoms or sideline tests.”Often, safety improvements follow grisly on-field events. But as Krieger pointed out, soccer has had plenty of scary moments.“If you ask a player, ‘Forget about your concussion; forget about your ankle,’ and leave it up to the player, he’ll always want to play and then make it worse,” Krieger said. “So I think it’s also the job of the coach, of the doctors, to say: ‘No. You’re going to be sitting out. You’re going to take it easy, and we’re going to follow the protocol.’“Because sometimes it has to be that. Sometimes it has to come from above.”A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page D9 of the New York edition with the headline: Competitive Environment Complicates Decisions About Head Injuries .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.