By SETH BERKMANMAY 3, 2015
A week and a half ago, the Mets were the hottest team in baseball, having won 11 straight games. Citi Field was shedding its longstanding reputation for being desolate for much of April, attracting boisterous fans who, having been roused from their hibernation, were championing the ballpark as the home of the best pitching staff in the major leagues.But after a four-game series with the Nationals in which the Mets lost three times, including a second consecutive 1-0 loss at home on Sunday, the road to the National League East pennant still appears likely to go through Washington.Although the defeat did not knock the Mets out of first place — they are three and a half games ahead of Atlanta and Miami and four ahead of Washington — they have lost five of their last six games. They have also dropped 17 of their last 19 home games against the Nationals, dating to 2013.“Anytime you don’t win in your division, it’s missed opportunities,” left fielder Michael Cuddyer said. “But at the same time, it’s not like those guys are cakewalks over there. That’s a good team, good pitching.”AdvertisementThe Mets’ pitchers remain their best asset, and Sunday’s starter, Dillon Gee, gave the team a chance to win even as his accuracy was off.AdvertisementThe Mets’ offense, however, was unable to solve Nationals starter Doug Fister, who allowed five hits in his six and a third innings, and the Mets finished the game 0 for 7 with runners in scoring position, with Lucas Duda and Cuddyer striking out swinging to strand runners on second and third in the eighth inning.Gee fell to 0-2, walking five and allowing six hits. He left the game after loading the bases with no outs in the sixth, but Alex Torres struck out the next three batters to keep the score at 1-0.“I feel like almost from the first inning today, it was kind of like, this is going to be a battle,” Gee said, adding that he did not feel as good as he had during his last start, when he allowed one run in seven and two-thirds innings against the Marlins.The Mets’ recent struggles to drive in runs have been compounded by the continuation of a problem that arose in spring training: substandard middle- infield defense, particularly at shortstop.Ruben Tejada was given a second straight start at shortstop on Sunday to allow the usual starter, Wilmer Flores, to “get his mind straight,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said before the game.Tejada, while less of a threat offensively than Flores, is considered more sure-handed in the field. But a costly early miscue had Gee working from behind all afternoon.After Denard Span led off the game with a walk, Yunel Escobar hit a grounder to Mets second baseman Dilson Herrera, who made a clean throw to Tejada for the forceout. Tejada, though, did not cleanly transfer the ball from his glove, and his delayed throw to first base could not complete the double play. Escobar later scored on a broken-bat single by Ryan Zimmerman.AdvertisementTejada said after the game that the ball stuck in his hand momentarily and he could not find a grip.Sunday’s lineup change will not be permanent, Collins indicated. But with Flores having committed seven errors in his first 21 games of the season, including one in each of his last three starts, Collins felt Flores would benefit from some time off. (The Mets do not play Monday.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m not just really thinking about anything,” Flores said. “I was just watching the game and trying to clear my mind.”Cuddyer, who made a leaping grab at the left-field wall to rob Zimmerman of a home run in the fourth, said the day off would be beneficial for the entire team.“Everybody can get recharged, refreshed,” Cuddyer said, adding that players would also have a good opportunity to realize the Mets were “still on top of the division right now.”“There’s no reason to press,” he said.Lately, though, in an effort to jump-start their offense, the Mets have been swinging at balls out of the strike zone, including pitches in the dirt with two strikes in the count. This series against Washington included little evidence that the team could consistently score on the Nationals’ pitchers, who outpitched their Mets counterparts.The Mets tallied two runs on Thursday against Stephen Strasburg but could not score again. On Friday, they were clinging to a 1-0 lead in the late innings; Nationals left fielder Jayson Werth then misplayed a fly ball in the eighth that led to three runs and an eventual 4-0 Mets victory.“This isn’t just one or two guys,” Collins said. “We’ve got to put some better swings on the ball throughout the lineup.”The Mets opened the season by taking two of three at Washington, which was missing three important position players: Werth, Danny Espinosa and Span. The Nationals’ pitchers still gave up only four earned runs in that series (10 total runs).The Mets are trying not to let their recent disappointments linger even though the path to a division crown may not be as easy as it appeared a couple of weeks ago.“You’re not going to beat them every single time you play them,” Cuddyer said. “That’s the nature of the business. The other side of it is, we only lost, 1-0, the last two days. So we were right there in the game. One big hit here, one big hit there, we win those games.”A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Quiet Bats and a Flub Send the Mets to Another Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.