AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressAfter resting up for the past week, the Washington Wizards merely had to withstand the Atlanta Hawks’ early pace.Once the Hawks ran out of gas, Bradley Beal and the Wizards took control in Atlanta.Beal shook off a sprained ankle to score 28 points, and the streaking Wizards remained unbeaten in the postseason by defeating the top-seeded Hawks, 104-98, on Sunday in Game 1 of their Eastern Conference semifinal series.It was another gritty performance by the Wizards, who improved to 8-1 on the road in the playoffs over the last two postseasons, including a 3-0 record this year. Washington became the first team in N.B.A. history to win four straight Game 1 matchups on the road.“Just withstanding adversity,” said the Wizards’ John Wall, who had 18 points and 13 assists. “We know they’re going to come out and give us a punch right away.” Taking advantage of a week off since their sweep of Toronto, the Wizards wore down the Hawks in the fourth quarter.Otto Porter scored a couple of big baskets coming down the stretch for Washington, including a 3-pointer, and Marcin Gortat sealed the win with a lay-in off a pass from Wall with 14.6 seconds remaining.“We kept talking about it’s a long game,” Washington Coach Randy Wittman said. “We got better and better and better.” The Hawks needed six games to beat the eighth-seeded Nets and had to open this best-of-seven series with about a 36-hour turnaround. After racing to a 37-26 lead after the first quarter on Sunday, Atlanta struggled in the fourth.Even with plenty of good looks, the Hawks hit only 5 of 28 (17.9 percent) in the final period, including 1 of 10 from beyond the 3-point arc.Game 2 is Tuesday night in Atlanta.“Our pace was better in the first half,” the Hawks’ Al Horford said. “Maybe in the second half, we were just tired or whatever.”The frustration for the home team was epitomized by one crucial possession with just over two minutes to go. The Hawks kept giving themselves extra chances, hustling for five offensive rebounds. But they missed six straight shots before the Wizards finally grabbed possession, the crowd groaning louder with each ball that clanked off the rim.“I had a couple of tips that just came out,” Horford said. “I couldn’t believe it. I think that was the key point of the game.”DeMarre Carroll had another big game for Atlanta with 24 points, but 21 came in the opening half and he went scoreless over the final quarter. He had plenty of company. Horford made only 7 of 19 shots, Kyle Korver was 5 of 15, and Jeff Teague went 4 of 14.Beal hobbled off the court with a sprained right ankle after landing on Horford’s foot with 8 minutes 8 seconds remaining. He went to the locker room to get it taped and returned to finish out a superb performance at both ends.In addition to tying his career scoring high in the playoffs, Beal grabbed seven rebounds and did a good job shadowing Korver at the 3-point line. Korver, Atlanta’s long-range specialist, made only 3 of 11 from beyond the arc.Paul Pierce had 19 points for the Wizards, and Drew Gooden provided some key minutes off the bench, finishing with 12 points.WARRIORS 101, GRIZZLIES 86  Stephen Curry had 22 points and 7 assists, and host Golden State wore down undermanned Memphis in Game 1 of the Western Conference semifinals.Klay Thompson added 18 points and Draymond Green scored 16 to help the top-seeded Warriors roll to their 21st straight victory at raucous Oracle Arena.The Warriors led by 9 points at the half and by 20 late in the third quarter, and they never let the Grizzlies build any momentum in the fourth.Game 2 of the best-of-seven series is Tuesday night in Oakland.Marc Gasol had 21 points and 9 rebounds, and Zach Randolph finished with 20 points and 9 rebounds for a Memphis team missing point guard Mike Conley.Conley sat on the bench in a suit, his left eye still swollen, as he continued to recover from surgery to repair broken bones in his face.It is unclear when, or if, Conley will play in the series.Curry, the favorite for most valuable player, got off to a slow start before joining the sweet-shooting performance Golden State put on in front of its home crowd.The Warriors shot 50.6 percent, including 46.4 percent from 3-point range (13 of 28), to keep the fans roaring all afternoon. Memphis shot 45.2 percent but was just 3 of 12 (25 percent) from beyond the arc.Curry pushed the pace from start to finish, and the Grizzlies never could slow Golden State down. The Warriors went ahead by 16 in the second quarter and looked ready to rout the road team early.That would have to wait.The Grizzlies charged back behind their big physical frontcourt of Randolph and Gasol to slice the deficit to 7, but Curry came back with a couple of 3-pointers to put the Warriors up by 61-52 at the half.Advertisement