By HUW RICHARDSMAY 3, 2015
TWICKENHAM, England — Even after they made history, it will be business as usual Monday for the players of Toulon, who won the European club championship.“Of course we will be happy and celebrate,” said Toulon Coach Bernard Laporte after his team became the first club to win three straight European crowns with a 24-18 victory over Clermont Auvergne on Saturday. “But Monday it is back to work. There is still more to look forward to, with still three games in the Top 14.”If that said something about the demands of the rugby calendar, it was also a glimpse of the relentless quality that has underpinned Toulon’s ascent to Continental dominance. Saturday’s win was its ninth straight in European playoffs, and it offered no evidence of why Toulon would stop winning anytime soon.Toulon was not quite the irresistible force of last season, when it crushed Saracens in the final in Cardiff, Wales, by a score of 23-6. This year’s victory demanded different qualities, as Clermont started on fire and took an early lead.AdvertisementClermont came close to scoring a try in the first minute and built a quick six-point lead with two penalty goals. It led, 11-3, after 25 minutes, following a brilliant try by its French national team center, Wesley Fofana. He gathered the ball about 40 yards from the Toulon line after the Clermont scrumhalf Morgan Parra blocked a kick from Sébastien Tillous-Borde, and then Fofana smoothly accelerated clear of the defense before diving over in the corner.Advertisement“When they missed the conversion, I thought ‘We are going to win,”’ Laporte said of Clermont’s failure to add the two extra points. After that, Toulon began to impose itself physically.“At this level you pay cash for the slightest error. They are a very big team, physically stronger than us,” Parra said after the game. “They know how to score and we made small mistakes, which brought them back into the game.”Two penalties by Toulon’s Leigh Halfpenny cut the margin to 11-9, but Clermont still held the lead as the clock neared halftime.Rugby is, as the Welsh legend Gerald Davies said, “a game of calculated risks.” Unfortunately for Clermont, its English fullback Nick Abendanon, a gifted risk-taker, got his calculation wrong. The safe thing would have been to kick to touch and take that two-point lead to the locker room.Instead he chipped ahead. Toulon’s powerful back row forward, Chris Masoe, fielded the ball inside his own half, then shrugged off Abendanon’s tackle and launched a counterattack that ended with the rhinoceros-like center Mathieu Bastareaud driving between two defenders to score. Halfpenny added the conversion, and Clermont trailed, 16-11, at the break, a lead it never overcame.Abendanon made some amends with a superb solo score of his own midway through the second half, chipping so artfully over the Toulon defense that he was able to gather and score without anyone’s getting near him.That brought Clermont back to within a point, but the contest was settled with 11 minutes left when Toulon wing Drew Mitchell shrugged off half a dozen tackles to score after a jinking, swerving run.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I have never loved an Australian so much as I loved Drew Mitchell when he scored that try,” Toulon’s veteran forward Ali Williams, a New Zealander, told Sky Sports television.AdvertisementClermont attacked to the end, but without ever convincing that it was capable of stopping Toulon from winning.“The effort was there; it was just the execution,” Clermont’s center Jonathan Davies told Sky Sports. “This is a huge disappointment. We have to get silverware for this town.”The loss meant Clermont joined two other French clubs, Biarritz and Stade Français, in having lost two finals without winning one. But it will keep on coming back as it did in its domestic league, Top 14, where it finally won a title in 2010 after three straight losses in the finals.France dominated in the first year of a revamped tournament, after it went from 24 to 20 teams and changed its name from the Heineken Cup to the European Rugby Champions Cup.Irish clubs did far worse this season, though, with only Leinster reaching the playoffs. It lost to Toulon in the semifinals.Both Welsh clubs were eliminated early in the tournament this season, and it is likely that only one team, Ospreys, will qualify for next season. The decision of Wales center Jamie Roberts to sign with the English club Harlequins, rather than return to the Cardiff Blues next season, a decision announced Saturday, underscored the challenges facing Welsh rugby.England grabbed the consolation prize with Gloucester’s 19-13 win over Edinburgh on Friday in the final of the second-tier European Challenge Cup. Its clubs continue to bemoan the financial clout of the French clubs, but one off-field factor should help it close the gap: the British pound has risen more than 10 percent against the euro in the last year.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.