By ROB HUGHESMAY 3, 2015
LONDON —  There are two ways to prepare for this week’s Champions League semifinals — the Spanish way, and the way the rest of Europe does it.In Spain, where the domestic title is going down to the wire, both Barcelona and Real Madrid were obliged to put out the best teams they could Saturday to sweat out games played in the upper 80s in Andalusia.Barcelona toiled for over 40 minutes before it opened up and beat last-place Córdoba, 8-0.Real then stepped into the oven of Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán Stadium, where Sevilla had not lost since February 2014. Madrid won thanks to a hat trick from Cristiano Ronaldo, but it had to fiercely defend until the final seconds to hang on to a 3-2 victory.Ronaldo and company have a few days to cool down before they travel to Turin, Italy, to play Juventus on Tuesday in the first leg of their Champions League semifinal. Juventus was able to rest key players as it won Saturday at Sampdoria and neatly tied up the Italian championship for the fourth year running.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Barcelona will face its own past in the form of Pep Guardiola, who will be returning to the Camp Nou stadium, where he served as a youth player, a captain and a coach. Guardiola is now in charge at Bayern Munich, which, with the Bundesliga title already in its pocket, fielded a largely reserve team in losing, 2-0, at Bayer Leverkusen.AdvertisementSo, which is better, to strain every muscle for a league win or take your foot off the pedal and preserve your top players for the Champions League?The coming days will tell. The Spanish duo still have tough opponents in the coming weeks — Valencia versus Real and Atlético Madrid against Barcelona — and a slip might decide the title.Their German and Italian foes can preserve their energy, with European competition the only thing on their minds.This in a way contradicts the past, when La Liga was a two-horse race between Barcelona and Real. Nowadays, Atlético, Sevilla and Valencia — all still chasing Champions League qualification for next season — are far from pushovers.There are new financial backers from Singapore and China helping to drive Valencia and Atlético. Ever- resourceful Sevilla is enjoying money from Visit Malaysia’s sponsorship of its jerseys. And it looks as if, starting next year, there is going to be more equitable sharing of television revenues among the Liga clubs after Barcelona and Real have enjoyed a near- monopoly of it.So it is game on in La Liga, and time to see whether Spain can dominate the Champions League again, as it did last year.The fact that Barcelona thrashed Getafe, 6-0, four days before it played in Córdoba did not indicate the Andalusian club would be easy pickings. It speaks to the ruthlessness with which Barça, now coached by Luis Enrique, is able to turn all its passing into firepower.It helps that the Catalans, banned by FIFA from adding players after last summer, decided to gamble and add Luis Suárez to their already extraordinary duo of Lionel Messi and Neymar.AdvertisementThe trio has shared 108 goals in all competitions so far this season.  Messi, as usual,is ahead with 51 goals (and 26 assists). But on Saturday, Suárez — who is still finding out what it means to play in Barcelona’s pass-and-move system — celebrated his first hat trick in the club.The most telling moment of Saturday’s sacking of hapless Córdoba, though, was when Messi eschewed a chance to complete his own hat trick by taking a penalty kick after Neymar was knocked over.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Neymar hadn’t scored in the game, and when the Brazilian asked to take the penalty, Messi gave him the ball with a smile.One wonders if Cristiano Ronaldo, Messi’s perennial opponent for the trophy given to the top striker in Spain, would have been so magnanimous?Ronaldo has been less than friendly to his Madrid colleagues of late when they were scoring and he was not.That was always likely to be temporary, and in Seville, Ronaldo scored all Real’s goals. His first two fed on his poaching instinct as he nicked the ball past the keeper from a few yards away.Sevilla had given Ronaldo the space to score because its coach, Unai Emery, who usually gets decisions right, chose to play on a man short for seven minutes while his medical staff tried to stem the blood seeping from the broken nose of Grzegorz Krychowiak. The Pole had collided in midair with Sergio Ramos and had to wear a protective mask when he returned.By then, his team was two goals down, but Sevilla had rallied from two goals down to tie its game against Barcelona last month. There was hope of a repeat performance of that after Ramos, just seconds before halftime, hacked down Sevilla’s Aleix Vidal.AdvertisementNot only was Ramos’s tackle mistimed, it was irresponsible, because at least three other defenders stood between Vidal and the goal. Carlos Bacca converted the penalty kick with aplomb for Sevilla.That wild tackle gave us something we seldom see: Real Coach Carlo Ancelotti losing his temper and yelling at Ramos from the sideline.It was game on, and Madrid was obliged to throw everything it had at the contest and brought on Gareth Bale as a substitute, even though he recently suffered a calf strain. Bale’s precision helped to create a chance for Ronaldo, who rose mightily beyond the far post to direct a world-class looping header over the goalkeeper.But Sevilla, down 3-1, still would not let up. Driven on by Éver Banega and José Antonio Reyes, it tore into Madrid. Vicente Iborra side-footed in one goal, and the game finished with Real goalkeeper Iker Casillas riding his luck and stretching his agility to the limit.There is little time to rest, let alone train, before the Champions League. The Spaniards should be match-tight, but their opponents will be relaxed and waiting.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.