AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirEarly on, it appeared that the HBO/Showtime broadcast of the welterweight title fight between Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Manny Pacquiao would sink under a sea of hype and celebrity gazing. The host, James Brown, sounded overwhelmed by the atmosphere and marketing when, soon after 9 p.m. Eastern, he said, “This is the Super Bowl, the World Series, Final Four, World Cup and Kentucky Derby all rolled into one 12-round fight.”Then there were the constant sightings of stars at the MGM Grand Garden Arena — including Mary J. Blige, Michael Jordan, Bradley Cooper and Mark Wahlberg — that culminated with a lingering shot of Jay Z and Beyoncé near ringside and this certification of celebrity by HBO’s Jim Lampley: “Royalty from all walks of life.”Two retired tennis monarchs, Andre Agassi and Steffi Graf, were perfectly placed to be seen through the bout.The announcers who called the Mayweather-Pacquiao fight, which was preceded by two lopsided featherweight bouts that roused no one in the arena, did not succumb to hyperbole. You sensed that despite the popularity of Pacquiao, they thought Mayweather would do what he always does: use his scintillating defensive skills to win.The pleasant surprise was how well Al Bernstein, the Showtime analyst, worked with Lampley. They were so engaging together that fight fans should wish for more joint broadcasts — or for Bernstein to defect to HBO. But more about that later.The bout did not start until nearly midnight because pay-TV providers around the country were overwhelmed by the demand for the broadcast, which cost fans upward of $100. When the fight should have been starting, Lampley told the audience that he had received the signal that “so many people are ordering that they need more time to deal with the traffic.”What ensued was the equivalent of rain- delay programming inside an arena: an interview with Magic Johnson; a canned profile of Pacquiao; and a discussion about Al Haymon, Mayweather’s adviser and the mastermind of the burst of new boxing events on various broadcast and cable networks.The delay was as maddening as it was unnecessary. Anyone paying attention already knew that record pay-per-view purchases had been predicted, and that estimates ran to more than three million. That should have led to better preparation for all pay-TV providers and anyone else involved in distributing the fight. If they could not fulfill orders fast enough, something was wrong with the technology. Yes, fans were encouraged to order early, even before the production went on the air. Doing so worked for me, but not for everybody, given the number of people complaining on Twitter. I ordered successfully in Queens, but a friend in Westchester, also a Time Warner subscriber, did not have the same luck.And some people, maybe the smartest ones among us, boasted on social media that they were not going to succumb by paying the record pay-per-view price. Others sought illegal video streams. And some used Twitter’s Periscope streaming app.“I was a pirate last night,” William Mericle wrote on Twitter, “watching the fight via #Periscope streams w/chatty hosts, shaky cams and crying babies.” Another user wrote, “I watched the Pacquiao-Mayweather fight on #Periscope and saw the future.”Dick Costolo, Twitter’s chief executive, clucked about the triumph of his app, which lets people post live video feeds, posting, “And the winner is ... @periscopeco.”When the Mayweather-Pacquiao fight finally began, those able to watch it saw a very good production. Bernstein and, to a lesser extent, Roy Jones Jr. of HBO provided some excellent analysis, particularly in describing how Mayweather was thwarting Pacquiao’s strategy to overwhelm his opponent with torrents of punches. In the ninth round, Lampley distilled their commentary into the rationale for Pacquiao’s eventual loss by unanimous decision: “You have to fight twice as fast as Floyd Mayweather. That’s what Pacquiao knew he had to do but hasn’t done for most of the fight.”What was apparent throughout the broadcast was Bernstein’s ability to communicate his boxing knowledge easily and clearly and engage in a friendly conversation with Lampley.Lampley can call a fight alone — he easily combines blow-by-blow with analysis — but he benefited from working with Bernstein. The two had worked together in film and television but had never been partners on a fight. The fast-talking Lampley and the easygoing Bernstein had immediate chemistry.Jones, one of Lampley’s regular HBO analysts (along with Max Kellerman, who served as a reporter Saturday night), struggled to have his voice clearly understood. The audio made it difficult to hear him. But Jones, a former champion, knows better the rhythms of a fight and what can happen in a ring. During one of Pacquiao’s best attacks, Jones warned, “Floyd Mayweather is still very dangerous and still looking for the kill.”It was reasonable, then, to believe that if Pacquiao could break through Mayweather’s defensive shields, he could win. But Jones knew that it was early and that Mayweather had spent a career avoiding getting hurt or being outfoxed.The on-screen production was strong, particularly the jarring corner close-ups and the super-slow-motion replays and graphics that Bernstein used to describe strategy. In the 11th round, he ably voiced over the replay by saying, “Mayweather coming forward, using his jab as a range finder to land a right on the side of Manny’s head.”Strong as the video was, the sound from the corners was not nearly as good.The exhortations for Mayweather to be more aggressive from his father and trainer, Floyd Mayweather Sr., were often too faint to be easily heard, even though it appeared that the elder Mayweather was shouting. And little of what was said by Freddie Roach, Pacquiao’s trainer, was clear. Sometimes, what the trainers say is more illuminating than the commentary from the announcers. Email: sandor@nytimes.comAdvertisement