AdvertisementSupported byBlue Jays 3, Yankees 1By Billy WitzTORONTO — In the middle of April, with the Yankees off to a dispiriting start to the season, Brett Gardner arrived at the visitors’ clubhouse at Tampa Bay with several days of stubble, knowing he had to shave before someone tapped him on the shoulder with a reminder that the Yankees had a no-beard policy.Then Gardner, a Yankee since he entered the majors, had an impulse.“I told McCann maybe I should leave my mustache, and he said, ‘Yeah, I think you should,’ ” Gardner said, referring to catcher Brian McCann. “So I did.”Gardner’s barely discernible wisps of hair remained on his upper lip, and as they continued to grow, so did the Yankees’ win total. By the time they had completed that series against the Rays — their first sweep at Tampa Bay in a decade — a movement had been born.The mustaches have since become as contagious as the Yankees’ winning, with most players sprouting some sort of growth.They appeared poised to carry the momentum across the border Monday, and they took a lead in the seventh inning, but their usually infallible bullpen failed to hold it. The Yankees ended up with their fourth loss in 17 games, a 3-1 defeat against the Toronto Blue Jays, who scored all their runs in the eighth.An Edwin Encarnacion double off Dellin Betances tied the score, and the Blue Jays pushed across two more runs as the Yankees’ Chase Headley made a diving stop of a Russell Martin grounder down the third-base line but first baseman Garrett Jones could not corral Headley’s one-hop throw.“In the moment, you go from extremely fired up to dejected a little bit,” Headley said. “You think you make a great play and you’re going to get out of a big spot; then it doesn’t go your way.”Jones said, “It’s a pick I should have made, and it’s upsetting that I didn’t.”Betances, who had entered the game after Chris Martin had allowed two singles, surrendered his first run of the season. The loss ruined an outstanding performance by Chase Whitley, who was making his second start since replacing the injured Masahiro Tanaka in the rotation. He allowed six hits in seven innings with no walks and six strikeouts, escaping two severe jams.The Yankees were stymied for most of the night by the knuckleballer R. A. Dickey, who allowed three hits in his eight innings. But the Yankees were still able to take a lead when Carlos Beltran doubled in the seventh, advanced to third on a ground ball and scored on a Jones grounder.That ball went off the glove of a diving Encarnacion at first, and although Jones was thrown out, with the ball deflected to Toronto second baseman Devon Travis, it was a rare contribution for him — Jones’s first R.B.I. this season.Jones, who is batting .152, joked before the game that perhaps the mustache he was growing might change his fortunes at the plate.“When Tex had it going, he said it was ’stache power,” Jones said, referring to Mark Teixeira, who leads the Yankees with nine home runs. “Hopefully it will bring me some luck.”The Yankees are hardly the first team to grow facial hair en masse. Playoff beards are an N.H.L. staple this time of year, and the Boston Red Sox famously grew beards on their way to the 2013 World Series title — a hirsute team that featured two current Yankees, Jacoby Ellsbury and Andrew Miller.“I don’t know what the end of the line is, but I’m more than willing to look ridiculous if we keep winning games,” Miller said.Some teams celebrate home runs with ritual handshakes or even a toy bubble machine, which sat on a Dodgers bat rack last season. When Jones played for Pittsburgh, the Pirates celebrated victories by turning out the lights in the clubhouse, turning up the music and having Josh Harrison dance.“Laughter is a huge medicine in this game,” Jones said. “When you have funny things going on and take your mind off the grind of the everyday, it helps you recharge the batteries in a sense.”Part of the mustaches’ allure for the Yankees is the club’s longstanding ban on beards and long hair, which George Steinbrenner assiduously enforced (much to the chagrin of Don Mattingly). Over the years, though, particularly in the late 1970s, players like Catfish Hunter, Sparky Lyle and Thurman Munson wore mustaches with distinction. Jason Giambi was responsible for a one-man renaissance in the later years of his career.Ellsbury joked that he began growing his mustache in Detroit — where it snowed during one Yankees game — so that he could stay warm. John Ryan Murphy said the Yankees’ rule against beards benefited him because his upper lip was about the only place he could grow any hair on his baby face. Headley said his young son had told him he looked funny.Alex Rodriguez, one of the few holdouts, said he was considering giving in and growing one, which would give the movement an added shot of momentum.“My wife’s not a big fan,” Jones said, a sentiment echoed by several of his married teammates. “But I think she knows she’s going to have to sacrifice for the team.”If there is a point to the mustaches, it seems to be that: In order for a team to make the most of a season, all its members must contribute, pulling together and pulling one another up. That was as true for the Yankees during their recent hot stretch as it was on Monday, a night when they fell a hair short.Inside PitchThe Blue Jays’ hitting coach, Brook Jacoby, was suspended for 14 games for his postgame conduct toward the umpires after an April 29 game at Boston. The Blue Jays said they intended to appeal the suspension and would not comment further until their appeal was heard. (AP)Advertisement