AdvertisementSupported byCapitals 1, Rangers 0By Ben ShpigelWASHINGTON — So far this series, the Rangers have endured the daily exercise of discussing Alex Ovechkin and then going out and trying to neutralize him. It has all become a bit tiring, as if he is the lone Washington player they must contend with, but just as exhausting are the Capitals’ brutish forecheck and physical style. The Capitals wore down the Islanders in the first round of the playoffs and bullied the Rangers enough Monday to generate a sequence that defined the game and produced a loser’s lament. “I guess they bounced it better than we did,” Martin St. Louis said.By “they,” St. Louis was referring to the player who performed most like Ovechkin aside from the man himself. Jay Beagle, a third-line center, dominated in the face-off dot, dispensed bruising hits and fired shot after shot at Henrik Lundqvist. One of them caromed into the net off defenseman Keith Yandle and then Lundqvist’s skate, the only goal scored in a 1-0 Washington victory that sent the Rangers careening into Game 4 on Wednesday trailing in this Eastern Conference semifinal by two games to one. As the crowd erupted, Lundqvist looked behind him and snatched the puck with his glove. He peered through his mask at the video board, waiting to watch the replay of the only goal that betrayed him. “Obviously,” Lundqvist said, “it’s kind of shocking when it happens.” It was not as shocking as Joel Ward’s buzzer-beater that cinched Game 1 for Washington, or Ovechkin’s from-his-knees goal in Game 2, or Lundqvist’s diving glove save of Ovechkin that same afternoon — just different and, in a way, not altogether unexpected. The Rangers, after playing their eighth consecutive playoff game decided by one goal, bemoaned the unhelpful bounce, their puck luck — how it just happened to be shot from the perfect angle, at the perfect speed, with Yandle positioned just so. But if they are prone to believe that they create their own luck, then they must also realize that their aggregate performance Monday foretold an unhappy ending.“We’re a better team when we start with the puck than when we’re chasing it,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. Led by Beagle, who lost only two of 12 face-offs, the Capitals won 40 of 58 from the dot. The Capitals outhit the Rangers, 39-31. And the Rangers, despite outshooting Washington 30-22, had 27 other attempts blocked. “If anything, we’ve got to put it off to the side of the net and find a way to get it on the net from a different angle,” defenseman Ryan McDonagh said. “If they’re blocking the shot lane, throw it off to the side and kind of get greasier — try to muck one in.” Mucking, slapping, wristing — nothing the Rangers mustered could solve Braden Holtby, who made 30 saves, including one on a partial breakaway by St. Louis in the second period and another on a deflection by Rick Nash in the final minute. “It doesn’t matter what’s going to happen,” Ovechkin said of Holtby. “He’s just going to make a save and keep us in the game.”Including the postseason, the Rangers had won 30 of 43 on the road, and in their return to Verizon Center, they found comfort in the mundane: the slate-gray stalls of their locker room, the labyrinthine corridors at ice level, a hollering crowd clad in red.Unlike other teams, who might tweak their style away from home by abstaining from risk or counterattacking, the Rangers try to establish a fast pace from the opening face-off.The Rangers gave away the puck only twice (to Washington’s six) early on and registered the first six shots, but in a trend that persisted all night, they still ceded the more dangerous scoring chances. Most of those came on the Capitals’ two power plays, when Ovechkin lurked like a shark, waiting for the puck to find his stick.Ovechkin tramps onto the ice, a stampede of one, as if each stride should be measured by a seismograph. He is a wizard with the puck and a menace without it, but one of Ovechkin’s underappreciated skills is his ability to make opponents lose sight of his linemates. The closer he is shadowed, the more ice Washington has to operate.On the Capitals’ first power play, Ovechkin drifted to the bottom of the circle unimpeded, but the Rangers were rescued by the awareness of Lundqvist, who zipped from post to post to stone him. Another acrobatic glove save thwarted Ovechkin later, and the Rangers were fortunate to enter the first intermission with the game scoreless.Even as the Rangers focused on shadowing Ovechkin and his linemates, Nicklas Backstrom and Ward, they remained wary of the other forwards Washington rolled out, loaded with size and strength and skill. That included the Capitals’ third line, which had not scored in nine games this postseason and was aware of it. More than midway through the second period, that group imposed its presence on the Rangers’ top line. Charging toward the puck behind the Rangers’ net, Troy Brouwer knocked St. Louis off it. St. Louis braced himself for the hit, trying to free it for Dan Girardi, but Andre Burakovsky muscled it away from him and backhanded it to Beagle, cutting across the slot. Lundqvist saved the shot, but Beagle corralled the rebound, whirled around the net and banked it in off Yandle at 12 minutes 29 seconds.“I love the skill of the game, but I have a special place in my heart, I think, for all those grinders, if you will,” Washington Coach Barry Trotz said. “Guys like Beags.” Chris Gordon contributed reporting.Advertisement