AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanSomething is sweeping through Major League Baseball this season that makes the batting-practice cage, the stands and the suites of team executives feel more like the halls of NASA. Everywhere you go at the ballpark, it seems, people are talking about exit velocity.In their quest to uncover data that better measures players’ performances, the sport’s aficionados have decided that exit velocity — not a space shot but rather the speed of the ball as it leaves the bat — says a lot about a hitter.“It’s really just physics,” said John Ricco, the Mets’ assistant general manager. “If you hit the ball hard, at a certain velocity and a certain angle, it’s going to be a home run.”The Mets believe in exit velocity so much that they used it to help determine their first baseman of the future.For months, their front-office executives debated the merits of Ike Davis and Lucas Duda. Davis was a former first-round pick whose career had been stymied by injuries and a plummeting batting average. Duda, a lower-round pick, had worked his way into the lineup but did not have a great batting average, either, or an extensive track record.Both were left-handed power hitters, and they were close in age. But one clear advantage Duda had over Davis was better exit velocity when he connected. Given regular playing time, the Mets projected, Duda could develop into an elite slugger.So a year ago they kept Duda and traded Davis, and Duda flourished. In 2014, he hit 30 home runs, drove in 92 runs and established himself as one of the team’s core players.The challenge now for teams is how to consistently use exit velocity in a smart way. The challenge for fans is to become familiar with yet another of the advanced statistics that are rapidly changing the way people think about the game. Exit velocity is already being mentioned during game broadcasts.The threshold for hitting a home run, analysts believe, is an exit velocity of about 95 miles per hour. Some players regularly achieve higher numbers. Nelson Cruz of the Seattle Mariners recently had an exit velocity of 119 m.p.h. on a game-winning single.“It’s eye-popping when it breaks the 110 threshold,” said John Mozeliak, the St. Louis Cardinals’ general manager.Not surprisingly, hitters with high exit velocities tend to be accomplished sluggers, like Cruz, Giancarlo Stanton of the Miami Marlins and Mike Trout of the Los Angeles Angels.Major League Baseball, which knows that offense sells, plans to publicize an exit velocity leaderboard by the end of the season. Some players, though, are not convinced of the statistic’s value.“I don’t care about it at all, to be honest,” Stanton said recently. “There are enough things to worry about: Where’s he going to throw the ball? How are we going to win the game? Not ‘If I square this up, I’m going to get it 105 miles per hour off my bat.’ I don’t care.“I understand it. It’s cool to see after the fact. But I don’t follow it at all.”Even so, many teams have analytics teams to crunch such numbers. They see exit velocity as another way to evaluate players and search for trends. If a player’s average exit velocity is lower than usual, for example, that may be a sign he is hurt or needs to adjust his swing.One league official suggested that teams might even shift their fielders according to exit velocity, to give themselves more time to react to a particular player.Ricco, the Mets executive, said some teams had a chance to gain an edge by embracing exit velocity more quickly than their competitors did. “It’s a new tool in the toolbox,” he said.Mozeliak said, “It’s a part of the secret sauce.”Even John Hart, the Atlanta Braves’ president for baseball operations, who is a relative newcomer to advanced statistics, was well aware of exit velocity as he drastically rebuilt his team during the off-season.Hart traded away a significant chunk of his batting order, including, he noted ruefully, some players with high exit velocities. The problem, he said, was that “they didn’t put it in play enough.”That was the case with Duda on Sunday, when he struck out in the eighth inning with the tying and go-ahead runs on second and third base. The Mets lost, 1-0, to the Washington Nationals.Ruben Amaro Jr., the Philadelphia Phillies’ general manager, has a more traditional approach. He said he liked to watch batting practice up close, next to the cage. That way he can hear the sound of the ball off the bat, see the trajectory and determine if a player is swinging well.“You don’t have to be a rocket scientist to see that,” he said.Timothy Chupp is not a rocket scientist, either, but he is a nuclear physicist at the University of Michigan and a Boston Red Sox fan. Asked about exit velocity, he said he was intrigued by its new popularity and thought it might highlight just how much went into hitting a home run.“You have to move the bat at 80 miles per hour when it hits the ball,” he said. “It has to hit the ball in just the right place. To give it a little extra oomph, you have to give it a little bit of an undercut so it gets some backspin on it.“And of course,” he added, “the ball is moving crazily as it is approaching the plate. So, really, it takes microadjustments that are almost faster than the speed of thought.”Exit velocity emerged in baseball almost by accident. Baseball evaluators became intrigued by the fact that radar guns used to measure how fast a pitch was moving toward the plate were also picking up the speed of the ball as it came off the bat.About five years ago, a number of teams turned to TrackMan, a Danish technology company that used radar and was able to get a better read on the exit velocity data.Major League Baseball eventually became involved, too, teaming up with TrackMan and ChyronHego, a graphics company, to create hardware and software that tracks every ball, as well as every player on every play.In time for this season, that equipment was installed in every major league park — two arrays of cameras along with Doppler radar.Major League Baseball can now measure how fast Billy Hamilton of the Cincinnati Reds runs while stealing a base, the efficiency of the path that Yankees center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury takes to a fly ball, and how long San Francisco Giants second baseman Joe Panik takes to react to a grounder.Major League Baseball is calling all of this analysis Statcast and, in addition to promoting its use in broadcasts, is distributing the data to each team to parse on its own.It was Statcast that concluded that Bryce Harper hit a recent home run with an exit velocity of 109.5 m.p.h., at an angle of 26.75 degrees, and that the ball hung in the air for 5.36 seconds. Of course, those are a lot of measurements for a general manager to absorb, let alone a fan.“It’s the velocity, the angle, the hang time — those are the factors that all go together in a cocktail of power,” said Joseph Inzerillo, the chief technology officer for Major League Baseball and one of the people who oversaw the creation of the Statcast package.“It will evolve over time,” Inzerillo added. “People will come up with ratios and formulas to say that’s the power indicator.”But for now at least, exit velocity is the statistic being repeatedly cited, the one teams are keeping a close eye on. When the Mets boarded the team bus after a recent game against the Yankees, the bench coach Bob Geren was still excited about a hit from the day before. Kevin Plawecki, the rookie catcher, had hit his first career home run, off C. C. Sabathia.“Did you see what that was?” Geren asked Ricco, the assistant general manager. The answer: 111.3 m.p.h.Advertisement