AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressYunel Escobar had a career-high five hits, the last a tiebreaking, two-run single in the eighth inning, as the Washington Nationals rallied to beat the visiting Miami Marlins, 6-4, on Monday night.Washington trailed by 4-2 before sending eight batters to the plate in the eighth against Bryan Morris (3-1). A leadoff walk and a home run by Ian Desmond tied the score, and with two outs the Nationals came up with three straight hits to take the lead for the first time.Pinch-hitter Tyler Moore singled, Denard Span doubled and Escobar hit a liner to right.Matt Grace (1-0) got his first major league win despite giving up two hits and a walk in the eighth. Tanner Roark worked the ninth for his first career save.Justin Bour homered for the Marlins, who have dropped two straight after winning nine of 10.With the score tied at 2-2, Dee Gordon led off the Miami eighth with a walk and stole second. With two outs, pinch-hitter Jeff Baker singled to right, and the throw from Bryce Harper bounced away from catcher Wilson Ramos. Ichiro Suzuki added a run-scoring infield hit for a 4-2 lead.It did not last.Nationals starter Jordan Zimmermann and Miami’s David Phelps were locked in a pitchers’ duel until the seventh.Starting at first base for the slumping Michael Morse, Bour sent a 3-2 pitch over the left-field wall to put the Marlins up by 2-1.In the bottom half, Phelps was pulled after issuing a one-out walk to pinch-hitter Clint Robinson, who scored on Jayson Werth’s two-out single off Sam Dyson.Zimmermann gave up one earned run, six hits and no walks in seven innings. He has not lost to Miami in 13 starts since May 28, 2012.Phelps allowed two runs and six hits in six and one-third innings. He is 1-0 with a 1.88 E.R.A. in four starts since replacing the injured Henderson Alvarez in the starting rotation.BREWERS 4, DODGERS 3 Milwaukee rallied for three runs in the eighth inning to win in Craig Counsell’s managerial debut, beating visiting Los Angeles. Dodgers starter Clayton Kershaw was denied his 100th career win, and took a no-decision.The Brewers overcame a 3-0 deficit with one run in the sixth and three in the eighth in Counsell’s first game since he took over for Ron Roenicke, who was fired Sunday night.RAYS 5, RED SOX 1 Jake Odorizzi pitched seven strong innings, Joey Butler hit his first career homer and Tampa Bay’s offense perked up a bit in the Rays’ win over host Boston. David DeJesus drove in two runs for Tampa Bay, which scored just four runs in a three-game set this past weekend against Baltimore.Boston left fielder Hanley Ramirez was injured in the first inning and left the game with a sprained left shoulder after he ran into a padded side wall attempting to make a catch.The Rays have been held to two or fewer runs in nearly half of their games.Odorizzi (3-2) gave up one run and seven hits and struck out six. He matched a Rays record by not allowing a homer for the sixth straight start.PHILLIES 5, BRAVES 2 Jeff Francoeur had four hits and drove in two runs, Aaron Harang allowed one run in six innings, and Philadelphia won in Atlanta.Francoeur had a run-scoring double off Alex Wood (1-2) in Philadelphia’s three-run first inning. Francoeur, who began his career with Atlanta, drove in another run with a triple off Jim Johnson in the ninth. He also had two singles.The Phillies set a season high with 14 hits.Harang (3-2) allowed five hits against the team he played for in 2014. In two starts against Atlanta this season, Harang has allowed one run and seven hits in 14 innings.RANGERS 2, ASTROS 1  Robinson Chirinos hit a tiebreaking sacrifice fly in the ninth inning, and visiting Texas ended Houston’s 10-game winning streak.Chirinos’s sacrifice fly to center scored Adrian Beltre, who led off the inning with a double off Chad Qualls (0-2), moved to third on Kyle Blanks’s single and slid in as Jake Marisnick’s throw to the plate went to the backstop.Keone Kela (2-1) pitched the eighth for the win, and Neftali Feliz pitched the ninth for his third save.TWINS 8, ATHLETICS 7  Torii Hunter’s three-run homer broke a sixth-inning tie, giving Phil Hughes his first win and streaking Minnesota a home victory. Brian Dozier and Jordan Schafer each drove in two runs for the Twins, who won their fifth straight game.Hughes (1-4) gave up a grand slam to Stephen Vogt five batters into the game and a solo shot to Mark Canha in the sixth, but the right-hander was good enough in between to get his first victory in six starts. Advertisement