By PAT BORZIMAY 4, 2015
ST. PAUL —  An optional skate in the N.H.L. is exactly what the name suggests: a practice that is not mandatory. Stars do not usually take part in optional skates. Lesser-known veterans often skip them as well, to ease rubbery legs and the accumulating aches of a long season.On Feb. 2, the morning after the Minnesota Wild returned from a three-game trip to Western Canada, five players appeared for an optional skate at Xcel Energy Center. Four needed the work. The fifth was the alternate captain Zach Parise, who certainly could have taken the day off after logging more than 17 minutes of ice time and scoring a goal the previous afternoon in Vancouver.But that is not how Parise, a left wing who led the Wild with 33 goals and 62 points in the regular season, operates. Less than a month after his father, the former N.H.L. player J. P. Parise, died of lung cancer at 73, Zach Parise took the ice as he usually does — with his father’s words in his ear.“He would always tell me how he wasn’t the most skilled guy ever on the team, so he had to work extra just to stay in the league,” Parise said last week.Advertisement“He played for 13 years, but he had to work hard to stay there. So he would always tell me about working extra, and work ethic. I heard a lot of that when he was telling me that stuff, and I took a lot of that to heart. That’s a huge reason why I’m here right now and playing right now.”AdvertisementThis Wild season has been tinged with sorrow. Defenseman Ryan Suter, who joined Minnesota with Parise in 2012 with a matching 13-year, $98 million free-agent deal, lost his father, Bob, a member of the 1980 Miracle on Ice team and a Wild scout.The owner Craig Leipold chartered a plane for Wild players and staff members to attend Bob Suter’s funeral in Madison, Wis., in September. Most of the team turned out for J. P. Parise’s memorial service Jan. 16 in Edina, Minn., with Leipold among those in a front pew.“With both Ryan and I, things happen for a reason,” Zach Parise said. “We didn’t know three years ago, or however long it was, that this was going to be the path. We were blessed that we were able to spend time with both of our dads that we wouldn’t have been able to had we been somewhere else. I look at it like that. It was a little bit of a blessing.”Suter struggled early, before the Wild’s season-salvaging acquisition of goalie Devan Dubnyk on Jan. 14, but Parise had his best season since returning to Minnesota, where he was born and raised.His leadership has continued in the postseason. Parise, 30, totaled 7 points in a first-round victory over the St. Louis Blues, tied for second best in the league. In Game 1 of the second round against the Chicago Blackhawks last week, the Wild trailed by 3-1 in the second period before Parise added a goal and an assist to tie the game. But Minnesota lost, and the team trails, two games to none, going into Game 3 at home Tuesday night.“With Zach, the pressure of being a star player and having to maintain that level was really difficult with what he was going through,” said the Wild radio broadcaster Tom Reid, a former Minnesota North Star who gave the eulogy at J. P. Parise’s funeral. “But he really didn’t waver at all. Even when his dad was going through the tough times, and even near the end, I don’t think his game ever faltered.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Early this season, Wild Coach Mike Yeo offered to allow Zach Parise to skip practice to spend time with his father, who was hospitalized a few blocks from Xcel Energy Center. Parise instead stopped in before or after practice.The Wild endured a 2-11 swoon from mid-December through mid-January, but Parise scored 19 goals in 39 games after Jan. 15, tied for fifth best in the league in that span.Advertisement“Once the puck drops, I don’t want to say his brain shuts off, but it goes into a certain mode,” Yeo said. “Maybe at that time, that was the escape that he needed, and his level of play gave him something to feel good about.”Parise at least had a chance to say goodbye to his father. Bob Suter died unexpectedly of a heart attack, with Ryan almost 300 miles away at an informal preseason practice.“A lot of people have lost people,” Ryan Suter said. “It is difficult to go and do your job and not think about. Our coaching staff has been great. All of our teammates have helped us. It’s not me helping him or him helping me. It’s kind of everybody coming together in here.”Both enjoyed listening to their fathers’ friends retelling favorite stories. For Parise, that began long before his father became ill. While Parise was with the Devils, he said, he frequently ran into Rangers fans who never forgave J. P. for his overtime goal for the Islanders that eliminated the Rangers from the 1975 playoffs.“I heard that all the time,” he said with a laugh.When a new player joins the Wild, Parise acts as a team concierge of sorts, suggesting ways to smooth the transition. When Parise learned that Dubnyk, the goalie, sought a place for his wife and young son to live, he took a suburban house he was selling off the market to rent to Dubnyk.“Nobody buys a house in the winter, so it was just sitting there gathering dust,” said Parise, who is married with 16-month-old twins. “I’m glad we were able to help him. You don’t want to be in a hotel for a couple or three weeks when you’ve got a family.”Now Parise must help solve the Blackhawks, who have eliminated the Wild from the postseason the past two years. Minnesota began second-round preparations with an optional skate. Parise was there, of course, and most of his teammates joined him.“He’s a guy that doesn’t have to be out there, the guy that should be taking the rest,” said Wild forward Matt Cooke, who did not skate. “But Zach is a guy who wants to go out and shoot, skate, work on his game, stay sharp. He’s always doing extra shooting drills. Even in a drill, he’s not going to give up on a play. He’s going to try to play it out and steal the puck. That just makes everyone better.”A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Sorrow and Celebration for Minnesota Teammates.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.