AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensCiting his advancing age and a need for “a progression,” Lou Lamoriello turned over his job as general manager of the Devils to Ray Shero, one of the N.H.L.’s top free-agent executives.Lamoriello, 72, has been the Devils’ general manager since the 1987-88 season, winning three Stanley Cups during that time. He will remain the team president and will oversee Shero, who was most recently general manager of the Pittsburgh Penguins.“My age is no secret,” Lamoriello said in a conference call Monday. “I have to be realistic. I have to be honest with myself.”Shero, 52, was the architect of the Penguins’ recent run of success, which included playoff appearances in each of his eight seasons. He took over in Pittsburgh in 2006, Sidney Crosby’s second season with the team, and the Penguins won the Eastern Conference in 2008 and 2009, claiming the Stanley Cup in 2009.Shero was named the N.H.L.’s general manager of the year in 2013 as the Penguins posted an Eastern Conference-best 72 points in the lockout-shortened season. But after Pittsburgh failed to return to the Stanley Cup finals, he fell out of favor and was fired — along with Coach Dan Bylsma — after the Penguins’ second-round playoff exit against the Rangers in 2014.Shero did not work in the N.H.L. this past season.“We’re going to be the beneficiary of this,” Lamoriello said, referring to Shero’s year off. “We made a decision to get someone in here with experience in different organizations and someone who has a background in winning.”Lamoriello said Shero’s first job would be to find a coach. Lamoriello filled the role of interim coach, with Scott Stevens and Adam Oates assisting, after Pete DeBoer was fired Dec. 26. After making the Stanley Cup finals in 2012, the Devils have missed the playoffs in three straight seasons, which had not happened before under Lamoriello.Among Shero’s goals is to improve the Devils’ struggling offense. They have finished among the league’s bottom four teams in goals scored each of the last three seasons. “New Jersey has a foundation built upon defensive hockey,” Shero said. “Improving up front is going to be a goal — augmenting that foundation with offense.”Lamoriello said this was not the end for him — just a time to freshen the organization.“The emotion comes from what hasn’t been done and what should be done,” he said. “I take full responsibility for where we are at.”Advertisement