By SAM BORDENMAY 4, 2015
Some call them friendship scarves while others refer to them as half-and-halfs. Vendors have recently taken to marketing them as match-day scarves, while in Spanish they are labeled, more lyrically, bufandas con los dos escudos, or scarves with two shields.Of course, these are the names that are printable.Split scarves, or scarves that have the names and crests of both teams competing in a given soccer match, may be souvenir catnip for tourists, casual spectators and, occasionally, those who did not check their weather app and showed up underdressed on a frosty night. But for an increasingly vocal segment of hard-core fans around the world, these scarves are — how to say it? — horrendous.“I’d rather get a cold than wear one of those, honestly,” Josep Trepat, 73, who has been a Barcelona member for more than four decades, said recently.He added: “I support one club, not two.”That basic sentiment — which has been expressed in far more obscene terms by scads of web-savvy fans, including one whose entire Twitter account is devoted to pictures of half-scarf-wearing spectators and profanity — is not unique. But there is also no denying that split scarves, despite the bile that is often directed toward them, have become a significant part of soccer’s keepsake culture.AdvertisementAt big matches, like the Champions League semifinal first legs that will be played Tuesday in Turin, Italy, and Wednesday in Barcelona, Spain, merchants outside the stadiums will prominently feature Juventus-Real Madrid or Barcelona-Bayern Munich scarves amid their other, more team-specific — and presumably less-offensive — offerings.AdvertisementThe vendors’ motive, naturally, is simple: to make money. And so it stands to reason that they would not offer these split scarves if there were not a market for them.“The biggest group of buyers is the out-of-towners, that’s for sure,” John, a longtime peddler of souvenirs outside Chelsea matches, said earlier this season. John, like many vendors interviewed, asked that his full name not be published because match-day scarves (among other items) are often produced without official licensing approval from the clubs.“At European matches, you’ll have some fans shouting about selling them, or shouting at people who buy them,” John continued. “But the nastiest it gets is at the league matches or a derby match. Then it can get ugly.”This issue, it seems, is the root of the split-scarf divide. Sure, even the most passionate split-scarf critic can find a moment of understanding for, say, the French fan of Guingamp who travels to Belarus and wants to take home a scarf commemorating the dull, dreary 0-0 midweek tie between his club and Dinamo Minsk. At the very least, a scarf is a far easier memento to keep track of than a beer-soaked ticket stub shoved carelessly into a coat pocket.But what about the fans who buy an A.C. Milan-Inter scarf before the Derby della Madonnina? Or a Manchester United-Liverpool scarf before an F.A. Cup clash? That is where, for many enthusiasts, the whole notion goes wrong.“No one would dare wear one of those scarves in the Bayern fan block,” Georg Salzeder, 59, said before noting in strong terms that his personal collection of scarves included only the one-team variety.“Imagine us playing against 1860 and I’ve got to put on a Bayern-1860 scarf!” he added, referring to Bayern Munich’s intracity rival. “No, no. I don’t think so.”AdvertisementSplit scarves are not a new concept. Similar scarves from matches that took place decades ago can be found on eBay or elsewhere, and many — designed in the “friendship” mold — even feature a floating handshake (picture a pair of Hamburger Helper hands embracing) to hammer home the scarf’s amiable nature.More recently, though, as ticket prices have generally risen and clubs have increasingly sought to make the “match-day experience” more of a special event regardless of whether it actually is one, the split scarf has become more prevalent, popping up at matches that might otherwise seem mundane.Sometimes, this can feel excessive (split scarves for a sixth-tier club’s match against a third-tier club, for example) while other times it just feels silly (split scarves for a match between rivals whose fans have fought each other so often the police now limit the number of visiting fans who can attend).Timothée Pavillard, 24, said that as a fan of Paris St.-Germain he “struggled” to imagine himself ever wearing anything with the logo of his team’s rival Olympique Marseille on it. The only possibility, he said, would be “one of those anti-O.M.” scarves — yes, there are anti-scarves for those who like to turn their contempt into an accessory — but even then, Pavillard conceded, it would be unlikely.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some fans have theorized that the rise of the split scarf is connected with the general decrease in fan violence and hooliganism across Europe’s top leagues. Casual brawling is less common now than in decades past, the thinking goes, so perhaps it is more acceptable for one’s club and one’s opponent to be separated only by a nape.To many, though, soccer’s contribution to mash-up culture remains a farce. One fan at a Sunderland-West Bromwich Albion match this season was the subject of Internet ridicule after being spotted on television wearing a split-shirt — inexplicably, the shirt was divided between Sunderland and Arsenal, a club not involved in the game in any way — and one can only imagine the vitriol that might crop up if Barcelona and Real Madrid both advance to the Champions League final, an event where split scarves, and shrill emotions, are particularly prevalent.In that situation, however, it is likely that even the most rabid fans might be tempted to surreptitiously slide up to a kiosk, fork over some euros (and a bit of their soul) and then slip a split scarf into a pocket or a bag.Doing so, though, comes with a risk. What if the match is more forgettable than memorable?“I bought one for the 2007 UEFA Cup final,” said Marc Invernon, 21, who cheers for the Spanish team Espanyol. “Then we lost to Sevilla in the penalty shootout and I don’t even know where it is now.”Pere Bosch, Chris Cottrell and Laure Fourquet contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Up to Their Necks in Scorn.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.