AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew DasIs it Champions League week or derby week? The answer is both.It’s hard to pick an underdog in the semifinals of the Champions League, but since Real Madrid and Bayern Munich have won the past two titles, and since Barcelona might be playing better than both of them, the outlier might be Juventus. What have Juve done lately? Well, it just wrapped up its fourth straight Serie A title over the weekend and it has the home-field advantage for Tuesday’s first leg against Real Madrid (2:45 p.m., Eastern time, Fox Sports 1).Wednesday brings what some consider the main event: Bayern Munich at Barcelona (2:45 p.m., Fox Sports 1). Given all of its recent injuries, Pep Guardiola’s German champions may turn up in an ambulance instead of a team bus. But rest assured, with Bayern’s stable, they will pull together a lineup with a fighting chance.Fair warning, though: first legs with immense stakes can be cautious affairs.The knockout stages of the Copa Libertadores, the South American championship, offer a higher-than-usual-stakes version of the Buenos Aires derby this week: Boca Juniors against River Plate in a bonus chapter of the Superclasico rivalry (8 p.m., Fox Deportes). The Superclasico label also is claimed by the rivalry between Club America and Chivas Guadalajara in Mexico and once, more comically, by Major League Soccer’s Los Angeles Galaxy and Chivas U.S.A. But given that Boca and River share a deeper history and a home city, we’ll grant them top billing. And Thursday’s match is only part of a trilogy over this week and next: Boca won Round 1, an Argentine Primera Division match, on Sunday by 2-0, which only raises the stakes. River Plate is the home team for this one at the wonderfully named Estadio Monumental. The return leg is next Thursday at Boca’s La Bombonera.M.L.S. at last gets its first New York derby on Sunday when New York City F.C. crosses the Hudson River to face the Red Bulls in the first league meeting between the teams (7 p.m., Fox Sports 1). Can you manufacture a rivalry out of thin air? Probably not. But you have to start somewhere, and with the Red Bulls feeling perpetually underappreciated in their home market and expansion N.Y.C. winless in its last seven games, at least the combustible elements are in place for a little fire.Advertisement