AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe Chicago Bulls came in oozing with confidence, unafraid of LeBron James and convinced they could keep their playoff momentum rolling.Derrick Rose made sure they did.Looking like the league most valuable player he was before being slowed by knee injuries, Rose scored 25 points, Pau Gasol added 21 and the Bulls led from the start in a 99-92 victory over the short-handed Cavaliers in Game 1 of an Eastern Conference semifinal series Monday night in Cleveland.Rose, who sustained a shoulder stinger in the closing minute, helped the Bulls swipe home-court advantage from the Cavs. Cleveland was missing the starters Kevin Love and J. R. Smith, and it could not stop Rose or his pick-and-roll plays with Gasol.After all he has been through — operations, hours of rehab, uncertainty about his future — Rose, who has missed more than 180 games the past four seasons, is savoring every moment back in the postseason.“I just appreciate everything, getting back on the floor and just every aspect of basketball,” he said. “It’s allowed me to change my life and my family’s life. I owe so much to this sport. I’m just trying to roll with it.”Jimmy Butler added 20 points and banked in a contested jumper with 30 seconds left as the Bulls closed it out, silencing a roaring Cleveland crowd already worried about Game 2 on Wednesday night.Kyrie Irving scored 30 points and James added 19 points and 15 rebounds for Cleveland, playing its first game since Love was lost for the remainder of the postseason with a shoulder injury.“No excuses,” Cavaliers Coach David Blatt said.James did not offer any.“We all just have to play better,” said James, who had nine assists but six turnovers. “I wasn’t that good tonight.”Finally fully healed after dealing with injuries all season, the Bulls are peaking at the perfect time. Coming off a 54-point win over Milwaukee to wrap up its opening-round series, Chicago jumped to an early lead, withstood a Cleveland comeback and buckled down on defense in the closing minutes to hand Cleveland just its second loss in 24 home games.Rose ran the show the way he used to, and Gasol made the Cavs pay for leaving him open by hitting one midrange jumper after another.“They made their runs, but we kept our poise,” Gasol said. “We came in with the right mind-set and attitude. We went after it.”CLIPPERS 117, ROCKETS 101 Blake Griffin had 26 points, 14 rebounds and 13 assists for his second straight triple-double, and Los Angeles, playing without the injured Chris Paul, won at Houston in Game 1 of a Western Conference semifinal series.The Rockets scored 5 straight points to cut the Clippers’ lead to 1 with about seven and a half minutes left. Matt Barnes got the Clippers going after that, making two 3-pointers in a 12-0 run that made the score 101-88 three minutes later, and Los Angeles coasted to the victory.Paul, who has a strained left hamstring, missed his first game of the season. But the Clippers received a lift from Jamal Crawford, who had 21 points, and Barnes, who added 20.Dwight Howard led Houston with 22 points, and James Harden had 20. CURRY PROVES HIMSELF M.V.P. His voice cracked first. Then his eyes got red. Finally, Stephen Curry cried.He had felt this way in the past: when he barely received any scholarship offers out of high school, when some questioned whether his game could translate from Davidson College to the N.B.A., when he sat in a doctor’s office searching for answers on how to fix his troublesome right ankle.Curry could let it all out and laugh now. This was a time for celebration.Curry, the Golden State Warriors’ point guard, won the N.B.A.’s Most Valuable Player Award, the biggest moment yet of a young career already full of overcoming obstacles.“There were obviously good times and bad times,” Curry said. “Times I wanted to shut it down. Times where you realize that all the hard work you put into it was worth it. It just made me realize how blessed and thankful I really am to be in this position.”Curry received 100 of 130 first-place votes for a total of 1,198 points from a panel of 129 writers and broadcasters, along with the fan vote on the N.B.A.’s website. Houston’s James Harden had 25 first-place votes and 936 points. Cleveland’s LeBron James, a four-time M.V.P., got five first-place votes and 552 points.Curry’s family informed him of the news at his house after Golden State’s win over Memphis in Game 1 of a Western Conference semifinal series on Sunday. Curry, pulled into a room, opened the door to see everyone wearing personalized M.V.P. T-shirts, holding cameras and sporting, he said, “the cheesiest smiles you could ever imagine.”“It was a great moment that I’ll remember for the rest of my life,” Curry said.Curry was joined onstage Monday by Warriors Coach Steve Kerr, General Manager Bob Myers and his teammates — praising each of them individually. He got choked up talking about his pregnant wife, Ayesha, and their 2-year-old daughter, Riley, who sat in the front row with the rest of his family. Curry, who averaged 23.8 points, 7.7 assists and 4.3 rebounds a game, carried the top-seeded Warriors to a franchise-record 67 wins and surpassed his N.B.A. record for 3-pointers in a season.Advertisement