AdvertisementSupported byBlue Jays 11, Royals 8By David WaldsteinTORONTO — Many people offered Ryan Goins their support after his critical fielding mistake on Saturday, including his teammates on the flight home, the fans at Rogers Centre and a dear relative.“My grandma told me she loved me,” Goins said. “So that was good.”For a downcast player, there are few things quite so fortifying as the unwavering love of a grandparent, and Goins repaid it in a fitting way. A lightly regarded hitter, Goins ignited an offensive outburst by the Toronto Blue Jays, who beat the Kansas City Royals, 11-8, in Game 3 of the American League Championship Series on Monday. Toronto trails in the series, two games to one.Goins hit a go-ahead two-run single with two strikes and two outs in the second inning and later added a home run — his first in the postseason — to help make up for his gaffe in Game 2. In Kansas City on Saturday, Goins pulled away from an easy pop-up by Ben Zobrist, allowing the ball to fall in for a hit that led to a five-run rally by the Royals. It was a devastating moment for Goins, who took full responsibility for the mistake as the Royals won their second game of the series.But he said he was able to clear his head and compartmentalize the pain before he took the field Monday, when many fans in the announced crowd of 49,751 showered him with some love of their own during introductions.“I put the game in Kansas City behind me,” Goins said. “Had the day off yesterday, came in and worked out, and today it was probably the last thing in the back of my head. Didn’t think about it. Came in with a mind-set to do what was needed to win.”The victory, which came on the day of Canada’s federal elections, was vital for the Blue Jays, who could not afford to fall behind by 3-0 in the series. They were searching for a breakout game, and the fans were looking for a moment to unleash their thunderous support.The moment came in the second as Goins, the lineup’s No. 9 batter, who had an .087 postseason batting average entering the game, stood at the plate. There were two outs and runners at second and third, and the Blue Jays trailed by 1-0. Goins fell behind, 0-2, in the count, but he eventually ripped a single to left field against Royals starter Johnny Cueto.Both runners scored, and Rogers Centre, known for earsplitting decibel levels in big games, thundered in approval, with the cheers echoing off the roof and reverberating down to the field.The Blue Jays broke open the game with six runs in the third inning, five of them coming on two home runs. Troy Tulowitzki, who was later ejected by the home-plate umpire, John Hirschbeck, for arguing balls and strikes, drilled a three-run shot to center against Cueto. Five batters later, Josh Donaldson, facing reliever Kris Medlen, sent a two-run blast into the second deck in left field. It was Donaldson’s third home run of the playoffs, but after the game, he seemed more pleased when discussing the instant revival of Goins, who also made several key plays at second base and later at shortstop after Tulowitzki was ejected.“He was huge,” Donaldson said. “That shows you a lot about who Ryan Goins is and the amount of character he has.”A fourth-round draft pick by the Blue Jays in 2009, Goins said that the people who offered support Saturday included Jose Bautista, the right fielder whom Goins called off before Goins pulled back, allowing the ball to drop. Some wondered if Bautista’s reaction to the play indicated that he was displeased with Goins.“He came up to me on the plane and told me he had my back,” Goins said, “and we moved past it, and that’s what we did today.”Most of the Blue Jays’ damage was done against Cueto, the pitcher the Royals acquired from the Cincinnati Reds on July 26. He was charged with eight runs, six hits and four walks and recorded only six outs, and he walked off the mound smiling to the accompaniment of the fans’ hoots and taunts in the third inning. “His next start, he’s going to be able to work on things on the side,” Royals Manager Ned Yost said, “and I guarantee you, if he makes another start in this series, he’ll be good.”Cueto actually gave up fewer hits than Marcus Stroman, the winning pitcher, who surrendered 11 hits and four runs in six and a third innings. But it was good enough on a day when the Blue Jays came to hit.As it turned out, the Blue Jays needed almost all the offense they produced. The Royals scored two runs in the fifth inning and added four in the ninth, including a two-run homer by Kendrys Morales against closer Roberto Osuna, who eventually got the final outs. “We desperately needed that breakout,” Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons said. “You look at how the game finished up, those runs really came in handy.”Gibbons also noted that it was the perfect game for Goins to have after what happened on Saturday. It was Gibbons’s way of showing some love, too.Advertisement