By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 6, 2015
Shelby Miller threw his third career shutout, Freddie Freeman and Kelly Johnson hit home runs to spoil Chad Billingsley’s first start in more than two years, and the Atlanta Braves beat the visiting Philadelphia Phillies, 9-0, on Tuesday night.Miller (4-1) allowed only three hits and one walk with eight strikeouts. He has not allowed more than two runs in any of his six starts.Billingsley (0-1) gave up six runs, five earned, in five innings. A right-hander, he fought back from two major operations on his pitching arm to make his first start since April 15, 2013, for the Dodgers against San Diego.Freeman had three hits, including a two-run homer in the first. Johnson, who drove in four runs, hit a three-run shot in the fourth. He added a sixth-inning single for his 1,000th career hit.AdvertisementMiller struck out Ryan Howard to complete his first shutout since June 17, 2014, with the Cardinals at Toronto.Miller faced the minimum 12 batters through four innings. Cesar Hernandez had an infield hit to lead off the third before Carlos Ruiz hit into a double play. Howard led off the fifth with a double but was stranded on second base.Johnson leads the Braves with six homers and has 14 R.B.I. in his last 10 games.The left-hander Elvis Araujo, making his major league debut, pitched around two hits in a scoreless sixth for Philadelphia. Dustin McGowan walked four batters in the seventh, including a bases-loaded walk to Johnson to force in a run. Jace Peterson and Cameron Maybin followed with run-scoring singles.REDS 7, PIRATES 1  Marlon Byrd homered and drove in four runs and Todd Frazier hit his National League-leading ninth home run as Cincinnati beat host Pittsburgh.Byrd hit a two-run shot in the third inning off Jeff Locke (2-2) and added a two-run double in the ninth for the Reds. Frazier finished 2 for 5 for Cincinnati, which remained unbeaten against the Pirates this season.AdvertisementThe rookie Michael Lorenzen (1-1) worked six-plus innings for his first major league victory. Lorenzen, a 23-year-old right-hander, kept the struggling Pirates off balance, giving up one run and three hits, walking three and striking out four.RED SOX 2, RAYS 0  Mookie Betts homered to lead off the sixth inning — the first hit off Rays starter Drew Smyly — and added another in the eighth to lead host Boston.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On the night when the Red Sox honored their 1975 A.L. championship team, Betts hit two solo shots over the Green Monster, which Carlton Fisk cleared to end Game 6 of the World Series. It was Betts’s first career multihomer game.The Red Sox had lost four straight and nine of their last 12 to fall into last place in the A.L. East.Rick Porcello (3-2), who was the starter in Boston’s last win, pitched seven innings of shutout ball. He scattered eight hits while walking none and striking out six. Koji Uehara pitched the ninth for his fifth save.Smyly (0-1) took a no-hitter into the sixth and left trailing by 1-0 despite allowing just two hits in all.ATHLETICS 2, TWINS 1 Jesse Chavez struck out seven and allowed one unearned run in seven and a third innings as visiting Oakland ended Minnesota’s five-game winning streak.Chavez (1-2) gave up four hits and needed just 87 pitches for his first victory of the season.WHITE SOX 5, TIGERS 2  Jeff Samardzija pitched seven effective innings as host Chicago ended a five-game losing streak.Samardzija (2-2) allowed a run in each of the first two innings, then pitched four-hit ball. He struck out seven and walked one.Advertisement ROYALS 5, INDIANS 3  Eric Hosmer hit a three-run homer, Jason Vargas shut down the Indians for the second straight start and host Kansas City went on to beat Cleveland.Hosmer also had an R.B.I. triple in the eighth inning, and Alex Gordon drove in another run for the Royals, who bounced back after losing two straight to Detroit over the weekend.Vargas (3-1) only allowed two hits, one a two-run shot by Michael Brantley, over six stingy innings. He struck out five while walking two and was rarely in trouble.A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Braves’ Miller Throws Shutout in Victory Over Phillies; Reds Rout the Pirates .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.