AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressDeMarre Carroll scored 22 points, and the top-seeded Atlanta Hawks held off the visiting Washington Wizards, 106-90, on Tuesday night, taking advantage of John Wall’s absence to even their Eastern Conference semifinal series at one game apiece.The Wizards had insisted that Wall, who finished out the series opener despite injuring his left hand, would play in Game 2. Instead, he was a surprising scratch just before the game. Ramon Sessions did an admirable job filling in, leading the Wizards with 21 points, but Washington still lost for the first time this postseason.The Hawks’ Kyle Korver bounced back from a miserable first half in which he went 1 for 7 from 3-point range. He made three 3s after the break, including one from the corner with just under three minutes remaining that restored the Hawks’ lead to 10.Game 3 is Saturday at Washington.Washington had won its first five games of this postseason, sweeping Toronto before shocking Atlanta, 104-98, to start the second round.Even without Wall, the Wizards were competitive on Tuesday until the closing minutes. Paul Pierce hit a 3-pointer, and Bradley Beal knocked down another long-range jumper with his foot on the stripe, cutting the Hawks’ lead to 95-88.But the Hawks closed the game on an 11-2 run to put away Washington.Carroll, considered a defensive stopper, had his sixth straight game with at least 20 points, giving Atlanta another much-needed offensive lift. Beal, playing on a sprained right ankle, had 20 points and 7 assists for the Wizards.STARS ON THE MEND Memphis point guard Mike Conley started in Game 2 of the Grizzlies’ series against the Golden State Warriors, played late Tuesday night. Conley, who had missed three straight playoff games, said after testing himself in warm-ups while wearing a protective mask that he would play. He had been recovering from an operation to repair broken bones in his face.Also on Tuesday, Los Angeles Clippers Coach Doc Rivers said the chances that Chris Paul would play Wednesday against the Houston Rockets were 50-50, and Chicago’s Derrick Rose, who sustained a shoulder stinger in a Game 1 win over Cleveland, said he would play in Game 2.“The shoulder feels great,” Rose said. “It’s not sore or anything. So that’s a good sign.”Paul missed Game 1 against the Rockets after straining his left hamstring in a stirring Game 7 victory over San Antonio in the first round of the playoffs. The Clippers surprised many by opening their series against Houston with a road victory, but Rivers said that would not affect the timeline for Paul’s return.Advertisement