AdvertisementSupported byOn HockeyBy Ben ShpigelWASHINGTON — The most remarkable thing happened to the Rangers on Tuesday at Verizon Center. Rick Nash stationed himself at the top of the crease, fought off a check and, with a deft flick of his stick, redirected a point shot into the net.Nash skated away, and practice continued without a flicker of recognition. The Rangers — and Nash, in particular — want to score goals when they count, an act that eluded them in a 1-0 Game 3 loss to the Washington Capitals on Monday night, as it has since these playoffs began. Across eight postseason games, the Rangers have scored 15 goals, tied with Montreal for fewest among the eight remaining teams. The Canadiens’ futility is an extension of regular-season struggles. The Rangers’ is not.Only two teams — Dallas and Tampa Bay — scored more regular-season goals than the Rangers (252), who entered the playoffs as the most balanced group in the tournament, loaded with speed and skill and depth. It helped them overwhelm Pittsburgh last round, but Washington, which leads this Eastern Conference semifinal by two games to one, presents a more daunting foil.The Capitals, who host Game 4 Wednesday, are choking shooting lanes. They are preventing Rangers from anchoring in front of the net. They are preserving sightlines for Washington goalie Braden Holtby, who has stopped 93 of 97 shots this series, and minimizing scoring chances.The way to counter Washington’s strategy is to — well, the Rangers have known it since Game 1. They need to shoot more pucks at Holtby. They want to shoot them off his pads, from sharp angles, and create rebounds. They want to generate more, and better, chances off the rush. They want to make Holtby — and his teammates — find pucks at his feet, slowing the Capitals’ counterattack. They want to make quick plays before Washington falls into its defensive structure and quicker decisions to avoid being trapped on the perimeter. More than anything, they want to make Holtby work, which he did not do enough, compared with the barrage of high-quality shots absorbed by Henrik Lundqvist. “It’s the traffic, it’s outworking them — those are the things we’ve got to do,” Nash said. Much of Tuesday was devoted to driving more players in front of the net, to fend off slashes and elbows to establish position. The assistant Scott Arniel ran one drill in which forwards escaped his checking to deflect shots, and another in which he stood at the bottom of the right circle as they came from behind the goal line, whirled around him and fired quick wristers. These opportunities will come, the Rangers are confident, but only if they improve in other areas. Winning more than 31 percent of their face-offs (18 of 58), for instance, would help the Rangers control possession.“They allowed themselves to be denied way too easy for me,” said the former N.H.L. executive Craig Button, who is an analyst on the N.H.L. Network, in a telephone interview. Button mentioned that Holtby did not mind squeezing unthreatening shots, forcing face-offs in the Washington zone, because he knew his teammates would win them. “Every face-off is your first puck battle, and they got annihilated,” Button said. “That’s lapses in mental competitiveness and physical competitiveness.” For his part, Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said he was pleased with his team’s effort and execution. He just wished it was scoring more goals, particularly the line of Derick Brassard, Martin St. Louis and Nash, which has one goal this series.Brassard did not have a shot Monday. St. Louis, elevated to the top line in the absence of the injured Mats Zuccarello, was thwarted on a second-period breakaway and has not scored in his last 11 games. Nash has starred defensively, but, after tallying 42 in the regular season, has one assist against Washington and one goal in the playoffs. “You can play real well and do the right things with and without the puck at both ends and through the neutral zone,” Vigneault said. “But at the end of the day, I mean, you expect Marty St. Louis to find the back of the net. You expect Rick Nash to find the back of the net. You expect Derick Brassard to help those guys and himself find the back of the net.” Much of the credit goes to the retooled Capitals, who hired Barry Trotz last May to change their style. After accepting the job, Trotz watched their final 35 games from last season. “Very big team that didn’t feel like they would always play big,” Trotz said, adding, “I thought we could play a little better there.”Trotz integrated Washington’s speed with its brawn, and the identity he forged diversified the team. The Capitals started winning without production from the power play or their top two scorers, Alex Ovechkin and Nicklas Backstrom. They did just that in Game 3, when the third line produced the lone goal. Trotz demanded more of a physical presence — heavy on the puck, he calls it — and emphasized blocking shots.“Last year, we were sort of advised to let the goalie make the save,” Washington defenseman Mike Green said. “That’s not the way the game is played.”It was not Monday, when the Capitals smothered 27 of the Rangers’ 69 shot attempts. Holtby has asked his teammates to block a certain way — staying low — so his view is not obstructed. That way, center Jay Beagle said, if the puck gets by, it sails above them, allowing Holtby to still track it. The responsibility of screening Holtby on the power play belongs to Nash, whose 6-foot-4 frame prevented Holtby from seeing Dan Boyle’s goal in Game 2, which the Rangers won, 3-2. Nash has taken to that new role, but is not satisfied. “I don’t know if I’d say I’m pleased,” Nash said. “I’d be pleased if we were winning and I’m scoring.”Tim Rohan contributed reporting from Arlington, Va.Advertisement