AdvertisementSupported byMets 3, Orioles 2By Zach SchonbrunIt had been 21 innings since any Mets player had experienced the rubbery sensation of home plate under his feet. But once they finally scored, in the fourth inning Tuesday night, it seemed to alleviate the angst that clung to the ball club like globs of pine tar throughout the weekend.All it took was one brief outburst — four hits, including three for extra bases — to lift the Mets out of their offensive malaise. Anything was better than nothing, and it helped Bartolo Colon earn his fifth win of the season, as the Mets edged the Baltimore Orioles, 3-2, in an interleague matchup at Citi Field.Colon was magnificent yet again — unloading strike after strike, nimbly fielding his position, working efficiently, and even supplying Mets fans with a comedic moment, when he swung so hard at a pitch that his helmet spun off his head.It seemed momentarily symbolic of how the Mets’ collective offense had likewise been flailing of late, dropping back-to-back games by 1-0 margins to the Washington Nationals, losses that epitomized how much the bats had chilled since the season’s opening weeks. After an off-day Monday, the Mets returned to Citi Field looking to rekindle any of their early sparks.It did not look so promising in the first three innings. The Mets had base runners in each but failed to put anything on the scoreboard other than hits.A leadoff double by Lucas Duda in the fourth got the rally started. Orioles starter Bud Norris entered the game having allowed 23 runs in 17 innings this season. Surely he was hittable, and the Mets left little doubt, bringing Duda around to score with a single by Daniel Murphy and adding two runs on a double by catcher Kevin Plawecki.That was it — one outburst, one inning, and the bats receded into hibernation for the remainder of the game. But it was a windfall for Colon, who allowed six hits with nine strikeouts.“We had a talk today about getting back to our game plan,” Manager Terry Collins said. “They don’t really believe they’re in a slump. We’ve hit the ball hard, we’ve hit it at somebody — that’s part of the game. We’ve got to continue to battle through it, and tonight they came up with a big inning.”Colon needed only 41 pitches to race through the first three innings. He ran into trouble in the fourth, allowing singles to Adam Jones and Chris Davis to begin the inning.But Colon gathered himself. He fielded his position on a ground ball toward third by Delmon Young and then struck out Caleb Joseph for the second out. And Colon spryly covered the bag on a grounder to Duda by Travis Snider to end the threat.“When you’re getting ahead of everybody, you can throw just about any pitch you want,” Plawecki said. “We were doing that a lot tonight. It’s a big part of why he was effective.”The Orioles scored with solo home runs by Manny Machado in the eighth and Davis in the ninth, but that was all the damage. Colon became the first pitcher to beat one major league team for seven different clubs over the course of his career, having defeated Baltimore during stints with the Indians, the White Sox, the Angels, the Red Sox, the Yankees and the Athletics. He also extended his streak without a walk to 341/3 consecutive innings, issuing only one in six starts this season.“The most important thing for me is being confident about it and knowing what I’m doing,” Colon said through an interpreter. “I’m able to spot and put the ball where I want it to be.” He is the ageless and indefatigable engine in the middle of this Mets’ rotation, now 5-1 with a 2.90 E.R.A. Colon acknowledged his success had come as a bit of a surprise even to him. Though the offensive support was short-lived, he walked off the mound to a standing ovation, pounding his fist into his glove, seemingly happy he had received any support at all.“The team needed a game like today,” Colon said. “It was really important for me to perform the way I did. I had that in mind. We needed a win and needed me to pitch a good game.”INSIDE PITCHThe Mets called up catcher Johnny Monell from Class AAA Las Vegas and sent down infielder Eric Campbell. Monell, a Bronx native, was hitting .397 with 15 runs batted in through 17 games. Manager Terry Collins said the team wanted an extra left-handed batter on the bench. ...Third baseman David Wright is expected to run the bases Thursday and Friday and could begin playing in rehabilitation games this weekend. ... The Mets wore New York Police Department hats during batting practice to honor Brian Moore, the officer who was fatally shot in Queens on Saturday. The team also held a moment of silence.Advertisement