By BILLY WITZMAY 5, 2015
TORONTO —  Gregorio Petit and Jose Pirela, each carrying a bat in his hand, were engaged in friendly conversation late Tuesday afternoon as they walked from the batting cages back to the clubhouse here.There was nothing out of the ordinary about the scene, one Venezuelan trying to make another feel comfortable at the fringes of a major league roster. Except for this: The arrival of Pirela could spell the departure of Petit.The Yankees made no announcement Tuesday, other than that Pirela, who has been on a rehabilitation assignment while recovering from a concussion suffered during spring training, will be activated on Wednesday.Just whose place he would take on the 25-man roster is, for the moment, an unanswered question.“I know you guys are trying to figure out what the move is,” Manager Joe Girardi said, before the Yankees beat the Blue Jays, 6-3, for their 14th win in 18 games. “We’ll make it tomorrow. Something could change it today.”AdvertisementA trade could happen. Or an injury; Petit took a fastball off the right wrist in the eighth inning on Tuesday. But the most plausible scenario seems to be exchanging one right-handed-hitting backup second baseman for another. Girardi conceded it was awkward to have Pirela already present before another player is demoted, but the purpose was to have Pirela work out with the team before the game.AdvertisementPirela may be a lesser fielder than Petit, but he is a menacing hitter; he batted .370 in spring training. In his last three rehab games, with Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, he had 10 hits in 15 at-bats, with three doubles, a home run and three R.B.I.With the Yankees’ starting middle infielders not hitting well — shortstop Didi Gregorius is batting .215 and second baseman Stephen Drew just snapped an 0-for-19 skid with two hits, raising his average to .167 — there is room for a productive hitter.“He hit the ball hard, he hit the ball in the gap, he hit different pitches,” Girardi said of Pirela. “It wasn’t like he hit one pitch. He hit an off-speed pitch, he hit a changeup. He’s swinging the bat like he did in spring training.”Having such a bat in the lineup on Tuesday would have been superfluous. With Jacoby Ellsbury still scorching the baseball, Mark Teixeira returning from a day off to hit his 10th home run and Michael Pineda pitching like a staff ace, the Yankees had few other needs — at least until the Blue Jays hammered David Carpenter for all their runs in the ninth, when it became necessary to call on Andrew Miller to get the final out with the tying run at the plate.Until then, the night had gone swimmingly for the Yankees. Three batters into the game — a single by Ellsbury, a double by Brett Gardner after an 11-pitch at-bat, and a double by Alex Rodriguez — the Yankees had more runs and as many hits against Marco Estrada as they did the previous night against the knuckleballer R. A. Dickey in a 3-1 loss.The Yankees made the score 3-0 in the second when Petit reached on a two-out infield single, took second on third baseman Josh Donaldson’s throwing error and scored on Ellsbury’s single. Ellsbury had three hits and is now 17 for 32 in his last seven games.Teixeira, who did not play on Monday because of a tight muscle in his upper back, hit a two-run homer to center in the fifth. It was Teixeira’s 373rd career home run, tying him with his teammate Carlos Beltran for fourth among switch hitters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pineda may have pitched his best game of the season, throwing eight shutout innings against the team that was leading the major leagues in runs scored. He gave up five hits and a walk and struck out five while improving his record to 4-0 and lowering his E.R.A. to 2.97.Advertisement“I pitched a really good game tonight and I’m happy with that,” said Pineda, who got even better during the second half of the game after rediscovering command of his slider.Despite Monday’s hiccup, the Yankees are on a roll, and Pirela could fit right in. A powerfully built 5 feet 11 and 215 pounds, he plays in a hard-charging manner on the bases and in the field. He batted .333 as a late-September call-up last season.“He loves to play the game,” Petit said of Pirela, whom he has played against in Venezuela over the winter. “His intensity, it’s always good when you have a guy that gives 100 percent of himself. It’s contagious.”It also led Pirela, who declined to speak to the news media, to crash into an outfield wall when he played center field — a new position for him — while he was trying to make a catch in a spring training game against the Mets. Pirela was taken to a hospital for tests and found to have a concussion. He did not resume baseball activities for close to a month.Petit’s time with the Yankees came close to ending a week ago, when he was sent to Scranton/Wilkes-Barre so the Yankees could add a sixth pitcher to their rotation. But as Petit was making the drive, he got the word to turn around because Masahiro Tanaka was being put on the disabled list.Another reprieve seems unlikely.In the eighth inning, Petit’s eight-pitch at-bat ended when he struck out while unsuccessfully trying to check his swing. The pitch from Chad Jenkins struck him on the right hand. A fluoroscope showed no break, but Girardi said Petit would be re-examined Wednesday.Petit stayed in the game, but left an inning later, allowing Alex Rodriguez to make a rare appearance at third base. What should be learned soon is whether Petit’s departure presages another, more enduring exit.A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Fresh Bat Awaits, but Yankees Have All They Need Against the Blue Jays .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.