By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 1, 2015
With the Blue Jays safely in a playoff spot, the longest active postseason drought in North American sports has come to a close.Toronto was last in the playoffs in 1993, when Joe Carter hit his famous game-ending home run against Mitch Williams of the Philadelphia Phillies in the World Series.Over the next 21 seasons, the Jays had 10 winning records and Cy Young Award seasons from Roy Halladay, Roger Clemens and Pat Hentgen. They fired and rehired Manager John Gibbons and signed Jose Canseco. But they never made the playoffs.With that drought over, the new leader in baseball is the Seattle Mariners. After the Yankees won at Seattle in Game 2 of the 2001 American League Championship Series, Mariners Manager Lou Piniella said, “I guarantee you we will be back here for Game 6.” The Mariners did not come back, losing the series in Game 5 in New York, and have not been back to the playoffs since, a span of 14 seasons.AdvertisementSeattle will finish fourth in its division this year, having never truly gotten into the race despite 44 home runs from its big free-agent signing, the 35-year-old Nelson Cruz.AdvertisementThough the Mariners’ drought is impressive, sports’ new leader is the Buffalo Bills.The Bills’ last taste of the N.F.L. playoffs was in January 2000, when they lost a wild-card playoff game to the Tennessee Titans on the Kevin Dyson touchdown known as the Music City Miracle. Since then, Buffalo has had two 9-7 seasons, including one last year, but no playoff appearances, a run of 15 seasons.This year, hopes are high that the Bills can emulate the Jays and end the drought. Under their new coach, Rex Ryan, the Bills are 2-1, with the loss coming to the Patriots, and they look like a top-10 team.There is less hope for the N.B.A. drought leader, the Minnesota Timberwolves. The Wolves lost in the Western Conference finals in 2004 and since then have 11 seasons without a playoff trip. Last season they were 16-66, worse than even the 76ers, whose front office seemed to be actively trying to lose.Minnesota has since picked up Karl-Anthony Towns with the first pick in the draft, but rebuilding in the N.B.A. takes time, and the Wolves are projected by oddsmakers to win only 25 or 26 games next season.The Edmonton Oilers lost the 2006 Stanley Cup finals and followed that with nine years of futility. They had the third-worst record in hockey last season and are now counting on the so-called next Gretzky, the No. 1 overall draft pick Connor McDavid.Toronto fans may soon be celebrating the end of another bad streak. Toronto F.C. never made the Major League Soccer playoffs in its first eight years of existence. But this year the team is 13-13-4 and in a playoff spot with four games to play. If Toronto gets in, the Philadelphia Union will become the new leader, with four playoff-less seasons.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.