AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrousePONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — The cheese on the burgers served in the clubhouse was sharper than Tiger Woods’s game Tuesday. Playing TPC Sawgrass for the first time since winning the Players Championship two years ago, Woods found two fairways and three water hazards in nine practice holes.He acknowledged afterward that he was tired. Woods does not sleep well in the best of circumstances, and this week has been, in some respects, the worst of occasions. Sunday marked the ninth anniversary of the death of his father and lodestar, Earl, who introduced him to golf and was his primary adviser to the end.Anyone who has buried a parent knows well the tidal currents of grief, and how the sadness crests every year on the anniversary of the death.“This time of year is really, really hard on me,” Woods said.It was extra hard this year because Sunday spelled the end of another cherished relationship. Woods and the champion skier Lindsey Vonn announced they had dissolved their romantic relationship, which they took public in March 2013. That they described the breakup as amicable does not mean it was painless.“Obviously it does affect me,” Woods said. “It is tough. There’s no doubt. I’m not going to lie about that.”Since earning the fourth of his five PGA Tour victories of the 2013 season here, Woods has arm-wrestled adversity and lost. In 2014, he twice was sidelined by back surgery, for a total of seven months. This season, he tied for last in his own tournament, the Hero World Challenge, shot a career-worst 82 to miss the cut at the Phoenix Open and withdrew midway through his first round of the Farmers Insurance Open at Torrey Pines. He then took two months off to shore up his short game, once his strength.That is a lot of misery for someone who once went a record 142 starts without missing a cut, and who averaged five tour victories a season from 1997 through 2009. Until recently, Woods has always been able to find solace in golf, his safe place.“You go out there, and for me, I focus, I get into my little world, my little zone, and do the best I possibly can,” Woods said.So imagine how disconcerting this year has been for Woods, seeing his game, his refuge, become his main source of distraction.“I’ve made some huge, huge strides since what I was at Torrey and what I was at Phoenix,” Woods said. “Huge.”In the weeks since Woods extended to 10 years his winless drought at the Masters, the major most people once expected him to dominate like none other, the news has served up reminders that adversity is all relative.Two players who blazed the path for Woods, 39, recently died: Pete Brown, the first African-American to win a PGA Tour event, and Calvin Peete, the first African-American to win this tournament. They are gone, but their stories should not be forgotten.To watch Woods dominate amateur golf and star in college before turning pro is to perhaps overlook that before Woods was born the main avenue into the game for members of minorities was caddying.To see Woods open golf courses like the one he designed in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, is to perhaps overlook that there were courses and tournaments, including the Masters, once closed to minority players.“I didn’t have those struggles when I was trying to get out on tour,” Woods said, “but I certainly can relate to when I was a kid and the things that I had to endure just to try and play golf, and I wasn’t allowed to play at certain places. That part I can understand; I can relate to.”Peete was 23 when he took up the game. By the time Woods turned 23, he had seven tour victories, including the 1997 Masters. Peete did not earn his PGA Tour card until he was 32 but won 12 times before retiring from competition in 1993, three years before Woods turned pro.Their paths never crossed even though Peete was a regular presence at this event.“I never really got a chance to spend any time with him,” Woods said. “It’s unfortunate.”Woods described Peete as “one of the guys I looked up to, certainly, a person of color, being able to do it, especially at the time when there weren’t that many out here.”He marveled at Peete’s accuracy off the tee.“There is a stat not too many people know about and that is at Muirfield Village he didn’t miss a fairway for two years,” Woods said, referring to the Memorial Tournament site. “I mean, over 10 rounds without missing a fairway. O.K., you’re going to hit one bad shot somewhere in two and a half years. That would be pretty good with a 7-iron off the tee.”Woods may not have taken Peete’s circuitous path to the PGA Tour, but Peete did not envy Woods’s fishbowl life. In a 2012 interview with The News-Press in Fort Myers, Fla., Peete said: “I did not want to be Tiger Woods. I wanted to take care of my kids and make a living.”In 1976, when Woods began mimicking his father’s swing from his crib, there were a handful of African-American golfers playing on the tour. In 2015, Woods is the only one with full tour playing privileges, but that does not mean he has not inspired a minority group to take up golf.Last month Woods traveled to China and Japan to spread the gospel of golf according to Nike, his main sponsor. Like Brown and Peete, Woods is growing the game, sometimes at a high personal cost. In separate statements issued Sunday, Woods and Vonn mentioned hectic schedules that made it difficult to spend time together as the main factor in their breakup.“May 3rd through the 5th is just brutal on me,” Woods said, referring to the anniversary of his father’s death, “and then with obviously what happened on Sunday, it just adds to it.”Advertisement