By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMAY 5, 2015
Pete Brown, who survived polio to become the first black golfer to win a PGA Tour event, died on Friday in Augusta, Ga. He was 80.PGA Tour officials announced his death. He had had several strokes and congestive heart failure, The Augusta Chronicle reported.Brown joined the tour in 1963, two years after Charlie Sifford broke the color barrier, and played until 1978, making 356 career tournament starts and surviving the cut in 225 of them.His history-making victory came in 1964 at the Waco Turner Open in Burneyville, Okla., where he made an up-and-down par to beat Dan Sikes by one shot. He took home $2,700 in prize money. He also won the 1970 Andy Williams-San Diego Open, rallying from seven shots behind in the final round to beat Tony Jacklin in a playoff at Torrey Pines.At a time when professional golf was segregated, Brown won the United States Golf Association’s Negro National Open Championship four times.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His death followed by two days that of Calvin Peete, the most successful black professional golfer before Tiger Woods. Sifford died in February.Brown was born on Feb. 2, 1935, in Port Gibson, Miss., and learned to play golf in Jackson, Miss., after working as a caddie.He is survived by his wife of 58 years, Margaret, and six daughters, The Florida Times-Union in Jacksonville said on its website.After his victory at Torrey Pines in 1970, Brown told Newsweek magazine: “It’s going to take a while to get Negroes into golf, and that’s why I feel it’s so important to make a good showing. I feel that pressure, because I feel that I’m playing for all black people first and Pete Brown second.”A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Pete Brown, 80, Black Golfer Whose Victory Broke Ground.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.