By SAM BORDENMAY 5, 2015
TURIN, Italy —  Massimiliano Allegri does not have Carlo Ancelotti’s three Champions League titles or his seemingly limitless payroll or his squad of stars like Cristiano Ronaldo and Gareth Bale and Toni Kroos.What Allegri does have, at least for the moment, is a lead. Allegri’s Juventus, unlikely underdog in a Champions League semifinal round full of juggernauts, outplayed Ancelotti’s Real Madrid on Tuesday night, beating the Spanish giants by 2-1 in the first leg of their two-game aggregate series.The return match will be played next Wednesday in Madrid.On that night, Allegri may well have his players bundled together and trying to hang on. On Tuesday, however, he saw them move the ball with verve and energy as Carlos Tevez created the first goal and scored the second in a victory that has fans of the Old Lady, as Juventus is known, fantasizing about the club’s first European final appearance since 2003.“We played with extraordinary intensity,” Allegri said. “This is deserved.”For Ancelotti, the evening was disappointing but not a total loss. With away goals serving as a tiebreaker should aggregate scores end equal, Real Madrid’s goal here means that Los Blancos need only to win by 1-0 at home to advance and try to become the first club to win back-to-back Champions League titles. Given Madrid’s considerable firepower, that is hardly unreasonable.AdvertisementStill, Juventus appears primed and, more important, altogether unmoved by its stature among the final four teams.AdvertisementIndeed, if it seems strange that Juventus — winner of Italy’s top division 31 times, including this season — entered the semifinals as an outsider, one need only consider the résumés of the Champions League competition.On Wednesday, Bayern Munich, which has made shredding Germany’s Bundesliga a virtual rite of spring, will face Barcelona, which is in the Champions League semifinals for the eighth time in the past 10 seasons. Madrid is merely the defending champion, whom Juventus would have to beat first to get a shot at either of them.Still, there was no shiver or shake from Juventus on Tuesday. With a veteran core that includes the captain Gianluigi Buffon in goal, Giorgio Chiellini in defense, and Claudio Marchisio and Andrea Pirlo in the midfield, Juventus’s spine is as sturdy as it is grizzled. Paul Pogba, one of Europe’s fastest-rising stars, was absent because of injury, but Juventus played fearlessly from the first whistle.“They were intense at the back,” Real Madrid’s James Rodriguez said. “It’s a cliché to say Italian teams are strong in defense, but it’s true.”Ancelotti had seemed worried about his own team’s back line — “It’s clear we must defend better than we have been defending recently,” he said Monday — and those fears looked justified early on, as Tevez led a Juventus attack that peppered goalkeeper Iker Casillas’s penalty area.Tevez ultimately manufactured the opening goal after just eight minutes when he unleashed a rifled blast from the right side that Casillas deflected straight into Álvaro Morata’s path. Morata tapped the ball in, and the fans, who seemed to sense the importance of the home team’s early surge, erupted.Morata, however, did not. He used to play for Real Madrid, and despite the fact that Los Blancos seemed perfectly willing to cut him loose last year, he chose to follow the soccer tradition of not celebrating a goal scored against a former club.AdvertisementRonaldo, on the other hand, has never played for Juventus and celebrated loudly and openly when he evened the score about 20 minutes later. Rodriguez created the goal with a delicious dinked lob across the face of the goal, and Ronaldo needed only head it into the net.It was Ronaldo’s 54th goal of the season and his 76th in Champions League competition, pushing him, for the moment, past Barcelona’s Lionel Messi as the tournament’s career scoring leader.That goal steadied Madrid, and it finished the first half in command, nearly going ahead when Isco’s header from a few yards out smashed off the crossbar. Buffon had no chance on the play, and, as the ball eventually was sent upfield, he wiped his brow in relief. His face was ashen.Ten minutes after halftime, though, Buffon’s expression was remarkably brighter. Morata and Tevez took off on a break into the Madrid half and Tevez, after a slinky shimmy, was taken down in the area by Dani Carvajal. Even from 100 yards away, Buffon knew how critical the ensuing penalty kick would be.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tevez did, too. Unruffled after a short delay, he unleashed a cannon of a penalty down the middle that was past Casillas before the goalkeeper had finished his helpless dive. Carvajal hung his head. Chiellini danced with glee.“We needed to show ourselves that we could compete at the top level,” Buffon said.Madrid pushed hard over the final 20 minutes, with Bale finally making an impact as part of a few decent breaks, but there was no reward. Kroos had a shot from long range that wasn’t close. A scramble in front of goal petered out. Sergio Ramos wasted a long cross.Finally, one last ball lofted in from the wing, and Buffon charged out to claim it. He clutched the ball to his chest for a few seconds before tossing it toward the referee as the final whistle blew.On the sideline, Allegri pumped his fist.He and Juventus had the victory they craved. With 90 minutes to go, the underdogs are ahead.A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Juventus Serves Notice That It Belongs in Mix for the Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.