AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Michael PowellJames L. Dolan, owner of the New York Knicks, a semiprofessional basketball team, has decided to get into the business of raising reputations from the ashes.He has recalled Isiah Thomas from purgatory.Dolan announced that Thomas, a Hall of Fame point guard, would serve as president of the W.N.B.A.’s Liberty, the city’s women’s basketball team. “We believe Isiah belongs in basketball,” Madison Square Garden officials said in a statement, “and are grateful that he has committed his considerable talent to help the Liberty succeed.”This statement is fine as far as it goes, particularly if you’ve suffered catastrophic memory loss.Thomas and Dolan last roamed together in the corporate suites at the Garden in 2008. A year before that, a jury found that Thomas had sexually harassed a team executive in the crudest of terms. The executive, now known professionally as Anucha Browne, testified that Thomas had used misogynistic slurs. When she complained to top officials at the Garden, Dolan personally insisted on firing her.Who among us does not believe in repentance and second chances? I called to ask the Garden about Thomas and the boss.Have the two men repented? Do they have second thoughts? Or have they rethought their first thoughts?This email statement arrived in my inbox:“We did not believe the allegations then and we don’t believe them now,” the statement noted. “We feel strongly that Isiah Thomas was held responsible for sordid allegations that were completely unrelated to him, and for which M.S.G. bore responsibility.”Several problems arise here. The facts of the Browne harassment case are no longer “allegations.” A jury verdict is not a friendly tap on your shoulder or advice whispered in your ear. You appeal a verdict or accept it, at which point, like freshly poured concrete, it quickly hardens into accepted fact.After the verdict, Dolan and Thomas made a show of suggesting that the jury was gullible and that they would appeal. “I’m very innocent,” Thomas said immediately afterward, tapping his chest for emphasis. “I will appeal.”He did not.During the trial, Dolan took puffed-chest pride in testifying that he had decided to fire Browne all on his own, without talking to his corporate counsel. “All decisions at the Garden I make on my own,” he said.Yes, well, that worked out, didn’t it? The jury found that Dolan’s decision constituted a retaliatory firing and violated federal law.Dolan’s people vowed that the boss positively, absolutely would appeal. He did not. But he did assure New Yorkers that “the normal operations of M.S.G. and the New York Knicks will continue unabated.”Grown men wept when they read those words.Dolan and his men took shelter in a shallow and technical foxhole Tuesday. While the jury held Dolan responsible for the frat house atmosphere on West 33rd Street, and held him liable for millions of dollars, they noted that the “jury did not find Isiah liable for punitive damages, confirming he did not act maliciously.”Yes, O.K., sorry, but not really. Six of the seven jurors wanted Thomas held financially responsible. He can thank a lone holdout for the fact that the damage was only to his reputation, and not to his bank account.I spoke to three law professors Tuesday. All said that fact could not be remotely construed as clearing Thomas. Dolan, of course, declines to talk to his lawyers.This is not to argue against the power of the redemptive state. Thomas has proved himself a reliable judge of talent, and a bright fellow. A little public repentance, his and the Garden’s, could go a long way.You wonder if Thomas and Dolan paid any attention to any part of the past N.F.L. season. We live, thankfully, in a slow-dawning age of cultural change, in which sexual harassment of women is less and less tolerated. (It’s worth noting that the N.B.A. press office dodged the question of this appointment altogether, noting only that the Board of Governors of the W.N.B.A. had to approve the hiring.)I called Suzanne B. Goldberg, director of Columbia Law School’s Center for Gender & Sexuality Law. She is, by her own acknowledgment, not a big basketball fan and does not seem to follow the Knicks. (I suggested this was just as well.) She noted, however, that the cultural storms were buffeting the sports world with gale force.“It’s surprising that a company whose fan base is primarily women would not directly express itself on this question,” she said. “You would expect the Knicks to be upfront about affirming a basketball environment free from sexual harassment.“Their posture seems defensive rather than affirming.”In the age of Dolan, the Garden forever seems to fire from a crouch.Email: powellm@nytimes.com Advertisement