AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanA half-inch, maybe. A while back, the Mets asked Jeurys Familia to change the way he gripped his heavy sinker and to spread his index and middle fingers about a half-inch wider on the ball, creating a new pitch that went about four miles per hour slower but dropped out of the zone even more emphatically than the sinker did.For about two years, Familia tinkered with the pitch in the bullpen, until he unveiled it in August to rave reviews. Familia called it a splitter. Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach, said it was not quite that. But whatever it is, it has become another element in Familia’s arsenal that hitters have to worry about.And since Familia, the Mets’ strapping closer, started using the new pitch, he has, at times, seemed unhittable. In the postseason, he has appeared in six of the team’s seven games and has retired 23 of the 26 batters he has faced. Not Mariano Rivera, maybe, but close.Indeed, the Mets have now come to rely on Familia in a way that resembles how the Yankees used to employ Rivera in October — in big spots that might require one inning of work, or more. And Familia’s teammates have noticed, for amid all the beefed-up offense in the Mets’ lineup and all the team’s standout starting pitchers, it is Familia, they say, who is the one player they could not do without.At the start of the 2015 season, Familia was supposed to be the Mets’ setup man, the bridge to the established closer, his good friend Jenrry Mejia. But the league suspended Mejia in early April after he tested positive for performance-enhancing drugs. Collins pulled Familia aside separately from his teammates to break the news to him, and Familia took it particularly hard.Not only that, Familia, 26, was now expected to fill Mejia’s role.A few years earlier, that prospect might have terrified him. Familia, who was signed by the Mets in 2007 out of the Dominican Republic, did not necessarily trust his stuff. He lacked confidence. When he had a bad outing, it would rattle him. Early during the 2014 season, his first full one in the major leagues, he endured a stretch in which he allowed five runs over his first six outings. Bartolo Colon, the elder statesman of the Mets’ pitching staff, approached him and bluntly asked if he was afraid to challenge hitters.“If you’re scared,” Colon told him, “take your bat and go home.”“He told me if you don’t trust yourself, you’re not going to have success,” Familia said in an interview earlier this season after he had settled into the closer’s role. “What I’m doing right now, he helped me a lot mentally.“A couple of years ago, going into a game, I had doubt if I could throw strikes or if I was going to have a bad game,” Familia added. “Right now, going out there, I know I’m going to do my job. I know I’m going to throw strikes. I know I’m going to get people out.”Colon, who is also from the Dominican Republic, has become a mentor to Familia, answering his questions and giving him advice about pitching and life in general. It has worked. As a setup man last season, Familia finished seventh in the National League Rookie of the Year voting. And having been thrust into the closer’s role this season, he converted 43 saves in 48 chances, tying the franchise record set by Armando Benitez. His E.R.A. was a sterling 1.85.Familia went about the closer’s role more like Rivera than Mejia. Instead of ending his saves with an elaborate celebration, Familia projected calmness. Or, more accurately, 6 feet 3 inches and 240 pounds of calmness.Given his size, in fact, Familia’s first love was basketball, not baseball, but once his friends switched to baseball, Familia did, too. He was 15, and he had become motivated by how much success Dominicans were having in the major leagues. The Mets, then being run by Omar Minaya, signed him two years later.“I just got it in my head I wanted to be like a Pedro Martinez,” Familia said of his decision to go with baseball. “I wanted to be like a David Ortiz. I wanted to push myself to get to the greatest levels of this sport.”As for Familia’s new pitch, whatever it is, it is not as good as Rivera’s cutter, at least not yet. But his overall repertory, his combination of velocity and movement, has a lot of hitters shaking their heads these days. His sinker, his best pitch, sits around 97 miles per hour and feels like a brick. His slider darts hard, about 90 m.p.h. And that splitter — if that is what you want to call it — comes in at 94 m.p.h. and can drop as much as a foot.“I mean everything that he throws, you’re like, how do you do that?” said Tyler Clippard, the Mets reliever who has generally been serving as Familia’s setup man.In the playoffs, Collins has chosen at times to skip over his setup relievers in favor of using Familia in the eighth inning to essentially end the game right then.So four of Familia’s six postseason appearances have required him to get more than three outs. He recorded a six-out save on just 21 pitches to clinch the Mets’ division series against the Los Angeles Dodgers — the Mets’ first six-out playoff save since Jesse Orosco recorded one in Game 7 of the 1986 World Series.In all, Familia has now pitched in 82 games this year, the most of any reliever in the majors. But he tells Collins he feels healthy, he feels strong.“It’s just God-given,” catcher Travis d’Arnaud said. “He’s just got that loose, electric arm.” An arm that throws a new pitch that may keep getting better and better.Advertisement