

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
OCT. 19, 2015
CHICAGO — With that rooster walk of his, Terry Collins walks out of the cool, damp, 6-foot-high hallways that snake through the ancient belly of Wrigley Field and sits at the press table. With a little prompting, he talks of the good, the bad and the obsessive for a playoff manager.What about those big-bodied Chicago Cubs sluggers?“Any team that’s got good power, this is a good place to play,” he says. “If you make mistakes. ...”And overconfidence? And tired young pitchers? And, and, and. The catalog of potential worries is impressive.What about managerial fatigue, Terry? Is your mind going 24/7? The peripatetic Mets manager nods before you finish.Advertisement“Yes.”Really?“There’s something that’s always going to crop in,” he says, adding: “Do you need to make a lineup change, do you need to move the lineup around? All right, gee, Matt Harvey’s arm swelled up, who do we pitch? How has he done in this park?”AdvertisementHe looks you in the eyes. “Sleep is the enemy right now,” he says.One of the personal intrigues of a playoff run in any sport is watching how coaches react. Gregg Popovich plays his mind games. Bill Belichick does an excellent Golem imitation. The Cubs’ Joe Maddon is the sardonic beatnik.Ask about a bad cold he’s been nursing for days, and Maddon talks of his medication: “They make something for ‘severe’. I kind of like the word ‘severe’ on it, so I thought that was made for me.”Maddon and Collins are friends; Maddon served as Collins’s bench coach decades back. These two baseball lifers plainly enjoy their moment in the late career sun. Collins is looser than he used to be, back when the idea that he might return to managing seemed an impossibility left behind in his tightly wound 1990s.His voice still double-clutches sometimes, as though he cannot quite catch up with all the words that his brain is sending down the vocal chutes. He is loyal and attentive to his players’ insecurities, even as he’s aware that a carefully chosen word or four might light a useful bonfire.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He says he is careful not to walk back into the clubhouse too often. That’s their place; he leaves the policing to his veterans and his coaches.The Yankees’ Joe Girardi treats any question of injury or managerial strategy as a bit impertinent. If he answered honestly, he’d have to toss you into lockdown. Not Collins. Ask him about a slumping player or a bruised ace, and the answer comes tumbling down the chute.Last Saturday, Dexter Fowler, the Cubs’ center fielder, lined a baseball off Harvey’s right shoulder, a sight that must have caused Collins’s brain to tilt. Harvey showed up the next day with the shoulder purple and blue.AdvertisementIs Harvey a go for Game 5 of the playoffs on Thursday? The managerial workbook dictates the easy answer: Thursday is a long way off.“He, as we sit here today, is a go,” Collins replies. “But that could certainly change in the next couple of days.”Then he adds: “Anytime you have swelling, it leads to stiffness. As stiff as he was yesterday, we’re going to be careful.”Maybe ageless-so-far Bartolo Colon starts that game. Or Jon Niese. Listen long enough, and you can feel the snake of anxiety rising in your gut. After he speaks to the news media, Collins walks the field at Wrigley. He and his pitching coach, Dan Warthen, pick batting practice baseballs out of the ivy, even as they keep an eye on a remedial batting-cage class for three slumping sluggers: Lucas Duda, David Wright and Michael Conforto.Then Harvey walks out of the dugout. Every television camera in the place follows him like sonar locked on a submarine. He strolls into right field for a not-at-all-casual little game of catch. Terry Collins walks over. Arms folded, shifting from foot to foot, he talks and jokes with Harvey.After a minute or two, Harvey smiles. A minute or two after that, he walks off the field, trailed by a sheepherder of a Mets public-relations man. How you feeling, Matt? You going to pitch?“O.K.,” Harvey says. “Yep.”Collins walks down the steps after him, never losing sight of his erstwhile ace. As he said earlier: “The conversation level with my wife has gone downhill. There’s too many other things that take place right now for me.“That’s just me.”Email: powellm@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball Lifer and His Moment in the Late Sun.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »