By BILLY WITZOCT. 19, 2015
CHICAGO — After two dispiriting losses to the Mets, the Chicago Cubs returned to the friendly confines of Wrigley Field for a workout Monday, and in something of a surprise, there was not a penguin or a cockatoo wandering around the clubhouse. Nor was there a mariachi band to improve the mood or a magician to make the team’s lengthy curse (or the Mets’ Daniel Murphy) disappear.Then again, there is always Tuesday.You never really know with the Cubs’ manager, Joe Maddon, who has dug into his voluminous bag of psychological tools as heartily in his first season here as he did during his years managing underfunded, overachieving Tampa Bay teams.The object, then and now, is to create a sunny-side-up environment.“It’s a tension-free kind of a game,” said Maddon, whose clubhouses have in the past featured exotic animals, a magician and, yes, a mariachi band, as well as a D.J. “So anything I can do to promote that, that’s what I attempt to do. I really think to bring out the best in your group, the best thing to do is to somehow get them to be able to relax and think in the moment and be mentally relaxed. That is my biggest concern, always.”At the moment, the Cubs have plenty of others, too. They not only are in a two-games-to-none hole in the National League Championship Series but also have lost with their top two pitchers, Jon Lester and Jake Arrieta, on the mound. Now, they have the daunting task of beating the Mets’ ace, Jacob deGrom, who outpitched Clayton Kershaw and Zack Greinke, arguably baseball’s two best starters this season, in a division series win over the Los Angeles Dodgers. And the Cubs have yet to figure out a way to cool off Murphy.AdvertisementIn circumstances like these — especially for a franchise like the Cubs, who have not reached a World Series since 1945 and not won one since 1908 — it is easy for players and coaches to feel the anxiety of a city.When two of Maddon’s predecessors, Dusty Baker and Lou Piniella, took the Cubs to the playoffs, they asked fans not to put too big a burden on the players.Maddon has welcomed the pressure, insisting that even if the Cubs arrived at this stage sooner than some expected, it was not a surprise to him.“Listen, they beat us, but it’s not nearly over with, and we are really good,” Maddon said, pointing to the phrase now attached to the team on Twitter, “#wearegood.” Maddon added, “I have a lot of faith in our guys.”Catcher David Ross said the positive environment had been in place since spring training, and it perhaps helps explain why Maddon can stick Kris Bryant, typically a third baseman, and Kyle Schwarber, primarily a catcher in the minors, in the outfield while giving them the confidence not to worry about their inexperience there.Advertisement“I really believe winning is a skill,” said Ross, 38, who won a World Series with Boston. “You learn how to win, and you figure those things out — how to have that personality when things are going really bad. We play so many games, and especially in a seven-game series, I don’t think we’re going to have any kind of letdown. The only thing now, being down two games, is just staying positive if things don’t go our way.”Maddon has long believed the mental component of baseball is a sixth tool, alongside the traditional five: hitting for average, hitting for power, running, fielding and throwing.“In our game,” Maddon said, “with all the breaks and pauses, what do you do with them mentally, and how do you focus in the moment without letting your mind wander off into those bad reaches?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the mid-1980s, when Maddon was a minor league field coordinator for the Angels, he met Doug Larish, then a professor at Arizona State, and persuaded the Angels to invite Larish to minor league spring training to evaluate how the coaches were teaching.“He’s very open-minded and progressive,” said Larish, whose son Jeff reached the major leagues. “He’s been very willing to think outside the box.”Too often, Larish found, coaches knew the points they wanted to get across to players but had a hard time doing so. For instance, a coach might tell a hitter that 70 percent of his weight should be on his back foot and 30 percent on his front foot.“How does a player judge that?” Larish said. “He doesn’t have scales under his feet. While the information is correct, it’s presented in an ambiguous way.”Maddon said: “You have to imagine the middle ’80s. It was: ‘Where did he play? What has he done?’ All these ridiculous comments. And my point was always, it’s no different than a hitting coach or a pitching coach — he’s trying to teach you a skill.”Around the same time, Maddon came across another academic, Ken Ravizza, a sports psychology professor at California State, Fullerton. Ravizza, who has worked with various college baseball and football teams, as well as the Jets, later wrote the book “Heads-Up Baseball: Playing the Game One Pitch at a Time.”AdvertisementRavizza has been a consultant for the Rays and the Cubs.“Joe creates an environment where people can be themselves and play their game,” Ravizza said. “It’s very important to be able to relax and be focused on what you need to do and not make it bigger than it is, and Joe creates a culture that encourages that.”So after the Cubs lost to the Mets, 4-1, on Sunday night, music pulsed through the clubhouse, just as it always does. Maddon had the theme from “Rocky” blaring.“ ‘Rocky’ did set a great example in 1976 for all of us,” Maddon said. “So when you get behind the eight ball a little bit, sometimes you just go pound on some big slabs of beef in the cooler, and obviously you come back, and you’re fine.”When it was pointed out to Maddon that Rocky lost the title bout in that first movie, he shrugged.“It was just about the effort,” Maddon said. “He came back. He came back.”The Cubs hope they can do the same.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Rose-Colored Approach .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.