By BEN SHPIGELOCT. 19, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  The craziest thing happened at Jets headquarters on Monday. Their coach faced the news media at the beginning of that seven-day stretch of bedlam known as Patriots Week and acted unaware that he was beginning that seven-day stretch of bedlam known as Patriots Week.“Winning this game is not going to make us,” Todd Bowles said. “Losing this game is not going to break us.”Bowles does know that the Jets (4-1) are playing New England, right? As in the divisional overlord New England — perennial antagonist, crusher of dreams and all that.“You don’t get up or down for one game,” Bowles said.His equanimity behind the lectern was disorienting. Bowles’s predecessor, Rex Ryan, perceived the twice-a-season skirmishes with New England as referendums on his team and his coaching ability. He once said he never stopped thinking about the Patriots, about Bill Belichick and Tom Brady and Randy Vataha and Stanley Morgan, and his obsession filtered to his players. To Ryan, a game against New England, like all division matchups, was worth a game and a half, and the Jets invested so much emotional energy that win or (more often) lose, it left them exhausted.Advertisement“If you fall into it,” offensive guard Willie Colon said, “you kind of lose focus on everything that needs to be done around you.”AdvertisementBut now?“New regime,” he said.The message inculcated by Bowles this week is the same, in spirit, as the approach he has espoused since taking over for Ryan in January. He wants the Jets to be amped up on Sunday at Gillette Stadium, but not before. It is one game. Of six in the A.F.C. East. Of 16 over all. And its importance is relative to expectations and the Jets’ standing, which is to say in possession of the conference’s No. 5 seed by a game and a half over Ryan’s 3-3 Buffalo Bills.Given the weak state of the A.F.C. through six weeks — only five of 15 teams are better than .500 — the Jets, as currently constituted, are, at worst, a wild-card favorite. At best — well, they do not much care to discuss that.“Good teams don’t ride the emotional roller coaster,” Colon said. “They stay steady, they stay straight ahead, they stay in their lane, they don’t look left or right and see what other teams are going through. We’re trying to be that team. You don’t have to look at what Buffalo’s going through, what New England’s doing. We just got to worry about the New York Jets.”Through five games, the Jets have adopted Bowles’s personality. They do not bask and they do not sulk. They prepare. They practice. They play. They express confidence in themselves — “We’re not really surprised; I think we should be undefeated,” right tackle Breno Giacomini said — without needling opponents.“If you’re preparing for one harder than you did last week,” quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick said, “you’re not doing it right.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Jets spent most of Monday’s preparation concerned with themselves after beating the Washington Redskins: the communication breakdowns in the secondary, the missed blocking assignments, the three first-half turnovers, the blocked punt that led to the Redskins’ final touchdown (the Jets had only 10 players on the field).“We can’t have that happen,” Bowles said.What Bowles wants to continue happening is the weekly dominance along the offensive line, which has allowed a league-low two sacks while creating running room for Chris Ivory, who ranks third in the league in rushing after bulling for 146 yards on Sunday. And the Jets’ efficiency in the red zone, where they have scored touchdowns on 73.7 percent (14 of 19) of their chances, including three of four against the Redskins.One of those came on Fitzpatrick’s 18-yard scramble, the longest touchdown run by a Jets quarterback since Richard Todd’s 30-yarder against New Orleans in 1980. A day later, he still marveled at it.Advertisement“I don’t know how I got 18 yards down the field without anyone touching me,” Fitzpatrick said.It helped that Ivory detected a nickel blitz and thwarted it, clearing the middle of the field, but it probably will not happen again, at least not this week. New England, meticulous and thorough, no doubt will be ready for such a tactic on Sunday, when these teams will engage in what could be called the least important most important game of their recent rivalry.Said Colon: “For us, it’s another chance to prove ourselves. And the only thing we need to prove to ourselves is that we can win.”EXTRA POINTSTodd Bowles said it was too soon to know whether slot cornerback Buster Skrine, who would figure to be an integral part of the Jets’ game plan against New England, will be able to play. Skrine sustained a concussion in the second quarter Sunday and is currently in the league’s protocol. ... Cornerback Dee Milliner, who is on the short-term injured reserve list after breaking his wrist in August, is mandated to miss another two games but is eligible to start practicing this week. Bowles said he was not sure if Milliner would actually do so. Bowles sounded more optimistic about running back Stevan Ridley, who, 11 months after tearing a knee ligament, is likely to put pads on Wednesday.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Once a Jets Obsession, the Patriots Have Now Become Just an Obstruction.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.