AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressBrowns quarterback Johnny Manziel’s roadside argument with his girlfriend could lead to punishment from the N.F.L.Cleveland Coach Mike Pettine said Monday that the league was investigating a domestic dispute last week involving Manziel, the team’s backup. Manziel was questioned by the police in Avon, Ohio, after his girlfriend said he had been physical with her when the two had a heated disagreement while driving on an interstate highway.In a video taken with a dashboard camera, the woman, Colleen Crowley, can be heard telling the police that Manziel “hit me a couple times.” Manziel was not arrested, and Crowley, who the police said appeared intoxicated, did not press charges.The league spokesman Brian McCarthy said Manziel’s situation would be reviewed.“It is standard procedure to look into any incident that is a potential violation of our personal conduct policy,” McCarthy said in an email.After a rocky first season in 2014, Manziel spent 70 days in a Pennsylvania rehabilitation center for an undisclosed condition. It is not known whether he is in the league’s substance abuse program. If he is in the program and violated any conditions, Manziel could face discipline.NETWORK APOLOGIZES TO BENGALS NFL Network apologized to Cincinnati players who were shown naked in the locker room during an interview after the Bengals’ victory Sunday in Buffalo.A network reporter was interviewing cornerback Adam Jones, and the videographer’s angle included the entrance to the shower area. Several players were shown naked in the background.The NFL Network executive vice president Alex Riethmiller said during a conference call that the crew had not followed network procedures. He apologized “to everyone that was affected, to the players to the organization to the viewing public, first and foremost.”Left tackle Andrew Whitworth, one of those shown, is the team’s union representative. He said that to prevent a similar occurrence, the news media should not be allowed in the locker room while players are showering and dressing. SAINTS REPLACE KICKER The New Orleans Saints made a change at kicker, releasing Zach Hocker and replacing him with the former Washington kicker Kai Forbath. Hocker missed two field-goal attempts in the Saints’ victory over Atlanta on Thursday, dropping him to 9 of 13 on the season. Advertisement