By SCOTT CACCIOLAOCT. 19, 2015
James L. Dolan, the chairman of Madison Square Garden, said in an interview with HBO Sports that he was surprised by the amount of public criticism he faced in May after hiring Isiah Thomas as president of the W.N.B.A.’s Liberty.“Worse than I imagined,” Dolan said in a segment for “Real Sports With Bryant Gumbel,” which is scheduled to air Tuesday night.Thomas’s return to the Garden was clouded by controversy stemming from his tenure as coach and president of the Knicks. In 2007, a federal jury ruled that Thomas had engaged in sexual discrimination against Anucha Browne, a former team executive who won an $11.5 million judgment against Madison Square Garden after she accused Thomas of harassment. Thomas left the Knicks in 2008.Dolan, who owns the Knicks and the Liberty, has maintained a close relationship with Thomas, who was also interviewed by HBO. Eight years after the court ruling, both men expressed defiance.AdvertisementWhen Gumbel asked Thomas whether he had harassed Browne, Thomas said, “Never happened.”Dolan suggested that Browne had fabricated much of her testimony.Advertisement“I think a bunch of it, she did, yes,” Dolan said. “I was running a business, and she didn’t do very well in it, and she was real unhappy about that. And she decided to go get a lawyer.”Browne, a vice president with the N.C.A.A., responded to the comments made by Dolan and Thomas via email.“Dolan and Thomas continue to act as if the jury’s verdict is open to debate,” she said. “It is not. Had there been any question that the jury got it wrong, there was an opportunity to appeal. Having chosen not to, their attacks years later should be rejected as clearly delusional and a continuation of their contemptuous treatment of women.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Browne added, “Anyone who is familiar with the trial will know that Dolan and Thomas were not believed by the jury, and they are not believable now.”In his interview with HBO, Dolan said he had turned down a settlement with Browne — a decision that wound up costing the Garden millions after the jury ruled in her favor. “The fighter in me came out,” Dolan said. “I’m like: You know what? I’m not going to settle because that’s an admission of guilt and we’re not guilty.’ ”As for his more recent reunion with Thomas, Dolan said he had considered shuttering the Liberty before bringing him aboard.“When you looked at the overall landscape of the franchise and the league, it just looks like a never-ending pit of money that just keeps going out the door,” Dolan said.In Thomas’s first season with the team, the Liberty advanced to the Eastern Conference finals before falling to the Indiana Fever.“I didn’t think I would get a better person to do that job than him,” Dolan said of Thomas. “And he would draw attention to the team.”A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Dolan Tells of Surprise Over Harsh Reactions to Thomas .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.