By BEN SHPIGELOCT. 19, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  In its continuing clampdown on domestic violence, the N.F.L. suspended Jets receiver Quincy Enunwa for four games for violating the personal conduct policy.Enunwa’s suspension took effect Monday. He will be eligible to rejoin the Jets on Nov. 13, the day after they play Buffalo in Bills Coach Rex Ryan’s return to MetLife Stadium.Enunwa, 23, was a sixth-round draft pick out of Nebraska last year. He has eight receptions for 94 yards in five games this season.In a statement, the Jets said they supported the league’s decision to suspend Enunwa, who was arrested Aug. 31, 2014, and charged with simple assault at a hotel near the Jets’ complex here. The police said that Enunwa pulled a woman off a bed and that she hurt her head and finger, but that she opted not to pursue the case. Charges were dismissed in municipal court last October.AdvertisementJets Coach Todd Bowles said he learned of a possible suspension about six weeks ago, but he was not notified until Monday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m surprised it happened so late in the season, being it’s something that happened last year,” Bowles said. “That’s the process they went through, and they took their time going through it, so we respect the decision.”In December, the N.F.L. adopted a revamped personal conduct policy, which included more stringent guidelines for players and league employees involved in domestic violence cases — suspensions of six games instead of two for first-time offenders. But the league has applied the rule inconsistently.AdvertisementESPN.com, citing an anonymous source, reported that Enunwa’s suspension was reduced to four games because he cooperated and expressed remorse during the process.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Receiver Is Suspended for 2014 Assault Allegation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.