By ROB HUGHESOCT. 1, 2015
LONDON — The penalty brought a bitter end to an enthralling contest in the first European Cup game at Borussia Mönchengladbach in 37 years.Bitter, but not recriminatory.“We performed very well and showed that we don’t need to hide in the Champions League,” said Fabian Johnson, the Mönchengladbach player whose foul conceded the last-minute penalty awarded on Wednesday.“I clipped Sergio Agüero on the foot, and he was clever,” Johnson added. “It was the correct call.”Agüero scored from the penalty spot to give Manchester City a 2-1 victory at the home of a club that once was synonymous with the fast-flowing, thrilling style of top European soccer. Mönchengladbach was up there with Bayern Munich, Ajax, Barcelona and Real Madrid at the heart of the sport.AdvertisementHistory matters only if the best of it can be repeated by later generations. For my part, I remember a day spent at the old Gladbach training grounds northwest of Cologne, drawn there to take part in a session run by Hennes Weisweiler.AdvertisementWeisweiler was the master of all he surveyed. He was in his element at the center, developing a style of play that raised Mönchengladbach to the summit of soccer.He stood on the grass, hands behind his back, bandy legs seemingly anchored in heavy rubber boots, first a smile and then a frown upon his face. The training he invited me to join came down to simplicity: Pass, pass, pass — please the master by the sweetness of touch on the ball, or incur his wrath for a misplaced pass.He worked the same way with Mönchengladbach veterans — including the greats Günter Netzer, Rainer Bonhof, Berti Vogts, Jupp Heynckes and so many more — as he did with the boys of various age groups, starting from age 12 on up.Eventually, Weisweiler left his beloved Gladbach for Barcelona and later moved on to the New York Cosmos.He died 32 years ago, and Germany’s national soccer coaching academy is now named after him. His philosophy was carried on as some of his pupils started coaching, but eventually his style — molding a champion through teaching and development — was overtaken, as clubs like Manchester City instead bought their way to titles.But as Johnson, a member of the United States national team, observed this week, there is something stirring in the city and its relatively new stadium, Borussia-Park.Mönchengladbach changed coaches last month when Lucien Favre, the Swiss who restored Weisweiler’s legacy over the past five years, suddenly resigned after the team lost its first five games in the Bundesliga. André Schubert stepped up from the club’s under-23 team and immediately turned things around as the club won its next two league games to climb out of last place.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Manchester City, though, is in a different world, a team financed to win the English title and expected to go on to win in the Champions League, too.AdvertisementThat is a work in progress, and City Coach Manuel Pellegrini admitted Wednesday that Gladbach’s swift brand of soccer and its extraordinary quick transition between midfield and attack almost overwhelmed City for the first hour.“We missed chances, but Joe Hart kept us in the game, too,” Pellegrini said. Hart made five important saves in goal, including a penalty stop from Gladbach’s bright Brazilian, Raffael.Mönchengladbach is developing a player, Mahmoud Dahoud, who might be the future of both the German national team and Gladbach. Dahoud, 19, was born in Syria but his family moved to Germany while he was still a baby. He now anchors Gladbach in midfield, taking on players like Yaya Touré, Fernandinho and David Silva, and represents Germany at youth level.Despite Wednesday’s loss, Schubert found bright points as the club hosted its first top-level match in European competition since 1978. “Obviously the disappointment at taking nothing from the game is overwhelming, but I’m proud of my team, regardless,” Schubert told reporters.Pellegrini, speaking nearby, said that the game could have been 4-4 after 65 minutes. His feeling was of pride mixed with relief at the way that his team, finally, persevered against a club full of young talent that is much better than its position in the Bundesliga and two straight losses in the Champions League indicate.Manchester City will face tougher, more European-savvy challenges this season. Mönchengladbach is lower on the learning curve and may not in this era be able to achieve what Weisweiler instilled in his time.In the 1970s, there was time for a coaching professor to slowly brew his broth, to turn foals into fine stallions. Heynckes, born in Mönchengladbach and the club’s all-time leading scorer, matured into a fine coach, first in his home town and later with clubs like Real Madrid and Bayern Munich.Heynckes retired after guiding Munich to the ultimate treble of winning the German league, the German Cup and the Champions League trophy in 2013. Way back in the mid-1970s, Heynckes was one player in Weisweiler’s fold, striving to please the coach.An English admirer, the former Chelsea and Manchester United coach Dave Sexton, recalled: “No matter which Borussia player got the ball, he went forward with it at his feet. That seemed to me the essence of good soccer.”AdvertisementIf the essence is rising again, watch out for Gladbach.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.