By ANDREW DASOCT. 19, 2015
No rest for the weary, or the good teams, this week, which will end with a day of preplayoff drama in Major League Soccer.One would have to go pretty far down Arsène Wenger’s wish list of places to spend Tuesday before finding “On the Bench Watching Bayern Play Arsenal.” But that’s just where the Gunners will be Tuesday, hosting Bayern in London (2:45 p.m., Eastern time, Fox Sports 2). Arsenal has already lost to Dinamo Zagreb and Olympiacos — the easy teams in its group — and now runs the risk of serious trouble against the Bavarians. Naturally, that probably means Arsenal will win valiantly, 2-1, while down a man and then scrape into the knockout round somehow. Because that’s what Wenger’s Arsenal does.Wednesday’s sexy matchup is Real Madrid at Paris St.-Germain, though it has inexplicably been shunted to the fringes (2:45 p.m., Fox Deportes) in favor of two more marketing friendly matchups: Manchester United at CSKA Moscow (FS2) and Borussia Monchengladbach-Juventus (ESPN2). But seek out Madrid-P.S.G. if you can; neither team has allowed a goal through two games, and the Ligue 1 leaders are unbeaten in all competitions this season. If they are ever going to make a statement that they are serious contenders to win the Champions League, a victory Wednesday would be a good platform to do it.If you’re dying to see United, wait until Sunday, when they host first-place Manchester City in the league (10 a.m., NBCSN).Sunday is the last day of the regular season in M.L.S., and while it will lack the drama of relegation fights, there will be quite a bit to play for. The early game is D.C. United at Columbus (5 p.m., FS1). The winner will earn a bye in the first round of the playoffs. The late game is Los Angeles at Sporting Kansas City (7 p.m., ESPN), which could have similar seeding ramifications. Both games of the doubleheader will feature live cut-ins to other matches with playoff drama.The United States women’s national team plays Brazil twice this week, on Wednesday night in Seattle (10 p.m., ESPN2) and on Sunday afternoon in Orlando (2:30 p.m., FS1). Both games are friendlies, part of the World Cup champions’ continuing (and seemingly never-ending) victory tour. ... The United States under-17s could face a make-or-break game against host Chile on Friday night in the Under-17 World Cup (7 p.m., FS2), but only if their Tuesday game against Croatia goes well first.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.