By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 19, 2015
A great trick play that pays off can demoralize the opposition and provide enjoyable memories for years to come. Think of Dan Marino yelling, “Clock,” to delude the Jets into thinking he would spike the ball or the Bills sneaking a defensive lineman onto the field to catch a touchdown on a fake field goal attempt.But trick plays can also go wrong. And when they go as badly wrong as whatever the Colts were trying Sunday night, they bring not admiration, but scorn, mockery and just plain laughter.With 1 minute 14 seconds left in the third quarter, and trailing the Super Bowl champion Patriots by 27-21 and still very much in the game, the Colts had a fourth-and-3 at their own 37.The New York Times’s Fourth Down Bot advised the aggressive strategy of going for it. But the Colts decided to punt … or so it seemed.AdvertisementPunter Pat McAfee came out on the field, but suddenly he and eight other players shifted to the far right side. That left only two Colts players over the ball: Griff Whalen at center and Colt Anderson at quarterback.AdvertisementIt might be worth mentioning at this point that Whalen is a wide receiver and Anderson is a safety.A number of Patriots shifted, too, but at least three or four remained in the vicinity of the ball. Perhaps the ruse was to lure New England offside? If so, it did not succeed, as the Patriots players kept their discipline and stayed put.So, delay of game and then punt, right?Nope. Whalen snapped the ball.It turns out that a single wide receiver cannot hold off several defenders for very long. Before he could do a thing, Anderson was swarmed and tackled.
            Colts ran what literally may be the worst trick play in NFL history: http://t.co/9GnPQXOBDR pic.twitter.com/P0NFcqjWlS Even if the play had somehow led to a first down — though it is hard to see how — the Colts would not have succeeded. At least some Indianapolis players were not properly lined up on the line of scrimmage, and an illegal formation was called.The Patriots took over on downs in great field position and quickly scored to go up by 13. A late Indianapolis touchdown made the final score, 34-27, Patriots.Needless to say, Coach Chuck Pagano faced some puzzled questions after the game. What, exactly, was his plan?“The whole idea there was, on a fourth-and-3 or less, shift to an alignment to where you either catch them misaligned, they try to sub some people in, catch them with more men on the field, 12 men on the field. And if you get a certain look, you got 3 yards, 2 yards, you can make a play,” he said.So when the Patriots sent out the correct number of players, and the Colts didn’t get that “certain look,” why was the ball snapped?Advertisement“A communication breakdown between the quarterback and the snapper,” Pagano said. “That’s all on me. I take full responsibility on that, and I didn’t do a good enough job of getting that communicated to the guys.”Certainly, after he was brought down, Anderson gestured to Whalen as if to say “What were you doing?”“Obviously, it played a huge factor in this loss given the field position at that point in the game and the touchdown that resulted from that,” Pagano said.Punter McAfee told reporters, “It turned out to be one of the most failed fakes probably of all time.”As the play unfolded, the NBC commentators were as baffled as everyone else.“What the heck?” Cris Collinsworth said. “That was insane.”“We’ve seen a lot of bizarre stuff. I’ve never seen anything more bizarre than that.”“Completely nuts,” Al Michaels said.Predictably, Twitter had a field day:
            Operas could be written about that bizarre Colts play.        
            I'm now dumber for watching the @Colts try to outsmart the @Patriots. #SNF #INDvNE 
            That Colts play is something I would try while plastered playing Madden just to see what would happen.        
            Probably the best thing about the Colts fake punt was the commentators extreme confusion after the snap. "What in the world."        At least one fan likened the play to one in the remake of “The Longest Yard.”
            The Colts tried pulling off that play from the Longest Yard pic.twitter.com/fzznQcudyf Perhaps that answers the question a lot of fans were asking: In which universe would the play have succeeded?One in which Adam Sandler is a former N.F.L. player who along with Chris Rock and Nelly forms a prison football team coached by Burt Reynolds.As the Colts found out Sunday night, we don’t live in that universe.An earlier version of this article misspelled the given name of the NBC commentator who called the Colts’ trick play “insane.” He is Cris Collinsworth, not Chris.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.