By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 20, 2015
There were multiple comings and goings for the Giants on Tuesday, a day after they were routed by the Philadelphia Eagles.Cooper Taylor, a 2013 draft pick who had hardly played, was cut. Another selection from that draft class, defensive end Damontre Moore, was put on notice that his playing time might be sparse after a senseless penalty in the defeat.The player whom Moore has at times been trying to replace, Jason Pierre-Paul, was expected to visit the team’s doctors and officials Wednesday. Pierre-Paul is hoping to find a way back into uniform as the Giants try to determine if his damaged right hand has recovered enough for him to again become a valuable member of the defensive line.A Fourth of July weekend fireworks accident cost Pierre-Paul his right index finger and injured his thumb and middle finger.AdvertisementEven if the team and Pierre-Paul come to an agreement, his return to the field would not be imminent.AdvertisementCoach Tom Coughlin sidestepped a question about Pierre-Paul on Tuesday. In general, he did not seem to be in a good mood.“Bad game,” Coughlin said of the penalty-filled, mistake-laden performance in Philadelphia. “Bad production.”There was one bit of good news. Tight end Daniel Fells, who had been hospitalized since Oct. 2 with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA, was released from Hackensack University Medical Center in New Jersey and returned to his home.Fells contracted the dangerous staph infection in his foot and required multiple operations to prevent amputation.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Early this month, Fells was placed on injured reserve, ending his season. His football career remains in serious jeopardy, although Coughlin has said that a full recovery is still possible. Doctors devised a cocktail of antibiotics that quelled Fells’s infection but not before his foot sustained considerable damage.The Giants have not replaced him on the field. The team’s blocking, which was a Fells strength, suffered Monday, and tight end Larry Donnell made a costly mistake that ended a promising drive when he lost possession of the football after what seemed a certain completion. It was ruled an interception, even if it was more of a fumble, and it led to the Eagles’ first score.There was another Giants blunder on the way to that Eagles score that especially troubled Coughlin. After Donnell’s turnover, the Giants had the Eagles stopped after three plays when a pass to Darren Sproles came up short of the first-down marker.AdvertisementBut well after the throw to Sproles, Moore wrapped up quarterback Sam Bradford and forcefully threw him to the ground. A roughing-the-passer penalty — an obvious call — kept the Philadelphia drive alive, and four plays later, the Eagles wiped out the Giants’ 7-0 lead.“There’s no excuse for that — no excuse,” Coughlin said.Asked if he could trust Moore on the field, Coughlin replied: “I don’t know. That’s a good word.”Moore, a third-round pick two years ago, is seen as a pass-rushing talent who lacks discipline or savvy on the field. Coughlin was asked if he might sit down and talk with Moore.“There’s been a lot of sitting down and talking,” Coughlin answered. “I certainly will do more of it, and he is very good about listening. But we’ve got to see whether it can hold true on the field.”As for Taylor, he was a fifth-round pick who played 10 games almost exclusively on special teams as a rookie and missed all of last season with a foot injury. In the preseason, he was handed one of the starting safety spots after four safeties went out with injuries. Taylor was soon demoted and played sparingly in three games. The Giants could be adding another safety to the roster this week.There does not appear to be much chance that two prominent injured starters — wide receiver Victor Cruz and left tackle Will Beatty — will be in uniform soon. Coughlin gave no update on Cruz’s rehabilitation. Beatty, who tore a pectoral muscle in the spring, is eligible to return to practice this week, but Coughlin discouraged any suggestion that Beatty’s return was on a fast track.“The idea is to bring him back slowly,” Coughlin said. “He’s got a lot of work ahead of him.”The Giants could certainly use the infusion of Beatty’s experience on the offensive line, which lacks depth at tackle. The Giants have not rushed for more than 100 yards in any of their six games — the first time they have rushed for fewer than 100 in six straight games, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. The Giants are also the only N.F.L. team without a 100-yard rushing game this season.A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: On Day of Flux, Good News for Giants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.