AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanCHICAGO — Before the Mets ever made it to October, Matt Harvey’s agent, the visible and vocal Scott Boras, had already made his concerns known about how many innings his client might end up pitching this season, his first after having Tommy John surgery.From Boras’s point of view, anything more than 180 innings, which was roughly the number Harvey pitched in 2013, the year he was hurt, was a danger zone. Boras’s remarks set off some sniping between him and the Mets, and for a while, Harvey was caught in the crossfire, until he made it clear to the team and its many anxious fans that he would keep pitching in the postseason for as long as the Mets were still playing. As a result, Harvey, a 26-year-old right-hander, has now pushed past 200 innings for the year. Boras, having lost that battle, has now taken out an insurance policy on Harvey to give him some financial protection in the event he sustains another serious arm injury before he can cash in — either by reaching free agency after the 2018 season or by signing a multiyear deal before then. Harvey, according to the Baseball Reference website, is making $614,125 this season, which is pretty good by most standards, but sort of paltry by baseball’s. He will soon be eligible for salary arbitration, which can boost his salary significantly for one year. But until a bigger, longer deal gets his signature, he will now have his insurance policy.CBSSports.com reported news of the insurance policy, and Boras confirmed the development in a telephone interview Tuesday. Harvey pitched the September game that clinched the National League East division title and has pitched twice in the postseason, winning both games. In his division series start against the Los Angeles Dodgers, however, he lasted only five innings and was a little ragged. He was more dominant Saturday night against the Chicago Cubs, when he lasted seven and two-thirds innings and surrendered just two runs.He continues to maintain that he feels fine and wants to keep pitching.“We had a plan to get him through this season healthy and performing well, and we’re pretty comfortable with that, with the doctor’s involvement all the way through,” John Ricco, the Mets’ assistant general manager, said Tuesday after the existence of the insurance policy was disclosed. “He’s still feeling great. I think we’re comfortable with how it all played out.”It was in September — after Harvey was pulled after five innings against the Yankees with a 1-0 lead in a game that the Mets went on to lose in lopsided fashion — that he went to the Mets and requested that he be allowed to pitch more regularly, with fewer innings restrictions. “I’m not skinny like deGrom,” Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach, recalled Harvey saying in reference to his teammate Jacob deGrom. “I’m a big, strong guy. I can pitch.”Warthen added: “Since that incident, he wants to pitch. He wants to pitch when it’s his turn. He wants to finish the season.”For the moment, the Mets seem more concerned with Harvey’s triceps than with his elbow, a result of his taking a line drive off his upper right arm during Saturday’s game against the Cubs. Manager Terry Collins joked that Harvey had baseball seams imprinted on him, and the area did swell. But Warthen watched Harvey play catch Monday and was convinced he could pitch a potential Game 5 on Thursday.Asked how Harvey looked that day, Warthen said, “Very handsome.” Advertisement