AdvertisementSupported byBy Marc TracyThe N.C.A.A. took further steps Tuesday to distance itself from daily fantasy sports websites, calling off planned talks to iron out differences after having already told the sites privately that they would be barred from advertising during the men’s and women’s basketball tournaments.The association opposes the websites’ offering of fantasy contests based on college sports because it considers them gambling. It sent a letter Tuesday to two of the largest sites, DraftKings and FanDuel, canceling a meeting with them in light of several official inquiries, including those by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the New York attorney general’s office, into the fairness and integrity of the games. Along with the 10 most prominent football conferences, the N.C.A.A. had asked the sites in August to stop offering fantasy games based on college sports “because they were inconsistent with our values, bylaws, rules and interpretations regarding sports wagering” and could violate “various state laws.” Daily fantasy sports websites offer games in which contestants draw up virtual teams and win cash prizes based on the actual performance of athletes on the field, but the games’ classification as those of skill has been called into question by lawmakers and potential regulators. The companies claim to have millions of players and have grown into multibillion-dollar businesses, with ubiquitous advertising during sports broadcasts and little regulation, to the ire of a growing body of lawmakers.N.C.A.A. athletes are barred from sports wagering, including daily fantasy sports. A violation is punishable by at least a year of lost eligibility. The letter, obtained by The New York Times, said the association was now informing referees and others who officiated at championships that they were prohibited from participating in paid fantasy games.The letter mentioned that DraftKings and FanDuel had agreed to confirm whether any members of a list of referees or game officials that the N.C.A.A. planned to provide had participated in their contests.“The integrity of our collegiate contests are paramount,” stated the letter, which was signed by Mark Lewis, an executive vice president.DraftKings and FanDuel officials, reached by email and telephone, declined to comment. The letter comes as daily fantasy sites have come under scrutiny after allegations that employees had access to sensitive data and used it to play contests and that the sites accepted payments and deposits from states where they are banned.In canceling a planned meeting to discuss their position, Lewis wrote, “We believe that your product should not be offered in the college space for a variety of reasons, and we do not believe a further meeting with your organizations will change that view.”Lewis added, “As we have communicated to you previously, since your games meet the definition of sports wagering within our bylaws, the N.C.A.A. will not allow advertising of your products in connection with N.C.A.A. championships, including television broadcasts.”Numerous N.C.A.A. championships appear on television, but most prominent are the Division I men’s and women’s basketball tournaments, with the men’s on CBS and Turner stations and the women’s on ESPN and its affiliates. The men’s tournament deal is worth more than $10 billion for 14 years. ESPN has broadcast deals for a few dozen other N.C.A.A. championships, including the College World Series.CBS Sports and Turner Sports declined to comment.The College Football Playoff is not administered by the N.C.A.A., but rather by the Football Bowl Subdivision conferences and Notre Dame, which is independent. Bill Hancock, executive director of the playoff — which comprises seven bowl and playoff games annually, including the national championship game and the Rose Bowl — said the playoff had not engaged in extensive discussion on the topic yet with ESPN, which signed a 12-year, $7.3 billion contract to broadcast those games.While several professional sports franchises and media companies are investors, the college sports establishment appeared to have fewer entanglements.The Southeastern Conference has asked the SEC Network, which ESPN owns, not to air ads for daily fantasy sports, according to SEC Commissioner Greg Sankey.“It certainly doesn’t seem the right tone,” Sankey said, adding, “We are in an academic environment. Candidly, a lot of this advertising reaches out to a lot of young people, and a piece of the concern is about individuals.” The Pacific-12 Network and Big Ten Network, which are fully or jointly owned by the conferences and their universities, still air daily fantasy ads, although not ones that promote college games.“As long as the federal government has determined this isn’t gambling, it’s in a different category,” said Larry Scott, the Pac-12 commissioner.Sankey said the SEC had had discussions with ESPN and CBS, which broadcast conference football games, about barring daily fantasy commercials.Joe Drape contributed reporting.Advertisement