AdvertisementSupported byRoyals 14, Blue Jays 2By David WaldsteinTORONTO — The first indignity came hours before the first pitch on Tuesday when the Kansas City Royals essentially accused the Blue Jays’ batters of stealing signs from their pitchers. The second came in the first inning when the Royals pounded the knuckleball pitcher R. A. Dickey for four runs. The final embarrassment arrived in the ninth when, for the first time in postseason history, the Blue Jays were forced to use a position player as a pitcher.By the time Game 4 of the American League Championship Series had ended, the Royals had put up a football score, 14-2, to grab a three-games-to-one lead. They can clinch the pennant on Wednesday.“It was ugly — no doubt about that,” Toronto Manager John Gibbons said. “That’s all I can say.”The Royals’ scheduled starter for Game 5, Edinson Volquez, was already firing high heat before Game 4, dredging up old claims that the Blue Jays steal signs at Rogers Centre. His charge came a day after Toronto’s sluggers broke out for 11 runs in Game 3.According to Volquez, Johnny Cueto told his Royals teammates after taking the loss in Game 3 that he was alerted to the problem while on the mound and that there might have been someone in the outfield seating area signaling to the Blue Jays’ batters what pitches were coming.Volquez acknowledged Tuesday that it would be difficult to see someone signaling from center field. “But when the guy gets on second base, he said something about that, too,” Volquez added of Cueto.Cueto, who was charged with eight runs and recorded only six outs, walked off the mound smiling when he was pulled. He was not available to comment before Tuesday’s game.The Blue Jays, who have always denied the accusations, scoffed at the resuscitation of the claims.Catcher Russell Martin said that when he was with the Yankees in 2011, the players used to try to steal signs from the basepaths — considered within the confines of acceptable espionage.“Honestly, I would tell you,” Martin said. “We did it with the Yankees. But we don’t do it here.”Stealing signs is practically as old as the game itself. Some players on the 1951 Giants admitted they were doing it when Bobby Thomson hit his pennant-winning home run off Ralph Branca of the Dodgers. The general understanding is that if a player steals signs from the basepaths or the dugout, it is part of the game, but anything involving technology or the use of allies in the stands is off limits.According to an ESPN report in 2011 citing anonymous opposing pitchers, the Blue Jays had a man wearing white in the outfield stands who raised his hands for slower breaking pitches and did nothing for fastballs. It was unclear how the sign information was supposedly relayed to the person in the stands.Martin said that while he was with the Yankees, he was instructed by the team’s manager, Joe Girardi, to use multiple and complex signs because they also suspected the Blue Jays of stealing during games in Toronto.“If you feel it is coming from somewhere else besides a player on the field, then I do have issues with it,” Girardi said at the time.Volquez was asked if sign stealing was more of a problem at Rogers Centre than at other ballparks.“That’s what I hear,” he said before Tuesday’s game.The only hitters who seemed to know what pitches were coming in Game 4 were the Royals, who teed off on Dickey’s primary pitch, the knuckleball. In only one and two-thirds innings, he gave up five runs (four earned) and four hits, including two home runs, and walked two.The first batter Dickey faced, Alcides Escobar, reached on a bunt single, and then Ben Zobrist crushed a high knuckler into the right-field seats. Four pitches into the game, the Royals had a 2-0 lead. It would quickly become 4-0 and then 5-0 after an Alex Rios home run in the second. The rout was on.In the ninth, the Blue Jays brought in the backup infielder Cliff Pennington to pitch. A former college pitcher, Pennington gave up two hits in a third of an inning and allowed two inherited runners to score.Still, the Blue Jays remain confident. They beat the Texas Rangers three games in a row in the division series, avoiding elimination, and they take inspiration from the 1985 Royals, of all teams, because they came back from a similar deficit to beat that year’s Blue Jays in the A.L.C.S.“Thirty years ago the roles were reversed, and Kansas City was down, 3-1,” Dickey said. “So we’ve been here before where we had to win three games.”Perhaps that, more than anything else on Tuesday, was a real sign of things to come.Advertisement