By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 20, 2015
For the Yankees, part of the reason for signing Masahiro Tanaka to a $155 million contract in January 2014 was his age: Even now, after seven seasons in Japan and two more in New York, he has not turned 27.But all that pitching has taken a toll on Tanaka’s right arm, which has not been as sturdy as the Yankees had hoped when they brought him to New York. And on Tuesday, the team announced, Tanaka had arthroscopic surgery to remove a bone spur from his pitching elbow.“The only thing I can really tell you is, it’s not a complicated surgery,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. “If you ever have to do one, you want to do it this time of year because the total rehab time is about three months. So October or November is the best time to do it — get it out of the way and get him up and running for spring training.”Cashman said the Yankees had known about the bone spur since Tanaka’s free agency, when he took a physical exam with Dr. Neal ElAttrache.AdvertisementCashman said Tanaka did not complain of an elbow problem all season, or in his exit physical this month, which included a magnetic resonance imaging exam. A week later, though, Tanaka’s agent, Casey Close, called Cashman to report that the bone spur had caused trouble for Tanaka — specifically in his getting arm extension on his split-finger fastball.The operation, performed by the Mets’ team doctor, David Altchek, at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, is only the latest medical news involving Tanaka. In July 2014, after he had earned a spot on the American League All-Star team, Tanaka was found to have a partial tear of the ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow, an injury that often leads to Tommy John surgery.That procedure typically carries at least a year of recovery time; instead, the Yankees and Tanaka chose rest and rehabilitation, and he returned to make two starts at the end of last season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This year, he did not pitch between April 23 and June 3 because of a strained right forearm and tendinitis in his right wrist.Cashman said Tanaka’s M.R.I. after this season “either showed no change or an improvement of the U.C.L. — it’s somewhat in that arena.”Cashman added: “Listen, it’s all in the same region, so I can’t tell you if it’s related or not. But he had the bone spur for years.”AdvertisementTanaka has essentially missed 20 or so starts in his two seasons, but when he has pitched, he has been excellent, with a 25-12 record and a 3.16 E.R.A. in 44 starts. Still, he lasted only five innings, allowing two runs, in the Yankees’ wild-card loss to Houston this month.A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Tanaka Has Bone Spur Removed From Elbow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.