
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 20, 2015
CHICAGO — The Chicago Cubs are built in the image of the Boston Red Sox, by the same architectural firm that turned another hard-luck franchise into a champion. Only through extreme hardship did Theo Epstein’s Red Sox win their elusive title. For the Cubs to do it now, they must follow the same path.After a sloppy 5-2 loss on Tuesday, the Cubs trail the Mets in the National League Championship Series by three games to none — the same hole the Red Sox fell into against the Yankees in the fabled American League Championship Series of 2004. No other baseball team has won a best-of-seven series after losing the first three games.“There’s confidence in this clubhouse that’s never going to go away,” the Cubs’ Anthony Rizzo said. “We’ve just got to keep playing baseball. One New York team has blown a 3-0 lead; let’s make it the other New York team. That’s the way we’re going to look at it. That’s the only thing we can do. We have to be optimistic.”Epstein, who drafted Rizzo while with the Red Sox in 2007, had sounded that note at Wrigley Field on Monday, a workout day. He predicted a better game than the one his team went on to play Tuesday.Advertisement“We’ve always responded, all year long, with a long winning streak after a stretch of poor play,” Epstein, the Cubs’ president of baseball operations, had said. “I’d be shocked if this is how we’re going out, with play that’s not representative of the talent and character we have in the clubhouse. I think we’ll show a lot better in the course of this series.”AdvertisementYet the Cubs’ first two losses, both at Citi Field, were not marked by ineptitude or misfortune. The Mets simply pitched better than the Cubs and got their daily dose of Daniel Murphy heroics. The same factors helped the Mets on Tuesday — but this time, the Cubs helped, too.With two outs in the sixth inning and the score tied at 2-2, Cubs reliever Trevor Cahill struck out Michael Conforto. That should have been a very good thing, a clutch out by a reliever pitching for his fourth organization this season.But these are the Cubs — so naturally, the strikeout took the Mets to the verge of their first World Series berth in 15 years and the Cubs to the brink of being eliminated from contention for the pennant for a 70th season in a row.On the previous pitch, catcher Miguel Montero had saved a run by blocking a ball in the dirt. But he could not do it again, and Cahill’s curveball skipped between his legs. Yoenis Cespedes, who had stolen third when Cahill failed to hold him close, scampered home, and the Mets had a lead they would not give back.“It was a tough one,” Montero said. “I went down to block it, and unfortunately, I didn’t. It really hurts. I’ve blocked pitches like that many, many times. I didn’t block that one. It really hurt because it was strike three. You know what? It happens. It’s part of the game. We can’t block every ball. I wish we could.”Even the famous ivy at Wrigley Field could not save the Cubs, no matter how much it tried. When Wilmer Flores followed Conforto by slashing a sinking liner to right, Jorge Soler dived for it in vain. The ball hopped to the wall, where it disappeared into a thicket.The ground rule kept Conforto at third and cost the Mets a run when Jacob deGrom flied out to end the inning. But the Mets got the run back when more Cubs things happened.AdvertisementWith one out and David Wright on second, Murphy beat out an infield single on a spinning squibber to third. Then Kyle Schwarber, a Cubs slugger with five home runs this postseason, did a Greg Luzinski turn in left field in the seventh; a catchable Cespedes fly ball became a generously scored run-scoring single.“I just misread it,” Schwarber said. “No excuses. I just didn’t get a good read; that’s it.”Lucas Duda then bounced to first, and Rizzo stepped on the bag before firing to the plate, wide and just late, as Murphy slid into home. Rizzo’s momentum had taken him to the base anyway, but perhaps the extra step cost him just enough on the throw.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Cubs have repeated a mantra they got from their manager, Joe Maddon, who likes to remind his team never to let the pressure exceed the pleasure. Those words have sunken in by now, and Maddon said he would not address the players before Game 4.“I don’t have team meetings,” he said. “I don’t believe in them. For me to stand up and give a speech has nothing to do with tomorrow at all. Our guys know how to come prepared to play. I expect the same thing tomorrow. The Mets have just pitched exceptionally well, and you’ve got to give them credit in these three games. So from my perspective, business as usual.”That includes his choice of starting pitcher. Maddon will use Jason Hammel and deploy his deep platoon of relievers without hesitation. He will not bring back Jon Lester on short rest.“A lot of times, pitchers don’t do that well on three days’ rest, so why even take that risk right now when you know you’ve got to win more than just one game?” Maddon said. “If it was one-and-done, you may do something like that, but it’s got to be four-and-done.”While the 2004 Red Sox are the only encouraging example to cite for a team facing this sort of hole, Boston’s 2007 championship team compares more closely to this version of the Cubs.AdvertisementThat team was not burdened by decades of failure, as the Red Sox were in 2004, but it did face a three-games-to-one deficit in the American League Championship Series against Cleveland before rallying to win it all. The core of Dustin Pedroia, Jacoby Ellsbury and Lester stayed together long enough to win another title six years later.With Rizzo, Schwarber, Kris Bryant, Starlin Castro and Addison Russell, the Cubs have stockpiled young hitters with years of contractual control. Schwarber was just drafted in 2014, and some of the scouts and coaches were at Wrigley for his mammoth home run against the Cardinals in the last round.“They got to tell all the kids in instructional league, ‘Hey, someone who was sitting here a year ago is on national TV hitting bombs,’ ” Epstein said. “We saw that in Boston when Ellsbury and Pedroia had a great World Series. It ties the whole organization together; a Cubs Way starts to take hold. We’re a united, talented, gutsy organization.”Unity, talent and guts helped carry the Cubs to this stage. They will need all of that, and some of the old Boston magic, to keep this New York team from dancing on Wrigley Field on Wednesday night.A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Needing Help, Cubs Instead Revive Hard-Luck Past .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »