AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherMichel Platini will not be recognized as a candidate for FIFA’s presidency while he is under suspension, its executive committee ruled Tuesday in Zurich, although the ruling left the door open to his candidacy should the ban be lifted.Without mentioning Platini by name, the committee said candidates for the top job who are suspended were not eligible to run. But its statement also said that should a ban expire or be lifted before the election, such candidates could be reinstated by what it called the Ad Hoc Electoral Commission.Platini, the president of European soccer’s governing body, known as UEFA, was once considered the front-runner for the presidency of FIFA, which governs soccer worldwide. But he was suspended for 90 days this month at the same time as FIFA’s longtime president, Sepp Blatter, amid a corruption investigation by the Swiss. Both men have vigorously professed innocence.Domenico Scala, FIFA’s financial compliance chief, told The Associated Press that Blatter’s authorization of a payment to Platini without a written contract was a “classic conflict of interest.”FIFA also confirmed Tuesday that the election for a new president would take place Feb. 26, as scheduled. The executive committee said it welcomed recommendations by a reform committee that included term and age limits for the president. The full FIFA conference will consider the proposals in February. The reforms would also include more transparency for FIFA’s ethics committee.“The tone in the meeting today was good,” Sunil Gulati, the president of U.S. Soccer, said of the executive committee’s meeting Tuesday. “We took some steps — small steps, maybe, but important steps in the right direction.”FIFA has been beleaguered over ethical matters for years, culminating in the indictments in May of nine top soccer officials by the United States on corruption charges.In June, after 17 years in office, Blatter, 79, said he would step down when a successor was elected. In September, Swiss investigators announced that they had opened criminal proceedings against him.Sam Borden contributed reporting.Advertisement