By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 21, 2015
ST. JOHN’S, Newfoundland — The vast stretch of Blue Jays Nation is awoken by dawn’s rosy glow at Cape Spear, a rocky promontory jutting out into the frigid North Atlantic, about 1,300 miles from Rogers Centre in Toronto.It is known as the easternmost point in North America, closer to Portugal’s Azores Islands than to Toronto, and just a short sail to Greenland. But make no mistake: This, too, is Blue Jays country.“Oh, we are 100 percent behind the Jays,” Evan Puddister said Wednesday as he sat on the wheelhouse of the Gesmer I, a family-owned ferry docked in St. John’s harbor. “That’s all people are talking about here.”Canada, a nation of some 35 million, has only one Major League Baseball team, with the Expos having moved to Washington in 2005. Some Canadians may prefer the Minnesota Twins, the Seattle Mariners or the Boston Red Sox, but from Vancouver to Moose Jaw to Witless Bay just south of here, the Blue Jays are the home team.Advertisement“When you have a whole country pulling for you, it’s different than other teams,” Jose Bautista, the Blue Jays’ slugging right fielder, said in a recent interview. “Maybe the Yankees are the only ones who can say they have as many fans as we do. We hear it from every angle.”In the United States, there are 29 teams. Some, like the Yankees, the Atlanta Braves, the St. Louis Cardinals and the Red Sox, have historically enjoyed overwhelming regional popularity. But none have attracted the full support of their nation.AdvertisementThe Blue Jays get it all.In Whitehorse, Yukon Territory, fans formed a Facebook page to complain about the early starting times of Blue Jays playoff games in the Pacific time zone. Viewership for the Blue Jays’ playoff games is said to be over seven million across Canada.In Vancouver, British Columbia, a big issue recently was whether bars would open for postseason games that started at 9:30 a.m. Some did.St. John’s is in the Newfoundland time zone — oddly enough, 1 hour 30 minutes ahead of Toronto and New York. It is not the only unique thing about this enchanting land, where icebergs float off the wind-swept coast and the local accent is infused with the most distinct Irish brogue heard west of Tralee.The first pitch of Game 5 of the American League Championship Series, which the Blue Jays won, 7-1, was at about 5:30 p.m. Wednesday (4 p.m. in Toronto and New York). Mike Buist, a former Mets minor league pitcher, and his friends gathered at the local Elks club to watch on a large projector screen.Buist (pronounced boost) was signed by the Mets in 1964 and played alongside Tug McGraw for the Mets in the Florida Instructional League, and he later pitched against Nolan Ryan in the minor leagues. Born in Hamilton, Ontario, he moved to St. John’s after his playing career ended, and he began coaching and administering in the local baseball leagues.Buist is the executive director of St. John’s Minor Baseball, which supervises and organizes youth leagues for some 600 children. There are also adult leagues like St. John’s Amateur Baseball.Advertisement“People here love baseball,” he said. “There’s a lot of interest and participation. And, of course, everyone is following the Jays.”Mark Healy is the president of St. John’s Amateur Baseball and, even at 42, is a catcher for Holy Cross, a local team. He also helps run one of the indoor winter leagues. He had a curling match on Wednesday but was still eager to watch Game 5 at the pristine arena just outside downtown St. John’s.He noted that Newfoundland had produced good college players, including Gerald Butt, an outfielder who was drafted by the Yankees in 1994 and played several years in independent leagues.Hockey is still the national sport, but baseball has its place, too, and the Blue Jays are Canada’s team.“Every kid now has some piece of Blue Jays paraphernalia,” Healy said. “We’ve had a couple of Blue Jays rallies here. There’s a ton of interest and hype right now. Everyone is talking about it and questioning all of the manager’s moves.”The Blue Jays conduct clinics all around Canada, including a popular Girls’ Day clinic in St. John’s. They also refurbished one of the local fields. Geographically, that would be like the Red Sox running clinics and fixing up fields in Omaha.Newfoundland, the setting for Annie Proulx’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel “The Shipping News,” is an island whose nickname is the Rock. It does not do justice to its breathtaking coastal views and charming local flavor.For centuries, it was a stopping point for explorers, traders and settlers. Cod was abundant and the fishing industry flourished, and now the local economy is also heavily invested in oil and shipping.There is also ample hunting and fishing in Newfoundland. Michael Saunders, an injured Blue Jays outfielder, grew up in Victoria, British Columbia, but spent his boyhood summers in Gander, Newfoundland, at his grandparents’ hunting and fishing lodge about 130 miles northwest of St. John’s.AdvertisementHe would while away the long daylight hours fishing and playing in the wilderness, but the only sport he played here was soccer.“I loved it there,” he said Tuesday. “But after I was about 12, I started concentrating on sports, and I haven’t been back since. But I’ve heard they are big time into the Jays.”Rod Dunne, a 32-year-old painter, is one of those fans. He said he never misses a game, even when the Blue Jays are not good.“Everybody around here is into the Blue Jays,” said Dunne, a lifelong resident of St. John’s. “It’s the only team in Canada.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.St. John’s itself is a quaint port town of about 100,000 on the eastern edge of the Rock, full of art galleries, coffee shops and a Labatt brewery. The local arena hosts the St. John’s IceCaps, a minor league hockey outfit, and the harbor is choked with Coast Guard vessels, tankers and ferries, like Puddister’s Gesmer I.Puddister, 24, watched Game 4 of the A.L.C.S. below deck with co-workers on a satellite feed, but it turned out to be a 14-2 loss for the Blue Jays. He had planned to watch Game 5, a most happy affair, at one of the many pubs that line St. John’s famous George Street.“Deadly game,” he said in a text message after the Blue Jays won Game 5. “Such a big win.”Earlier in the day, Roger Tonkin walked by wearing a crisp new Blue Jays cap. Tonkin, 31, is a derrick man on oil rigs. He spends three weeks on the rigs and three weeks off back home in Toronto, using St. John’s as his transport hub. The rigs are 150 nautical miles off shore and require a two-hour helicopter flight from St. John’s.Advertisement“We do watch a lot of Blue Jays games on the rig,” he said. “When they’re doing well like now, everyone is into it.”Down the block, at Maverick Sports & Collectables, Andrew Corbett, the proprietor, opened the store 16 years ago, but he has never had business as he does now. “In the last month, we probably sold as much as we have in the last year,” he said. “The suppliers can’t keep up with the demand.”Corbett’s small store, just a minute’s walk from the waterfront, had a long waiting list of anxious customers hoping their shirts would arrive before game time Wednesday. With the Blue Jays on the verge of elimination, there was fear that the goods would not show up in time for what could have been the final game.But the Blue Jays won in a rout — Troy Tulowitzki hit a bases-clearing double, and Toronto’s pitching dominated — and so the sun will come up over Cape Spear again to signal a new day for a vast Blue Jays nation.As two visitors walked out of Corbett’s store and into a chilled rain, Corbett had a request.“If you see a delivery truck,” he said, “send them here quick.”A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: With Glowing Hearts, a Nation Unites Behind the Blue Jays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.