AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzCHICAGO — Maybe it was the head-scratching misadventures of Daniel Murphy, or perhaps it was General Manager Sandy Alderson’s adherence to the tenets of “Moneyball,” but it was hard to find a team more risk averse on the basepaths than the Mets during the regular season. They stole 51 bases, fewer than every team in baseball except the Baltimore Orioles.But in the National League Championship Series, Manager Terry Collins unshackled his troops, flashing a light to his base runners that was as evergreen as the Wrigley Field ivy.The Mets stole seven bases in the series, more than any other team has in the postseason, including two more on Wednesday night when they wrapped up their four-game sweep with an 8-3 victory over the Chicago Cubs. Not all of the stolen bases have been consequential, but they symbolized the aggressive tone the Mets took in a series in which they never trailed. Three times the Mets stole third base, and Wilmer Flores’s theft of second base in the first inning on Wednesday was his first of the season and the second of his major league career.“Before the game we would talk about it,” Flores said. “We would say we need to be aggressive, and that’s what we did. It was something we felt we could take advantage of, and in a series like this, we have to take advantage of anything.”When Collins and his coaches met via teleconference with the Mets’ advance scouts before the series, they reviewed the Cubs’ tendencies and looked for areas they might exploit. Asked in a meeting with the team’s beat writers before Wednesday’s game if there was something the scouts saw that told them they would be able to steal third, Collins nodded vigorously, but stayed silent.He did not have to say too much. The Cubs allowed 137 stolen bases this season, and threw out only 21.71 percent of base stealers, both the second-worst marks in baseball.“When you read reports on your opposition, you better know some of their weaknesses,” Collins said. “And you’ve got to try to exploit them if you can. One of the things they have done is they have given up stolen bases. We don’t have a lot of speed, but we’ve gotten ourselves in some counts, we’ve gotten ourselves in some situations where you can guess off-speed and try to send them.”Before each series during the regular season, teams meet to go over scouting reports that are compiled by advance scouts who follow the team’s upcoming opponents and provide current information, such as whether an outfielder might have a sore arm or what pitch a pitcher likes to rely on in a two-strike count. In the playoffs, these reports might carry more detail or nuance. They also can carry more weight.A scouting report that took on mythic stature was the one provided by the Dodgers scout Mel Didier, who on the eve of the 1988 World Series told his team that, as sure as the sun would come up, Oakland Athletics closer Dennis Eckersley would throw a backdoor slider on a 3-2 count.When the Dodgers’ Kirk Gibson hit his game-winning home run off Eckersley in Game 1, he recalled Didier’s advice when he worked the count full. “There are all kinds of little details you’re looking for to take advantage,” said Tim Teufel, the Mets’ third-base coach. “If we get one thing out of it that we can take advantage of it, it’s well worth it.”The Cubs’ inability to keep runners from stealing bases did not take forensic tools to discover, but Collins had to break from his team’s regular-season tendencies. He has done so with perhaps the only three players he trust to run on the bases: Juan Lagares, Curtis Granderson and Yoenis Cespedes.Lagares stole third in Game 1, getting a big jump on a 2-1 count with one out and Granderson at the plate against Jon Lester. He would score on a sacrifice fly by Granderson, one of the most proficient hitters at driving home runners from third with less than two outs. It gave the Mets a 4-1 lead.In Game 2, Granderson stole second and then third against Jake Arrieta, getting to third on a 1-0 count to Cespedes and one out in the third inning. He came home on Cespedes’s infield hit.In Game 3, Cespedes stole third with a big jump on Trevor Cahill with one out in the sixth inning and an 0-1 count on Michael Conforto. He scored when Conforto swung and missed at strike three, and Cahill’s pitch bounced past catcher Miguel Montero, who was the catcher in all three steals of third.“We’ve had some teams take advantage of it during the year, but it hasn’t really reared its head until this series, where you’ve got a team that doesn’t run much at all,” catcher David Ross said. “They’ve done a good job exploiting that part of our game.”David Wright, bad back and all, has showed his baserunning acumen, if not his speed, by stealing second with a walking lead and also tagging up from first to take second on a fly ball to left fielder Kyle Schwarber, a converted catcher. Cubs Manager Joe Maddon said his pitchers were not attentive enough, noting that sometimes just holding the ball is an effective tactic. He conceded that the Mets probably scouted that deficiency.“You’re always looking for a little nugget here or there that you might be able to utilize at that time of the year,” Maddon said. “But even having received nuggets, you still have to go out there and execute, and they’ve been able to execute their nuggets.”Maddon paused and smiled.“Hopefully,” he said, “we can execute our nuggets.”Instead, only the Mets continued to be golden.Tim Rohan contributed reporting.Advertisement