By BRETT MICHAEL DYKESOCT. 21, 2015
8:25 p.m. Eastern, CBS, NFL NetworkLine: Seahawks by 6The Seahawks and the 49ers have dominated the N.F.C. West in recent years, but the teams enter this matchup tied for last place. While the 49ers were not expected to be very good this season, the same cannot be said for the Seahawks, who were expected to contend once again for a spot in the Super Bowl.And just when it looked as though the Seahawks might be on the verge of getting their swagger back on Sunday, the team’s vaunted Legion of Boom defense blew a fourth-quarter lead at home to the Carolina Panthers. With the Seahawks up late, 23-14 — after holding a 20-7 lead — Cam Newton led two 80-yard drives for touchdowns to keep the Panthers undefeated and send the Seahawks on a desperate search for answers.“I know you guys don’t want to hear it, but we have six games we should have won, and we know that,” Coach Pete Carroll told reporters after the game. “It’s not what happened, it’s how we’re going to handle it. We’ll find out.”(Carroll this week also dismissed rumors that he might leave Seattle to return to coach U.S.C. “That’s not happening,” he said.)AdvertisementColin Kaepernick has rebounded from a disastrous start and is beginning to resemble the quarterback who took the team to the Super Bowl after the 2012 season. He has taken many more snaps under center in the past two weeks than he did in the first four weeks, which saw him sitting back in the shotgun most of the time. Observers believe this is allowing him to get the ball out quicker, while also giving him better looks at defenses.That said, the Seahawks’ defense has tormented Kaepernick. In six starts against Seattle, Kaepernick has thrown nine interceptions and lost two fumbles, while throwing only three touchdown passes and accumulating a 54.1 passer rating. With a loss, the Seahawks’ record in the division would be 0-2, making any shot at a playoff berth increasingly improbable.AdvertisementPick: SeahawksBRETT MICHAEL DYKESBecause of an editing error, an article on Thursday previewing the N.F.L. game between the Seattle Seahawks and the San Francisco 49ers misstated, in some copies, the recent season when the San Francisco 49ers advanced to the Super Bowl. It was the 2012 season, not the 2013 season. (The game was played on Feb. 3, 2013.)A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Thursday’s Matchup: Seahawks (2-4) at 49ers (2-4).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.