AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat PickensNEWARK — Anthony Duclair’s career with the Rangers resulted in just one goal in 18 N.H.L. games.Yet when Duclair laces his skates in the visiting locker room at Madison Square Garden on Thursday night, his coach knows emotions will be high.Duclair, a dynamic rookie wing, leads the Arizona Coyotes with five goals in six games entering his first game at the Garden since being traded by the Rangers last spring. “Anytime you play your old team after a trade, it’s good to get that one out of the way,” Coyotes Coach Dave Tippett said. Max Domi and Duclair, both 20, are tied for second on the team in points, with seven, and have made Arizona (3-2-1) one of the N.H.L.’s most exciting teams to watch early in the season.“Our biggest thing at the start of the year is we want to grow as an organization,” Tippett said. “These young players have the ability to help us grow, and the quicker they can get up and going like Max and Duclair, the better off we are. They’ve been good so far.”Duclair narrowly earned a roster spot out of Rangers training camp last season, but he struggled to fit on the team’s skilled veteran roster. He was lent to the Canadian team for the world junior championships last winter before being returned to the Quebec Remparts of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League for the remainder of the season. When the Rangers had the opportunity to acquire defenseman Keith Yandle from Arizona in March, the Coyotes asked for Duclair. “Sometimes to get a good player, you have to give up good players and good young prospects, and that’s what we did there,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “He had a real strong skill set with the puck and speed-wise. You just wonder, like any young player, is he going to put it all together?”Duclair, a third-round pick by the Rangers in 2013, was disciplined by the Remparts twice in his three-year stay. He was suspended in 2013 by Patrick Roy, the coach at the time, and Duclair was a healthy scratch in March after Coach Philippe Boucher perceived a lack of effort. But Tippett has seen nothing but strong play.“I haven’t seen any indication of those things from early on,” Tippett said. “I didn’t know him back then. I know he’s a young player who has brought some good speed and skill to our group and is working hard to try to learn the rest of the game. He’s trying hard to do things. There’s a few habits in his game we have to continue to work on to correct, but he’s been a good player for us so far.”Domi, the son of the former Rangers forward Tie Domi, brings more skill to the rink than his feisty father did. Max Domi, a center, was born in Winnipeg but grew up in Toronto while his father played with the Maple Leafs. Although Max, who compiled 102 points in the Ontario Hockey League last season, is more of a scorer than Tie was, he said he was not afraid to mix it up.“I play hard, and he played hard too,” said Domi, the 12th overall pick in the 2013 draft. Domi and Duclair grew up playing against each other in Canada, but they were linemates at last winter’s world junior championships, combining for nine goals and nine assists in a gold medal run. When Duclair recorded his first N.H.L. hat trick in Arizona’s 4-0 victory last week in Anaheim, Domi had the other goal and assisted on one of Duclair’s goals. They have developed a strong off-ice bond and are roommates on the road.“He’s always been an unbelievable hockey player,” Domi said of Duclair. “He’s always gotten better as the years go on, and it’s been fun to watch.”Their up-tempo style helped the Coyotes to a 3-0 start, with wins over the Los Angeles Kings, the Pittsburgh Penguins and the Ducks. Arizona finished with the league’s second-worst record last season and was expected to be at the bottom of the highly competitive Western Conference standings again. Domi and Duclair occupy spots on the first power-play unit, but despite their chemistry, they have not been linemates five-on-five yet. That may change soon. Tippett had Duclair on the right wing and Domi on the left with center Martin Hanzal during Wednesday’s practice.Tippett would not say whether that group would see time together Thursday against the Rangers.“I wouldn’t set that in stone yet,” Tippett said.But if Domi and Duclair end up on the same line, Domi is confident they will be successful.“I think the biggest thing is our relationship off the ice and how much it translates on the ice,” Domi said. “We understand each other. We understand what each other can do, our strengths, and that’s probably the biggest thing.”Advertisement