By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 21, 2015
The shadowy comeback story of Giants defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul remained something of a mystery Wednesday. Pierre-Paul had been expected to meet with team officials this week for a second time since he injured his right hand in a Fourth of July weekend fireworks accident.But when Coach Tom Coughlin was asked what the situation was with Pierre-Paul, he replied, “I wish I knew.”Asked if Pierre-Paul was visiting with the Giants on Wednesday, Coughlin said: “Not that I know of. As soon as I have information, I’ll let you know.”Pierre-Paul is trying to convince the Giants that despite the amputation of his right index finger and the additional damage to his right thumb and middle finger, he is — or soon will be — ready to resume playing football.AdvertisementBut the Giants must be convinced of Pierre-Paul’s readiness because a financial arrangement has to be worked out. Even though Pierre-Paul is technically still tethered to the Giants, he is not under contract, and the team is allowed only two medical examinations of him before he signs a contract. Pierre-Paul first showed Giants doctors his injured hand in early September. They sent him home to Florida to continue his rehabilitation.AdvertisementIf Pierre-Paul is not signed by Nov. 17, he is ineligible to play this season.In other Giants news, the team signed cornerback Leon McFadden from the Arizona Cardinals’ practice squad. McFadden was a third-round draft choice of Cleveland in 2013. He played 16 games for the Browns that season but was cut before the 2014 season. He played seven games for San Francisco last season but was waived by the 49ers just before their season opener this year. The Cardinals placed McFadden on their practice squad a few days later.MARIOTA RESTS KNEE Titans quarterback Marcus Mariota did not practice, giving the sprained medial collateral ligament in his left knee a day of rest. He was not wearing any protective gear on his injured leg as he talked about playing Sunday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No brace, not even a wrap for any support.Mariota said he would wear a brace if he had to. He also said that his chances of playing against the Atlanta Falcons were pretty good, and that he was keeping up with treatment and preparing as if he would start his sixth N.F.L. game.“I’m going to do my best to make sure that I’m prepared and hopefully can go on Sunday,” Mariota said.Mariota sprained the ligament in his knee after being hit low by Dolphins defensive end Olivier Vernon in last Sunday’s 38-10 loss to Miami. Vernon said Wednesday that the N.F.L. had fined him for the hit and that he planned to appeal.The Titans (1-4) have lost four straight games.Coach Ken Whisenhunt said that Mariota’s status was day to day and that he was making progress.After Sunday’s game, Vernon apologized to Mariota. (AP)SEAHAWKS’ JACKSON TO PLAY Seattle running back Fred Jackson will play Thursday night against San Francisco after being examined by the team following a minor car crash Tuesday night near the team’s complex.Seattle Coach Pete Carroll said Jackson participated in the team’s walk-through Wednesday. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Pierre-Paul Still Poses a Problem for the Giants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.