By DAVE CALDWELLOCT. 21, 2015
PHILADELPHIA — Six weeks after beating Penn State in football for the first time in 74 years, and standing 6-0 for the first time in 41 years, the Temple Owls began this week in yet another unusual position: ranked in the Associated Press poll for the first time since the end of the 1979 season.These heady days have been decades in coming. But just hold that thought.“Being ranked is cool,” said P. J. Walker, the Owls’ junior quarterback, “but you don’t want to be ranked 22nd in life.”As if No. 22 Temple needed any additional inspiration to move to 7-0 for the first time in the program’s history, the Owls are 2 ½-point underdogs against East Carolina (4-3), their opponent Thursday in an American Athletic Conference game in Greenville, N.C. But Temple already had plenty of incentive.Two years after they won only two of 12 games, and a year after they finished 6-6 but were not invited to a bowl game, the Owls are determined to show that this upswing in fortune will continue.Advertisement“I believe this is just the start of several years of being really good,” said Matt Rhule, 40, a former Penn State linebacker in his third season as the Owls’ coach. “I don’t want to build that and just dismiss it.”AdvertisementAfter only two seasons, and an 8-16 record, Rhule received a four-year contract extension from Temple in June. But he knows that hot young coaches are noticed quickly and, thanks to Temple’s unbeaten start, his name has been mentioned in connection with vacancies at several Power 5 conference colleges, including Maryland, Illinois and South Carolina.But Rhule pointed out that he had nine years invested in the Temple program. His son, Bryant, was only a year old when Rhule came to Temple from Western Carolina to serve as Al Golden’s defensive line coach in 2006. Rhule left in 2012 to be an assistant offensive line coach for the Giants, but he returned to Temple as head coach a year later when Golden’s successor, Steve Addazio, left for Boston College.Now, Rhule says, Bryant has hand-drawn Temple block T’s all over the walls of his bedroom. Rhule and his wife, Julie, also have two young daughters.“This is all my family knows,” he said this week as he wolfed down lunch in his office. “I’m as committed as you can be to this long-term because I believe in the vision of this.”Rhule acknowledges that Philadelphia loves a winner and, as a result, more people in the city seem to know who he is lately. He might get a job offer at a bigger program even if the Owls, who play No. 18 Memphis at home on Nov. 21, do not reach the team’s goal of winning the A.A.C.Rhule said he would be honest with his players if he were presented with an opportunity to coach at a larger program in a more prestigious conference, but then he said, “I don’t talk about myself anyway.”Rhule has plenty of other things to do. He mostly wears Temple-issued pullovers, coaching shorts and running shoes, as if headed to a workout. He talks at a two-minute-offense pace and uses his hands to punctuate sentences.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was not much of a payoff in his first year as Temple coach in 2013. The Owls were feisty but also young, beating only Army and Memphis and finishing tied for last in the A.A.C. Last season, Temple won four of its first five games, but lost five of its last seven.Advertisement“We wanted to go to a bowl game because we felt we should be there,” running back Jahad Thomas said.Instead, the Owls were one of six bowl-eligible teams to be jilted. But the snub also jolted them.“In that moment, we all felt the same pain,” Rhule said. “It eliminated any thought of us not being in this together.”The team’s current slogan is “What’s next?” Like other coaches, Rhule wants his team to focus on immediate challenges, but he also wants his team to play down past results, positive or negative. That was why the Owls regarded their first national ranking in decades as little more than a nice salute.“I kept telling everybody last year that we were good,” the senior linebacker Tyler Matakevich said. “It was just that something was missing. We were just missing a spark.”They found it by Sept. 5 when they opened the season by beating Penn State, 27-10. It was Temple’s first victory over the Nittany Lions since 1941, and ended an 0-38-1 drought. Temple followed with wins at Cincinnati, Massachusetts and Charlotte, and home victories against Tulane and Central Florida.There are, Rhule said, no conference championship trophies in the Temple football complex, so at this point even an A.A.C. trophy would be precious. This is, after all, the same program that was thrown out of the Big East Conference in football after the 2004 season because it lost a lot, drew poorly and had inadequate facilities.But even more may be at stake. A berth in a New Year’s bowl game awaits the highest-ranked champion of the Group of Five conferences, the second-tier group that includes the A.A.C. But there are six regular-season games to play first.AdvertisementThe Owls do not want a replay of last year. Most teams have a 24-hour rule, meaning players can savor a victory for a full day before moving on. Rhule said, “We enjoy them for a little bit less than that.”Temple’s next home game is Oct. 31 against Notre Dame at Lincoln Financial Field. The game was a sellout before ABC announced Monday that it would be televised nationally.Notre Dame is, to be sure, the drawing card; Temple drew 31,372 fans, less than half of capacity, to Saturday’s 30-16 victory over winless Central Florida. But these days, Temple is not merely supplying the opposition for college football’s titans, either.Rhule said with a smile that Matakevich peered over at the sideline during a tight game this year and hollered to his coach: “What’s next? Don’t panic!”The Owls have received Rhule’s message.An article on Thursday about Temple’s success during this college football season misstated Coach Matt Rhule’s position with the New York Giants in 2012. He was an assistant offensive line coach, not assistant defensive line coach.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Temple, Unbeaten and Unlikely, Strives to Make Success Last .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.