AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichFantasy football analysis for Thursday night’s game between the Seattle Seahawks and the San Francisco 49ers. Check back Friday for analysis on Sunday’s games and Monday’s matchup between the Baltimore Ravens and the Arizona Cardinals. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy.Seahawks at 49ers8:25 p.m. Line: Seahawks by 4Quarterback Russell Wilson (SEA) — There have not been any huge performances from Wilson so far, which is disappointing to those who drafted him early, but this week could be different. The 49ers have permitted the fifth most fantasy points to the position (19 F.P.P.G.). The Giants’ Eli Manning managed 441 passing yards and three touchdowns against them in Week 5 and the Ravens’ Joe Flacco compiled 343 yards and two touchdowns in Week 6. Needless to say, this is an enticing matchup for Wilson.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.Colin Kaepernick (SF) — He is coming off his two best performances of the season, but those were against two weak defensive opponents (Giants and Ravens). Kaepernick produced just 262 yards and no scores in the 49ers’ two losses against the Seahawks last year. While Seattle’s defense has not played up to last season’s standard so far, it still ranks eighth against the pass (238 Y.P.G.). We consider Kaepernick a low-end QB2 play this week.Running Back Marshawn Lynch (SEA) — Lynch is practicing without limitations this week, making him a no-brainer start against a run defense allowing 21 F.P.P.G. (eighth most).Carlos Hyde (SF) — Seattle remains the fourth worst fantasy matchup for running backs despite Jonathan Stewart’s surprise 78-yard, two-touchdown performance last weekend. Hyde (foot) is expected to start in this one, but is unlikely to be running at full strength. He is a low-end RB2 option at best. Wide Receiver/Tight End Anquan Boldin (SF) — Like Hyde, Boldin is banged up but expected to play. Boldin gets the tall task of facing a Seattle secondary allowing the second fewest fantasy points in the league to opposing wideouts. While Boldin has strung together consecutive 100-yard games against poor defensive units, the Seahawks have not permitted one since Randall Cobb’s 116 yards in Week 2, and only one receiver has scored a touchdown against them this year (James Jones).Jimmy Graham (SEA) — It appears Seattle has finally wised up and is using Graham like the elite receiving option he is, after his 12-target, 140-yard breakout against Carolina. San Francisco has surrendered an average of 8 F.P.P.G. to the position this year (13th most).The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. Follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy.Advertisement