By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 21, 2015
John Tortorella hoisted a Stanley Cup with Tampa Bay and led the Rangers to the Eastern Conference finals.In Columbus, there is a more modest goal for Tortorella, a veteran coach: Win a game.Tortorella is back in the N.H.L. after the Blue Jackets fired Todd Richards on Wednesday with the team off to an 0-7 start.Tortorella, who helped the Lightning win the Stanley Cup in 2004, has been out of hockey since the Vancouver Canucks fired him in May 2014 after one season. Richards had been with the Blue Jackets since 2012, and in 2013-14 he led them to their second playoff appearance, when they lost to the Pittsburgh Penguins in the opening round.After a 4-0 defeat against the Islanders on Tuesday night, Columbus became the sixth N.H.L. team to open with seven consecutive losses. That is not the type of start that was expected from a team that restocked its roster over the summer after closing last season on a 16-2-1 run.Advertisement“One of the problems right now is expectations,” Tortorella said. “Expectations that weren’t there last year with this club.”AdvertisementTortorella, 57, signed a three-year contract and will make his debut with the team Thursday when Columbus visits the Minnesota Wild.SABRES 2, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Evander Kane scored his first goal for Buffalo, tying the score with 4 minutes 29 seconds left, and the host Sabres won in a shootout.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Matt Moulson and Tyler Ennis scored in the shootout, and Chad Johnson made 23 saves as Buffalo improved to 2-4.P. A. Parenteau scored and Jonathan Bernier made 34 saves as Toronto fell to 1-3-2.Kane’s goal was his first with the Sabres, who acquired him in February but sat him until this season because of injury.FLYERS 5, BRUINS 4 Claude Giroux’s second goal, coming on a power play 2:09 into overtime, lifted Philadelphia over Boston.The visiting Flyers overcame a two-goal deficit in the third period before Giroux one-timed a shot past Tuukka Rask from the left circle for the winner. The Bruins were short-handed with Ryan Spooner off for hooking.Pierre-Edouard Bellemare and Sam Gagner also had goals for the Flyers. Chris Kelly, Jimmy Hayes, Brett Connolly and Patrice Bergeron scored for the Bruins, who have lost their first four games at home this season.AdvertisementPhiladelphia goaltender Michal Neuvirth left the game after the first period. No injury was announced, but he was not on the bench the rest of the game.STASTNY BREAKS FOOT St. Louis Blues forward Paul Stastny was placed on injured reserve and was expected to be sidelined for at least five weeks with a broken right foot.Stastny, 29, was injured in the second period of a 4-3 victory in Vancouver on Friday. He has a goal and four assists in five games.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Tortorella to Coach Blue Jackets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.