By NICK RADUCANUOCT. 21, 2015
Week 6 was about as bizarre as Week 5.Consider this: Landry Jones, who played less than a half of football Sunday, ended up outscoring Peyton Manning, whose game went deep into overtime. It is surprising, but how surprising? Let’s talk Manning for a second, because many folks will be looking to drop him for another quarterback off waivers, and I cannot say I disagree with that.First, no quarterback in the N.F.L. this season has more interceptions than Manning, with 10. Also, he has only seven touchdown passes — the Denver defense has four scores. There is just no upside in using Manning right now, and with at least one interception in every game this season, there is a clear downside. Manning ranks outside the top 30 in terms of yards per attempt and Denver’s offensive line has struggled. After consecutive plus matchups against Oakland and Cleveland, Manning combined for 17 fantasy points. After years of fantasy dominance, he is nothing more than a streamer until further notice. Perhaps he can figure things out entering the bye week, but he has been brutal.Let’s find some replacements, whether it be at quarterback, or any other position.Note: Ownership percentages are based off Yahoo.Tyrod Taylor, Buffalo Bills (56 percent) — Taylor was on the sideline in Week 6 with a minor medial collateral ligament sprain. After initial reports stated he would be out multiple weeks, he is planning to play Sunday against the Jaguars in London. If that’s the case, some owners are in for a treat, as his ownership dropped over 20 percent since the injury. Now below 60 percent ownership, Taylor has been a top-seven quarterback when on the field, and would easily be a top 10 guy for Week 7 against the Jaguars, if active. With no Aaron Rodgers, Andy Dalton or Manning, if you wanted to use him (no), owners will need to find options, and there probably isn’t a signal caller available with higher upside than Taylor, who is averaging 24 fantasy points per game on the season. There is no reason he should have been dropped in so many leagues, and his end-of-season schedule is appealing. If he keeps running (he is averaging 6.2 attempts for 37.4 yards per game), his floor will remain comfortably high for fantasy owners.AdvertisementJames Starks, Green Bay Packers (17 percent) — Eddie Lacy finally had a good matchup, but it was Starks who reaped the benefits of playing against the Chargers’ weak run defense. He carried the football 10 times for 112 yards and a score, and added a 5-yard touchdown reception. He ended up outcarrying Lacy, 10-4, and Coach Mike McCarthy stated that he wanted to get Starks more involved. Lacy, meanwhile, was not on the injury report, but Jim Nantz disclosed on the CBS broadcast that Lacy’s ankle was not 100 percent. Starks has looked much better than Lacy in all aspects of the game this season, and Aaron Rodgers and the Green Bay coaches have always loved his game. This could be the beginning of a hot-hand approach at running back, with Starks getting the edge if Lacy is still feeling the effects of that bum ankle. Remember, Green Bay has always given Starks multiple series, not just snaps. The Packers go on the bye in Week 7, so we will see if Lacy can get back to 100 percent, but it’s pretty evident that Starks is going to play. He is worth an add if you need running back depth.AdvertisementRonnie Hillman, Denver Broncos (58 percent) — I know the Denver running game, like the rest of its offense, has been a wreck to start the season, but Hillman appears to have taken over the lead back role. Sure, C.J. Anderson got the start for the Broncos, but Hillman finished with 111 rushing yards to Anderson’s 41. They both played 42 offensive snaps in that game, but Hillman had seven more carries. Even though this offense is a mess, the Broncos will still have their days, and Hillman appears to be getting about 15 carries a week, which is rare in fantasy land. He is a must-own right now as Denver heads into its bye.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Theo Riddick, Detroit Lions (21 percent) — If there was one issue with Ameer Abdullah out of college, it was ball security. For the second week in a row, he put the ball on the ground, giving him four fumbles this season. This, and a reported stinger, kept him out of the offense for most of the fourth quarter and overtime. It is becoming a problem for Abdullah, and in his place, Riddick continues to look very strong. He carried the ball seven times for nearly 30 yards, adding three receptions for 50 yards. He now leads all N.F.L. running backs in catches with 33, and with Joique Bell hurt (and terrible), Riddick should continue to see plenty of snaps to make him fantasy relevant in P.P.R. formats. On the season, Matthew Stafford is targeting the running back position a healthy 27 percent of the time, and Riddick has seen 42 targets, hauling in nearly 80 percent of them. I love picking up Riddick and stashing him, or even using him if you need a pass-catching back, as Detroit’s schedule is really starting to become favorable for fantasy purposes.Christine Michael, Dallas Cowboys (38 percent) — The entire universe apparently wants Michael to become a thing, and while there are better running backs who deserve a better role (Khiry Robinson), you cannot deny the raw talent he has. And it appears that Dallas is beginning to realize that, as the running backs coach Gary Brown says it is time to take the reigns off Michael and “let him rock.” It makes sense, as Joseph Randle has been uninspiring, averaging 3.9 yards per carry, while Darren McFadden has transitioned to the third-down role with Lance Dunbar out for the year. The Cowboys have put an emphasis on their running game during their bye week, and they know that Randle has not made many things happen behind that top-notch offensive line. Michael has the athletic ability to make big plays behind that line, and with Matt Cassel and Terrance Williams leading this passing game, you know Dallas wants to try to establish a running game with Tony Romo and Dez Bryant still sidelined.Michael Floyd, Arizona Cardinals (32 percent) — After the emergence of John Brown, as well as a preseason finger injury, Floyd became the forgotten man in the Arizona passing attack. But he still has some serious big-play ability and had a great game Sunday, hauling in five of eight targets for 50 yards and a touchdown against the vulnerable Steelers pass defense. This Cardinals’ passing attack is one of the best in the league right now, and there will be enough volume for Floyd to have some big games, too. If you need a bye-week replacement for guys like Randall Cobb and A.J. Green, Floyd gets a Baltimore secondary that allowed both Anquan Boldin and Torrey Smith to go for nearly 100 yards against it in Week 6 and is surrendering the second most fantasy points per game to opposing wideouts this season.Stefon Diggs, Minnesota Vikings (6 percent) — With Charles Johnson still inactive, Diggs, the talented rookie out of Maryland, continued to make big plays for the Vikings. On Sunday, he torched the Chiefs’ secondary to the tune of seven catches for 129 yards, and is quickly becoming a favorite target of quarterback Teddy Bridgewater. Over the last two weeks, Diggs has been targeted a healthy 19 times, and while that may be a result of Johnson’s being inactive, Diggs has emerged as a legitimate force in this offense. In those last two games, he averaged an impressive 6.5 receptions for 108 yards. He gets a beatable Lions secondary in Week 7.Marvin Jones, Cincinnati Bengals (35 percent) — Andy Dalton continues to use his embarrassment of riches, and this week it was Jones receiving the most work. He was their best offensive player in this game, catching nine balls off 12 targets for 95 yards and a touchdown. Jones made an acrobatic effort to find the end zone, and has now been targeted 20 times over his last two games. With so many weapons in this Bengals offense, it will be hard for Jones, A.J. Green and Tyler Eifert to all have big games, as it is yet to happen, but Jones is worth an add in most leagues. There was a drive in the third quarter in which Jones had three catches for 60 yards and that touchdown, as he got the better of Stephon Gilmore. Consider him a high-upside WR3 in fantasy circles.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.