By ANDREW DASOCT. 21, 2015
FIFA’s ethics committee took less than a day to exercise some of its new transparency powers, confirming on Wednesday that it was actively investigating nearly a dozen current and former officials.Most of the names released Wednesday were not new: the FIFA president, Sepp Blatter, and the head of European soccer’s governing body, Michel Platini, had already been provisionally barred as FIFA looks into what has been described as a “disloyal payment” of about $2 million by Mr. Blatter to Mr. Platini.But ethics committee investigators also confirmed that they had advanced cases related to Franz Beckenbauer, the former German star who once served on FIFA’s governing executive committee, and Ángel María Villar of Spain, the FIFA senior vice president who is temporarily running Europe’s governing body, UEFA, while Mr. Platini is suspended.The committee did not detail the accusations against Mr. Beckenbauer and Mr. Villar, but news media reports have linked both men to the investigation into the bidding for World Cups. Their cases have been forwarded by investigators to the ethics committee’s adjudicatory chamber; in effect, the evidence against them has been presented to the committee’s judge, Hans-Joachim Eckert, for sentencing.AdvertisementThe committee did note that its investigation of Jérôme Valcke was related to “the suspicion of misuse of expenses and other infringements.” Mr. Valcke, FIFA’s top administrator and Mr. Blatter’s top deputy, was relieved of his duties last month amid charges that he had profited from a black-market ticketing scheme. Like the others, he has denied wrongdoing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The other names released Wednesday amount to a who’s who of past FIFA scandals: Jeffrey Webb, the former Concacaf president who was arrested at a Zurich hotel in May; Eugenio Figueredo and Nicolás Leoz, who were included in United States indictments in May; Ricardo Teixeira, the former Brazilian soccer chief who quit FIFA in 2012 to head off an earlier corruption inquiry; Amos Adamu, a Nigerian who served a three-year ban from world soccer for soliciting a bribe in exchange for his vote in the bidding for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups; and Worawi Makudi, a Thai soccer official and former executive committee member who was provisionally suspended earlier this week.AdvertisementThe ethics committee was given new rights to discuss its activities by FIFA’s executive committee on Tuesday. Previously, it was barred from even confirming the existence of an investigation before a final ruling was announced. The ethics committee said that it would “do everything in its power” to settle the cases of Mr. Blatter and Mr. Platini within the 90-day window of their provisional bans. Mr. Platini has said he will run in the election to choose Mr. Blatter’s successor next February, but he cannot be approved as a candidate while under suspension.Mr. Villar’s case could be a new embarrassment for world soccer’s leadership. In addition to serving as Mr. Platini’s temporary replacement as the head of UEFA, Mr. Villar is currently the senior vice president — and second-ranking official — at FIFA while Mr. Blatter is banned.During an executive committee meeting in Zurich on Tuesday, Mr. Villar was also named Mr. Platini’s temporary replacement as the head of FIFA’s organizing committee for the 2018 World Cup in Russia. At that meeting, FIFA also approved the ethics committee changes that resulted in Wednesday’s announcement that Mr. Villar, too, could be facing a ban.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: FIFA’s Ethics Group Expands Its Inquiry on Soccer Scandal .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.