AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Victor MatherDaniel Murphy hit another one.In the top of the eighth inning at Wrigley Field on Wednesday night, Murphy blasted home run No. 7 of this postseason. In doing so, Murphy became the first player to homer in six consecutive playoff games, breaking the record of five set by Carlos Beltran of  the Houston Astros in 2004. Murphy’s seven home runs in a single postseason put him in a four-way tie for fourth in baseball history. But those statistics are even more remarkable than they sound. Murphy has socked the homers in only 39 plate appearances. The players tied or ahead of him had 42 to 77 chances.Even more remarkably, Murphy is not really a home run hitter, or at least he has not been until now. He did have his career high in homers this year, but the total was just 14. Most of the other players who top the postseason homer list were sluggers. Tied for first at eight home runs are Barry Bonds with the 2002 San Francisco Giants, Beltran of the 2004 Astros and Nelson Cruz of the 2011 Texas Rangers; their regular-season homers ranged from 29 to 46. Among the players with seven, Troy Glaus of the 2002 Los Angeles Angels had 30 in the regular season, and Jayson Werth of the 2009 Philadelphia Phillies had 36.Perhaps the most comparable player to Murphy is the other player with seven postseason homers, Melvin Upton of the 2008 Tampa Bay Rays. He had three homers in the division series against the White Sox and four in the A.L.C.S. against Boston, though he was shut out in the World Series against the Phillies. Upton had hit just nine home runs in 640 regular-season plate appearances that year.But Upton did have a 24-homer season in his past and a 28-homer season in his future. Murphy’s top three home run totals are 14, 13 and 12. Over his career he has needed 58 plate appearances for each homer. For the playoffs, that figure is six. To some, Murphy’s newfound power echoes Gene Tenace, the Oakland Athletics catcher, who created a stir with four home runs in the 1972 World Series, winning the Most Valuable Player Award of the series. Tenace had been a part-time player, never hitting more than seven homers in a season.His subsequent career showed that the display had not been a fluke, as he wound up with five 20-homer seasons and 201 home runs over all.Tenace turned 26 in October 1972 and had never had a shot as a regular starter, so the potential for upside was there. At 30, with six full-time seasons under his belt, it is unlikely that Murphy will suddenly become the next Howard Johnson or even Ed Kranepool. Using the simple Marcel forecasting system, Baseball-Reference expects Murphy to hit 11 home runs next year.But Murphy has earned his place in baseball folklore, no matter where his career goes from here. Advertisement