

 Michael Powell
 

SPORTS OF THE TIMES
OCT. 21, 2015
CHICAGO — Cubs right fielder Jorge Soler settled into the batter’s box, a home run already to his credit last evening. Jeurys Familia, the 6-foot-3 Mets closer, stared at him, impassive, and went to work.A 93-mile-an-hour split-finger. A 97 m.p.h. fastball that followed on the heels of one that traveled 96. A few missed the strike zone, most hit it, and whatever.Strike three. The Mets win, 5-2.So here the Mets stand, on the verge, the lip, the precipice. One more victory against a talented young Cubs team rocked on its heels and the Mets walk into the World Series.The cognitive dissonance is considerable. Three months ago, two lifelong Mets fans — my son Nick and I — sat high in the Citi Field stands. On that languid summer evening, we watched a mercy killing, as the Dodgers’ Clayton Kershaw mowed down the hitless wonders known as the Metropolitans, 3-0.AdvertisementBartolo Colon, the Mets’ starter that night, was batting .147; his catcher logged in that night at .137. When Manager Terry Collins wrote out his lineup card, his No. 4 hitter, John Mayberry Jr., was batting .170. The No. 5 hitter, Eric Campbell, stood at .179; team factotums blathered about how he led the team in hard outs.AdvertisementThe Mets’ record, after the loss, was 49-47, which defined high mediocre. The owners were defensive bunker dwellers, the general manager specialized in setting expectation bars low.Looked at with the perspective of the past three months, it’s as if I am describing a planet near Alpha Centauri.The Mets have now taken the first three games of a best-of-seven set with the Chicago Cubs, leaving them a single victory from claiming the National League pennant. And they seem to have piqued the imagination of New York City.The Yankees claimed a playoff spot this year. They lost a game and were gone, the pinstripes suddenly old. The Mets have all these strong young arms tossing fastballs 98 m.p.h. The Wall Street Journal pointed out recently that 41 percent of the Mets’ pitches in the playoffs had arrived at 95 m.p.h. or faster. Catcher Travis d’Arnaud is blowing out the laces on his catcher’s mitt trying to catch these lightning bolts.In place of .170 hitters, the Mets have the pride of Campechuela, Cuba, Yoenis Cespedes, who hauls some nice 2015 numbers — 35 homers and a .542 slugging average — to the plate with him. D’Arnaud, who looks like a muscle beach kid with his stiff-armed batting stance, stroked a laser beam home run off the Apple in Citi Field last weekend.The team captain, David Wright, restored to something like health, is making spinning stops and throws at third base and slapping singles and doubles, dancing off bases, playing mind games with the young Cubs. And second baseman Daniel Murphy has done his best Irish-American Bambino imitation.What’s up with all these home runs, Danny? He looked at a reporter Tuesday night and shrugged. Baseball Rule 372, Subsection 8: Do not question the gods of baseball; accept their bounty with thanks. “I wish I could explain it,” he said. “I would have done it like six years ago.”AdvertisementAfter frigid nights by Flushing Bay, the Cubs returned to Chicago and found balmy 72-degree temperatures. Joe Maddon, the hip-when-hipsters-were-in-pampers Cubs manager, was buoyant. He expected his young hitters to drive balls in their medieval bandbox of a stadium.“Our guys are going to go into the game with a better feel in their hands,” he said.The night began with Jimi Hendrix’s “Purple Haze” blasting away, and everyone in the stadium — and on the rooftops of surrounding apartment buildings — rose and roared. This was no car-clogged Los Angeles: As in New York City, many Chicago fans arrived by an elevated subway train that rolls past handsome brick rowhouses and men sitting at card tables and women hanging laundry on backyard lines. You’d need better eyes than mine to count more than a dozen empty seats in the joint.The Mets drew first blood. Then in the bottom of the first inning, Maddon’s hitters awoke. The rookie Kyle Schwarber, who at 6 feet and 235 pounds looks like a block of marble pulled from the mines of Carrara, settled in.Met pitcher Jacob deGrom spun a fastball that skidded six inches off the plate. Schwarber extended his arms so far his top hand flew off the bat. The ball soared into the left-field bleachers.DeGrom appeared destined for a long night. “In the third inning, I said if we get five out of this guy tonight, we’ll be lucky,” Collins said afterward. “Then all of a sudden, he started making pitches.”Where he’d fed the Cubs hitters, red meat carnivores all, fat fastballs, deGrom began tossing weirdly angled sliders and changeups, and nibbling at corners. Eventually his fastball began to skate left and right. That was more or less that.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The precocious Cubs picked a bad night to play young. Shortstop Javier Baez made an error. Cespedes sent a drive bouncing off the glove of Schwarber in left field. Most disastrously, a swinging third strike bounced by the Cubs’ catcher to the backstop and a run scored.Maddon pulled his starting pitcher after four innings and began to burn through his bullpen like a pyro through dry kindling.AdvertisementFor his part, Collins had offered pregame indirection. Would his guys run? He shook his head. That’s a bad bet. The Mets are a home-run-hitting team, and you don’t want to run out of an inning at Wrigley Field. Reporters dutifully recorded this.Then Curtis Granderson was thrown out trying to steal second. That was the opening salvo. Cespedes stole third base, and scored on the errant third strike. Wright tagged up from first base. Murphy slid home in a cloud of dust, beating a throw from first.The Mets’ offense has been a two-cylinder jalopy for much of the postseason. The running game has stirred it to life. Cespedes had three hits and knocked in two runs. He turned up in the interview room looking natty in a black leather baseball cap turned backward, and a diamond-encrusted watch. Tell me, I asked him, about your batting adjustments. He tried, then shrugged and told his interpreter: “You just have to be in the cage to see what it is I do.”I dropped that line of inquiry.The Cubs offered no hint of whines after the game. Asked about their errors and missed chances to break open the game, they were stoics. “ ‘What if’ didn’t happen,” Schwarber said. “This is what happened.”Maddon showed up pasty-faced to talk with the press. “You’ve got to give them credit, man,” he said of the Mets. “It’s not just that we haven’t been that good; they’ve been that good.”He advised his team not to get uptight. “In baseball, man, you’ve got to be in the present tense and be tension-free.”The tense does not get much more present for the Cubs than Wednesday night’s potential elimination game.Collins refused to look around the corner at the Series. He knows that the other New York team once blew a 3-0 playoff series lead to the Red Sox. He said that all his players were “talking about is tomorrow.” Why rush things? This hallucination of a year only seems to get more gloriously preposterous.Email: powellm@nytimes.comWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »