By ANDREW KEHOCT. 2, 2015
An injury that Steven Matz first described as similar to a crick in his neck, only in his back, has apparently turned into something more serious.While the Mets returned to Citi Field on Friday for a game against the Washington Nationals that was eventually rained out, Matz was visiting a doctor to address the lingering soreness in the right side of his back.Matz, a 24-year-old left-hander, awoke on Tuesday morning believing he had simply slept in an awkward position.But when the pain lingered, he was scratched from his start on Thursday against the Philadelphia Phillies.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since making an electrifying rookie debut this summer, Matz had emerged as a prime candidate to serve as a No. 4 starter in the postseason. The club had hoped that he could pitch in the final series this weekend as a tuneup before the division series against the Los Angeles Dodgers.AdvertisementBut Matz in all likelihood will not be ready before next week, putting his spot on the playoff roster into doubt. The Mets do not have to make any personnel decisions until Friday, when the series begins.Advertisement“I think the concern level has certainly gone up,” General Manager Sandy Alderson said. “It hasn’t seemed to get better. I probably downplayed it a little too much at the outset, based on hope rather than information. But the fact that it hasn’t responded particularly well is concerning. But that doesn’t mean it won’t respond quickly over the next few days. These things are sort of hard to predict.”The rainout put aside for a night concerns about playoff seeding and home-field advantage. Friday’s game was rescheduled for Saturday as part of a split-admission doubleheader. The Mets started the day tied in the standings with the Dodgers while holding the tiebreaker.The focus, then, was on Matz, who has not pitched since Sept. 24. Manager Terry Collins said the Mets were hoping Matz could pitch in an instructional league game in Florida next week, a final chance for him to go through a normal day of work and reaffirm his health before the postseason was underway.“If he goes down and gets through that and comes out O.K., I’d probably have to say there’s a good shot he’d be on,” Collins said about the playoff roster. “I’m not worried about results. I’m worried about his health right now.”Matz was superb in his six starts and compiled a 2.27 E.R.A. But his Mets career has been otherwise marred with injury. He missed about two months this season with a muscle tear in his back. He was drafted in 2009, but he required Tommy John surgery in 2010, and he did not make his minor league debut until 2012.Matz was not the only Mets player whose health was being monitored. Collins said outfielder Yoenis Cespedes, who sustained bruises on the middle and ring fingers of his left hand when he was hit by a pitch on Wednesday, would have played Friday had there been a game.Collins said that infielder Juan Uribe, who bruised his chest Sept. 20, “was not much better” and that he still had considerable swelling in the affected area. And Collins said infielder Wilmer Flores, who left the game Wednesday with lower back stiffness, “seemed a little bit better.”The biggest concern remained the starting rotation, the state of which will become clearer in the coming days.Advertisement“One important point is we don’t have to make a decision until a week from today,” Alderson said.A version of this article appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Matz Could Lose Spot If Back Pain Lingers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.