By EMMA STONEYOCT. 21, 2015
WELLINGTON, New Zealand — When South Africa Coach Heyneke Meyer named his roster for the Rugby World Cup, he highlighted the need for veterans who knew how to handle pressure, particularly during the knockout stages.Meyer was criticized for selecting several older players, like Jean de Villiers, Victor Matfield, Fourie du Preez and Duane Vermeulen, who had either been injured or had received little game time before the tournamentThat criticism only intensified after the Springboks lost their opening game against Japan despite fielding a lineup with 880 games’ experience. Many called for the veterans to be axed after the loss.De Villiers, who was the captain, was forced out of the tournament after sustaining a broken jaw in a group match against Samoa — he subsequently retired from international rugby — while Matfield has also not played since the Samoa game because of a hamstring injury.AdvertisementThe absence of that pair has been seen by many as a blessing in disguise. It brought Damian de Allende and Jesse Kriel together in the Springboks’ midfield, which has added a dynamic element that was lacking with de Villiers. Two young locks, Lood de Jager and Eben Etzebeth have been a towering presence in the pack, establishing themselves as one of the best second-row pairings in the tournament.AdvertisementBut over all since the shocking upset by Japan, it has been the veterans who have stepped up for the Springboks.Winger Bryan Habana, 32, scored a hat trick against the United States and is now tied with the New Zealand legend Jonah Lomu for most tries scored at the World Cup.Loose forward Schalk Burger, who nearly died of bacterial meningitis in 2013, has been a huge presence, too. Against Wales last weekend, the   32-year-old Burger gained more yards than any other player and tackled anything that moved.And Vermeulen, 29, and du Preez, 33, combined to score the late game- winning try that earned South Africa a semifinal showdown with New Zealand.Du Preez, who has taken over as captain, has been particularly influential since his recall. He is an astute reader of what goes on during the game and provides the cool-headed decisions behind the forward pack. His decision-making and communication with the players around him, as well as his kicking game, take some of the pressure off the young flyhalf Handré Pollard, 21.Meyer described du Preez as a “tactical genius” and the “most astute player I have ever coached.” But he also praised all of his old guard. “They are like charcoal; when you put them under pressure, you get diamonds,” Meyer told Reuters.There have been other diamonds on display, too.New Zealand flyhalf Dan Carter, 33, has had his critics this year, with many questioning whether he was still the All Blacks’ first choice as playmaker, after some below-par performances during the Rugby Championship.AdvertisementBut he silenced his critics with a dominant display against Australia in August and did so again in the quarterfinal against the French in Cardiff, Wales, as the All Blacks won, 62-13.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He directed play superbly at Millennium Stadium, with the highlight coming when he used one hand to hold off a defender and the other to offload the ball to Julian Savea, who scored a try.Ma’a Nonu, 33, made his 100th test appearance against Tonga earlier in the tournament. He is another veteran who played some of his best rugby against the French. He was second only to Richie McCaw, 34, in tackles, and his ball distribution and running were superb.New Zealand is a team renowned for its “big-game” players. The All Blacks have become increasingly adept since losing the 2007 quarterfinals to France at pulling out big performances when it matters.They did it in the last World Cup when they held out the French to win the final, 8-7. Carter, Nonu, Conrad Smith (age 34), McCaw, Jerome Kaino (32) and Kieran Read (29) all showed last weekend that they are capable of doing it again in this tournament, too.Their experience will be key against the Springboks, especially in helping to ensure that younger players, such as the exhilarating winger Nehe Milner-Skudder, 24, don’t succumb as the pressure builds.In the other semifinal this weekend, Australia and Argentina, in particular, will need their experienced players to step up again.The Pumas are a young team that has been expertly led by hooker Agustín Creevy, 30, who has 45 tests under his belt. Flyhalf Nicolás Sánchez, 26, playing at his first World Cup, has been one of the outstanding players of the tournament so far. But there is no doubt the presence of Juan Martín Hernández, a 33-year-old veteran of three World Cups, at center has helped the young No.10 Sánchez. Having two playmakers has brought an extra dimension to the Pumas’ attack and taken some of the heat off Sánchez, with Hernández able to swap in and out of the first receiver role.In the forwards, prop Marcos Ayerza, 32, has been a rock in the scrum, while flanker Juan Martín Fernández Lobbe, 33, has been truly world-class. He has done the hard work at the breakdown, and his all-around skills have been just as superb. His long cut-out pass that set up Matías Moroni’s first try against Ireland would have made a back proud, as would his show-and-go and one-handed offload that set up Juan Imhoff’s second try late in the game.For Australia, the captain Stephen Moore, 32, has been a major figure in improving the team’s culture. Both he and Matt Giteau, 33, played their 100th tests as Australia beat Scotland in the quarterfinals. Moore has played a critical role in Australia’s greatly improved scrum, an area of the game many felt would bring about the Wallabies’ demise.AdvertisementGiteau has brought direction and much-needed calm to Australia’s attack since a change in the eligibility rules allowed him to return to the national team. Adam Ashley-Cooper, 31, has been one of Australia’s most consistent players for years, but even he has benefited from Giteau’s vision and skill, as well as from the play of flyhalf Bernard Foley.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.