By BILLY WITZOCT. 2, 2015
BALTIMORE —  A daylong downpour washed away the Yankees’ game Friday night. The day off enables them to rinse away any lingering effects of Thursday’s playoff-clinching celebration and set their sights on Tuesday’s one-game wild-card playoff.The Yankees will play the Houston Astros, the Texas Rangers, the Los Angeles Angels or the Minnesota Twins.One more Yankees victory — or a loss by the Astros, who crushed the Diamondbacks, 21-5, late Friday — and the playoff will be at Yankee Stadium.While the Yankees profess they have no interest in whom they play, they are beginning to look at how their roster will be constructed depending on their opponent, so they might take advantage of certain matchups.Advertisement“They all present their challenges and we’ll see what happens,” Manager Joe Girardi said.The boogeyman who could be looming is the Astros left-hander Dallas Keuchel, who has thrown 16 shutout innings against the Yankees this season. He would be starting on three days’ rest, something he has not done in the major leagues.AdvertisementThe Yankees, with a left-handed-leaning lineup, have hit home runs — a main source of their offense — at a higher rate against right-handed pitching.The Angels would quite likely turn to the rookie left-hander Andrew Heaney, who allowed two hits in seven innings in beating the Yankees in Anaheim at the end of June. The Twins could send the rookie right-hander Tyler Duffey, who is 5-1 since being called up in August, or the former Yankee Phil Hughes.Even if a team has a poor track record against a pitcher, sometimes just having a track record is important, Headley said when he was asked about Keuchel.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As a hitter, any time you face a guy more, generally gives you a better chance, just because you’ve seen what their stuff looks like from the plate,” Headley said. “Having said that, he’s pitched really tough against us. Hopefully, we can make some adjustments. But, yeah, I’d rather face a guy that I’ve faced before, even if he’s really good, but at least I’ve seen what his stuff looks like.”The roster will look different because it is just a one-game playoff, making the usual allotment of 11 or 12 pitchers superfluous. Girardi said he might add extra pinch-runners, particularly since the Yankees have a number of slower runners. One of those potential pinch-runners is Rico Noel, who was caught stealing for the first time in six attempts against Boston on Thursday.The doubleheader scheduled for Saturday and Sunday’s regular-season finale will be a chance for final evaluations. Nobody will be watched more closely than Chasen Shreve, who has floundered in September.“We’re going to use him the next couple days to try to get him back on track,” Girardi said. “Is it possible if we can use him Saturday and Sunday and see if we can get that mojo back? Absolutely. He’s been through a tough month, a really tough month. And this is a kid who this is really his first full season up here and there are ups and downs, and we want to try to get him through it.”AdvertisementOne player the Yankees will not have is second baseman Stephen Drew, who is feeling the effects of a vestibular concussion that specialists believe he sustained when he was hit in the face by a ground ball on Sept. 9, but that was diagnosed just this week.Nathan Eovaldi, who has been sidelined close to three weeks with an inflamed right elbow, could be added to the roster for the division series, if the Yankees advance. He threw off a mound Friday (18 fastballs and 7 splitters) for the first time since the injury, and he will throw 35 pitches on Monday.Although he has not thrown in relief in the major leagues, Eovaldi did not expect it to be a difficult transition.“Anything I can do to help the team win,” he said. “I’ve always been able to get ready real quick. I don’t think it would be an issue. My arm doesn’t take too long to get loose.”Girardi revealed little else about his plans, not even telling Masahiro Tanaka that he would start the wild-card game — which is widely expected to be the case.“If he were to tell me that, I need to be ready to go so I’m working myself so that I’m ready on that day,” Tanaka, who was rusty Wednesday after returning from a hamstring strain, said through an interpreter. “It’s a do-or-die game, so it’s definitely going to be very exciting.”A version of this article appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Yankees Ponder Playoff, and Opposing Pitchers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.