By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 23, 2015
Russell Wilson threw a 43-yard touchdown pass to Tyler Lockett late in the first half, Marshawn Lynch had a 1-yard score, and the Seattle Seahawks subdued the host San Francisco 49ers, 20-3, on Thursday for their fourth straight win in this rivalry.The Seahawks whipped San Francisco in Levi’s Stadium on a Thursday in prime time 11 months after Richard Sherman chomped turkey on the field there last Thanksgiving night in the wake of a 19-3 victory.Wilson completed 10 of his first 12 passes and finished with 235 yards passing. He was intercepted twice and sacked five times to push his N.F.L.-leading total to 31.Lynch ran for 122 yards despite vomiting on the sideline in the first half as Seattle (3-4) won its first road game in four tries.AdvertisementColin Kaepernick struggled once again against the Seahawks. He was sacked six times and was limited to 13 of 24 passing for 124 yards.
      Highlights from around the league.
    PATRIOTS NEEDLE JETS The Patriots’ official Twitter account sent out — and then deleted — a picture of the Jets’ infamous “butt fumble” as the A.F.C. East rivals approached Sunday’s game in New England.AdvertisementWith a hashtag for throwback Thursday and the caption “This seems relevant,” the Patriots sent the picture of Mark Sanchez, then the Jets quarterback, losing the ball after running into the rear end of offensive lineman Brandon Moore in 2012. Although it was deleted from Twitter, a screen shot of it was published by The New York Post.The Patriots spokesman Stacey James did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The Patriots (5-0) host the Jets (4-1) on Sunday for the division lead.In personnel moves, New England released defensive lineman Khyri Thornton from the 53-man roster and offensive lineman Brennan Williams from the practice squad.Thornton was a third-round draft pick by the Packers. The Patriots claimed him off waivers from Green Bay last month.Williams was a third-round draft choice by the Houston Texans in 2013. His father, Brent Williams, played defensive end with the Patriots from 1986 to 1993.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BEARS RELEASE RATLIFF The Chicago Bears cut defensive lineman Jeremiah Ratliff, a day after he was seen having an animated discussion with General Manager Ryan Pace. The exchange between Ratliff and Pace occurred in a parking lot outside of the team’s practice center.AdvertisementThe move comes after the Bears lost, 37-34, at Detroit on Sunday to drop to 2-4 in their first season under Pace and Coach John Fox.Ratliff was suspended for the first three games of this season for violating the N.F.L.’s substance abuse policy. He started at nose tackle in each of Chicago’s last two games.A four-time Pro Bowl selection in Dallas, he signed with the Bears in 2013 after the Cowboys cut him.RECEIVER RETIRES Wide receiver Brandon Lloyd has announced his retirement after 11 N.F.L. seasons.In a statement, Lloyd, 34, said he had no regrets and was “blessed to leave the game in such a healthy and happy place.”Lloyd, who played for six teams in his 142-game career, led the league in receiving yards in 2010, his one Pro Bowl season. He had 399 career receptions and 36 touchdowns.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Seahawks’ Defense Stifles Kaepernick and 49ers .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.