AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressMike Trout hit a leadoff triple in the ninth inning on Friday and scored on a tiebreaking single by Albert Pujols, sending the Los Angeles Angels to a 2-1 win over Texas that kept the Rangers from clinching the American League West title.Los Angeles began the day tied with Minnesota in the race for the second A.L. wild card, and a game behind Houston, which played later on Friday.Rangers closer Shawn Tolleson (6-4) appeared in his fourth consecutive game. Trout hit the second pitch deep into the right-center gap, and then slid headfirst into third base before emphatically pumping his right arm toward his teammates in the dugout.Pujols followed with a soft single to left field on the next pitch.Already assured a playoff spot, Texas went into Friday needing a win over the Angels or a loss by second-place Houston to secure the division title.ROYALS 3, TWINS 1 Ben Zobrist put a major dent in Minnesota’s postseason bid with an R.B.I. double in the eighth inning against Glen Perkins, and visiting Kansas City topped the Twins.Perkins, hampered by neck and back trouble that led to his removal from the closer role, spoiled a stellar start by Ervin Santana (7-5) with a first-pitch fastball that Zobrist drove off the wall in right-center field. Zobrist then scored when right fielder Torii Hunter fumbled a single by Mike Moustakas, another blemish on an awful second half for Perkins.Chris Young gave the Royals another reason to consider him for the postseason rotation, allowing an R.B.I. single by Aaron Hicks in the third. Young, 36, gave up four hits in six and a third innings, retiring 15 out of 16 batters at one point.CUBS 6, BREWERS 1 Jake Arrieta struck out seven in six strong innings, and Chicago won at Milwaukee as the Cubs tried to keep up with Pittsburgh in the race to host the National League wild-card game.Anthony Rizzo had two hits and three R.B.I., including a solo homer into the Cubs’ bullpen in right in the fourth off Ariel Pena (2-1).Arrieta (22-6) allowed two singles in his final tuneup before the postseason. His E.R.A. dropped to 1.77.BLUE JAYS 8, RAYS 4 Troy Tulowitzki doubled and singled in his return to the Toronto lineup after missing three weeks with injuries, and the visiting Blue Jays rallied past Tampa Bay.Tulowitzki went 2 for 5 and scored a run.Edwin Encarnacion and Russell Martin homered for the Blue Jays, who started the day tied with Kansas City in the race for the American League’s best record and home-field advantage throughout the postseason.BRAVES 4, CARDINALS 0 Julio Teheran pitched six strong innings, Daniel Castro drove in two runs, and Atlanta beat visiting St. Louis.Teheran (11-8) allowed five hits, walked one and struck out six, closing his regular season by going 2-1 with a 1.62 E.R.A. in his last six starts.WHITE SOX 2, TIGERS 1 Chris Sale allowed one run over seven-plus innings and set the White Sox’ record for strikeouts in a season as host Chicago beat Detroit.By retiring James McCann, who looked at a 3-2 breaking ball for the first out of the second inning, Sale struck out his 270th batter of the season. He began the game with 267 strikeouts and broke the mark set by the Hall of Famer Ed Walsh in 1908, when he struck out 269 batters.Sale’s record came on an eventful day for the White Sox. Earlier Friday, General Manager Rick Hahn said he expected Manager Robin Ventura to return and also announced that the team would not be retaining the bench coach Mark Parent after the end of a disappointing season.Sale (13-11) had been struggling recently. His win on Friday was his first since Aug. 21, and he broke a four-game losing streak. He was helped by a diving catch by J. B. Shuck in right field on a drive by Dixon Machado that ended the seventh.Advertisement