By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 22, 2015
Thomas Vanek scored the go-ahead goal in the second period, and the Minnesota Wild beat Columbus, 3-2, on Thursday night, pushing the visiting Blue Jackets to 0-8-0 and spoiling Coach John Tortorella’s debut.The Blue Jackets’ start is the worst season-opening regulation losing streak in the N.H.L. since the Rangers started 0-11-0 in 1943-44. Tortorella took over as coach Wednesday after Todd Richards was fired.Zach Parise scored his sixth goal of the season, which is tied for the league lead, at 5 minutes 4 seconds in. After Alexander Wennberg and Brandon Dubinsky countered for Columbus, Nino Niederreiter tied the score, and Vanek scored the winner with 8:48 left in the second with his third goal of the season.DEVILS 5, SENATORS 4 Lee Stempniak tied the score with 32 seconds left in regulation and added the shootout winner as the Devils won at Ottawa.AdvertisementTravis Zajac, Jordin Tootoo and Adam Henrique also scored, and Cory Schneider made 35 saves to help the Devils improve to 3-3-1.AdvertisementChris Neil, playing his 900th N.H.L. game, and Mike Hoffman, Zack Smith and Mika Zibanejad scored for Ottawa. Andrew Hammond made 28 saves in his season debut.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.STARS 4, PENGUINS 1 Jason Spezza scored his fifth goal of the season, and Dallas won at Pittsburgh for their fifth straight victory.Johnny Oduya and John Klinberg scored their first goals of the season, and Mattias Janmark scored his third, helping the Stars finish a perfect four-game trip. They are 6-1-0 overall.Antti Niemi stopped 33 shots for his third victory of the season and his fourth straight against Pittsburgh. Niemi made 37 saves in a 3-0 win over the Penguins two weeks ago in Dallas.BLACKHAWKS 3, PANTHERS 2 Patrick Kane and Brent Seabrook each had a goal and two assists, and Chicago beat visiting Florida in their first game since defenseman Duncan Keith had surgery on his right knee.Artem Anisimov also scored for the Blackhawks, and Corey Crawford made 16 saves while improving to 5-1 against Florida.Jaromir Jagr scored his fifth goal of the season for Florida, which leads the team.PREDATORS 5, DUCKS 1 Colin Wilson and Ryan Ellis each had a goal and two assists to lead Nashville to a home victory over Anaheim.Mattias Ekholm and Mike Ribeiro each had a goal and an assist and Eric Nystrom had the other goal for the Predators. Pekka Rinne made 27 saves.AdvertisementJiri Sekac scored for Anaheim, and Anton Khudobin made 24 saves.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Tortorella Loses in Debut With Blue Jackets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.