By SCOTT CACCIOLAOCT. 22, 2015
BOSTON —  On the first possession of the Knicks’ final dress rehearsal before the start of the regular season, Kristaps Porzingis tried to assert himself against the Celtics’ David Lee and missed badly on a leaning hook. Porzingis spent the next four minutes collecting three fouls and soon planted his 7-foot-3 frame on the visitors’ bench.The preseason schedule was a mixed bag for the Knicks, who were not at their best Thursday in a 99-85 loss to the Celtics at TD Garden.The Knicks — scheduled to open the regular season Wednesday against the Milwaukee Bucks — trailed by as many as 19 points in the first half as Porzingis labored with foul trouble and Carmelo Anthony struggled with his shot.Arron Afflalo, who missed much of the preseason with a left hamstring injury, went to the locker room Thursday with what the team described as hamstring tightness. Losing Afflalo, a shooting guard, for any length of time would be an early blow to the Knicks, who figure to lean on his experience. Coach Derek Fisher said he wanted to exercise caution.Advertisement“We’re still trying to get him to a point where he can sustain longer minutes without getting the fatigue in the hamstring,” Fisher said. “So we’ll see how the next several days go.”The game was Fisher’s first opportunity to see his presumptive starting lineup on the court together. He opted for Anthony, Porzingis and Afflalo alongside Robin Lopez and Jose Calderon. But foul trouble, defensive problems and the injury to Afflalo reduced any potential chemistry among the starters into a bit of a ragged mess.Anthony finished with 8 points while shooting 4 of 18 from the field, and Porzingis had 8 points and 8 rebounds in 19 minutes. Calderon had a team-high 17 points and kept the Knicks involved for long stretches of the second half.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I missed,” Anthony said. “I can’t tell you why.”Porzingis, a 20-year-old forward whose development will be a focal point this season, showed flashes of potential. He forced Lee into an awkward jumper and corralled an offensive rebound that led to a jumper for Anthony. Porzingis scored on a turnaround jumper, even as the game was slipping away.At the same time, Porzingis was slow to make adjustments on defense, a step behind on rotations. At least he had company. Kevin Seraphin entered the game in the second quarter and needed four minutes to pick up three fouls. He and Porzingis were soon spectators.AdvertisementIf the game itself was a minor setback, the Knicks ended the preseason with a 4-2 record.“I just like where we’re at mentally,” Anthony said. “As a team, we came together quick.”Anthony, who had knee surgery in February, said his primary goal in the preseason was to remain healthy. So he ticked that off his list. Against the Celtics, he even converted a layup in the open court.“I didn’t expect to do it,” he said. “But I did it. So that’s a big deal for me.”Fisher has chosen not to wade into the thorny territory of expectations. He has not pledged to coach the team to the playoffs. He has not mentioned wins and losses, other than to say that he believes the Knicks are an improved product — not that they could play much worse than they did during last season’s 65-loss debacle.Fisher has cited the added value of the team’s new faces: Kyle O’Quinn’s strong presence in the locker room and Lopez’s defensive tenacity, to name two. The Knicks entered the game holding opponents to 40.5 percent shooting.While not exactly proficient, the Celtics shot well enough (33.3 percent from 3-point range) and forced the Knicks into enough miscues (17 turnovers) to reveal just how much work remains.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Show Little Cohesion in Last Tuneup Before Opener.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.