By ALLAN KREDAOCT. 22, 2015
The Rangers did not generate much of an attack early against the resurgent Arizona Coyotes on Thursday until Chris Kreider, Kevin Hayes and the former Coyotes defenseman Keith Yandle rallied the home team to a 4-1 victory at Madison Square Garden.Kreider scored on a lunging stretch midway through the second period to tie the game. Hayes took advantage of a misplay behind the net by goaltender Mike Smith early in the third to put the Rangers ahead.Then Yandle, who holds the Coyotes’ franchise record for points by a defenseman, chipped in an insurance goal in his first game against his former team.“I tried not to let it get in my head before the game — it was little bit emotional,” Yandle said. “But after the first couple of shifts, it was time to play. It’s very nice to get the win. That’s most important.”AdvertisementRick Nash completed the scoring in the closing seconds when he was awarded with a goal — his first of the season — because he was hooked on a breakaway toward an empty net.AdvertisementHenrik Lundqvist made 34 saves after sitting out a game as the Rangers (5-2-1) continued their domination of the Coyotes at the Garden, where they have won 16 of 18 games since January 1992, when the Coyotes were the original Winnipeg Jets.“It was a strange game,” Lundqvist said. “I knew they could play a really tight game and not create a lot of offense — that was the case in the first 30 minutes. Then the game changed a little bit, opened up with more chances both ways.”Lundqvist said he could understand the extra motivation for Yandle, a fourth-round draft pick by the Coyotes in 2005 who scored 65 goals and had 246 assists for the franchise.“It’s always special to play against a team you’ve been part of for a long time,” Lundqvist added. “He wants to show them he’s doing well here. He’s been a strong player for us.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Arizona’s first shot on goal came after almost 15 minutes had elapsed. Then the rookie forward Max Domi — the son of the former Rangers pugilist Tie Domi — made a perfect cross-ice pass to defenseman Klas Dahlbeck, who rifled the puck Lundqvist at 15 minutes 34 seconds.Kreider knotted the game at 10:06 of the second period with his first goal of the season by redirecting a Mats Zuccarello pass past Smith while sliding toward him.Hayes notched his second of the season at 2:35 of the third when Smith fumbled the puck behind his net and Hayes managed to backhand it into the open net.AdvertisementYandle, 29, played parts of nine seasons with the Coyotes before being traded to the Rangers on March 1. He made the score 3-1 on a deflected shot at 6:24 of the third on the power play.“I was just trying to get anything at the net, and I got lucky,” Yandle said.The Rangers traded the highly touted prospect Anthony Duclair to Arizona with first- and second-round picks and defenseman John Moore for the offensive-minded Yandle, a power-play quarterback the Rangers wanted heading into the playoffs. One of just three defensemen with 50 or more points in three different seasons since 2010-11, Yandle has not quite lived up to his offensive prowess as a Ranger. He had two goals and nine assists in 21 games after the trade and had four assists this season before scoring.Yandle contributed two goals and nine assists in 19 playoff games last spring, but he was hampered by a shoulder injury.The 20-year-old Duclair — who had a goal and six assists for the Rangers last season before they sent him back to juniors — has scored five goals for his new team, including a hat trick against Anaheim Oct. 14. He had a quiet game in his Garden return and acknowledged that the trade from the Rangers caught him by surprise.“It was a big shock for me,” he said. “When you’re a young guy, you don’t expect to get traded. When I got sent back to juniors, I really thought I’d come back and be part of the organization. I wasn’t angry, I wasn’t happy. I didn’t see it coming.”Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault was also gratified after the hard-fought victory over a pesky opponent.“The type of game that Arizona plays, which is a strong, defending game, is very tough,” he said.SLAP SHOTSMets pitcher Matt Harvey received an ovation and waved when he was introduced during the second period. The Mets will open the World Series on Tuesday.An article in some editions on Friday about the Rangers’ 4-1 victory over the Arizona Coyotes described incorrectly Keith Yandle’s goal to make the score 3-1 in the third period. His shot deflected off a Coyotes player into the net; he did not tip in a shot by Derek Stepan.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Extend Mastery of Coyotes at the Garden.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.