By BILLY WITZOCT. 22, 2015
CHICAGO —  Sitting atop the right-field scoreboard at Wrigley Field for the last week, encased in a plastic box, was the baseball that Kyle Schwarber had deposited there — a metaphorical marker of Schwarber’s prodigious power and the Chicago Cubs’ defeat of their perpetually haunting rivals, the St. Louis Cardinals.Schwarber, perhaps more than any member of the Cubs, is a proxy for the franchise: young, powerfully constructed and, with a baby face graced by a scruffy patch on his chin, still growing into himself.During the National League Championship Series sweep by the Mets, Schwarber left impressions on baseballs — he hit two impressive home runs — and on the left-field grass at Wrigley Field.In the Mets’ series-clinching 8-3 win on Wednesday, Schwarber twice came charging in for line drives, launching his 235-pound body toward them, only to miss. One ball popped into and out of his glove; the other skidded to the wall.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, he had another calamity in Game 3 — a ball bouncing into and out of his glove as he retreated — and nearly another one when he overran a fly ball down the left-field line only to be rescued when he reached back with his glove and plucked the ball out of the air.Advertisement“There’s a big pit in my stomach right now saying, ‘What if,’ ” Schwarber said Wednesday night in a clubhouse that searched to strike a balance between the satisfaction of a surprising season and the disappointment of its premature end. “What if we won four games and go to the World Series?” he said. “What if we won the World Series? But that’s what if. This is reality.”Still, the Cubs won 97 games, and with budding stars like Anthony Rizzo, Kris Bryant, Addison Russell, Jorge Soler and Schwarber; a strong top of the rotation, with Jake Arrieta and Jon Lester; and a farm system brimming with talent, the expectations are that this season was just the beginning.The final out of the series led to an incongruous scene. As the Mets poured out of the dugout to celebrate on the field, the crowd, virtually all of which had stayed, stood and watched.Then, after a few moments, a clapping chant broke out, and soon it reverberated throughout the ballpark: “Let’s go, Cubbies.” The fans carried on with the same equanimity as Whoville after discovering that the Grinch had stolen Christmas.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I walked around for six innings tonight, and I heard 10,000 thank-yous,” the Cubs owner Tom Ricketts said. “People were crying because this is a magical season, and they don’t want to see it end, but they’re also ecstatic that this team they’ve given so much love to after all these years is in the mix, and they know next year is going to be a special year.”About 15 minutes after the game, Manager Joe Maddon led the players back out onto the field to wave and applaud the fans, perhaps about 10,000 — including a contingent of Mets fans — who had remained.For as well as the Cubs played in the second half of the regular season and as formidable as they looked in dispatching baseball’s best regular-season teams — the Cardinals and the Pittsburgh Pirates — the series against the Mets exposed their deficiencies: starting pitching depth and shaky defense.AdvertisementThere are numerable pitching options on the free-agent market, with David Price — who played for Maddon with Tampa Bay — at the top of the list. If the Cubs are reluctant about making another big financial commitment — they spent $155 million on Jon Lester last winter — to a player like Price or Zack Greinke, there are also other next-tier upgrades: Jordan Zimmermann, Wei-Yin Chen, Colby Lewis or the former Cub Jeff Samardzija. Or the Cubs could choose to use some of their prospects to trade for help.“The topic sentence is we would like to add more quality pitching,” General Manager Theo Epstein said Thursday at a news conference. “Anybody who follows the team knows that.”Epstein said the Cubs would like to bring back center fielder Dexter Fowler, their most prominent free agent. But Fowler, who flourished in the leadoff spot, may command a longer-term deal than the Cubs are prepared to offer, not wanting to block the path of the center-field prospect Albert Almora, who was at Class AA this season.Perhaps the most interesting calculation involves Schwarber, the fourth overall pick in 2014, whose recall at the All-Star break coincided with the Cubs posting the best second-half record in baseball.Schwarber’s bat carried him to the major leagues far before his glove was ready. His natural position is catcher, but he struggled to throw out runners and block pitches in the minors, and he learned to play the outfield on the fly.Epstein indicated Thursday that the plan would be the same for Schwarber: Most of his at-bats will come in left field, but he will continue to work at catcher behind Miguel Montero and David Ross.“I’m not going to make a passive error, so I look at those plays as being aggressive,” Schwarber said. “They didn’t go in my favor, obviously — full responsibility is on me — but I’m always going to be an aggressive player.”The same might be said for the Cubs. Their championship drought since 1908 extended another year, but the promise of this season, along with another fruitful winter from Epstein, has left the feeling that — like Schwarber’s foibles in the outfield or his clout at the plate — the Cubs have not left their final impression.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: For Cubs Fans, the Eternal Optimism Finally Seems Justified.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.