By BRETT MICHAEL DYKESOCT. 22, 2015
8:25 p.m. Eastern (Thursday) Line: Seahawks by 6The Seahawks and the 49ers have dominated the N.F.C. West in recent years, but the two teams enter this Thursday night matchup tied for last place in the division. The 49ers, however, were not expected to be very good this season. The same cannot be said for the Seahawks, who were expected to contend for a spot in the Super Bowl.And just when it looked as though the Seahawks might be on the verge of getting their swagger back, the team’s vaunted Legion of Boom defense blew a fourth-quarter lead at home to the Panthers. With the Seahawks up, 23-14, late in the game — after holding a 20-7 lead at one point — Cam Newton led two 80-yard drives for touchdowns to keep the Panthers undefeated and send the Seahawks on a desperate search for answers.“I know you guys don’t want to hear it, but we have six games we should have won, and we know that,” Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll told the news media after the game. “It’s not what happened, it’s how we’re going to handle it. We’ll find out.”(Carroll this week also dismissed rumors that he might leave Seattle to return to coach Southern Cal again: “That’s not happening,” he said when asked about the rumors.)AdvertisementMeanwhile, in San Francisco, Colin Kaepernick has rebounded from a disastrous start to the season and is beginning to resemble the quarterback that took the team to the Super Bowl in 2013. Worth noting in regard to Kaepernick’s improved performance: He has taken many more snaps under center in the past two weeks than he did in Weeks 1 to 4, when he sat back in the shotgun the majority of the time. Observers of the team believe this is allowing him to get the ball out quicker, while also giving him better looks at opposing defenses.That said, the Seahawks’ defensive units have tormented Kaepernick in his time in the N.F.L. In six starts against Seattle, Kaepernick has thrown nine interceptions and lost two fumbles, while throwing only three touchdown passes and accumulating a dismal 54.1 passer rating. A loss by Seattle in this one will put it at 2-5 on the season and 0-2 in the division, making any shot at a playoff berth increasingly improbable.AdvertisementPICK: SEAHAWKSWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.