

 Karen Crouse
 

ON BASEBALL
OCT. 22, 2015
Don Mattingly’s parting with the Dodgers after five seasons as manager was a foregone conclusion. Depending on your perspective, it was presaged by Andrew Friedman’s hiring last October as the club’s president of baseball operations, Ron Roenicke’s appointment in August as the third-base coach or Daniel Murphy’s steal of third base against a dozing Los Angeles defense in Game 5 of the Dodgers’ National League division series against the Mets, who eked out a 3-2 victory.The only mild surprise was the timing. The official announcement on Thursday came the morning after the Mets swept the Cubs, a result that framed the Dodgers’ performance against Murphy and Company in a more respectable light.  At least the Dodgers won two games against the Mets. And who knows how Game 5 might have ended if not for the Dodgers’ defensive shift in the fourth inning that left third base uncovered? The left-handed, pull-hitting Lucas Duda walked, sending Murphy to second. After Murphy touched the bag, he took off for third when he saw that no Dodger was paying attention. Murphy then scored the tying run on Travis d’Arnaud’s sacrifice fly.On such unscripted moments, baseball pennants are won or lost, and managers are celebrated or jettisoned. The divorce was amicable between Mattingly and the Dodgers, suggesting that perhaps it would not have mattered if the rookie shortstop Corey Seager had made a move to cover third or if pitcher Zack Greinke had done so instead of taking a few brooding steps toward home plate.AdvertisementThe timing of Mattingly’s departure suggests that maybe this arranged marriage was doomed long before the Mets showed up. As Joe Torre’s handpicked successor, Mattingly could never shake the perception that he was the pinstriped stepchild in an organization that prided itself on hiring from inside the Dodger family.AdvertisementTommy Lasorda, Bill Russell and Glenn Hoffman were inoculated in the Dodger Way as players or coaches, or both, in the farm system. In the last decade, the organization veered from that model, and in doing so hemorrhaged the good will of many who bleed Dodger blue. Mattingly became the first manager to guide the Dodgers to three division titles, yet he could never win over the critics who held it against him that his family of origin was the Yankees.For Mattingly, the #Firemattingly movement on Twitter was not his most ominous sign. That would be the hiring of Roenicke, who was fired by the Milwaukee Brewers in May. He was drafted by the Dodgers in 1977, made his major league debut with the club in 1981 and later managed in its farm system.Another ominous sign was the interest from other teams in Mattingly’s bench coach, Tim Wallach, who has also managed in the Dodgers’ farm system. According to Yahoo Sports, Wallach has interviewed with the Washington Nationals, who fired Matt Williams four days before the start of the Dodgers’ series against the Mets.In a one-on-one interview the day after the firing, Mattingly said he felt for Williams, who went from N.L. manager of the year to unemployed in 12 months.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I know their club was a lot like our club over the past few years from the standpoint of big personalities, a lot of guys making big money, a young star who grabs a lot of attention and how that works in your clubhouse,” Mattingly said. “A lot of factors there. You just know there’s a lot to handle.”Mattingly’s cross to bear was an inconsistent bullpen and a glut of outfielders. Andre Ethier began spring training as the man without a spot in the game-within-a-game of musical outfielders, but Mattingly kept him engaged, and Ethier batted .294 with 14 home runs in 142 games. Ethier, who had a diving catch and an R.B.I. in the deciding game against the Mets, was asked before the series what he had learned from Mattingly.“It’s not personal; it’s about who can produce and help the team on an everyday basis,” Ethier said, adding: “It’s all about production. It’s not about things you’ve done or are expected to do.”Mattingly’s pre-series interviews with the news media were described in print as tense. But outside the cameras’ glare, he came across in a one-on-one setting as a man at peace, someone confident in his ability to manage and comfortable that his best days as a manager were ahead of him — if not in Los Angeles, then somewhere else.AdvertisementMattingly said that as a player, “your skills sometimes erode to the point where you can’t compete at this level.” He added, “As a coach or a manager, it’s almost the opposite way, where you get a little more life experience, you’re probably actually getting better.”The ink had not dried on the box score of the Dodgers’ 3-1 loss in Game 1 of the division series when a CBSSports.com report surfaced that the Marlins were interested in interviewing Mattingly if he ended up untethered from the Dodgers.In a teleconference with reporters Thursday, Mattingly offered no explanation for the mutual parting. “I’m doing what’s best for myself; I’m doing what’s best for the organization,” he said. “I just look at it that it’s the right time for both parties.”Asked if he expected to manage in 2016, Mattingly said: “I definitely want to manage. Period.”The timing of Mattingly’s departure from Los Angeles suggests that his critics were not the only ones who were fed up with the situation. Mattingly will get a fresh start somewhere. Do not be surprised if, wherever he goes, he gets better.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Hollywood Marriage Falls Apart.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »