By CHASE STUARTOCT. 22, 2015
The N.F.L. is making a parody out of the idea that it is a league defined by parity. For the first time in its history, five teams remain undefeated through six weeks. The Green Bay Packers, the Denver Broncos and the Cincinnati Bengals are 6-0, while the New England Patriots and the Carolina Panthers are 5-0. A parity-driven league could be defined as one in which all teams have similar records or one in which the top teams vary from year to year; right now, neither definition can be applied.The Panthers have made the playoffs in each of the past two seasons, making them the closest thing to an upstart among the unbeaten franchises. Both the Broncos and the Bengals have made it to the postseason in four consecutive years, while the Packers and the Patriots have made the playoffs in six straight seasons. Right now, the odds overwhelmingly favor each franchise making it to the playoffs again.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before 2015, there had been only one season in which even four teams emerged with perfect records through six weeks. That was in 2009, when the Minnesota Vikings, the New Orleans Saints and the Indianapolis Colts started undefeated and went on to play in their conference championship games. The fourth team that year, the Broncos, began 6-0 but finished 8-8 and out of the playoffs.In part, scheduling luck has helped these teams remain undefeated; the four head-to-head games among this group were all scheduled for November and December. In two weeks, the Packers will travel to Denver, and a week later, Green Bay heads to Carolina. At the end of November, the Patriots visit Denver, and the Broncos host the Bengals at the end of December.The Patriots, the Bengals and the Packers are perfect largely because of stellar quarterback play: Tom Brady, Andy Dalton and Aaron Rodgers are the three leaders in passer rating through six weeks. The Broncos are led by a dominant defense that has scored a touchdown in four of six games while leading the N.F.L. in sacks (26), turnovers (17) and yards allowed per play (4.3). Carolina’s success is not so neatly defined, but strong defense, excellent fourth-quarter play from quarterback Cam Newton and a friendly schedule has helped the Panthers remain unbeaten.The Patriots and the Panthers host the Jets and the Philadelphia Eagles next weekend, while the other three undefeated teams have byes. That means these five teams could remain unbeaten through seven weeks, a mind-boggling number in a league that is known for its parity.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: So Far, N.F.L. Parity Has Taken a Holiday .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.