
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 2, 2015
A manager pours his soul into his team, revels in the wins, chews on the losses, absorbs everything, takes it all so personally. Then one day he is fired and it all stops. The overarching loyalty to an organization, which keeps on going without him, is severed just like that.This is how it was for Mets Manager Terry Collins, twice, and both times his old team soon played on the stage he could not reach. The Astros — runners-up in their division in all three of Collins’s seasons — finished in first place as soon as he left Houston. The Angels — runners-up in their division twice under Collins — won the World Series three years after he left Anaheim.“I caught little glimpses,” Collins said. “I saw a lot of Game 7, with the Angels. I don’t know if I saw one Houston game.”He is vague on the reasons he did not watch his old teams in October, other than general fatigue after every season. Collins was happy for the players and coaches he still knew in both places, but he had moved on.AdvertisementHe was a scout for the Chicago Cubs, a coach for Tampa Bay and a minor league field coordinator for the Los Angeles Dodgers. He managed in Japan and coached China’s team in the World Baseball Classic. He oversaw the Mets’ farm system in 2010, and got another chance at managing in 2011.AdvertisementNow he is the majors’ oldest manager, at 66, and has finally guided a team to the postseason. A contract extension, which should be a formality, will presumably come soon enough. As he completes the roster for a division series against the Dodgers, Collins can appreciate the journey.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I sat here last October with Sandy,” Collins said in a conference room on Friday, referring to General Manager Sandy Alderson. “We told our fan base and our media that it’s going to get better, and next year we’re going to win. And to be sitting here today and say, ‘We told you,’ it means a lot.”Bill Bavasi, who hired Collins to manage the Angels from 1997 to 1999, could say a version of the same thing. Bavasi believed Collins was smart, prepared and skilled at running a game. He also thought he could communicate well with players, and for two years, Collins did.But a clubhouse mutiny forced Collins’s tearful resignation in 1999. Bavasi said it was his fault for giving Collins a toxic mix of personalities. Now, at last, Collins has shaken that episode as his lasting impression.“Jerry Dipoto said it when he took the job in Seattle,” Bavasi said, referring to the Mariners’ new general manager, who resigned his job with the Angels this season amid a power struggle with Manager Mike Scioscia.“He said he was not going to be defined by one thing that happened in Anaheim, and he’s going to be right — as long as he wins. If things go well in Seattle, he’ll be remembered for that. And with Terry, one of the thrills for me is that he’s now going to be acknowledged for the great job he’s done.”The opposing manager at Citi Field this weekend, Washington’s Matt Williams, will most likely be fired soon as a casualty of the Nationals’ flop. Williams had almost no managerial experience before being hired, and it has shown in his moves. A report in The Washington Post also said Williams sometimes failed to notify veterans of coming days off.AdvertisementUnlike Williams, Collins never played in the majors, but he has been a manager for more than two decades in the minors and majors. Michael Cuddyer, the Mets’ veteran left fielder, said Collins was especially good about letting players know the next day’s schedule, checking in with them as he roamed the outfield during batting practice.“He let us have success, he let us struggle,” Cuddyer said. “There were no meetings, no sense of panic — and also no sense of thinking we’re bigger than we are. He just kind of let things go.”That is one way in which Collins said he has changed. He processes the losses quicker now, and looks the other way at minor transgressions by players, trying hard to keep a fun, looser atmosphere. And from afar, Bavasi — who now runs Major League Baseball’s scouting bureau — said he marvels at Collins’s skill in handling the New York news media, staying true to himself while remaining a fierce advocate for the organization.Alderson concurred, saying: “One of his strengths is his authenticity. People accept the fact that he’s a spokesman for the organization and has to have a certain respect for the long-term view, but they also appreciate his emotional commitment to the short term.”Delivering any message, of course, is easiest when the speaker believes it. Collins’s years as a farm director, for the Dodgers and the Mets, have given him the patience he lacked before.Collins has balanced winning and development, today and tomorrow, all season. Young pitchers, and their delicate arms, are the engine of these Mets in the present and the future. Collins thrives on the passion of New York, but will not let that — or the novelty of his long-awaited chance at the playoffs — cloud his vision.“Winning is the only thing that matters in this city,” he said, explaining that the public’s focus never wavers from the current season. “I owe it to this organization to make sure next year’s going to be good, too.”Collins is comfortable in the spotlight, amicable and frank, even raw when he needs to emphasize a point. But as the Mets prepare for their close-up, he also knows his place. Collins believes he has done all he can to position the Mets well for this October and beyond. He writes the lineup card, keeps the workplace fun and tries to stay out of the way.“I’ve had seven guys wanting to do a story on me,” he said. “I don’t want to do a story on me. I’m not the story. Those guys are the story. They’re the guys that got to go and win every night, and tomorrow they’ve got to get ready to do it again. My job is to make sure they do that.”A version of this article appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: At 66, Hoping Playoffs Are a Start.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »