AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — If anything can be worse than old men stealing the profits of sport in the committee rooms, it is younger men betraying their talents on the field.Paris Saint-Germain versus Real Madrid was billed as the marquee game of the Champions League round this week. Famous and fashionable people were flown in to sit in the stand, but as rain swept relentlessly down on the Parc des Princes, the teams ground out a soggy tie that was both goalless and guileless.Cristiano Ronaldo and Zlatan Ibrahimovic were on the field, but as close to anonymous as these two players could get. Ronaldo, who was described before the event by the Paris manager Laurent Blanc as “one of the two extraterrestrials gracing the modern game,” had one of his sulky nights and squandered the game’s best chance to score by shooting woefully wide.Ibrahimovic never got that close to goal. He hid himself away in deep midfield, trotting around the center circle, looking like an aging superstar going through the motions of athletic performance.Indeed, among the invited guests was Ronaldo de Lima, the original Ronaldo from Brazil. Now 39 and comfortably above his playing weight, one couldn’t help but think that even in his overcoat this once great goalscorer might have been invited down to break the deadlock on the field.Alas, no. Madrid’s excuse for this boredom, which was the first time in eight years that its team failed to score at this stage in the Champions League, was that its starting lineup was deprived through injuries to some leading talents: Karim Benzema, Gareth Bale, James Rodríguez and Luka Modric.Poor Cristiano was made to play with their stand-ins and to earn his salary alongside makeweights. Yet according to the latest report by Global Sports Salaries Survey, these two clubs, Real and PSG, pay the highest wages in the whole of world sports — including the giant American baseball, basketball and N.F.L. teams.Paris averages about $9 million per man, Madrid about $ 8.6 million, and after that the scale descends through Manchester City, Barcelona, the Los Angeles Dodgers and — some way down the list — the New York Yankees and the Brooklyn Nets.Endorsement earnings, especially for the American superstars and the likes of Cristiano, would probably rearrange some of that wealth chart. But these are projected salaries for playing the game, and it can be argued that those at the Parc des Princes on Wednesday shortchanged their audience.Not one player did as Kevin De Bruyne, the new man at Manchester City, did late in City’s home game against Sevilla. When his team was struggling to strike, De Bruyne was switched from the wing to lead the attack and he controlled the ball with his right foot, swerved inside a defender, and curled the ball low inside the far post with his left foot. That is what really top players do. They change the course of matches; they fashion chances out of nothing, and they finish with aplomb.No one in Paris did that because no one dared.There have been rumors that Cristiano Ronaldo is brooding because he feels alienated by the defensive steel that Madrid’s new coach, Rafael Benítez, is trying to instill in the team. The rumor further goes that Ronaldo, who turns 31 in February, has two suitors in mind. One is a return to his former club, Manchester United. The other? Paris Saint-Germain, the team flooded with money from Qatar.True or false, he had little to say to anyone on Wednesday, either on the grass or in front of the microphones. He left the field hurriedly at the final whistle, not prepared to discuss his miscued free kicks, his muffed opportunity from an obvious scoring position or the ugly foul on him, just above ankle height, by Marco Verratti.Verratti, an Italian player, was shown only a yellow card for that lunge with both feet off the turf. And he was fortunate to stay on the field later in the game when a similarly dangerous tackle was excused by the Italian referee who merely awarded a free kick, and no second yellow card.But maybe this view is harsh? Maybe a reporter, or for that matter a rapper, an actor, or a former president of France, drawn to the big game in the Parc, should not expect to be entertained with so much at stake?Both teams are hugely favored to qualify from this group in which they outclass Malmo of Sweden and the fading Shakhtar Donetsk, which has lost some big players amid the hostilities between Ukraine and Russia.Paris and Madrid will do all this again two weeks from now when, if either dares, the prize is top of the group and advance to an expected easier route through the next knockout stages.All this was fear of failure?“It was a great game,” insisted Benítez, Madrid’s coach. “Players of the quality we lost are difficult to replace, but I’m happy with the performance with those that were on the pitch. I don’t think the lack of efficiency from the Paris forwards was purely down to them. I believe the credit should go to our defenders.”The Paris coach, Blanc, admitted: “We lacked a bit of aggression and desire to take on the opponent. We didn't dominate Madrid, but they didn’t either. Maybe some people expected us to get a big win and send a message to all of Europe, but that’s awfully hard to do. The aim remains to win the Champion League but you have to remember the project here is only four years old.”Advertisement