AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressDavid Pastrnak broke a tie late in the second period Friday night, and the visiting Boston Bruins beat the Islanders, 5-3.Brett Connolly, Joonas Kemppainen and Ryan Spooner also scored for Boston. The Bruins improved to 3-0 on the road this season to go along with an 0-3-1 record at home. Jonas Gustavsson, starting in place of the struggling Tuukka Rask, finished with 23 saves to improve to 2-0.David Krejci had an empty-netter with 2 minutes 25 seconds remaining to record his 12th point, which leads the N.H.L., giving him a point in seven straight games.Josh Bailey, Casey Cizikas and Thomas Hickey scored for the Islanders. Their four-game winning streak ended as they lost at home in regulation for the first time this season. Jaroslav Halak stopped 21 shots while taking his first loss after winning his first two starts.Hickey scored on a slap shot with 1 minute 53 seconds left to cap the scoring.Trailing by 2-1 after one period, the Bruins were the more aggressive team in the second and took the lead with two goals late in the period. Boston tied it when an initial shot by Spooner was blocked by Travis Hamonic, but Kemppainen knocked the rebound past Halak with 3:47 left for his first N.H.L. goal.Pastrnak gave the Bruins the lead just over two minutes later, firing the rebound on a shot from the point by Adam McQuaid past Halak.CANADIENS 7, SABRES 2 Andrei Markov had a goal and four assists, and Montreal won at Buffalo to run its season-opening winning streak to eight games.The Canadiens are two victories away from matching the league record set by the Toronto Maple Leafs in 1993-94, which the Sabres matched in 2006-7.Brendan Gallagher and Dale Weise each scored twice, and Max Pacioretty and Torrey Mitchell also scored. Mike Condon made 34 saves, and P. K. Subban and Tomas Plekanec each had three assists.Matt Moulson and Ryan O’Reilly scored for Buffalo, and Cody Franson had two assists. Chad Johnson allowed all seven goals.LIGHTNING 4, JETS 3 Ondrej Palat scored 36 seconds into overtime, and Tampa Bay won in Winnipeg.Palat scored off a three-on-one rush, converting a tap-in after a tick-tack-toe play with Steven Stamkos and Victor Hedman.Braydon Coburn, Cedric Paquette and Vladislav Namestnikov also scored for the Lightning. Hedman had three assists.Advertisement