By SETH BERKMANOCT. 23, 2015
With over four decades of professional baseball experience, Mets Manager Terry Collins said he had never taken the time to dream about competing in the World Series.“I always wondered what I was going to do tomorrow,” Collins said.But tomorrow and every day until Tuesday, Collins will prepare his players for the Mets’ first World Series appearance since 2000 and his first World Series appearance ever. It will come 44 years after he hit .306 as a 22-year-old rookie with the Niagara Falls Pirates of the Class A New York-Pennsylvania League.It is, by any standard, a long wait. And yet on Friday, which marked the Mets’ first day back at Citi Field for baseball activity since winning the National League Championship Series, Collins still did not appear to be in any rush to get to the promised land.He would not reveal his starting rotation for the Series or provide much of an update regarding injuries to Juan Uribe and Yoenis Cespedes, his injured infielder and outfielder. Instead, he spent the majority of the afternoon preaching the advantages of a respite that the Mets had earned from clinching the pennant early and how it would particularly benefit his veteran players and pitchers.Advertisement“The extra rest we’re going to get right now, I think, is going to benefit us more than hurt us,” Collins said.There are worries that teams can stunt their postseason momentum with too many days between series. In 2012, for instance, the Detroit Tigers swept the Yankees in the American League Championship Series, with their final victory coming on Oct. 18. They were then off for nearly a week before starting the World Series against the San Francisco Giants on Oct. 24.AdvertisementThe Giants, on the other hand, had reached the Series after a seven-game battle with the St. Louis Cardinals that extended to Oct. 22, just two days before the Series began. But it was the Giants who had the upper hand once the Series started, winning in four straight.Collins knows all that, but it does not bother him. His concern lies with his team’s reliance on its young starting pitchers — Jacob deGrom, Steven Matz, Noah Syndergaard and Matt Harvey — who have all pitched more innings this season than in any other year of their professional careers. With each of those four expected to make at least one start in the Series, adding to those innings totals, a couple of extra days of rest right now would seem to be a blessing. Certainly, Collins sees it that way.“Our pitching right now could use a blow,” Collins said. “We’re pushing them pretty hard.”It is not as though Collins’s rotation will undergo any drastic changes when the Series starts. The Mets could tinker a bit with the rotation based on who their opponent is, but in all likelihood they will lean toward deGrom as the Game 1 starter, followed by Syndergaard, Harvey and Matz, the same order they used in beating the Los Angeles Dodgers in their division series.Collins said it was a possibility that deGrom, who has established himself as the team’s ace this season, could pitch three times in the World Series if there was a Game 7, which would almost certainly limit Harvey, already at 202 innings this year, to one start. But Collins also noted that deGrom had looked erratic at times in recent outings, which he attributed to a bit of fatigue.“I know what we’re doing; I’m not saying,” Collins said of how the rotation would ultimately line up next week. “There can’t be a report. We just had a meeting five minutes ago. I’m the only guy who’s got the sucker written down.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Friday’s workout was optional, with several veterans, including David Wright, Curtis Granderson and Cespedes, choosing to rest.AdvertisementAnd no, Harvey, who attended the Rangers hockey game Thursday night at Madison Square Garden, was not there either, but this absence was excused, unlike his tardiness for the Mets’ first workout before the division series against the Los Angeles Dodgers.One notable sight was the appearance of Uribe, who emerged from the dugout 30 minutes after the noon session began. He held a red glove in his left hand and a bat in his right. Uribe, who has been working his way back from a chest injury that sidelined him for the Mets’ first two playoff series, casually fielded grounders for about 15 minutes and took some swings.There will be another workout on Saturday, and that one is likely to include Cespedes, who left Game 4 of the N.L.C.S. with a left shoulder injury. He received a cortisone shot Thursday and was told to rest for 24 hours.In any case, Collins seemed in a good mood throughout Friday’s session. He said that before the postseason began, he had talked to Jim Leyland, his baseball mentor and someone with a good deal of playoff managing experience, and asked him how to prepare for the different atmosphere of October baseball. “Play the best players, don’t ever take anything for granted, and by the way, there’s nothing you can do between now and when the game starts that’s going to get them ready except themselves,” Collins quoted Leyland as telling him.Some of those players were scheduled to appear on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!” Friday night. Collins, however, is maintaining a low profile. After getting in from Chicago on Thursday, he took his wife out to dinner and received a hero’s welcome at the restaurant. Collins then went to bed at 8 p.m.“It’s been a dream come true,” Collins said. And perhaps it is not over.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Despite Thirst for World Series, Mets and Collins Savor Some Time Off.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.