AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressJohnny Manziel is expected to remain Cleveland’s backup quarterback as the N.F.L. investigates whether he violated its personal conduct policy.Manziel was questioned on Oct. 12 by the police in Avon, Ohio, after he and his girlfriend, Colleen Crowley, argued while Manziel drove on a highway. Crowley told the police that Manziel had hit her several times.Manziel denied having struck Crowley and was not arrested, and the couple was allowed to leave together. Manziel could face a fine, a suspension or banishment if the league finds he broke provisions in its conduct policy.A league spokesman had no updates Friday on the inquiry. Manziel admitted having drunk alcohol a few hours before his argument with Crowley, who the police said was intoxicated. After practice on Friday, Browns Coach Mike Pettine said Manziel would “more than likely” back up Josh McCown on Sunday when Cleveland visits the St. Louis Rams. The Browns made Manziel active against Denver on Sunday despite the episode.The Browns’ only other option at quarterback is Austin Davis. MACLIN CLEARED TO PLAY Chiefs wide receiver Jeremy Maclin has passed the league’s concussion protocol and should be available Sunday against the Steelers.Maclin was hurt in Sunday’s loss in Minnesota. He did not work out early in the week while having tests performed, but he practiced Friday on a limited basis.The Chiefs (1-5) have lost five straight. Maclin is their leading receiver, with 39 catches for 531 yards and a touchdown. MARIOTA HIT LEADS TO FINE Miami Dolphins defensive end Olivier Vernon has been fined $37,363 by the league for two hits on the Tennessee Titans rookie quarterback Marcus Mariota.Vernon was docked for two roughing-the-passer infractions. For the hit that hurt Mariota, Vernon was fined $17,363. He was also assessed a $20,000 fine for hitting Mariota in the head and neck on another play.Mariota’s left medial collateral ligament was injured on Vernon’s low hit, and he will not play this week against Atlanta.BETHEA’S SEASON ENDS San Francisco 49ers safety Antoine Bethea was placed on season-ending injured reserve with a shoulder injury he sustained in Thursday’s 20-3 loss to Seattle.The move cleared room on the 53-man roster for wide receiver Jerome Simpson’s return after a suspension. The team used a one-game roster exemption for him this past week after Simpson served a six-game penalty for violations of the league’s substance abuse policy.Bethea grabbed Seahawks receiver Doug Baldwin in the second quarter and received a face mask penalty; that is believed to be when Bethea was hurt.Bethea, 31, had started all 23 games since joining the 49ers last March and recorded 44 tackles and a sack this season. INJURIES PLAGUE WASHINGTON Redskins cornerbacks DeAngelo Hall and Chris Culliver, receiver DeSean Jackson and center Kory Lichtensteiger will miss their home game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers because of injuries. All four were sidelined last week, too: Hall by a toe problem, Culliver a knee, Jackson a hamstring and Lichtensteiger a thumb.Advertisement