AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Jay SchreiberNot all interleague matchups are created equal. Over the last two decades, the Mets have faced the Yankees on 104 occasions in the regular season, the Boston Red Sox 24 times and the Kansas City Royals, their World Series opponent, just nine.In fact, there is only one team the Mets have met less often than the Royals since interleague baseball began in 1997, and that is the Chicago White Sox, who have played the Mets just seven times.The scarcity of Royals-Mets matchups will now add a bit of intrigue to the World Series. The teams played in 2013, when the Royals took two of three games at Citi Field; in 2004, when the Royals won two of three at Kauffman Stadium; and in 2002, when the Mets took two of three at Shea Stadium. That means each team has played just one series in the other’s current stadium. In contrast, the Toronto Blue Jays, the Mets’ other possible opponent until they were eliminated on Friday night, have played the Mets 25 times over the years, with the Mets winning 17 and the Blue Jays winning eight. Their last matchup came in mid-June this season, when the Mets won two games at Citi Field and the Blue Jays responded by winning the two games at Rogers Centre. They Mets and the Blue Jays will meet again soon enough, but not this October.Meanwhile, the Royals have an interesting role in Mets history despite the infrequency of their meetings. In 1985, the Mets were engaged in what remains the most intense pennant race in their history, battling the St. Louis Cardinals for the National League East crown (in the days before there was a wild card). The Mets and the Cardinals genuinely disliked each other back then, with some of the hostility stemming from the Cardinals’ conviction that the Mets received more attention because they played in New York.Maybe they were right. In any case, the race went down to the final week, with the Mets traveling to St. Louis needing to sweep a three-game series to draw even in the standings. The Mets won the first game when Darryl Strawberry broke a tie in extra innings with a monstrous home run off the clock at Busch Stadium. They won the next game behind Dwight Gooden in the final victory of his Cy Young season, in which he went 24-4. But the Mets lost the third game, and the Cardinals won the division. The Mets finished with 98 victories and nothing to show for it.Fast forward to that year’s Series, Cardinals vs. Royals. St. Louis thought it was about to wrap up the Series in six games until the famous blown call at first base by the umpire Don Denkinger opened the door for Kansas City to escape with a 2-1 victory.Game 7 then turned into a Royals blowout, an 11-0 victory in which the Cardinals lost their poise. In New York, Mets fans celebrated. Thirty years and nine interleague games later, the Mets are in the World Series and the Royals are there with them.Advertisement