AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressDrew Brees is expected to return as the starter for New Orleans against the Dallas Cowboys on Sunday night in the Superdome, Saints Coach Sean Payton said Friday.“We’re planning on starting him, based on the workweek,” Payton said after practice. “He’s thrown well. I thought he looked sharp today.”Brees missed the Saints’ 27-22 loss in Carolina last Sunday because of a bruised rotator cuff in his right (throwing) shoulder. The injury occurred on a hit in the second quarter of New Orleans’s Week 2 loss to Tampa Bay.Brees did not leave that game, but he did not appear to perform at his normally high standard, finishing 24 of 38 for 255 yards, a touchdown and an interception.Brees then did not throw during practice in Week 3, but started taking first-team snaps at practice again this week, saying on Wednesday that he planned to steadily expand the variety of throws he made as the week wore on.Brees is officially listed as probable on the injury report. If he does start as planned, he will return to a team that is 0-3 and in desperate need of a victory.BEARS’ CUTLER QUESTIONABLE Quarterback Jay Cutler and receiver Alshon Jeffery were among seven Chicago Bears players listed as questionable for this weekend’s home game against Oakland.Cutler has been nursing a hamstring he injured trying to make a tackle two weeks ago after an interception. Jeffery has the same injury.The Bears (0-3) said that left tackle Jermon Bushrod (concussion) would not play against the Raiders (2-1).Coach John Fox said Cutler would play if he was cleared by team doctors. Otherwise, Jimmy Clausen will make his second straight start. SIDELINED FOR FALCONS Unbeaten Atlanta will be without running back Tevin Coleman, tight end Jacob Tamme and safety Ricardo Allen for Sunday’s game against the Houston Texans. The players were ruled out Friday.Coleman (ribs) will miss his second straight game. Tamme (concussion) was hurt in last week’s victory at Dallas and has yet to be cleared.The Falcons (3-0) will also be without the return specialist Devin Hester, who has yet to play this season because of turf toe.GIANTS’ CRUZ STAYS HOPEFUL Despite another setback with his injured calf, Giants wide receiver Victor Cruz said he believed he would play this season.Speaking Friday for the first time since experiencing another problem with his left calf, Cruz confirmed that he received a shot of platelet-rich plasma on Thursday in an effort to hasten his recovery.Coach Tom Coughlin and Cruz said there was no timetable for Cruz’s return.Cruz, 28, had hoped to play on Sunday against the Bills in Buffalo, but the calf did not feel right on Wednesday when he tried to run full speed.Advertisement