By MARC TRACYOCT. 23, 2015
In the three years since Rutgers announced that it would join the Big Ten, its sports teams have repeatedly made headlines, but mostly for the wrong reasons.There was the player-abuse scandal that cost the men’s basketball coach and the athletic director their jobs, and the embarrassing revelation that the coach’s replacement, a beloved former player, had not in fact graduated from the university, as he and Rutgers had claimed. Last month, there was the dismissal of six football players before the team’s second game for their suspected involvement in criminal activities and their coach’s three-game suspension for contacting a teacher and asking her to give a player extra-credit homework to keep him eligible.Yet a little more than a year after Rutgers, New Jersey’s flagship state university, joined the oldest and perhaps the wealthiest conference in college sports, it is difficult to find someone who thinks that it or the conference did not make the right decision.“It might be a fun read that the Big Ten has remorse, but it’s somewhat irrelevant,” Jim Delany, a New Jersey native who has been the Big Ten commissioner for 26 years, told The Chicago Tribune last month. (A spokesman said Delany was not available to comment this week.)Advertisement“We hope the situation improves,” he added, “but we are glad that Rutgers is in the Big Ten.”AdvertisementThe reasoning has a lot to do with geography. Ohio State Coach Urban Meyer, who will lead his top-ranked Buckeyes into Piscataway on Saturday night for a nationally televised game, said that New Jersey had “as good high school football as anywhere in the country, and obviously a ridiculous amount of TV sets.”Those TV sets may help the Big Ten negotiate a blockbuster new television deal in the next year, and they have already helped the Big Ten Network, according to its president, Mark Silverman. The network, which is now in more than 60 million homes nationally, added eight million subscribers in the New York metropolitan area in the past year, a period that coincided with Rutgers’s first year as an associate member of the Big Ten. It also experienced a 20 percent year-over-year rise in advertising revenue — more than twice what would have been expected without conference growth.Rutgers also has further raised the conference’s profile in the country’s media capital. Without Rutgers, it would be difficult to imagine the Big Ten staging its basketball championship tournament at Madison Square Garden, as it will in 2018.And while the change has been a money loser so far for Rutgers, which at $36.3 million last year had the largest subsidy to its athletic department of virtually any public college in Division I, as calculated by USA Today, sports may soon be able to pay their own way: In just a few years, Rutgers will begin receiving a full member’s cut of the Big Ten’s exploding media revenue.In this context, even the staunchest critics of big-time athletics at Rutgers have acknowledged the Big Ten’s sheer financial pull.“I thank God we joined the Big Ten,” said Mark Killingsworth, an economics professor who is chairman of the New Brunswick Faculty Council and a longtime critic of the university’s enmeshment in major athletics. “The situation, as terrible as it is, would be even worse if we were still in the A.A.C.” — the American Athletic Conference, where Rutgers spent one season — “or whatever is left of the Big East,” a conference that no longer sponsors football.For decades, Rutgers had an ambivalent attitude about raising its athletic profile. A 1970s president could pledge only to move sports into the “bigger time, not the big time.” The Janus-faced outlook was perhaps best exemplified by a stretch of the 1980 football schedule in which a game against top-ranked Alabama was sandwiched between ones against Cornell and William & Mary. As late as the 2000s, numerous campus voices bemoaned athletic department deficits and urged the university to back away from big-time sports.Advertisement“There was a longtime feeling there that they wanted to be Princeton during the week and Penn State on the weekend,” said Robert Mulcahy, the Rutgers athletic director from 1998 to 2008, when he was fired amid accusations of financial misdeeds related to the athletic department’s pursuit of a top-flight football program.But the die has since been cast. A physical master plan for the university has called for more than a dozen new athletic buildings or renovations. On Saturday morning, Rutgers will break ground on its first new athletics construction in years, a $3.3 million indoor baseball and softball facility. And on Saturday evening, Rutgers (3-3) will host No. 1 Ohio State (7-0) at a sold-out High Point Solutions Stadium in ABC’s prime-time game.“For as long as I’ve been here,” said Robert L. Barchi, who took the office of university president in 2012, “moving into the Big Ten was a major objective.”The road has not been without bumps. Athletic department budget shortfalls in the two academic years leading up to 2014 totaled more than $83 million combined. The dismissals of the six football players after their arrests was an embarrassment, and Coach Kyle Flood’s actions in contacting a teacher about a player’s grade might have violated N.C.A.A. rules.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Any time we ratchet up the level of competition and we have to scramble in a year to make a transition that might take most places 10 years, I am concerned about that sort of thing happening,” Barchi said.A university financial plan has predicted that Rutgers will continue to run substantial deficits for several years, in part because — as with the other recent Big Ten additions Nebraska and Maryland — for its first six years of membership it will receive smaller conference payouts than longstanding members. That figure is about $9 million to $10 million a year, said Janine Purcaro, the athletic department’s chief financial officer. The other Big Ten universities received $25 million to $26 million, she said. (Leaving the A.A.C. also required Rutgers to pay an $11.5 million exit fee.)Both Killingsworth and a committee of the Rutgers University Senate have questioned whether even those projections underestimate rising expenses.But Rutgers will fully vest as a Big Ten member in 2022, and will then start receiving a conference and N.C.A.A. payout estimated at $35.5 million a year. But that figure, too, is conservative: The Big Ten is set to sign a new deal for national broadcast rights next year, which, combined with continued growth at the Big Ten Network, is expected to establish annual payouts exceeding $40 million for each program.Barchi, echoing a criticism he himself has made, said, “Right now, at Rutgers, athletics is siphoning dollars away from the academic mission.” He added: “That is why we have a plan to eradicate that imbalance. I am fully convinced that if we stay the course, that is what’s going to happen.”AdvertisementHe also pointed to other, nonfinancial benefits, including a higher national profile and a place in a research consortium restricted to the Big Ten and the University of Chicago.“We constructed a group of universities that we felt were our peers or aspirational peers, and virtually every one of the Big Ten schools falls into one or another of those groups,” Barchi said, adding, “not just athletics, but academics.”A report published this year by the Rutgers University Senate’s budget and finance committee was skeptical. The notion that investing in athletics benefits academics, it said, “amounts to a suggestion that one can take funds away from academics, use those funds to increase spending on athletics, and then expect this to create substantial net benefits for academics.”Rudy Bell, a history professor who has been at Rutgers nearly 50 years, sounded a more optimistic note.“If we can use this to hoist up our academic strength, that would be valuable,” he said of Big Ten membership, suggesting that the university spend “the kind of money on the academic side that is now being spent on the athletic side.”But Bell, who has a football season ticket and planned to attend Saturday night’s game, added, “I cannot imagine anyone deciding the history department can run a $20 million deficit.”A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Rutgers Seeks Dividends in Costly Switch to Big Ten .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.