By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 23, 2015
Gregg Popovich will take over as coach of the United States men’s basketball team after the 2016 Olympics, USA Basketball announced Friday.Popovich will lead the team for the 2019 World Cup and the 2020 Olympics. He replaces Mike Krzyzewski of Duke, who has coached the national team since 2005.In the N.B.A., Popovich is widely acclaimed, and even revered, having won five titles with the San Antonio Spurs. This week, NBA.com’s annual survey found that 93 percent of general managers picked Popovich as the league’s best coach.Popovich, 66, has led the Spurs for 19 years, the longest current tenure of any head coach in the major North American sports leagues. He has had 18 straight winning seasons.Advertisement“I’m extremely humbled and honored to have the opportunity to represent our country as the coach of the U.S.A. national team,” Popovich said in a statement.AdvertisementPopovich will have the same challenging task as the team’s earlier coaches: matching sky-high expectations. The United States team of N.B.A. stars is always heavily favored in international competitions. Gold medals are expected; anything less is considered a disaster.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He will also face a recruiting task: Not every American N.B.A. star is eager to give up summers for international glory. LeBron James, for example, has said he is not sure if he wants to play in the Olympics next summer.When the team began using N.B.A. professionals in 1992, USA Basketball initially chose coaches for one shot only, beginning with Chuck Daly. But when the team failed to win at the 2002 world championships and the 2004 Olympics, the organization turned to Krzyzewski as a longer-term head coach, to provide greater continuity.Krzyzewski’s first team lost to Greece in the semifinals of the 2006 world championships, but he has since won four straight world and Olympic titles, and he will go for a fifth in a row in Rio de Janeiro next summer. His record with the team is 75-1.Krzyzewski, 68, who had announced this week that he was stepping down, will remain an adviser to USA Basketball.Popovich was previously an assistant on two of the disappointing American teams, under George Karl with the 2002 team, which finished sixth in the world championships, and under Larry Brown with the 2004 team, which won the bronze medal at the Athens Olympics.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Popovich to Lead U.S. Team in ’19 Cup and ’20 Olympics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.