
On Tennis By                     
 CHRISTOPHER CLAREY
 
OCT. 23, 2015
It was an end-of-career odyssey: Flavia Pennetta went from Tianjin, China, to Barcelona to Moscow and finally to Singapore in less than two weeks.“Not sleeping so well — a lot of different hotels and a lot of different beds,” she said.But Pennetta caught the flights, hit the shots, shrugged off the setbacks and acquired the points necessary to finish her playing days in the style to which she has only lately become accustomed.“I was thinking after the U.S. Open, nothing was going to be better, but I have another unbelievable thing now that just improved it,” Pennetta said in an interview this week.At the advanced tennis age of 33, Pennetta not only has her first Grand Slam singles title — secured in New York last month in highly surprising fashion — but she also now has her first singles spot in the W.T.A. Finals, the eight-woman event reserved for the sport’s elite.Advertisement“I think it’s nice after so many years, after so many matches, after so many tournaments and fights on court, that I get this good reward for all my career,” she said.AdvertisementHer parents could not make it to the U.S. Open, but they are coming to Singapore. And win or lose, Pennetta confirmed that she will call it a career after the Finals. She first announced her impending retirement minutes after her victory in New York.She will be one of the few in tennis history to go out at some place resembling the top.Pete Sampras, for example, won the U.S. Open in 2002 and never played another tour match but waited nearly a year before announcing his retirement. The best modern comparison to Pennetta is Marion Bartoli, the strong-minded Frenchwoman who won her first Grand Slam title at Wimbledon at age 28 in 2013 and retired several weeks later.But there was a bittersweet taste to that announcement, which Bartoli made in tears after an opening-round loss to Simona Halep in Cincinnati as she cited constant pain and recurring injuries.Bartoli sounded burned out, even if she has stuck by her retirement after plenty of rest. Pennetta, who is engaged to her fellow Italian player Fabio Fognini, sounds simply fulfilled, exquisitely aware that there will be no topping this scenario. She is ready to start a family and see how her heart and mind respond to staying in one place.“A beautiful finish,” the veteran coach Wim Fissette said. “And I think every player on the W.T.A. side will be very happy to see Flavia out there on the court in Singapore. She’s a very popular lady on tour, always smiling, always in a good mood and always friendly to everybody, whatever the ranking.”Manners matter to Pennetta. She admits to being troubled by what she sees as the new wave’s sense of entitlement.“My way is always to be the same, doesn’t matter if now I’m a champion or before I was No. 20,” she said. “I still am Flavia, the same one. And always I say hello to everyone, buon giorno, and I try also to teach the young ones how is life because the young ones, sometimes they do not have so much respect. I remember myself when I get in the tour for the first time and I see Monica Seles or Jennifer Capriati, I was like shaking and my heart was going really fast. I remember really well that time, and now it looks like it’s not the same for them.”Advertisement“They also don’t have a lot of respect for the team,” she added. “It looks like they think everything is there for them and that is normal. But it is not normal. You have to deserve these things. You have to be nice with the people because the same people you meet when you go up are the same people you meet when you go do down.”Pennetta has passed plenty of people in both directions through the seasons. In 2002, she started the year ranked 289th and promised herself she would quit if she did not make the top 100. She finished at 95.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She broke into the top 10 in 2009, then fell out of the top 40 in 2012 when a wrist injury threatened her career.Long a great doubles player, she pushed on and was rewarded in singles, too. She won her first Premier Mandatory singles title at Indian Wells in 2014 and then won the United States Open several weeks after she had already decided to make this season her last.“Maybe that’s why in the U.S. Open I played so well — because I was playing so free,” Pennetta said.Some come to New York and hear cacophony. Pennetta hears a lullaby.“It’s peaceful for me and it’s strange, because it’s a crazy city,” she said.Still, her favorite major did not come easy. She had to beat the former major champions Samantha Stosur and Petra Kvitova to reach the semifinals and second-ranked Simona Halep to reach the final as she braced herself mentally to face Serena Williams.Instead, her opponent was a fellow Italian, her longtime roommate and close friend Roberta Vinci. That brought another type of pressure and a long afternoon walk in New York, but no end to their friendship.They even sat down at a table together at Flushing Meadows not long before the final, as if it were any other day. They said they laughed when Boris Becker, sitting nearby, reminded them that they would soon be opponents.AdvertisementThe final point remains a blur to Pennetta, but not the reaction of her peers.“Normally in women’s tennis we are not really happy or supportive when someone wins,” she said. “We are a little bit — what’s the right word in English? — jealous. But I received so many nice messages from all the players.”There were also two keepsake phone calls. The first was from Rafael Nadal the night of her victory.“It was 5 a.m. in Spain,” she said. “I know Rafa since he was a kid. I would practice in Majorca when he was not Rafa Nadal, he was just Rafa. We are friends.”The second call came the morning after from Williams, Vinci’s upset victim.“Really special, I have to say,” Pennetta said. “I know it was a bad time for her, but she called me just to say, ‘Hey baby, I’m so happy for you.”’There are rumblings in Italy that Pennetta might be convinced to postpone normal life until the 2016 Olympics.“What do you think?” Pennetta asked me.I said I believed Singapore was still the finish line.“Bravo, perfect,” she said. “You’re right.”A version of this special report appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Champion’s Career Reaches a Fulfilling End.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »