By JASON SABLICH and JUSTIN SABLICHOCT. 23, 2015
Eddie Lacy’s fantasy football owners finally received good news this week: The Packers have a bye for N.F.L. Week 7.We have been down this road before, with Lacy getting off to a slow start in 2014, but things might be different this time.Last season, Lacy topped 10 fantasy points only two times in his first six games and averaged 3.5 per game in the other four games, but still finished as fantasy’s sixth best back by averaging 17.5 F.P.P.G. the remainder of the season.
      Highlights from around the league.
    This season, Lacy scored 15 fantasy points and rushed for his only touchdown in Week 1, and he has averaged four F.P.P.G. in the five games since.AdvertisementOne big difference this season is that Lacy is dealing with an ankle injury, so in that regard, the bye week is a welcome break.AdvertisementBut Packers Coach Mike McCarthy seems intent on continuing to have James Starks involved in the run game, and not in a minor way.“We want to be a one-two punch,” McCarthy said this week. “At this point, I’m not really interested in running one of my running backs 20, 25 times in a game.”The coming schedule is more bad news for Lacy’s productivity, with tough matchups with the Broncos, the Panthers and the Vikings in the next four weeks.So, enjoy the break, Lacy owners, and continue reading for analysis on the backs who are playing in Week 7.Be sure to check out our complete player rankings for N.F.L. Week 7. You can also find us on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy.
                These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.            Bills (3-3) at Jaguars (1-5)9:30 a.m. (London) Line: Bills by 5.5 Quarterback E.J. Manuel (BUF) — The Jaguars’ 22nd ranked pass defense was just burned by Brian Hoyer for 293 yards and three touchdowns. They have allowed 279 yards per game and a 10-to-1 TD-to-INT ratio. Manuel could prove to be decent bye-week fill-in.Blake Bortles (JAX) — While Bortles has been inconsistent, he continues to produce QB1 fantasy numbers, ranking fifth over all among quarterbacks. The Bills have permitted 18 fantasy points per week to opposing quarterbacks, and another pass-heavy day could be in store if running back T.J. Yeldon is forced to sit again.AdvertisementRunning BackLeSean McCoy (BUF) — The offense should run through McCoy with Tyrod Taylor and Sammy Watkins out. Jacksonville allows the sixth most fantasy points to the position, including big games to Arian Foster and Doug Martin in the past two weeks.Wide Receiver/Tight End Robert Woods (BUF) — With Watkins out, Woods will be Manuel’s top receiver to target.Allen Robinson/Allen Hurns (JAX) — The Bills shut down A.J. Green last week, but over all, they have permitted the 10th most fantasy points to the position this year. You should feel fine starting both. Charles Clay (BUF) — Clay figures to be the focal point of the passing game with Watkins on the sideline. Jacksonville has served up more than 10 fantasy points to tight ends Coby Fleener and Rob Gronkowski.Saints (2-4) at Colts (3-3)1 p.m. Line: Colts by 4.5Quarterback Drew Brees (NO) — The Colts’ 27th ranked pass defense is allowing 298 passing yards per game and has mustered just eight sacks. Brees has thrown for at least 300 yards in four of five games. Oddsmakers are picking this matchup to be the highest scoring game of the week, which is always a plus for fantasy quarterbacks.Andrew Luck (IND) — He finally looked more like his old self with last week’s 312-yard, three-touchdown performance. We are expecting another one as he faces a Saints defense allowing the second most fantasy points to the position (21 F.P.P.G.).Running Back Mark Ingram (NO) — A model of consistency, Ingram has reached double digit fantasy points in all but one of his six games. The Colts are serving up 19 F.P.P.G. and rank 20th over all against the run.Frank Gore/Ahmad Bradshaw (IND) — The Saints are a top five matchup for opposing running backs, and have served up a jaw-dropping 433 rushing yards, 155 receiving yards and five total touchdowns to the position over the last three weeks.AdvertisementWide Receiver Willie Snead/Brandin Cooks (NO) — This is an outstanding matchup for Saints receivers, as the Colts allow the third most fantasy points to the position. They have permitted a receiver to top 100 receiving yards in four of their six games played, and the second most passing touchdowns with nine.T.Y. Hilton/Donte Moncrief (IND) — The Saints are giving up 283 passing yards per game. You can feel safe starting both yet again this week.Jets (4-1) at Patriots (5-0)1 p.m. Eastern. Line: Patriots by 9Quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick (NYJ) — He has thrown for multiple touchdowns in all but one game this year, and is likely to throw a lot Sunday to keep up with Tom Brady. The Patriots are the ninth best fantasy matchup for quarterbacks.Tom Brady (NE) — The Jets have the top-ranked pass defense in the league, allowing 198 passing yards per game. While standard league owners can never bench Brady, daily league players may want to steer clear. The Darrelle Revis-less Jets held Brady to 182 yards, one touchdown and one interception the last time they played (Week 16, 2014).Running Back Chris Ivory (NYJ) — New York’s bell cow is averaging the second most fantasy points per game among his peers (19), which is more than the likes of Le’Veon Bell and Peterson. He’s an automatic start against New England’s 22nd ranked run defense.Dion Lewis/LeGarrette Blount (NE) — Lewis played his worst game last week, perhaps because of an abdomen injury. He is the preferred RB play, if healthy, as the Jets’ only real weakness on defense has been against pass-catching backs with similar skill sets.Wide Receiver/Tight End Brandon Marshall/Eric Decker (NYJ) — Both are locked-in starts against a Patriots unit allowing the eighth most fantasy points to the position this year.Julian Edelman (NE) — WR1s are averaging just 40 yards and have one touchdown in their last four games against the Jets.AdvertisementRob Gronkowski (NE) — The Jets are likely to be his toughest matchup all year. But he has to start every week.Vikings (3-2) at Lions (1-5)1 p.m. Line: Vikings by 2Quarterback Teddy Bridgewater (MIN) — Bridgewater’s best fantasy day of the season came against the Lions in Week 2 (20 F.P.s), but he has averaged just 11 F.P.P.G. since. Adrian Peterson should be the focal point of this offense this week, but the Lions are permitting 281 yards a game through the air, if you’re feeling lucky.Matthew Stafford (DET) — Minnesota has been stout against the pass the last three games, limiting quarterbacks Peyton Manning, Alex Smith and Philip Rivers to a 12-point fantasy average. Stafford threw for 286 yards and two touchdowns against the Vikings in Week 2 and did look better last week.Running Back Adrian Peterson (MIN) — Detroit ranks 26th against the run and allows 120 rushing yards per game. Peterson went off for 192 total yards on 31 total touches in Week 2.Theo Riddick/Ameer Abdullah/Joique Bell (DET) — Abdullah managed just 9 rushing yards and 9 receiving yards on seven total touches in Week 2’s meeting. Bell is likely to return this week, and Riddick has been seeing meaningful carries as well. Stay away from this messy situation in Week 7. Wide Receiver/Tight End Calvin Johnson/Golden Tate (DET) — Cornerback Xavier Rhodes has played well against Johnson in recent matchups, but Megatron got the best of him in Week 2 (10/83/1 TD). Tate also managed 80 yards on six receptions.Kyle Rudolph (MIN) — This is a plus matchup, as Detroit gives up the eighth most fantasy points to opposing tight ends. Rudolph had five receptions and a touchdown in Week 2.Falcons (5-1) at Titans (1-4)1 p.m. Line: Falcons by 4.5Quarterback Matt Ryan (ATL) — The Titans rank second in the league against the pass (204 Y.P.G.) and ninth in sacks and interceptions in five games played. Ryan is a low-end QB1 option this weekend.AdvertisementRunning Back Devonta Freeman (ATL) — The Titans enter Week 7 play with the league’s 28th-ranked run defense, and one that has yielded at least 17 fantasy points to backs Frank Gore and Lamar Miller over the last three weeks.Bishop Sankey/Antonio Andrews (TEN) — Atlanta permits the second most fantasy points on the ground, but this backfield is as uninspiring as they come. Andrews led the team in touches last week with 10, and would be the desperation play this weekend.Wide Receiver Julio Jones/Leonard Hankerson/Roddy White (ATL) — Tennessee ranks second against the pass, allowing 204 passing yards per game, but could be without cornerback Perrish Cox, who is nursing a hamstring injury.Kendall Wright (TEN) — Wright saw just five targets last week after complaining about his limited role in the passing game. His situation degrades even further if quarterback Marcus Mariota misses the game.Delanie Walker (TEN) — Atlanta is permitting 10 F.P.P.G. to the position, and was just shredded by the Saints’ Benjamin Watson for 10 catches, 127 yards and a touchdown last week.Steelers (4-2) at Chiefs (1-5)1 p.m. Line: Steelers by 2Quarterback Alex Smith (KC) — While this is a plus matchup on paper, as the Steelers are 28th against the pass, Smith hasn’t cracked 20 fantasy points since Week 1. Smith remains a low-end QB2.Ben Roethlisberger (PIT) — This is an outstanding matchup if he can play, as K.C. surrenders the third most fantasy points to the position (20 F.P.P.G.), but it’s not looking promising.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Running Back Le’Veon Bell (PIT) — The Chiefs did manage to bottle up Adrian Peterson last week (60 yards on 26 carries), but were burned badly by Matt Forte and Jeremy Hill in the previous two games.Charcandrick West/Knile Davis (KC) — The Steelers rank 7th against the run and have permitted the third fewest fantasy points to the position in six games played. They have yet to allow a rushing score this season. Avoid if possible.AdvertisementWide Receiver/Tight End Jeremy Maclin (KC) — He is expected to be cleared to play after dealing with a concussion and will face a Pittsburgh secondary that allowed 339 receiving yards and one touchdown to the Arizona receiving corps last week. Antonio Brown/Martavis Bryant (PIT) — Both receivers get a massive boost if Roethlisberger plays, as the Chiefs allow the most fantasy points to the position.Travis Kelce (KC) — The Steelers are the third best matchup a tight end can have, allowing 12 F.P.P.G.Browns (2-4) at Rams (2-3)1 p.m. Line: Rams by 4Quarterback Josh McCown (CLE) — The Rams are permitting just 13 F.P.P.G. to the position. In a week full of byes, we still would not consider McCown this week.Running Back Todd Gurley (STL) — Gurley takes on the league’s worst run defense, as the Browns have allowed 149 yards per game to opposing backs. He is a consensus top-three running back play this week.Robert Turbin/Isaiah Crowell/Duke Johnson (CLE) — Turbin is now cutting into Crowell’s early down workload, which makes this backfield even harder to predict. Johnson is the best bet here, but avoid this situation if possible.Wide Receiver/Tight End Travis Benjamin (CLE) — The Rams are tied for the sixth most fantasy points allowed to wide receivers. Benjamin, the seventh ranked fantasy receiver after six games, remains a must-start.Gary Barnidge (CLE) — This guy is bound to have a bad week at some point, right? This would be the week, as the Rams have been tough on the position, allowing just 5 F.P.P.G.Texans (2-4) at Dolphins (2-3)1 p.m. Line: Dolphins by 4Quarterback Ryan Tannehill (MIA) — Houston is the sixth best matchup for quarterbacks at 23 F.P.P.G. He is a decent low-end QB1 option this weekend.AdvertisementRunning Back Lamar Miller (MIA) — Miller is fresh off his first real fantasy contribution of the year and has a good chance to keep rolling against Houston’s 17th ranked run defense that is surrendering the 10th most fantasy points to the position.Arian Foster (HOU) — A major mismatch in the making as Miami’s disappointing front seven is permitting the second most rushing yards per game (141).Wide Receiver/Tight End DeAndre Hopkins (HOU) — Elite receiving options like Allen Robinson (6/155/2 TDS) and Brandon Marshall (7/128) have had their way with this middle-of-the-road matchup. Continue to start and expect big numbers.Jarvis Landry (MIA) — The Texans have allowed at least 10 fantasy points to a receiver in five straight weeks. Landry ranks 31st over all in standard league settings, averaging 8.9 points per game.Jordan Cameron (MIA) — The Jaguars’ Julius Thomas returned last week against the Texans and had seven receptions for 78 yards and a touchdown. The Texans are permitting the 11th most fantasy points to the position.Buccaneers (2-3) at Redskins (2-4)1 p.m. Line: Redskins by 3.5Quarterback Jameis Winston (TB) — Washington’s banged-up secondary has yielded 20-plus fantasy points to the position in two of their last three contests, but Winston (14 F.P.P.G.) has yet to put together a solid game this year, and would still require nerves of steel to take a chance on this weekend.Running Back Doug Martin (TB) — Freeman and Ivory each managed at least 25 fantasy points against this fading run defense over the last two weeks. Martin ranks ninth in rushing yards and fifth over all in fantasy points.AdvertisementAlfred Morris/Matt Jones (WAS) — The Bucs’ 25th ranked run defense has permitted 120 yards per game to opposing backs, and the 12th most fantasy points to the position. This would be a good time to get Morris going, but that will not be easy if the star tackle Trent Williams remains sidelined.Wide Receiver Mike Evans/Vincent Jackson (TB) — The Redskins are the 11th best fantasy matchup for receivers and the Jets’ Decker and Marshall had productive days against them last week. Start both.Cowboys (2-3) at Giants (3-3)4:25 p.m. Line: Giants by 4Quarterback Eli Manning (NYG) — We’re not sure what to expect after last Monday night’s debacle. Manning typically plays well against the Cowboys, but he managed just 193 yards and no touchdowns against them in Week 1 and his offensive line remains a real concern. Treat him as a low-end QB1 and hope for the best.Running Back Joseph Randle/Christine Michael/Darren McFadden (DAL) — Word is that Christine Michael will take on a larger role this week, but Randle is still expected to remain the starter. This is a favorable matchup, as the Giants defense has allowed a double-digit fantasy performance to an opposing back in every game. We have Randle as a low-end RB2, and Michael as a flex to be on the safe side.Rashad Jennings/Shane Vereen (NYG) — The Giants have the 28th ranked rushing offense. Dallas is allowing the fourth most fantasy points to the position has been taken for an absurd 211 rushing yards, 214 passing yards and three rushing touchdowns over their last three contests. That’s your glimmer of hope for starting Jennings this week. Vereen has been an afterthought in recent weeks, averaging four carries a game despite Andre Williams’s continued ineffectiveness.Wide Receiver/Tight End Terrance Williams (DAL) — The cornerback Prince Amukamara will sit out this one and cornerback Trumaine McBride could as well, but will Dallas quarterback Matt Cassel be able to capitalize? Williams hauled in five for 60 yards in Week 1.Jason Witten (DAL) — Giants linebacker Uani ‘Unga did a fairly good job against Witten in the opener, limiting him to six receptions and 60 yards. But two of those catches went for touchdowns.Raiders (2-3) at Chargers (2-4)4:05 p.m. Line: Chargers by 4Quarterback Philip Rivers (SD) — Rivers is averaging 408 passing yards and has a 7-to-1 TD-to-INT ratio over his last three games. The Raiders have allowed a pair of passing scores in four of their five games. Rivers is an elite play at quarterback this weekend.AdvertisementRunning Back Latavius Murray (OAK) — Murray has been benched is his last two games because of poor play and ball security issues. But against fantasy’s most favorable running back matchup, it’s almost impossible to keep him on your bench.Melvin Gordon/Danny Woodhead (SD) — Gordon is expected to play Sunday despite missing Wednesday’s practice. His recent ball security issues and subpar play make him a risky start against the Raiders’ third ranked run defense (83.5 Y.P.G.). Woodhead continues to be the preferred play in both standard and P.P.R. leagues.Wide Receiver Amari Cooper (OAK) — Cooper draws the third worst fantasy matchup for receivers but is too talented to sit in any given week. The Chargers are yielding the fourth fewest receiving yards (729) and the fourth fewest touchdowns (4).Keenan Allen/Stevie Johnson (SD) — Allen should find success against a struggling D.J. Hayden. Oakland has surrendered double-digit fantasy performances to an opposing receiver in four consecutive games.Eagles (3-3) at Panthers (5-0)8:30 p.m. Line: Panthers by 3Quarterback Sam Bradford (PHI) — Bradford is averaging 13 F.P.P.G. and ranks 28th in the N.F.L. in passing. The Panthers are permitting 14 fantasy points per game, the fourth fewest in the league.Cam Newton (CAR) — The Eagles have yielded just one 20-point fantasy day to opposing quarterbacks, but they were allowing an average of 302 passing yards per game before Week 6. Newton has been matchup proof so far, and should be treated as a high-end QB1 option.Running Back DeMarco Murray (PHI) — Carolina ranks 12th against the run, but has permitted an average of 22 fantasy points per game to opposing RB1s over the last three weeks. Murray has finally gotten out of the gate and cannot be benched now.Jonathan Stewart (CAR) — Stewart performed admirably against Seattle’s defense last week, but the sledding gets even tougher against an imposing Eagles front that has surrendered the second fewest fantasy points to the position. AdvertisementWide Receiver Jordan Matthews (PHI) — The Panthers have held opposing WR1s Robinson, Hopkins and Evans to 112 scoreless total yards in previous weeks.Ted Ginn (CAR) — The Eagles are real bad at covering the position (sixth best WR matchup), which gives Ginn plenty of sleeper appeal this weekend. He has averaged just 4.3 targets per game over his last three, so do not expect the world.Ravens (1-5) at Cardinals (4-2)8:30 p.m. (Monday) Line: Cardinals by 7.5Quarterback Carson Palmer (ARI) — Fantasy’s fifth best quarterback gets the woeful Ravens secondary that is permitting the most fantasy points to the position (22 F.P.P.G.).Running Back Justin Forsett (BAL) — The Cardinals managed to limit the Steelers’ Bell to 88 yards on 24 carries last week and have permitted the sixth fewest fantasy points to the position.Chris Johnson (ARI) — The strength of the Ravens defense is their run stopping, which ranks ninth best in the league. Johnson is a low-end RB2 option once again in Week 7.Wide Receiver Steve Smith (BAL) — The ageless wonder continues to shine, but this is a tough matchup for anyone, as WR1s Brown, C. Johnson, Anquan Boldin and Cooks averaged just 39 receiving yards and 3.5 receptions against the Ravens earlier this season.Larry Fitzgerald/John Brown (ARI) — The Ravens’ 29th ranked pass defense is allowing the second most fantasy points to opposing receivers. Brown is dealing with a hamstring issue, but played through it last week to the tune of 196 yards and 10 receptions.The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. Follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.