AdvertisementSupported byBy Fred Bierman Saturday 3 Utah at Southern California7:30 p.m. Eastern, FoxThe most intriguing game of a sleepy week features third-ranked Utah traveling to the Coliseum. The Trojans (3-3) might be the most talented .500 team in the nation, and despite a lofty ranking, Utah is a 3 ½-point underdog. To add to the intrigue, Utah Coach Kyle Whittingham is among those being mentioned for the Southern California job. Utah has been getting it done with defense. The Utes are tough up front against the run and have 13 interceptions. Keep an eye on running back Devontae Booker, a bruising runner who has carried the offensive load. For U.S.C., this game is the last chance to save the season. Cornerback Adoree’ Jackson is one of the most exciting players in college football and will see more time at wide receiver this week.15 Texas A&M at 24 Mississippi7 p.m., ESPNThe only matchup between ranked teams this week also features two teams coming off losses. The Aggies were blown out by Alabama, while Mississippi lost to undefeated Memphis. The winner will stay alive in the Southeastern Conference’s West Division, and the loser will essentially be eliminated. The Rebels’ star left tackle, Laremy Tunsil, will return after serving a seven-game suspension, and his matchup with Aggies defensive end Myles Garrett might be the most compelling of the weekend.Washington at 10 Stanford10:30 p.m., ESPNStanford’s offense has clicked, and the team is suddenly among the hottest in the game. The offensive line has been tremendous, and running back Christian McCaffrey has been unstoppable over his last four games. Last week, he racked up 369 all-purpose yards and four touchdowns in a victory over U.C.L.A. He leads the nation in all-purpose yards and is making the case to be included in the Heisman discussion. The Cardinal offense will be put to the test against a Washington defense that is allowing 16.8 points a game, fewest in the conference.6 Clemson at MiamiNoon, ABCThis one has all the signs of a trap game for Clemson. It is the first real test on the road for the Tigers this season. Their only other trip away from Death Valley resulted in a narrow victory over a Louisville team that is now 2-4. Clemson is in the thick of the playoff hunt, but everyone seems to be waiting for it to slip up. Miami has done a great job forcing turnovers on defense and taking care of the ball on offense. This game features two great quarterbacks, Clemson’s Deshaun Watson and Miami’s Brad Kaaya.25 Pittsburgh at SyracuseNoon, ESPNUIn his first season as coach, Pat Narduzzi, a former Michigan State defensive coordinator, has the Panthers at 5-1 and in the Top 25 for the first time in five years. Their one loss came on the road to an undefeated Iowa team, which needed a 57-yard field goal as time expired for the win.1 Ohio State at Rutgers8 p.m., ABCHow many 7-0 teams change quarterbacks? That is what Ohio State has done, replacing Cardale Jones with J. T. Barrett. The speedy Barrett has gotten the Buckeyes into the end zone, which they had been struggling to reach.21 Houston at Central FloridaNoon, ESPN NewsThe Cougars are undefeated, and quarterback Greg Ward Jr. is among the best playmakers in the country. His 14 rushing touchdowns tie him with Louisiana State running back Leonard Fournette for most in the Football Bowl Subdivision. Winless Central Florida is unlikely to pose much of a threat.Texas Tech at 17 Oklahoma3:30 p.m., ABC/ESPN2 (Regional)The Red Raiders can score points, and they took Texas Christian to the wire last month in one of the season’s most entertaining games. The Sooners’ defense, however, made a statement last week, shutting out Kansas State.Tennessee at 8 Alabama3:30 p.m., CBSThe Tide are rolling, having beaten two top-10 teams on the road over their last three games. Since a loss to Mississippi in Week 3, the defense has been lights out, and the team is playing as well as anyone else in the country. FRED BIERMANAdvertisement