By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 23, 2015
During the winter break from racing early this year, the American driver Alexander Rossi, then 23, summed up his life over the previous six years: He had come to Europe at age 17 to pursue his dream of racing in Formula One after winning a couple of championships in the United States.He was given peripheral roles in Formula One at 18, landing one testing role after another, beginning with the BMW team’s car. But at every turn, just when it seemed that his dream of reaching the racing pinnacle was about to be realized, something obstructed the path.First, BMW withdrew from the series after the 2009 season. In 2010, Rossi signed with the new USF1 team as a test and reserve driver, but the team folded before it made it to the series. The Lotus team — later named Caterham — then hired him in that same role in 2012, but the team changed owners and went out of business in 2014, when Rossi was on the verge of racing.It was then announced that he would race as a replacement driver for the Marussia team at the Belgian Grand Prix last year. But at the last minute, the regular driver, Max Chilton, renegotiated with the team and returned. A few months later, at the Japanese Grand Prix, tragedy struck when Marussia’s other driver, Jules Bianchi, was seriously injured in a crash. Rossi was set to replace him — only for the team to go bankrupt and fail to finish the season.Advertisement“I have always been the guy that, ‘Oh, next year, maybe he’ll be in a seat, maybe he’ll get there,’ and it has never actually happened,” Rossi said in a recent interview.AdvertisementDuring the off-season, he came close to ending his Formula One adventure and moving to IndyCar in the United States. But then a call came and everything changed.“When the phone call came from Racing Engineering it was quite late in the off-season,” he said, referring to a team in the Formula One feeder series, GP2, where he has raced for the last two years without much success.“I knew that they were a championship-winning team,” he added. “And I thought there was something I still had to prove in GP2, and now I finally had an opportunity to be in a car that I felt was competitive. So I jumped on that. And in hindsight I think it was a really good decision because it helped open this door back up, and here we are.”He has won three of the last five GP2 races and is currently second in the series. Those results led to an offer in September to drive in five of the Formula One season’s seven remaining races, while also finishing the GP2 series.In Formula One he may be in the last-placed team, Manor, but in both of his first two races — in Singapore and Japan, both last month — he finished ahead of his teammate, Will Stevens. And he will be on the grid this weekend in Texas.Since the end of 1993, there has been only one American Formula One driver, Scott Speed, who raced in 2006 and 2007. He never showed any promise that he could become the third American world champion, after Phil Hill in 1961 and Mario Andretti in 1978.Speed’s most recent American predecessor in Formula One had been Mario Andretti’s son, Michael, who raced in 1993 at the McLaren team as a teammate to Ayrton Senna. It was a bad year for McLaren, even with Senna, who was one of the strongest drivers of the era. So Andretti had little chance.AdvertisementNow, though, Rossi seems to have whatever might have been missing from his two predecessors. He grew up in California racing go-karts and then won the Formula BMW Americas series in 2008. He also won the final of that series’s international competition that year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coming to Europe the following year, he finished fourth in the International Formula Master series in 2009, and then was third in the Renault 3.5 series in 2011. But aside from a victory in GP2 in 2013, his last three seasons were a struggle. He never landed a contract with a top team, but he did gain valuable experience testing Formula One cars.“There’s been an unbelievable amount of persistence and not only from my side, but from my family’s side as well, and especially my father,” Rossi said.“Considering that he doesn’t have a motor sport background, and his first day at a racetrack was my first day in a go-kart, what he has been able to accomplish in terms of being able to get me here and the effort that he has put in — he is not only my father, he is my manager as well — I think is the unbelievable part,” said Rossi.His father, Pieter, dropped his architecture and contracting business to work nearly full-time helping his son fulfill his dream. This was done first with the help of a small group of sponsors in the United States.Then, so Rossi could get his start in Europe, his father and another backer started an investment company in which people could invest in a piece of his racing future. They found nearly 70 investors, but for his move to Formula One, Rossi is now seeking major sponsors.“With the momentum that we have gained in the past few weeks, and with Austin coming up, I think there’s a big opportunity to get corporate America involved,” he said. “But it has been something that has been missing from my profile and we need to change that.”Rossi said the reason why there are so few American sponsors is the same as why there are so few American drivers.“It again comes back to the fact that people really don’t know about the sport,” he said. “And to educate a corporation in all of the tiers and levels of management that go along with that takes some time. And it’s always easier to demarcate yourself once you are in an F1 seat than kind of, ‘Oh, I will be, or I might be.’ So that’s why these next five or six weeks both on the track and off the track are very critical.”AdvertisementFor the Manor team, choosing Rossi was low risk: He’s probably the most experienced driver of Formula One cars never to have raced in the series.“He’s been around for a number of years,” said John Booth, the Manor team director. “I can remember when he first came over in Formula Renault, and he shone straight away. We got a look at him at Spa last year; he did a fantastic job, he’s very calm and gets on top of all of the systems very quickly.”But to excite the public, he will have to move to a stronger team.“As we all know, Formula One is its own beast in terms of getting into it, and just getting on the grid is the first box you need to tick,” Rossi said. “And then you can start thinking about what the future will hold.”“Even though I am only racing one other car, that is fine for me at the moment,” he added, referring to competing primarily with his teammate. “As long as I can keep winning those little battles then it will open up doors in the future.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.