By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 23, 2015
There is probably no sport in the world that would not like to have a piece of the rich, vast American market.One that has persistently tried to obtain that holy grail is Formula One, which this weekend stages the fourth edition of its United States Grand Prix at the Circuit of the Americas in Texas.No country has hosted Formula One races in as many different locations as the United States — 10 different circuits have hosted Grands Prix over the decades — and no other country’s population has as persistently failed to embrace the series. But now, three years after the inaugural race in Austin, the Texas state capital, many of the requisite elements for success seem to be converging.There is the fact that this weekend, with Alexander Rossi driving at the Manor team, an American is racing in the series for the first time since 2007 and only the third time since 1993. Also, the series will next year have an American-owned team: the Haas F1 team, with bases in Britain, Italy and the United States. That Haas is owned by one of the most successful and well-known Nascar teams is also an advantage.AdvertisementBernie Ecclestone, the series promoter, has spent decades trying to find success for Formula One in the United States. He is under no illusions, however, about the fact that if the Grand Prix races are to be broadcast live, most of them would be shown on U.S. television in the middle of the night or early morning. But he also has another idea of what needs to be added to that triumvirate of American race, driver and team: more races in the United States.Advertisement“You’ve got Europe, about the same size as America,” Ecclestone said. “We’ve got 10 races in Europe and we’ve got one in America. So you’re never going to get exactly what we’ve got in Europe, unless we’ve got 10 races. Wherever we have a race, we get capacity crowds, but we need 10 of them.”Ten Formula One races in the United States? For several years, Ecclestone has been seeking additional sites in the country, including in New Jersey and California. Another option has been to add a race in Mexico this year — on Nov. 1 — which, along with the Canadian Grand Prix in Montreal in June, makes three North American races on the calendar.And yet the hurdles to success remain numerous. First, most sports that succeed on a large scale in the United States are homegrown — like baseball, basketball and American football — unlike Formula One, which has its roots in Europe.“It’s not American,” agreed Ecclestone, who is British. “But I always used to say, ‘Americans like to buy European clothes, European cars, European whatever’ — and things not just European. So there shouldn’t be any problem with accepting European car racing.”“Except — and it’s a little bit why football is hard to get across in America — it means that people have to concentrate,” he added, referring to soccer. “All other American sport, you don’t have to. There’s always breaks all of the time. Most of the sports you can walk away, do a little bit of shopping, come back and continue watching the sport. You can’t do that with football, you might miss the only goal, because there might only be one goal. And in Formula One, you might miss some of the action. So it’s different altogether. I think the only way is if we had 10 races there; people would grow into it this way.”Similarly, Rossi believes that the United States has not produced more drivers because young Americans are not exposed enough to Formula One.“I don’t think it has anything to do with talent, I don’t think it has anything to do with ability, capability, really culture much anymore either,” Rossi said. “I think it’s just the fact that Formula One hasn’t been something that’s high profile in the States. So kids don’t grow up watching it; people don’t really know about it, so there’s never an aspiration to go to Formula One.”Advertisement“There’s so many other sports that interest young people, young kids,” he added, “football, baseball, basketball, there’s so many options that you have.”And one of the biggest obstacles is the lack of American sponsors backing drivers. Mario Andretti, the American driver who was crowned Formula One world champion in 1978, said the sponsorship issue could be improved with more races in North America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If you have two races in the States, you’ve got Mexico and you’ve got Canada, all of a sudden there could be added interest,” he said, “even from the standpoint of some very ambitious sponsor: ‘I’m going to get behind this lad, and I’m going to see him in a Ferrari.’ You see what I mean — ‘I’m going to see him in a McLaren, I’m going to see him in a Red Bull.’ That’s what it’s going to take, that kind of a push. That scenario exists, it’s just all about activating it.”Another ingredient in the recipe that has long been considered necessary for success in the United States is a winning American driver. Examples are the cyclists Greg LeMond and Lance Armstrong, before his fall from grace, who generated interest in cycling by winning the biggest titles in Europe.But Ecclestone refutes that idea: “We used to have one: Mario Andretti. It ain’t going to make any difference.”Quality does make a difference, though, as the track in Austin has proven. The circuit receives praise from just about everyone in the series, including former Formula One drivers such as Emerson Fittipaldi, who drove the safety car on the circuit during the first edition of the race there in 2012.“It’s a great challenge, I like it,” he said. “There is a very fast section downhill after Turn 1, and that is different from most of the tracks all over the world. Usually they try to keep slow corners, slow speed, and in Austin it is downhill and very challenging, you have the section with three esses, and then you go up hill.”Perhaps most importantly, for Formula One to succeed in the United States the series has to put on an entertaining show catered to the American taste.Andretti thinks that Austin has got that part of the recipe right.“What I think they are really doing right is they understand that to really make it successful it has to be not just a motor racing event; it has to be an event, period,” he said.“In other words, this has to draw not just a hard-core fan, but also people who just want to be part of an event,” he added. “You could have not just the guy who loves Formula One, but his girlfriend who just wants to have fun in the evening and go to a concert and do that sort of thing. And there are a lot of activities going on in the city itself.”AdvertisementFederico Gastaldi, the director of the Lotus team, agreed.“We arrive to a great welcome and experience a fantastic event with superb support from all the fans,” he said. “It’s good for Formula One to be building its presence in the U.S., as it is a great marketplace for us to be. We’ve also experienced some exciting racing at the Circuit of the Americas. All in all, there’s nothing not to like.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.