By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 23, 2015
The idea of running the United States Grand Prix at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, the home of single-seat, open-wheel racing in the country, looked brilliant on paper: a marriage between the greatest track in the United States and the highest form of auto racing in the world.The inaugural race there, in 2000, seemed to confirm that belief. It was the best-attended Formula One race ever in terms of paying spectators, with an estimated 250,000 in attendance.Unfortunately, it was mostly downhill from there for the sport in the United States, where Grands Prix had been held off and on at different sites for decades. The nadir came in 2005 with a tire fiasco that left only six cars competing in the race. The 50-year pattern of failing to find a permanent home for Formula One in the country continued, the last race taking place in Indianapolis in 2007.The speedway has had success with its Nascar race, the Brickyard 400, which began in 1994 and was the first race other than the Indianapolis 500 to be run there since 1916. And after many years of losing much of its luster amid disputes in the IndyCar series, the Indianapolis 500 itself has clawed its way back to success.AdvertisementSo why did Formula One fail in Indianapolis?Some clues were already visible in 2000 at the first race, which was won by Ferrari’s Michael Schumacher as he began his five-year reign of world championship titles.The very appearance of Formula One cars on the historic track was the start of the problem. While the circuit historically ran 33 larger cars lined up in 11 rows of three cars, Formula One put its 22 smaller cars in 11 rows of two cars. Unlike on one of their own purpose-built circuits, the Formula One cars looked unimpressive and small in the grand racing theater of Indianapolis.Also, there was the issue of the track itself. The Brickyard, as it is affectionately known for its brick surface first laid down for the inaugural Indy 500 in 1911, is an oval with banked corners. It is made for the kind of American open-wheel racing that it made famous. Formula One cars are not designed to run on ovals, so the speedway’s owners decided to use just one corner of the oval for the Grand Prix track and to build a new road circuit in Formula One style on the infield. Built on flat land, the circuit was devoid of character. The site might have been one of the world’s great racetracks, but the Formula One circuit was less interesting than most in the series.And there was a problem finding a date for the Grand Prix. The Indianapolis 500 is always run on the last Sunday in May (on what is the Memorial Day holiday weekend in the United States) and the Brickyard 400 runs in early August. This meant that for the first four years, Formula One had to run its race at the speedway in late September, a few weeks after the Brickyard. The last four years, the Grand Prix ran in June, not long after the Indianapolis 500.If the Indy 500 is renowned for mobilizing the state and city to support its traditional annual event, the challenge of doing the same for a new, exotic race was too much, at least beyond the first year, when novelty was a draw. That first year, the race was also successful because it came during a low period for both Nascar and IndyCar. (There was a vacuum to be filled at the time, and it was Nascar that eventually did so.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Formula One considers itself to be the world’s most technologically advanced form of racing, with the fastest cars on a road track (although they may be slower than an Indy-style car on an oval). Frills and entertaining spectators through anything apart from the wonder of car technology and the skills of the greatest drivers are unthinkable for the series.AdvertisementBut in 2005, that lack of concern for fan satisfaction is exactly what sealed the fate of the series in Indianapolis.Michelin, which was tire manufacturer for seven of the 10 teams, failed to provide tires that were safe for use on the speedway’s recently resurfaced circuit. The three teams that used Bridgestone tires and the International Automobile Federation, the sport’s governing body, refused to allow temporary changes to be made to the circuit layout so that the Michelin cars could run safely.So only the six cars of the Bridgestone teams competed in the race. Before a booing crowd that demanded ticket refunds, Schumacher and Ferrari secured their only victory of the season. It was a far cry from the euphoria of the first Grand Prix there five years earlier.The series ran in Indianapolis twice more, but then was absent from the United States for half a decade. It returned in 2012, at a purpose-built circuit in Austin, the capital of Texas. The drivers, teams and fans say it is one of the best sites in Formula One.“Circuit of The Americas is a great racetrack,” said Fernando Alonso, a two-time world champion driver at the McLaren team. “It has a bit of everything: fast corners, slow corners, heavy braking zones and corners where momentum is crucial. You need good balance in the car to be quick there. Austin is a fun city, too.”Although the idea seemed to be brilliant at the time, it now seems clear that Indianapolis was never going to be the right place for the U.S. Grand Prix.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.