By HUW RICHARDSOCT. 23, 2015
LONDON — The World Cup was intended to be a celebration of rugby, symbolized by the opening up for its final week of London’s Trafalgar Square, one of England’s most famed public spaces, as one of the tournament’s fanzones.But the elimination of the host country England in the tournament’s pool stages, followed by the other top European teams in the quarterfinals has led not so much to celebration as introspection.Yes, the fans have still been terrific — attending matches in unprecedented numbers and instilling almost every venue with an electric atmosphere. But nobody expected that the spectators by this stage would include all of Europe’s players.If there is to be a European on the field when two of the four Southern Hemisphere nations contesting this weekend’s semifinals take the field for next Saturday’s final, it will have to be a referee. Nigel Owens of Wales is the hot tip for that job, which suggests that — with an Englishman and a Frenchman in charge of this weekend’s games — one aspect of European rugby is in good shape.AdvertisementBut failure on the playing side has produced a vigorous debate about what can be done to close the gap between teams of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. Not all of the voices are those of doom.Advertisement“That is just the way the tournament has panned out, rather than any major issues with Northern Hemisphere rugby,” wrote the former New Zealand coach John Mitchell on the ESPNscrum website. “I don’t believe the chasm between the two hemispheres has widened that much since the tournament began.”History also shows there is nothing new in southern dominance. New Zealand’s won-loss record across 111 years against European teams is 199-26, South Africa did not lose to Northern Hemisphere opposition between 1906 and 1958, and southern teams have won six of the seven World Cups, with Australia, New Zealand and South Africa winning two titles each. England won in 2003.“Playing in the Northern Hemisphere, I see players who have fantastic skills and wouldn’t look out of place in the Southern Hemisphere,” said Chris Wyles, captain for the United States in the World Cup and a club rugby player in England for Saracens. “But there’s no getting away from it. The southern teams are totally dominant in the big matches, and we’d be fools to ignore it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Wyles, a smart, thoughtful man who has played in three World Cups, argues that others are better qualified to discuss coaching or playing styles. England fullback Mike Brown was less reticent, arguing on BT Sport television that: “The core skills that they are showing at the moment under pressure, playing at high speed and high tempo, is what is setting them apart, so we need to go away and work hard on those core skills.”The former Ireland forward David Wallace wrote on the Betway website: “The issue is being brave enough to stray away from the traditional, safe and secure style that many European nations adopt by default.”Wyles does see scope for changes in the structure of the game, echoing Mitchell’s belief that playing in warmer, drier conditions helps the southern teams. “The idea of moving to a summer season is pretty appealing,” he said. “It would be great to play in better weather and it would mean the Six Nations could be played in warmer, drier conditions. I can’t see how that would be a negative.”Wyles, who studied political science, recognizes the potential for conflict between the strong club scene in England and France and national team priorities. The parting shot of the outgoing French coach, Philippe Saint-André, was a complaint about the self-interest of his nation’s powerful clubs while New Zealand Coach Steve Hansen has argued that the European countries are hamstrung by a “lack of unity.”But Wyles has little doubt of the potential benefit of contracting players to national teams. “The New Zealand and Australian unions clearly have a big say in how, when and where national team players play,” he said, while pointing out that these structures are not exclusive to the Southern Hemisphere. “The Irish have done this pretty well as well, with the union managing players in a way which helps Leinster with the big European games.”In the shorter term, he looks forward, like every rugby fan, to the semifinals.“The real issue for the rest of the world is catching up with New Zealand, and I really can’t see them losing,” is his call for Saturday’s match between the defending champion and South Africa. “And I’ve a feeling that Argentina might come though against Australia. They’re played some good rugby, have fantastic players and look really confident.”AdvertisementAn Argentine victory would bring him more than just the pleasure of being proved right. “Marcelo Bosch is a great player and a great man,” he says of his Saracens teammate, who is usually a starter at center, but missed Argentina’s victory over Ireland because of a  suspension. “I hope he gets back from that, and I’d love to see him playing in the final.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.