By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 24, 2015
Sam Gagner and Claude Giroux scored in a shootout to lift the Philadelphia Flyers to a 3-2 win over the visiting Rangers on Saturday night.Mark Streit and Scott Laughton scored Philadelphia’s goals in regulation, and Steve Mason had 37 saves. Mason denied Dominic Moore to end the shootout.J. T. Miller and Derick Brassard had goals for the Rangers. Henrik Lundqvist was sensational in regulation and overtime with 46 saves, but he gave up two goals on three shots in the shootout.ISLANDERS 3, BLUES 2 Mikhail Grabovski scored his first goal of the season four minutes into overtime, and the Islanders won at St. Louis.AdvertisementJohn Tavares scored his fifth of the season and extended his point-scoring streak to six games for the Islanders. Frans Nielsen had two assists, including one on Grabovski’s winning goal.AdvertisementDEVILS 4, SABRES 3 Adam Henrique scored twice and added an assist, and the Devils won their fourth straight with a victory at Buffalo.Mike Cammalleri had a goal and two assists, and David Schlemko also scored for the Devils, who have not lost since starting the season 0-3-1.CANADIENS 5, MAPLE LEAFS 3 P. K. Subban and Max Pacioretty each had a goal and an assist as host Montreal beat Toronto to extend its season-opening winning streak to nine games.The Canadiens need one more victory to tie the N.H.L. record.PENGUINS 2, PREDATORS 1 Phil Kessel scored 41 seconds into overtime to give Pittsburgh a road win over Nashville.BLACKHAWKS 1, LIGHTNING 0 Jonathan Toews scored his first goal of the season 17 seconds into overtime to give Chicago a victory over visiting Tampa Bay.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Corey Crawford made 21 saves for this first shutout this season and 13th of his career in Chicago’s third straight victory.BLUE JACKETS 4, AVALANCHE 3 Ryan Murray and Brandon Dubinsky scored goals early in the third period, and Columbus rallied at Colorado for its first win in nine games this season.Boone Jenner had two goals and Sergei Bobrovsky had 31 saves for the Blue Jackets.Chris Kunitz had the other goal for Pittsburgh, which won for the fourth time in five games.AdvertisementPANTHERS 6, STARS 2 Nick Bjugstad had a goal and an assist after moving up to the top line, and Florida won at Dallas.Bjugstad was the center on a line with Jaromir Jagr and Jonathan Huberdeau because a hand injury sidelined Aleksander Barkov.WILD 3, DUCKS 0 Devan Dubnyk stopped 15 shots for his first shutout this season to lead Minnesota to a home victory over reeling Anaheim.Matt Dumba, Thomas Vanek and Ryan Carter scored to send Anaheim to its sixth loss in its first seven games.COYOTES 4, SENATORS 1 Mikkel Boedker scored three goals, and visiting Arizona beat Ottawa to end a four-game losing streak.Brad Richardson scored, and Anders Lindback made 35 saves in his first start of the season.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: Flyers Outlast Rangers, Winning in Shootout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.