By SETH BERKMANOCT. 24, 2015
Early Saturday, Mets Manager Terry Collins settled on his World Series starting rotation. He explained to his pitchers the reasoning behind his decision, then pulled his Game 1 starter in for a gut check.Collins asked, “Are you ready for it?”Matt Harvey replied, “Damn right.”In a surprising move, Harvey will take the mound Tuesday night at Kansas City, followed by Jacob deGrom, Noah Syndergaard and Steven Matz. Collins said the rotation would stay on course for a second turn if the series extended past four games.“Matt was going to pitch next,” Collins said, referring to Harvey’s place in the rotation during the National League Championship Series. “So I didn’t want to give him five more extra days if I can help it.”Collins added that he thought deGrom would benefit from extra rest and pointed to Syndergaard’s past success at Citi Field.AdvertisementTwo years removed from Tommy John surgery, Harvey, 26, has already thrown 202 innings, the most in his career.AdvertisementIn early September, Harvey’s agent, Scott Boras, publicly challenged the Mets’ handling of Harvey’s workload in his first season back from the operation. Harvey stoked the controversy when he initially indicated that he was not sure he wanted to pitch in the postseason because of the concern over the amount of innings he had thrown.Before Collins announced his rotation late Saturday afternoon, Harvey was noticeably exultant during a mandatory team workout. He wrapped his arms around Curtis Granderson in the outfield, joked with David Wright and casually talked about hockey with reporters before leaving the field.Whether Yoenis Cespedes will buoy Harvey in the Mets’ lineup remains uncertain, although Collins and Cespedes said that the left-shoulder injury he sustained Wednesday had vastly improved.“Compared to the first day, I feel a lot better,” Cespedes said through an interpreter, adding that he would be ready for Game 1. “I could have probably done a little bit more today, but I didn’t really want to push myself.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During the two-hour workout, Cespedes spent 35 minutes on the field, mostly keeping his arms tucked in the front pocket of his blue hooded sweatshirt, gripping a package of chewing tobacco that he shared with Juan Uribe. He threw two underhand tosses to Juan Lagares, but that was the extent of his physical activity before he headed into the clubhouse with the trainer Ray Ramirez.“He really felt good,” Collins said. “He’s going to hit tomorrow, he’s going to hit Monday, but he just said he wanted to take one more day.”Uribe, who missed the Mets’ first two series with a chest injury, participated in fielding drills and took batting practice. Collins was noncommittal about whether Uribe would make the World Series roster.The Mets will work out Sunday in Kansas City, visiting Kauffman Stadium for the first time since June 13, 2004, when Eric Valent hit leadoff and Tom Glavine outdueled Zack Greinke, neutralizing a lineup that included Ken Harvey and Byron Gettis.AdvertisementThe Mets and the Royals have played only nine times during the regular season. Several notable players have worn both uniforms — Bret Saberhagen, Endy Chavez, Carlos Beltran and David Cone — as have journeymen like Dan Schatzeder and Jorge Fabregas.The Royals have several left-handers in their lineup who can spray the ball around their roomy park, but they lack the power of the Toronto Blue Jays, whom they defeated in the American League Championship Series.Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson did not seem too concerned, given the skill of his starting rotation, which now has Harvey at the No. 1 spot instead of deGrom.“It’s a different way of maybe preparing, but certainly not a concern, I don’t think, on our part,” Alderson said.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: In Surprise Move, Mets Pick Harvey to Start in Game 1 of World Series.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »