By KEN BELSONOCT. 24, 2015
LONDON —  The N.F.L. will help finance research that will try to find ways to more actively treat concussions to speed recovery.Traditionally, athletes who have sustained concussions have been told to rest and avoid excessive stimulation, like light. But because concussion symptoms and the mental and physical conditions of athletes vary, doctors believe some concussions can be treated through therapy that, for example, helps patients regain their balance more quickly.“Everybody is looking at the tool, looking at the diagnosis and saying, ‘Is this a treatable condition?’ ” said Dr. Richard Ellenbogen, a co-chairman of the N.F.L.’s Head, Neck and Spine Committee.The research will track about 1,000 American high school and college football players, Irish rugby players and Australian rules football players over an undetermined period.AdvertisementThe study was one of three announced at the end of meetings here among doctors representing the N.F.L., FIFA, the N.C.A.A. and several other sports organizations, as well as the International Concussion and Head Injury Research Foundation.AdvertisementThe other research will assess the long-term effects of multiple concussions on jockeys and the effectiveness of the King-Devick test, a visual examination that is used to diagnose concussions, on players in the Canadian Football League. The N.F.L. will look at the results of the study in Canada to determine whether to add the test to sideline concussion protocol.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The N.F.L. declined to discuss how much would be spent on these studies or to discuss the specifics of five other proposals made at the two-day conference for future research.The investigation of the usefulness of active therapy will be led by Dr. Kevin Guskiewicz of the University of North Carolina, and Dr. Michael McCrea, the director of brain injury research at the Medical College of Wisconsin.The study is complicated because concussions have many symptoms and are caused in different ways. Athletes also have different mental and physical conditions, creating a wide number of variables.“The hypothesis is that active rehabilitation will safely hasten the return back to baseline,” Ellenbogen said. “The known hypothesis is it won’t, but before we starting telling the world that you don’t need to rest people for a week, we better have data.”A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: N.F.L. to Help Fund Search for New Concussion Therapy .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.