AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew KehGWANGJU, South Korea — You can see the craggy outline of Mount Mudeung from the home dugout of the Kia Tigers, the professional baseball team in this sleepy city near the tip of the Korean Peninsula. The summit is visible, too, out on the artificial-turf field at Gwangju Jeil High School, just a short drive from the Tigers’ stadium.When Seo Jae-weong, a Tigers pitcher and a graduate of the high school, was growing up in Gwangju, he always heard about Mudeung and its gi — the Korean word for a metaphysical energy force in East Asian culture. The mountain, on the eastern outskirts of the city, supposedly passed the energy on to people in its vicinity.“Back then, I didn’t believe it,” said Seo, 38, who played in Major League Baseball from 2002 to 2007 and had an 8-2 record for the Mets in 2005. “Yet as I’ve gotten older, I can’t help but feel there might be something to it.”Seo chuckled at that thought as he pondered how and why his old school had become a wellspring of Korean baseball talent. A decade ago, Seo and two of his high school teammates — Kim Byung-hyun and Choi Hee-seop — were navigating successful careers in the majors. This year, Kang Jung-ho (or Jung Ho Kang, as he is known in the United States) became the fourth graduate of the school to reach the majors, with a sparkling rookie season for the Pittsburgh Pirates. That Kang’s season came to an abrupt end last month, just before the playoffs, because of a serious injury to his left knee has not much diminished the pride that his success in America has brought to the school and his hometown.“We want him to have a long, healthy career and for him to inspire us for many years to come,” said Yang Jeong-gi, the school’s principal.There have been only 16 Korean-born major league players — including the Yankees’ Rob Refsnyder, who was adopted as a baby and raised in the United States — and nine of them have played fewer than 100 games. Yet baseball is one of the most popular sports in South Korea, and boldface names abound in Gwangju Jeil High School’s history. Sun Dong-yeol, widely considered one of the greatest Korean pitchers, is a graduate. So is Lee Jong-beom, one of the top Korean players of the 1990s. Seo Gun-chang, another graduate, won the 2014 Most Valuable Player Award in the country’s top league, the Korea Baseball Organization.More than any metaphysical force, Seo and other players said, the school’s proud lineage and baseball tradition are the impetus behind its success at producing players.“The older alumni make sure younger players keep the same mental approach and attitude they had, year after year,” Kang said. “The technical aspects of baseball are important. But more than that, the older players and staff always emphasized tenacity, discipline and strong-mindedness.”Gwangju is South Korea’s sixth-largest city, with a population of 1.5 million. It is best known in the country as the site of the student independence movement of 1929, a major protest against Japanese occupation, and of a massacre in 1980 when a pro-democracy demonstration turned bloody. Residents regard the area’s bittersweet history with veneration.In the 1980s, baseball added a different element to the city’s identity. The Tigers — known as the Haitai Tigers until 2001 — were one of the founding teams in the Korean league, which began play in 1982. The Tigers won the title in six of the league’s first 10 seasons. They have won 10 championships over all, the most of any team. “They’re a little bit like the Yankees of Korea,” said Brett Pill, a 31-year-old first baseman from San Dimas, Calif., who played in three seasons for the San Francisco Giants and is in his second season with the Tigers. The success of the team helped create a baseball-crazy generation, and Gwangju Jeil High School, which opened in 1920 and fielded a baseball team only a few years later, was the foremost place to play. Seo graduated from Gwangju Jeil High School in 1996, Kim in 1997 and Choi in 1998. The three have become teammates again on the Tigers — although this season, each has been on and off the active roster.Jung Jung-oh, a former professional player who was a year behind Choi and now works as a coach at the school, said the team was “invincible” in the late ’90s. Seo would start a game, and Kim would finish it. The next game, they would switch roles. Jung remembered Choi crushing home runs over the trees beyond the practice-field fence.The players kept close ties to their old school. Seo trained there every winter when he was in the majors. Kim used the school’s facilities while rehabilitating from injury. All three recalled seeing Kang as a student — he was thin, they said, with a quick bat and a strong arm — and were delighted by his fast success with the Pirates. “We need Jung-ho to do well so we can have a second Jung-ho and a third Jung-ho and a fourth Jung-ho,” Choi said of Kang, who has remained in Pittsburgh for now to rehabilitate his knee.South Korea’s top high schools compete in half a dozen tournaments each year, and this summer, Gwangju Jeil won its first major one since 2010. Two players from the school were picked in the K.B.O. draft; three were drafted last year.The team practices throughout the year, with players often missing classes in the weeks before tournaments. Major League Baseball games generally take place while the players are in school, but some said they kept tabs on Kang during the day on their phones. “It’s a source of pride for us, and it gives us some confidence about ourselves,” Choi Ji-hoon, the team’s third baseman and captain, said of Kang’s success.The players’ accomplishments in America reverberate back home. Yang, the principal, made sure to point out that Kim was the only Korean player to have won a World Series. When Kim was asked about his two World Series rings, a huge smile spread across his face. Momentarily switching to English, he used profanity while describing his luck. (He gave up five earned runs on six hits, including three home runs, in three and a third innings as Arizona edged the Yankees in 2001.)“My best memories of school were training so hard for so long and then going up to Seoul to play against the best kids in the country and seeing whether all the time I spent training had paid off,” Kim said.For Kim and the others, it did pay off. On the grounds of the school, which enrolls 840 boys in grades 10, 11 and 12, there is a modest museum dedicated to the history of the 1929 student movement, which originated at the school. On the second floor, which memorializes famous alumni, the most prominent display features large photographs of Seo, Kim and Choi Hee-seop hanging alongside other memorabilia, including an old Mets jersey that belonged to Seo.Outside the museum, there is a grand statue, almost 40 feet tall, commemorating the student protest. Choi said he sometimes stood beneath the monument to clear his mind before games. In the distance rises Mount Mudeung, where he occasionally still goes for hikes. “It reminds me of the good times in school, the amount of work that we put in,” Choi said. “A lot of us who became successful, we trained while looking out at that mountain.”Advertisement