AdvertisementSupported byInboxTo the Sports Editor:Re “Cubs Dreams Dashed in Loss to Metropolitans; Prayers of Wrigley Faithful Go Unanswered,” Oct. 23: Your encomium to-day to our victorious Metropolitans was well writ. The New-York Daily Tribune of yore reported on August the 16th of 1858 a sound defeating by the Metropolitans of the Manhattans. Came then the professional Metropolitans of 1880, members of the American Association from 1883. Too, let us not forget the Metropolitans of 1910, whose victory was reported in this very blat on the 30th of June that year under the headline “Opera Ball Team Trounces Boston.”MARK SCHUBIN, New YorkEvery Coach’s NightmareTo the Sports Editor:Re “This Postseason, Decorum Police Aren’t Stopping the Party,” Oct. 18: It is well and good to insist on over-the-top emotionalism as the holy grail for sports fans and players. In Bill Rhoden’s telling, it bespeaks openness to the human condition. It should not, however, escape notice that at the end of Michigan State’s astonishing win at hated Michigan’s stadium, the heroic Spartan had his hip dislocated by celebrating teammates.Expenditure of energies should go toward fourth-and-goal situations. Calories should be hoarded for tracking down triples up the gap. All else is distracting self-indulgence. Surely unconfined joy is every coach’s nightmare.STEPHEN D. CRAIG, Charlotte, N.C.To the Sports Editor:The severe injury sustained on Oct. 17 by a Michigan State football player during a celebratory pile-on should lead to a pregame discussion in every locker room by a coach in every sport. I have been watching these events for years, each time suspecting that the day would come when serious injury would result from similar youthful exuberance.A neck fracture or cerebral hemorrhage might result in a preventable death; a hip dislocation, as sustained by the Michigan State player, can be career-ending for the professional athlete, who might also suffer sizable financial loss. Coaches beware.JAMES W. HANWAY, Sarasota, Fla.Bat Flips, Children and Broken TeethTo the Sports Editor:Re “As an Antic Spreads, Negative Opinions Start to Flip,” Oct. 16: In the article and online comments, no one mentioned the safety issue among children. I have worked with children after school and have had to rule out those who flung away their bats after hitting a ball. Some would do it as a continuation of their swing. In official games, the danger might be negligible. On a playground, with children all over the place, a flung bat can become a teeth-breaking missile.Major League players are role models. They should realize that. The game is more than just about them.DENNIS NYBACK, Portland, Ore.Solid Career After an Unforgettable GaffeTo the Sports Editor:Re “Forget 1969. Cities’ Rivalry Is Built on a Gaffe for the Ages,” Oct. 18: A key mitigating fact missing from Dan Barry’s excellent piece about Fred Merkle was explained in my 1962 edition of Big Time Baseball. It says that Merkle’s base running was not unusual. “The rookie was only doing what he had seen dozens of veteran big-leaguers do before him.”So back then, after what we today call a walk-off single, Merkle’s failure to touch second was considered moot, as players on both sides just wanted to get off the field in one piece. His manager, John McGraw, was smart enough not to get rid of Bonehead Merkle, who played with the Giants for a decade, part of a solid 15-year major league career.DAVID DAVISON, Guilford, Conn.Advertisement