By BILLY WITZOCT. 24, 2015
KANSAS CITY, Mo. —  When Eric Hosmer laced a single down the right-field line, Lorenzo Cain came flying around second as if late for a job interview. A trip to the World Series was hanging in the balance. It was the moment Mike Jirschele had been waiting for.Maybe not as long as everyone in this once-again baseball-crazed city thought, not back to Game 7 of the World Series last October when Jirschele, the Kansas City Royals’ third-base coach, threw up a stop sign for Alex Gordon, who stayed anchored at third base as Madison Bumgarner got the final out and the San Francisco Giants became World Series champions.But Jirschele had waited long enough.Having spent 13 years playing in the minor leagues and 22 more coaching there before getting to the major leagues last season, Jirschele understood the value of patience, of biding your time. So, earlier in the series, when Jirschele saw Jose Bautista, Toronto’s strong-armed right fielder, turn his back to home plate as he wheeled around to throw to second base, he took note.On that play, it was Kendrys Morales, the designated hitter, running.There was no need then to make a reckless decision, the same as last October when sending Gordon might have rescued the Royals — but more than likely would have gotten him thrown out by 20 feet.AdvertisementWith Cain in the equation, though, the calculation went from rash to rational.“We were waiting for that situation where a ball hit down the right-field line, if I have speed coming into third and I see Bautista come up and make that long throw to second, I’m going to go ahead and wheel him,” Jirschele said.AdvertisementWhen Cain saw Jirschele furiously windmilling his right arm, his eyes widened and his stride lengthened.“When I saw him sending me, I was definitely shocked,” Cain said. “But I trust him to the fullest.”By the time shortstop Troy Tulowitzki gathered the throw and, with a poor grip, skidded his throw home, there was no chance of getting Cain, who slid across home plate, popping up with what would become the winning run in the 4-3 victory that put the Royals back in the World Series.“It was going to have to be a perfect throw,” Jirschele said.The play was somewhat reminiscent of the 1946 World Series, which the St. Louis Cardinals won on Enos Slaughter’s mad dash, when he scored the winning run from first in Game 7 on a hit-and-run single after Boston Red Sox shortstop Johnny Pesky supposedly hesitated for an instant to throw home.Cain’s daring dash and Jirschele’s enterprising decision were fitting touchstones for the Royals on their return to the World Series. The team remained largely intact from last season, though the handful of newcomers have loomed large in the playoffs. Ben Zobrist hit a solo homer Friday, and Johnny Cueto, also acquired at the end of July, was superb in a winner-take-all Game 5 victory over Houston in the teams’ division series. Morales has four homers and 10 runs batted in during the playoffs.“We knew it was going to be hard coming into the year,” Cain said. “It left a bad taste in everyone’s mouth, losing the World Series the way we did. But we stuck together and we’re back where we want to be.”It will be an intriguing matchup with the Mets, who have been carried thus far by the powerful right arms of starting pitchers Jacob deGrom, Matt Harvey and Noah Syndergaard and the unearthly hitting of Daniel Murphy.AdvertisementThe Blue Jays, with a heavily right-leaning, power-hitting lineup, might have been a more favorable matchup for the Mets. The Royals can start five left-handed hitters, put baseballs in play better than anyone else in the game, and run the bases in a frenetic manner that can pressure the Mets’ defense — particularly the middle infielders Murphy and Wilmer Flores — in a way that the Chicago Cubs and Los Angeles Dodgers could not.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several Royals, including Cain and Gordon, said afterward that they were impressed with the Mets’ pitchers, having watched them on television. But George Brett, the Royals’ vice president for baseball operations, used his own experiences against the other New York team’s pitchers to indicate how the Royals hitters might think.“I’d rather face Goose Gossage than Tommy John any day of the week,” Brett said, comparing the Yankees’ former hard-throwing reliever to the soft-tossing left-hander.Brett, who was caught by TV cameras checking his pulse during the harrowing ninth inning, was exuberant. After so many barren seasons, the Royals’ resurgence, he said, is apparent not just in the field, but also in the stands. No longer are fans wearing so many jerseys of Bret Saberhagen, Mark Gubicza, Bo Jackson or himself — relics from the past.“I love to live in the future,” Brett said. “I can’t live in the past anymore — I’m 62.” He went on: “But when I come to the game and see all these young kids wearing Hosmer, Moustakas, Perez and Cain jerseys, that makes me feel good.”Brett said he also felt good for Jirschele, with whom he bonded years ago when they discussed how to handle the longtime Royal Mike Sweeney, then a young prospect.In many ways, to watch the Royals is to question — on Friday, it was Manager Ned Yost’s decision not to bring closer Wade Davis in until after Bautista had hit a game-tying home run — and Brett had heard the questions about whether Gordon should have been sent last year.“Jirsch has been waiting for that,” Brett said. “They talk about the Gordon play last year. Jirsch was right in what he did, and he’s been waiting for a situation like that with a guy who could run at first. And it couldn’t have happened at a better time.”For Cain, for the Royals, and not least of all, for Jirschele.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP8 of the New York edition with the headline: After a Prolonged Wait, a Coach Makes the Right Decision in an Instant.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.