AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressBERKELEY, Calif. — In a tiny, out-of-the-way gym hidden among the hills on the outskirts of the campus of the University of California here, Toni-Ann Williams enthusiastically dragged a huge mat to the balance beam area before getting to work. She carried her own vault springboard to run through several repetitions.Her upgraded floor exercise needed to be just right at the World Gymnastics Championships in Scotland, a 10-day meet that began Friday, where Jamaica’s hopes of making history by qualifying its first Olympic gymnast ride on Williams’s every high-flying flip and acrobatic twist. As Williams practiced, her college teammates were working on routines they were months away from performing in competition.“When I first started, everyone had told me, ‘You’re the first gymnast to compete for Jamaica,’ and I never realized — you’re the first gymnast for an entire country,” Williams said. “I never realized how big that was. I never allowed myself to think that highly of myself before, but I do recognize it now. It helps me stay humble and keeps me going through this crazy journey.”Williams, 19, the Pacific-12 freshman of the year last season for California, realized that regardless of whether she reached the Rio de Janeiro Games next August, she had done much to lift the sport in her parents’ homeland, where the sprinter Usain Bolt is the most well-known and popular Olympian.Williams’s mother, Marlene, has already envisioned the moment many times: her daughter walking into the opening ceremony less than a year from now alongside Bolt and the rest of the Jamaican delegation.Toni-Ann does not dwell on that. “When I was younger, I definitely did,” she said, “but now it feels more tangible, so I can’t allow myself to get ahead of myself or I will go insane.”Because Jamaica is largely still discovering gymnastics, which remains underfinanced there, Williams hopes her platform will bring positive attention. Jamaica will host the Caribbean championships next month.Williams has been to Jamaica only a couple of times. Her mother moved to the United States in 1990 and her father about four years earlier. Williams was born in Maryland.The Jamaica Amateur Gymnastics Association covers its monthly expenses with assistance from the country’s sports development foundation, while the athletes must often earn much of the rest themselves through fund-raising and sponsorships — which they received to help with the trip to Scotland.“Most of the athletes have been working hard to fund themselves,” said Nicole Grant-Brown, president of the amateur association. “We are very grateful.”Still, there is a daunting path ahead on the way to Rio. A strong showing at the worlds, through next Sunday in Glasgow, is just the first step for any of the Jamaicans to qualify.The six-gymnast Jamaican contingent — that is all the federation can afford — is dependent on an athlete’s qualifying for Rio first through a strong finish at the world championships, and all as individuals, because the country did not enter enough international meets to send a team.Based on ranking and a complicated system that excludes the Olympic-qualifying teams from the worlds, Williams and the others must be among the top 40 to reach next spring’s Olympic test event in Rio for a chance at an Olympic berth.In an unusual twist, her college coach will be along every step of the way. The university is allowing Justin Howell to coach Cal’s student-athletes while simultaneously serving as Jamaica’s head coach. With Howell now gone for two weeks to coach Williams and Jamaica’s other athletes, his wife and associate head coach, Liz Crandall-Howell, is running things back in the Bay Area for the Golden Bears.Williams was typically in the gym for a couple of hours training on her own before her three-hour Cal practice. She is taking just eight units this semester — about half of a regular course load — during her chase of an Olympic bid.She has concentrated more on nutrition and on exercise outside the gym through extra spinning sessions for cardiovascular fitness, along with weight training.“She’s going to have to do her job,” Crandall-Howell said. “She has a very high level of difficulty, and with a high degree of difficulty comes more risks.”Williams went from three to four tumbling passes on the floor for the tournament in Scotland, where she will be joined by teammates including her younger sister Maya.But there is no pressure on the home front. Her mother is already beyond thrilled at what Williams has accomplished in a short time, especially considering that when she was 14, she was found to have juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. It flared up during the Pac-12 championships this year and caused Williams to shake during the meet.The Olympics would make her challenges worth it all.“We sleep, eat and walk Usain Bolt,” Williams’s mother said. “And at some point in this life, we are going to sleep, walk and dream about gymnastics in Jamaica also.”Advertisement