By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 24, 2015
AZUSA, Calif. —  Neighborhood children flowed into the Azusa Youth Boxing Club moments after the door opened on a weekday afternoon. The timeworn gym barely contained the tiny tornado of action on an otherwise sleepy residential street.The cramped, sweltering gym’s spotted mirrors reflected the plywood floors, rusted metal lockers and duct-taped heavy bags surrounding a compact ring where exuberant youngsters learned how to fight.In the middle of it all, Jajaira Gonzalez’s big brother, Joet, would not stop hitting her.She traded jabs and combinations with him as they shuffled in circles, testing each other for defensive weaknesses. Those in the gym occasionally stopped to watch as the nation’s most promising teenage female amateur boxer sparred with a 22-year-old pro. Jajaira absorbed Joet’s punches as fuel and wore them as armor.“I like getting bruises,” said Jajaira, 18, a two-time world junior champion. “It makes me feel like I did something.”AdvertisementHer father, Jose, trains her, while Joet is her hands-on tutor. Her second-oldest brother, Jousce, 20, is also an Olympic hopeful and a less pleasant sparring partner who leaves Jajaira seeing stars when he gets angry and hits her too hard.Advertisement“They don’t go easy on her,” Jose said. “They don’t play games. In order to help her, they’ve got to go harder. She says when she goes to the fights, she don’t feel no power in the other girls.”Almost every day, after Jose finishes work for a bail bondsman, Jajaira and several of her siblings gather at the gym a few miles from their Glendora home for boxing and bonding. A third brother, JonJairo, also fights, and their youngest brother, Jason, who has cerebral palsy, cheers on the family from home.“There’s no way I could get out of the sport, because we all do it and my dad is my coach,” Jajaira said. “Some people say, ‘Oh, you don’t look like a boxer,’ or, ‘You look too nice to box.’ When I get in the ring, it’s like I’m a whole different person.”Gonzalez has spent months away from family and high school while winning her two world junior championships and a Youth Olympics gold medal in the last three years. She returned from a tournament in Taiwan two days before doing a jet-lagged graduation walk in May.She is the first American boxer of either sex to medal at the Youth Games, and the first female American to win junior and youth titles — but everything was preparation for her step up to the United States Olympic women’s boxing trials this week in Memphis.One winner in each of the three weight classes will advance to an international qualifier, earning a strong shot at a place in the second women’s Olympic boxing tournament in Rio de Janeiro. Gonzalez would have to win four fights against women in a field that includes a lawyer, an accountant, a former model and a police officer in training.“I think the girls at trials aren’t ready,” said Joet, 11-0 as a professional. “Everybody knows who she is, and I think they’re not at that level. I think she’s going to try to walk through everybody.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jose Gonzalez was a boxer in his native Guadalajara, Mexico, but he did not set out to build a fighting family. Instead of taking his children to Mexico for vacation one summer, he and his wife decided to allow the boys to try boxing, just for the exercise.AdvertisementA couple of years later, 8-year-old Jajaira came along to watch because Jose didn’t have a babysitter. When a boy in the gym told her that girls could not box, Jajaira demanded to spar him, and she punished him so viciously that he never returned.“She didn’t want to do it,” Joet said. “She was the baby of the family and a little girly-girl. After she beat up that kid, she just stuck with it.”Jose had no problem allowing his daughter into the business.“At first, my wife said, ‘No, her beautiful face,’ ” Jose said. “But I told my wife that if I train her the right way, no one is going to be able to touch her. I trained her so she’s not supposed to get hit, and then when I watched her fight, nobody could take her punches. It’s stayed that way for a long time.”And 12-year-old Jason provides ample motivation whenever Jajaira needs a boost.“He’s a little sweetheart,” she said. “I’m always messing with him and trying to make him laugh. In the beginning, it was super hard for me. I would cry every single time I would get off the phone with him. Even on FaceTime, I would just start crying. Now, I think I’ve been gone for so many trips, I’m starting to get used to it. Family is something I look forward to after competition.”Jajaira gets the occasional Twitter attack from those who find women’s boxing unseemly. Her only passion is the daily grind of the family pastime and the quest for Olympic gold.“They don’t care if something is wrong one day; I’ve got to work,” she said. “My dad is always saying, ‘I’d rather have you cry in the gym than cry in a fight.’ He’s the best.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.