By JOHN HANCOCT. 24, 2015
In a short-billed running cap and yellow windbreaker, Bob Glover stood on the steps of Public School 6 on East 81st Street, faced more than 100 adults on the sidewalk in front of him and asked for a show of hands.“How many of you are running the New York City Marathon?” he said.More than three-quarters of those assembled complied.“Remember, you’re going to go hit rough patches in the marathon,” said Glover, the coach of New York Road Runners. “That’s when your training and your preparation come in. Just stay focused and you’ll come through O.K.”He paused in the midst of this seemingly earnest motivational talk and grinned devilishly.“I’m lying,” he said. “You’re going to be in a lot of pain.”AdvertisementThen, above a chorus of groans and nervous laughter, he added, “You’ll still come through O.K.”AdvertisementNearby, the assistant coach George Weiner shook his head and smiled. “That’s Bob,” he said. “He’s got the quirky sense of humor. But he’s speaking as a competitor. He’s not going to sugarcoat it.”Glover has been dispensing unsweetened but impeccable advice to runners who want to get faster for more than 37 years. He has run the organization’s classes since their inception in 1978, a time when the concept of a coach for competitors below the elite level was unheard of.“People told me he’s tough, he yells a lot,” said Tiina Ylonen, 51, from the Bronx, who was taking the class in preparation for her 10th New York marathon. “I like him. He’s not boring, and he knows his stuff.”Glover, 68, is stepping down from the organization at the end of the year. He has been one of the longest-running acts in the sport, and one of the few people still involved with the New York City Marathon who have a direct link to the race’s origins.Glover grew up in Dansville in upstate Livingston County, where he was a runner on his high school track team. He later ran cross-country at the State University at Oswego. After graduating in 1968, he was drafted into the Army and served a year in Vietnam, where among other things he organized a sports competition in the city of Hue the year after the Tet offensive. (Glover competed, and says he won the quarter-mile wearing combat boots.)Back stateside, he worked for Y.M.C.A.s near Fort Rucker in Alabama and in Rome, N.Y., where he helped start running-based adult fitness classes. In 1975, he was hired as fitness director for the West Side Y.M.C.A. He soon met a fellow running enthusiast named Fred Lebow who was organizing local races for a small group known as New York Road Runners Club.Glover helped Lebow stage the first five-borough edition of the marathon in 1976 (which Glover completed in 2 hours 56 minutes). Two years later, he approached Lebow with the idea of starting a running class with Road Runners.Advertisement“Fred liked the idea,” Glover said. “But then I said, ‘What if nobody shows up?’ He said, ‘Even if nobody comes but you and me, we’ll do it.’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Twenty-three people did show up for the initial class. The program eventually grew to about 3,500 a year in five 10-week sessions. The August-to-October session culminates with the New York City Marathon. As the numbers grew, Glover added coaches, including his wife, Shelly Florence, now 54, who holds a degree in exercise physiology from Columbia, and Weiner, 33, a high school runner from Brooklyn whom Glover took under his wing and who eventually ran for Penn, in large part, Weiner said, “because Bob called the coach there.”Glover also wrote — with a West Side Y member and writer named Jack Shepherd — “The Runner’s Handbook” in 1978, which was followed in 1983 by his “Competitive Runner’s Handbook.” Both became best sellers and helped establish his reputation nationally.“Bob Glover has contributed as much to training runners in this country as anyone,” said Amby Burfoot, editor at large for Runner’s World magazine. “He’s not warm and fuzzy, but his programs work.”One of the thousands who followed Glover’s advice was Michael Capiraso, chief executive and president of Road Runners, who will run his 24th straight New York City Marathon next Sunday.“When I first started running, I bought Bob’s books,” said Capiraso, who ran his first New York City Marathon in 1991 and still follows the Glover program for competitive runners, which emphasizes long runs, “quality” (speed, tempo and hill work) and higher mileage (40-plus per week).Glover, who has a son (the electro-pop musician Chris Glover) from a previous marriage, says he’s “semi retiring.” He will continue to coach the Greater New York Racing Team, an independent, competitive club. He and Shelly, who live in Sleepy Hollow, would like to spend more time with parents in upstate New York. And Glover, ever the competitor, says he wants to do more consistent training in order to race in the 70-74 age group.While he says he’s parting amicably from the organization, Glover admits that some of the changes in the running culture have hastened his departure.“If I could push a button and make races smaller and classes smaller, maybe I would have continued,” he said.AdvertisementWhile much has changed, Glover believes that success in running is still achieved using the same formula as in 1978: consistent hard work and dedication. His class workouts usually involve maximum efforts: accelerating up and down the hills; running faster intervals of various lengths.A workout three weeks before the marathon was typical in its intensity. A total of 300 runners participated, broken into eight groups based on pace, from under six minutes per mile to more than 11. About half started separately with Glover, the others with his wife. The runners did a warm-up jog from P.S. 6 into Central Park, then ran three one-mile intervals around the park’s lower loop.While Glover used to lead the fastest group, he now leaves that to Weiner and instead tries to offer encouragement to everyone. “Hey, where you going?” he joked, falling into step with one hard-charging runner for the last few yards of the second mile repeat. “Come on,” he called to a group cresting the last quarter-mile incline by Tavern on the Green, “you’re about to finish the marathon.”“I love it,” said Maria Taveras of Brooklyn, who will run New York for the sixth time. “You know you’re going to run hard in his classes, and that’s what we all need to get better. I can’t imagine what it’s going to be like without him.”A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: After 37 Years of Guiding New York Runners, Ready for a New Path.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.