AdvertisementSupported byBy Lucas AykroydVANCOUVER, British Columbia — It is a season of milestones for Alex Ovechkin. He cracked the 900-point barrier against the Calgary Flames on Tuesday, and he needs only four more goals to achieve his next mark: becoming the leader in goals among Russian N.H.L. players.But for that record, he will have to surpass his former teammate and longtime friend Sergei Fedorov. “For Ovie to break his record, I’m sure if they could, they’d want to share it, but that’s not how it works,” said Nicklas Backstrom, who has often centered Ovechkin in Washington.Ovechkin, a five-time winner of the Maurice Richard Trophy as the league’s top goal-scorer with the Capitals, has 480 career goals in 766 games. Fedorov left the N.H.L. in 2009 at age 39 with 483 goals in 1,248 games. He will be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in Toronto on Nov. 9.“He was my best teammate I’ve played with, obviously, with his skill and personality,” Ovechkin, 30, said. “I learned a lot from him. I was lucky to play with him. It’s going to be an honor to beat his record.”No other active Russian player is even close to Ovechkin. Evgeni Malkin of the Pittsburgh Penguins has 271 goals, followed by Alexander Semin of the Montreal Canadiens with 239.Fedorov, 45, ended his professional career in 2012 after three seasons with Metallurg Magnitogorsk of the Kontinental Hockey League, and he serves as the general manager of CSKA Moscow. “I’m glad that it is Alexander Ovechkin who will break my N.H.L. record among Russian players,” Fedorov said in an email. “We are friends for a long time, played shoulder to shoulder in Washington and Team Russia. We discussed playing the game a lot, and I’d like to believe that my advice helped him somewhere.”Ovechkin and Fedorov played together with the Capitals during Fedorov’s final two N.H.L. seasons, 2007-8 and 2008-9. With the Russian national team, they won the gold medal at the 2008 world championships and silver at the 2010 tournament. They also teamed up at the 2010 Olympics. So there is a certain symmetry in seeing Ovechkin supplant his mentor.“He always did good things for the team,” Ovechkin said. “He was the best on the ice, I think. He was an all-around player. He could play defense, center, wing. And his experience — how many games he played, how many Stanley Cup rings he had. You just watched how he prepared for the games and his routines. It was unbelievable.”Both men earned rock-star-like reputations in the N.H.L. In the 1990s, Fedorov was a spokesman for Nike, popularizing white skates, and Ovechkin has been known for his yellow skate laces and flamboyant goal celebrations. Both were linked romantically to Russian tennis stars. Fedorov was once married to Anna Kournikova, and Ovechkin split with his then-fiancée, Maria Kirilenko, in 2014.But these two players epitomized two different eras and styles of post-Soviet hockey.“Fedorov was a skater, a cerebral type who evolved and was more of a quiet player,” said Capitals Coach Barry Trotz, who guided the Nashville Predators during Fedorov’s prime with the Detroit Red Wings. “Ovie has a lot of intelligence to his game, but he has a lot of power and bite to his game. He makes the crowd stand up with some of the stuff he does. He makes the boards bang because he’s running over someone. He’s a louder, much heavier player. He can be very physical and ruthless at times, because he’s 230 pounds.”As a svelte teenager, Fedorov was a product of the Soviet Union’s powerful hockey program in the 1980s. He was expected to center a new top line for Viktor Tikhonov, the longtime autocratic Soviet national team coach, alongside Alexander Mogilny and Pavel Bure.But all three budding superstars left for the West before the Soviet Union’s collapse. Despite Fedorov’s obvious star potential, the Red Wings were able to draft him in the fourth round of the 1989 N.H.L. draft because it was unclear whether he could come to North America. In 1990, Fedorov slipped away from the national team at the Goodwill Games in Portland, Ore. He flew to Detroit to join the Red Wings, with whom he won the Stanley Cup in 1997, 1998 and 2002. (Mogilny, with 473, and Bure, with 437, are third and fourth on the list of top Russian goal scorers in the N.H.L.)In 1994, Fedorov was at his most dazzling, winning the Hart Trophy as the league’s most valuable player and achieving career highs with 56 goals and 120 points. He was a better two-way player than Ovechkin, capturing the Frank J. Selke Trophy as the top defensive forward in 1994 and 1996.Fedorov’s biggest moment with the Capitals came when he scored the winner in Game 7 of the first round of the 2009 playoffs against the Rangers. It remains a vivid memory for the likes of Backstrom and Brooks Laich, who were on that club.“He cut in and released a wrister, short side, top shelf,” said Laich, 32, who had a Fedorov poster on his wall as a boy. “And then he just got swarmed by teammates. That was really neat, because he was on the tail end of his career when he was here. But at certain moments, you could see the flashes of the superstar that was maybe 10 years ago, and that was one of those moments.”By the time Ovechkin was eligible for the N.H.L., he could come to North America freely. He was drafted first in 2004, leading a class of 18 Russian players, including Malkin, who went second. His relationship with the Russian hockey federation has been unwavering. He was the face of the Sochi Olympics last year.Even if Ovechkin retired today, he would go down in history as one of the greatest N.H.L. goal-scorers of any nationality.A Moscow native, Ovechkin is in the eighth year of a 13-year, $124 million contract. He entered 2015-16 with a goals-per-game average of 0.625. If he were to maintain that rate of production through the end of his contract, he would get close to 300 more goals by age 36. That would put him behind only Wayne Gretzky (894) and Gordie Howe (801) — and possibly Jaromir Jagr (728), who is still producing at age 43 with the Florida Panthers.“It’s within reason that he could potentially challenge for the all-time goal-scoring record,” Laich said. “That’s incredible to say in this day and age, with how tight the league is. He’s got the best shot in the world. He gets four or five good looks at the net every night. He can score in so many ways: individually, with traffic in front of the net, with deflections.”Along with individual achievements, there is another milestone Ovechkin hopes to be the first Russian to accomplish: captain a team to the Stanley Cup. Carol Schram contributed reporting.Advertisement