AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenMets Manager Terry Collins raised eyebrows Friday when he suggested that his star pitcher Matt Harvey could start three times during the World Series. Noting that Jacob deGrom looked “like he could use some time,” Collins, asked about the possibility of giving Harvey an extra start, said, “There’s a possibility, yeah.”On Saturday, Collins made the surprise announcement that Harvey would be the Game 1 starter for the World Series.Really? Must be World Series fever, when ego and manning up overtake common sense and pragmatism.If Harvey really is called upon to pitch three times, either his agent, Scott Boras, should drop Harvey as a client, or Harvey should cut ties with Boras.Boras had it right during the summer when he raised the issue of an innings limit for Harvey and his surgically repaired elbow. Harvey, he suggested, would not be overused or misused.The message was clumsily delivered, but the underlying idea was correct then and continues to be: If the player doesn’t look out for himself, he certainly can’t count on the team to do so.The overriding instinct for most players is to take care of the team, take care of teammates, do whatever it takes to win.For Harvey, vilified when he seemed to back his agent’s assertions, this may mean pitching three times in the World Series, even if it means putting his career at risk.But if an injury occurs while he goes the extra mile, will the franchise go the extra mile for Harvey and offer him a rich contract for damaged goods?Of course not.But this is the World Series, and all bets are off. Duty to team trumps duty to oneself. Teams rent players’ bodies. They pay many millions for the use of strong arms, powerful legs, broad shoulders. Brains.You play when hurt or pitch on short rest, and in critical moments like the World Series, you pitch three games when you should pitch only two.Toronto’s David Price started the Blue Jays’ Game 6 defeat to Kansas City on Friday. A game earlier, Price warmed up in the bullpen and said he was ready if needed. “At this point of the season, you’ve got to be ready for whatever,” he said. This from a pitcher who will be a free agent after the season and will probably not be with Toronto in 2016.“He came and said, ‘Hey, I can pitch out of the pen today,’ ” Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons said before Game 6, responding to criticism that the team was overusing Price. “It wasn’t like putting a gun to his head.”Price was doing what professional athletes are trained to do. This is why, in Harvey’s case, there was such frenzied criticism, mostly from fans but fueled by the news media, when Boras made the stand for his client. From elementary school to high school, college to the pros, athletes are taught a brand of selflessness that bonds them to their teammates, though one that ultimately benefits the institution. They are routinely asked to go the extra mile. When Bobby Valentine managed the Mets, he frequently asked reliever Armando Benitez to give him one more inning. Benitez never refused.We see it in all sports, every season: athletes struggling to balance the business of the game with their passion for it. They walk the thin line.“You learn on the fly,” said Kelly Johnson, whom the Mets acquired in a midseason trade with the Braves.Johnson made his major league debut in 2005 with Atlanta and over the course of his career has played with Toronto, Arizona, Tampa Bay, the Yankees, Boston and Baltimore. This will be his first World Series appearance.On Friday, after an informal workout at Citi Field, Johnson said his balancing process began when he signed as a free agent with the Rays in 2013 for what would be his first season not playing every day.“That was the beginning of trying to learn how to put your own feelings and your own ego to the side,” he said. “It’s the reality of the game.”For Price and Harvey, ego and a sense of responsibility to the team compelled them to ignore fatigue — and, in Harvey’s case, potential reinjury — and prepare to pitch two, perhaps three times.Price, 30, understands the urgency. Legacy also figures into the equation. Price has 104 regular-season victories since 2008, but two wins in the postseason.Fans are all about performance in the here and now. Nostalgia comes much later.Players play in the moment; teams plan for the future.A sports industry driven by fans thrives on fantasy and false heroism: We ask players to play hurt; we ask pitchers to risk their arms, to be available. We make heroes out of those who do and vilify those who do not.During the Mets’ National League division series against the Dodgers, Collins predicted that whatever ill will fans had for Harvey would dissipate if he won. “One thing about our society, people have short memories when you’re out there having success,” he said.By going seven and a third innings against the Cubs in Game 1 of the N.L. Championship Series, Harvey recaptured much of the credibility he had lost when Boras told the Mets to “cool it” with Harvey.But that was last series. Any player who studies history understands that even stars, for all of their dedication and courage in playing hurt or risking injury, will be discarded by teams and fans alike if they can no longer perform at the elite level.I don’t blame players like Harvey and Price for being caught up in the moment. It’s sometimes up to people like Boras to make sure they are not swept away.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement