AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressSOUTH BEND, Ind. — Running back C. J. Prosise and wide receiver Chris Brown were locked in an intense game of video soccer. Just then, the Showtime camera crew following Notre Dame players this season started talking to Prosise. He was not happy.“Of course, while I’m answering questions, Chris scores,” Prosise said. “So I’m like, Dude, I can’t talk anymore.”Too late. Brown won, 1-0, and taunted his roommate.The headaches have become part of the deal for players-turned-reality-stars for the cable series “A Season With Notre Dame.” The show is similar to HBO’s “Hard Knocks,” which followed an N.F.L. team through training camp.Fighting Irish players have had to adjust to a crew of about dozen following them daily. That number grows to more than 50 on game days. The 11th-ranked Irish (6-1) said it had been awkward at first.Even for Coach Brian Kelly. He said he had been in the bathroom and realized he was still miked.Still, the team is enjoying the attention.“At times it can be a little much, a little bit of a hassle,” Prosise said. “But it’s kind of cool to say you have your own TV show and you’re part of a TV show.”Showtime has shown Notre Dame in a positive light, though Kelly was not happy that it carried a teaser of him telling the team that tackle Ronnie Stanley was unable to accept being a captain. The scene was not included in the program, and Stanley later revealed that he could not accept because of parking violations.Stephen Espinoza, the executive vice president and general manager of Showtime sports and event programming, said the network had apologized. He also said that Showtime had worked with the university on story lines and on putting the show together and that it retained control over the program’s content. The university is aware of what scenes Showtime plans to use but does not see the full program until it runs. Espinoza said the network also understood it was about student-athletes and did not want to embarrass anyone. Players had the option of signing releases and could ask not to be filmed.“This show can only be produced in collaboration,” Espinoza said.Viewers have seen some lows, including the raw emotion of quarterback Malik Zaire after he broke his ankle, ending his season.They saw the stress of players studying for midterms while preparing for rival Southern California. But they also saw the team being rewarded with a meal of porterhouse steaks and crab legs after beating Navy.“I like crab legs,” linebacker Joe Schmidt said. “It tastes like victory.”The crew has eavesdropped on Kelly’s impassioned locker room speeches, as he told players before the U.S.C. game: “If you want something bad enough, you’ve got to go take it. That’s how we’re playing this game. We’re going to go get it.”The Irish won, 41-31.Viewers have also seen the close relationship between the defensive captain Sheldon Day and the freshman Jerry Tillery, including Day hazing Tillery a bit by ordering him to wear his helmet during a preseason practice when going to a portable toilet.Viewers have watched linebacker Jaylon Smith bowling, receiver Corey Robinson playing the ukulele and singing and Day and cornerback Cole Luke coaching a women’s flag-football team. During their off week, crews accompanied some players home.Espinoza said the network was pleased with the weekly 30-minute show.“There’s been a lot of drama within the program,” he said. “Some unexpected injuries, some come-from-behind wins. We couldn’t have scripted it any better.”The first three episodes averaged 663,000 viewers across all platforms. That compares favorably with Showtime’s most popular sports series, “Inside the NFL,” and the show is the third-most-watched program through its streaming service, Espinoza said.The program has followed the emergence of quarterback DeShone Kizer, showing how dorm mates covered his door with notes of support, saying: “You’re a stud,” “You seem like a nice person,” and “Thank you.”It aired a talk Kizer had with a fellow student, Jac Collinsworth, whose brother, Austin, was a Notre Dame safety and whose father, Cris, was a three-time Pro Bowl receiver and is now an NBC analyst. Kizer talked about how dramatically his life had changed after Zaire was injured.“There’s no transition at all,” he said. “Coach Kelly looks at me differently. He just expects me to be the starting quarterback at Notre Dame. Everyone just expects it.” He added, “All of a sudden I have all this pressure and all this obligation that you have that I never really prepared myself for,” he said.Espinoza said Showtime was interested in doing another show next year with Notre Dame or another program.“What we’re looking for is a top-notch program with compelling stories and a really interesting coaching staff,” he said.Advertisement