AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonLONDON — The N.F.L. shield is again flying beside the Union Jacks on Regent Street. Banners with pictures of players like Blake Bortles and Ryan Tannehill are plastered near Wembley Stadium. Fans from all corners of Europe are arriving in jerseys eager to tailgate.In what is now an annual rite of fall, the N.F.L. is back in London to play regular-season games, the main pillar of its bid to find new riches overseas and build what is already a $12-billion-a-year business.By some measures, hosting games in London has been a success. The number of fans here who claim to be “very interested” in the N.F.L. has doubled to 3.1 million in the last five years. All but one of the 14 games played here have sold out, including the matchup between the Buffalo Bills and the Jacksonville Jaguars on Sunday, when the one-millionth fan will pass through the turnstiles. And television viewership of N.F.L. games on Sky Sports in Britain has doubled since the first game in 2007.The number of subscribers for Game Pass International, which streams games on the Internet, has grown 22 percent so far this year. Encouraged, the league will add a fourth game, up from three per season now. Last week, the N.F.L. committed to playing at least two games a year at Wembley through 2020 in addition to two to be played in the London stadium being built by the Tottenham Hotspur that is expected to open in three years.“We’ve always said we want to have a fan base that is big enough, passionate enough and committed enough that it could sustain a full season of games, and the ultimate expression, of course, of the games is a franchise,” said Mark Waller, who runs the league’s international operations. “Our goal is for this market to be reflective of the 31 markets in the States.” Yet for all the league’s ambitions, turning a profit overseas has proved elusive. To fill its slate of games, the N.F.L. must reimburse teams for the not insignificant costs of traveling to London as well as for the revenue they give up by moving a home game overseas. The league spends untold amounts marketing their games to European fans.The cost of playing here, not to mention the complex logistics of planting a team here, means that the chances of a London-based franchise — something urged by Mayor Boris Johnson and other officials here — are remote, if only because the league is consumed with putting a team in Los Angeles for the first time in 20 years.“It’s a possibility, but I wouldn’t say it’s a priority,” Clark Hunt, the owner of the Kansas City Chiefs and the chairman of the league’s international committee, said about a London franchise. Rather, he added, “The priority is to grow the fan base overseas.”Waller declined to discuss the league’s finances in England, but Hunt and the other N.F.L. owners are sufficiently encouraged by the performance overseas that they voted unanimously this month to allow additional games outside the United States. Mexico and Germany, where there are more avid fans, are the most likely destinations initially. If the N.F.L. is satisfied with improvements to Aztec Stadium in Mexico City, teams could play there as soon as next season.The N.F.L. is also paying for the synthetic turf field that will be installed at Tottenham. A grass field, to be used by Spurs, will roll in and out of the stadium so that soccer matches, football games and other events can be held in quick succession.Tottenham is also making accommodations, like dedicated locker rooms and special seating, to suit the N.F.L.“Basically, we are buying into the future of the N.F.L. in London,” said Daniel Levy, the executive chairman of Tottenham Hotspur. “If I look at this purely on a contractual basis, I wouldn’t have done it. But we’ll offer such a great opportunity, if a franchise relocates to London, we’ll be one of the places to look at, and the association with the N.F.L. will grow our brand in the U.S.”While the N.F.L. continues to operate at a loss in England, the Jaguars, long one of the league’s weakest franchises, are benefiting from the push overseas. The team is playing in London as the home team for the third straight season, and Shahid Khan, the Jacksonville owner, has agreed to play a game a year here at least through 2020.Because Wembley is about 25 percent larger than EverBank Field in Jacksonville, and tickets are more expensive in London, the Jaguars generate about 15 percent of their local revenue from their game here. The Jaguars have also attracted multinational sponsors who want the extra exposure in London.“To me, right now, what we’re focused on is stabilizing the club,” Khan said last week. “We want to be the international team for the N.F.L. in London.”Other teams appear to have noticed how the Jaguars have parlayed their experience in Britain. According to The Tampa Tribune, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers have offered to pay for the bulk of the renovations to their publicly owned stadium if they can be allowed to move two regular-season home games overseas or elsewhere in Florida.Though N.F.L. owners appear committed to expanding overseas, even at a loss, they have changed course before. Teams once played preseason games in Australia, Japan, Sweden and elsewhere. The Bills no longer play in Toronto. And N.F.L. Europe folded in 2007.The current format appears popular with fans because they can see a variety of teams and do not have to commit to buying a season-ticket package, though about 40,000 people, or about half the crowd at Wembley, now attend all three games each year, up from 30,000 two years ago.“The games are great, but it’s the players and community spirit that I like,” said Scott Webster, 26, who traveled from Selkirk, Scotland, to see the Bills and the Jaguars, and who has tickets that cost 70 pounds ($107) each to all three games this year. “I wish I could see that with soccer.”Webster said he would remain loyal to the Baltimore Ravens even if the N.F.L. put a team in London permanently.Karl Baumann, who produces N.F.L.-related programming at Sky Sports, said the regular-season games in London and the spread of fantasy football and the Madden video game had re-energized fans who abandoned the sport after its initial burst of popularity in the 1980s and ’90s.“American football was seen as so passé, but things are a lot different now, so it’s seen as exciting and new,” said Baumann, who declined to provide viewership figures. “Having the N.F.L. games here has been a massive shot in the arm.”Advertisement