By BEN SHPIGELOCT. 24, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  There is nothing subtle about the way Chris Ivory runs — except the way he runs. Every time he blasts through tackles and razes defenders, Ivory preserves a secret of sorts, a feat that borders on illusion: how his least obvious asset is also his most valuable.“His feet, man, they’re so quick,” running back Zac Stacy said. “It’s, like, scientifically impossible.”This very topic, Stacy said, is discussed from time to time among the Jets’ running backs, who wonder how a man as compact and powerful and densely muscular as the 6-foot, 226-pound Ivory doubles as a bulldozing ballet dancer. How he bursts through a crease, decelerates, hops a few yards to the side and then accelerates again, reaching top speed in two or three strides.“The advantage of a guy being his size and having quick feet, it’s unexpected,” said Marcel Shipp, the running backs coach. “Guys come in thinking he’s a big, bruising back. Then he’ll hit a jump cut on you and head down the sideline.”AdvertisementWhen asked last month what surprised him most about Ivory, Coach Todd Bowles was unequivocal: his feet. That reaction extends to opposing defenders, who often take poor angles in pursuit, but also Ivory’s own defenders, like Dave Walkosky, who coached him as a senior at Division II Tiffin University in Ohio. Watching him run, Walkosky said he thought to himself, “Can you believe how quick this cat is?”AdvertisementIvory’s feet, Shipp said, allow him to move in and out of cuts like a smaller back, like Darren Sproles of the Philadelphia Eagles. If a camera were to zoom in tight on Ivory’s feet as he ran, Shipp could tell that they were his. From coaching him the last six months, Shipp knows how Ivory’s feet go “chop-chop” when he is about to plant and cut. He knows how Ivory pauses, ever so slightly, before ripping through a hole. He knows how Ivory stays low to redirect himself through a narrow fold.That ability challenges perceptions of Ivory, who enters Sunday’s game at the New England Patriots with 460 rushing yards, the fourth-most in the league, despite having missed a game with a sore quadriceps. He is neither a slasher nor a speedster. He is not a plodding battering ram. His combination of power and agility evokes, to some, Marshawn Lynch of Seattle and, to others still, the former Bengals and Patriots star Corey Dillon.The former N.F.L. fullback Heath Evans played with Dillon in New England and with Ivory in New Orleans, where the comparison occurred to him. Dillon was more elusive, Evans said, but Ivory has the same knack for making defenders miss in a phone booth.“That burst, to put your foot in the ground and then transfer 220 pounds and be at full speed — that’s just God-given ability,” said Evans, who is now an analyst for NFL Network. “His feet are sweet, I’ll just leave it at that.”Saying that Ivory has quick feet is somewhat imprecise. He cannot dazzle from the ankles down without flexible hips and strength through his calves and hamstrings, quadriceps and core. For someone his height, Ivory does not have long legs, which allows him to run with his feet closer to the ground. Watch closely, and Ivory actually runs on the balls of his feet, almost on his toes, so he can change direction.“The running backs with quick feet keep their shoulders square in tight spaces,” said the former N.F.L. running back Robert Smith, who is a college analyst for ESPN, “and get to the next hole without having to do a hard plant and wide leg separation.”He added, “Chris’s feet come up and down really quickly, and he can cross his feet without losing balance.”AdvertisementThere is, then, an elegant quality to Ivory’s style, not unlike a heavyweight boxer’s dodging a flurry of punches. He can plow forward into a pile of mush and then bounce outside. Or, if space materializes but not where it is supposed to, he is nimble enough to adjust and find the alley.A quintessential Ivory run, Shipp said, came in the second quarter of last week’s 34-20 victory against Washington, when Ivory darted right after receiving a toss, cut back across the formation after a hole closed up and then raced down the sideline for 54 of his 146 rushing yards.Among running backs with at least 80 carries this season, no one averages more yards per attempt than Ivory, whose 5.54 is nearly a full yard better than the closest competitor, his former teammate Chris Johnson of Arizona (4.78), according to Pro Football Reference.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Ivory, many of those yards come after contact, a product of his gift for almost immediately regaining his balance after getting hit. His forward lean when he runs —he presents the front of his shoulder pads to defenders instead of the tops — also makes it harder for them to knock him down. But Ivory sets up those opportunities with his proprioception, how his feet instinctively find space near him where he can step without landing on others.“His knees come up real high, and he’s just trying to find a place to put his foot and stabilize,” Evans said. “And then you’ll see the legs start turning over again, and he’s off.”This is what Leon Burtnett saw 10 years ago, when he watched Ivory on film. Before recruiting him to Washington State, where Ivory played three seasons before ending up at Tiffin, Burtnett visited Ivory’s East Texas hometown, Longview. The team had a prized recruit at tailback — but also Ivory, who played fullback in the triple-option offense.Focusing on his ability to cut when a hole opened, Burtnett thought Ivory was more talented than Vondrell McGee, who went to Texas. With his peripheral vision and deceptive speed, Ivory evoked a high school version of the Hall of Famer Eric Dickerson, whom Burtnett coached for five seasons with the Colts.“You don’t think he runs that fast,” Burtnett said, “and then you watch the yard markers fly by, and you say, boy, that kid’s moving.”As now, Ivory enjoyed running over people back then. After an interception, he once tackled an opposing player with such force that Longview Coach John King thought he had killed him.AdvertisementHad Ivory never lifted weights, King said, he would have looked better than 90 percent of his teammates. But Ivory focused on developing into as well-rounded a back as his body type would allow, bear-crawling around the track and up hills, and doing a series of drills King called the County Fair. No Ferris wheels or cotton candy booths here, just a rotation of five stations — shuttle runs, speed ladders, cones and the like. “He was always the most impressive,” King said.At his pro day in 2010, Ivory completed the three-cone drill, which measures a player’s change-of-pace aptitude, in 7.2 seconds, a time that would not have placed him among the top 15 running backs at that year’s N.F.L. scouting combine. That might have contributed some to his not being drafted, but it had no bearing on his evolution.In the off-season, Ivory adjusted his regimen, ditching treadmill and sand workouts in favor of track work, which was proposed by his Houston-area trainer, James Cooper. Ivory did not focus on improving in one particular area but said he did feel faster, particularly when running to and around the edge.In this, his sixth N.F.L. season, Ivory has developed a keener understanding of blocking schemes. He possesses the anticipation to know that holes will form, the patience to let them and the vision to see them before they close. Then he gets there as fast as his feet will let him.“A lot of stuff has been overlooked,” Ivory said. “It’s being noticed now.”Extra PointsThe Jets signed the veteran punter Steve Weatherford, who played for the Jets in 2009 and 2010 and most recently for the Giants, to replace Ryan Quigley, who has a shin injury.Weatherford spent the last four seasons with the Giants, winning the Super Bowl with them in 2012, before being released in training camp.It is unclear when Quigley, who had not appeared on the injury report all week until being added Saturday, sustained the injury, but he absorbed a hit when the Redskins blocked a punt in the fourth quarter last Sunday.To clear roster space for Weatherford, the Jets waived safety Jaiquawn Jarrett (knee) with an injured designation. Jarrett had been listed as doubtful.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bulldozing Ballet Dancer Keeps Defenders on Their Toes .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.