
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 24, 2015
Kevin Long had heard all about Daniel Murphy. When the Mets named Long their hitting coach last fall, he knew that Murphy was a highly intelligent hitter, but also stubborn. Long knew he would have to prove himself worthy of his new pupil’s attention. Honors students can tune out a teacher they do not respect.“When you talk to Daniel Murphy, you better make sense and you better be able to explain yourself and explain the benefits of why it will help,” Long said. “Otherwise you will lose him.”As Long spoke on Friday at Citi Field, he wore a hooded sweatshirt with the logo of the 2015 World Series. So it is safe to say he did not lose Murphy. The Mets rode Murphy’s bat — and the pinpoint command of their rotation — to their fifth National League pennant.Murphy is batting .421 in the postseason, with seven home runs and 11 runs batted in. His slugging percentage, with the sample so small but the stakes so great, is 1.026. The best single-season slugging percentage in major league history is .863, by Barry Bonds in 2001, when he hit 73 home runs.Advertisement“I wish I could explain it,” Murphy said in Chicago on the way to winning the Most Valuable Player Award for the N.L. Championship Series. “I would have done it, like, six years ago.”AdvertisementMurphy then thanked Long and his assistant, Pat Roessler, for their work in helping him. Long, on Friday, gave Murphy credit for seeking to improve the way he has.Many of the Mets’ hitters reached out to Long last off-season, and some, like David Wright and Curtis Granderson, visited him in person before spring training. But only Murphy asked Long for a detailed breakdown of his plan to make him better.Long was in Hawaii when he got Murphy’s message in January. He sent Murphy his thoughts and said he paced nervously around his uncle’s pool, unsure how Murphy would react.“He could have said, ‘Oh, God, who does this person think he is?’ ” said Long, who hit .273 in an eight-year minor league career. “And I don’t want to be that guy. But I have to do what’s best for the player.”The best thing for Murphy, Long believed, was to hit for more power. Murphy had made his first All-Star team in 2014 but finished the season with just nine home runs. He was a .290 career hitter, but it was a soft .290.What if Murphy could keep his best trait — his ability to make contact, like Robinson Cano — but do so with a different mind-set? Players around the league knew Murphy could hit, but he kept his power hidden, displaying it mainly in batting practice.“Seeing him from the other dugout, it’s obvious this guy can put the ball in play,” said Kelly Johnson, the well-traveled infielder who joined the Mets in July. “He’s a tough guy to strike out, he’s got a great eye and he was going to make solid contact.“Since I’ve been here, I’ve seen this guy in B.P. hit balls as far as anybody, as consistently as anybody. The power and pop is there and I’m thinking, This guy’s got a lot more power than people realize.”AdvertisementLong believed Murphy should harness that power by driving more with his legs, moving closer to the plate, getting his front foot down sooner and bringing his hands lower and closer to his body.Just five minutes after he shared those thoughts with Murphy, Long said, he got this reply: “Right on.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the Mets’ workout Saturday, Murphy said he had spent his career feeling as if he were late in getting to the ball. Long’s advice, especially about his front foot, made sense.“I was like, this guy’s talking my language, because he’s right,” Murphy said.But applying the changes took time. Through April 25, Murphy was hitting .145 with one homer. From that point on, he hit .300 with 13 homers. The home run output was rather ordinary, but from Aug. 1 through the end of the regular season, Murphy’s slugging percentage was .533.“He always says: ‘I’m not hunting hits anymore. I’m hunting to do damage,’ ” Long said. “And there’s a big difference.”Before the postseason, Murphy’s most significant improvement came in his existing area of strength. He struck out only 38 times in 499 at-bats, a major league-best 13.1 at-bats for every strikeout. Felix Millan was the last Met to lead the majors in that category, in 1975. He played every game and hit one home run.Murphy did it with respectable regular-season power that preceded extraordinary October power. His surge is the payoff for believing in Long’s suggestions.“I always tell guys you’ve got to go backward before you go forward,” Long said. “That’s why you have to trust what you’re doing and kind of sell it. If you stick to it, it will turn, because you see it in B.P.”AdvertisementOften, Long said, Murphy will take his practice in the indoor batting cage instead of on the field, the way Jason Giambi did with the Yankees. The fear is that hitting on the field, with the fences so inviting, can lead to a bigger, loopier swing. Inside, Murphy can work on smaller, more precise adjustments. Few spend as much time in the cage as Murphy, or seem to enjoy it as much.In Chicago, Manager Terry Collins spoke of the first time he met Murphy, when Collins was the Mets’ minor league field coordinator in 2010. Murphy missed the season with a knee injury, but Collins would find him in Port St. Lucie, Fla., watching a rookie-league game in the morning and a Class A game at night.“There are people in our game who do this because this is what they can do best, and if they could do something else, they might — because of the pressures, and the time, and the effort, and being banged up,” Collins said. “Dan Murphy is a baseball player.”From a baseball lifer like Collins or Long, there is no higher compliment. For a baseball player like Murphy, there is no higher stratosphere than the one he is reaching now.Seth Berkman contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: How Mets Coach Brought Out Murphy’s Power.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »