By BENJAMIN HOFFMANOCT. 24, 2015
AtlanticThe Toronto Raptors enter the season with their hopes resting on whether Kyle Lowry and Jonas Valanciunas are great players or merely good ones. Lowry was an All-Star last season, and Valanciunas was dominant at times, but the team ran out of gas. The additions of DeMarre Carroll and Cory Joseph were offset by the departures of Greivis Vasquez and Amir Johnson, increasing the pressure on Lowry and Valanciunas.Johnson is now with the Boston Celtics, who also added David Lee. Combined into one player, they would make a perfect forward, but since Johnson and Lee inhabit two bodies, the Boston frontcourt is a bit crowded. Brad Stevens is a great coach, and Isaiah Thomas is pure, concentrated offense, but the team’s ceiling for playoff success seems low.The Knicks’ teardown has given way to rebuilding, and the team is definitely more likable. Robin Lopez was an inspiring addition, and a draft that landed Kristaps Porzingis and Jerian Grant resulted in a foreign concept: optimism.The rebuilding Nets will complement Brook Lopez and Joe Johnson with Thaddeus Young and a group of young players with something to prove. The Philadelphia 76ers continued their pursuit of every highly ranked big man that colleges can produce by drafting Duke’s Jahlil Okafor to play alongside Nerlens Noel. If Joel Embiid ever plays, they may have to invent a three-center offense.AdvertisementCentralLeBron James asked for patience while he rebuilt the Cleveland Cavaliers into a title contender. If not for injuries to Kevin Love and Kyrie Irving, the franchise might have won a championship in James’s first year back. Love re-signed, and the injured Irving is expected back long before the playoffs, so a lack of flashy signings, and a seemingly ill-advised contract for Tristan Thompson, may not slow their pursuit of a title.Greg Monroe was brought in to anchor a low-post offense for the Milwaukee Bucks, but the return of Jabari Parker from injury could be even more important. Coach Jason Kidd seems to have a knack for getting defense from unexpected players, and while the Bucks do not have Cleveland’s flash, they should be fun to watch.The Chicago Bulls unceremoniously dumped Tom Thibodeau as coach. Fans expecting Fred Hoiberg to recreate Steve Kerr’s success at Golden State may want to consult Derrick Rose’s injury history.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Indiana Pacers have abandoned Coach Frank Vogel’s style of play, jettisoned Roy Hibbert and told Paul George, their most important player, that, whether he likes it or not, he is a power forward. It could be a long season. But not as long as the one the Detroit Pistons can expect. Choosing Stanley Johnson over Justise Winslow in the draft is not exactly choosing Darko Milicic over Carmelo Anthony, but it could haunt them.SoutheastThe Miami Heat went through an adjustment period without LeBron James, and losing Chris Bosh for much of the season did not help, but Goran Dragic should pay dividends this season, and Justise Winslow was a tremendous addition through the draft. In many ways, this team seems more complete than the teams James played on.It is hard to know what to make of the Atlanta Hawks. Year 2 of the Mike Budenholzer era was a resounding success, but his team-over-individuals approach did not thrive in the playoffs. The Hawks’ biggest concerns are a full-strength Miami and DeMarre Carroll’s departure for Toronto.AdvertisementIn a strong off-season, the Charlotte Hornets added Nicolas Batum and got rid of Lance Stephenson. If Cody Zeller leaps to the next level and Frank Kaminsky adjusts well to the N.B.A., the Hornets could be ready for the playoffs, especially if Al Jefferson remains healthy and Jeremy Lin reawakens his career.John Wall may take things to the next level for the Washington Wizards, and Bradley Beal is a strong second option, but the team may take a step back without the veteran leadership of Paul Pierce.The Orlando Magic will very likely scrape the bottom of the barrel in the standings, but Mario Hezonja will be among the league’s most quotable players, so at least they will be entertaining.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Eastern Conference.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.