By BENJAMIN HOFFMANOCT. 24, 2015
NorthwestEvery N.B.A. team will be trying to figure out if it can add Kevin Durant as a free agent next season, but the Oklahoma City Thunder get him this season. The mood in the locker room will be closely watched, with Russell Westbrook having grown accustomed to alpha-dog status, but the team is overflowing with talent. Enes Kanter has been mocked for his defensive shortcomings, but if Serge Ibaka and Durant can lock down that end of the court, Kanter will prove his value on offense.Rudy Gobert of the Utah Jazz is so good he has two nicknames: the French Rejection and the Stifle Tower. He and Derrick Favors anchor a strong front line, and Gordon Hayward is a force, but losing Dante Exum to injury will hurt.Losing LaMarcus Aldridge and Wesley Matthews would cripple most teams, but the Portland Trail Blazers still have a talented roster, and Damian Lillard is so good that he can keep the team relevant by himself.The Denver Nuggets are not ready for prime time in terms of winning, but Emmanuel Mudiay could make them a must-watch team on N.B.A. League Pass. The same is true of the Minnesota Timberwolves, who are a year or two away from contention but may be among the league’s most entertaining rosters, with Karl-Anthony Towns, Andrew Wiggins and the high-flying Zach LaVine.AdvertisementPacificThe Golden State Warriors are so deep that they won a championship, even though Klay Thompson, probably their second-best player, had a so-so postseason. With space in the team’s rotation at a premium, not much was changed, but no changes were really necessary.The primary challenger to Golden State’s supremacy in the division is the Los Angeles Clippers, who survived a scare when DeAndre Jordan tried to defect to Dallas. In the emoji battle heard ’round the world, the Clippers retained Jordan, their defensive whiz of a center, and should be among the game’s best teams.Markieff Morris provided some off-season drama by demanding a trade after the Phoenix Suns got rid of his brother Marcus, but that has settled down, and Tyson Chandler should help a team that was already close to playoff contention.The Sacramento Kings have the game’s best big man in DeMarcus Cousins, who goes by Boogie, and they added an intriguing prospect in Willie Cauley-Stein, who wants to be called Trill. With nicknames like that, you would hardly guess that the Kings’ roster is considered among the league’s most combustible. But for a team that is often forgotten, it has at least achieved notoriety.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kobe Bryant’s retirement parade will dominate the headlines for the Los Angeles Lakers, even if no one knows whether he plans to retire. But the development of Julius Randle and D’Angelo Russell will have a lot more to do with whether or not the team is successful.SouthwestPersuade Tim Duncan not to retire? Check. Bring back Danny Green on a below-market contract? Check. Get the league’s top free-agent prize in LaMarcus Aldridge? Check. Persuade David West to join the team practically as a volunteer? Check. Enter the season as one of the two or three teams most likely to win it all for roughly the 17th consecutive season? Check. The San Antonio Spurs have some sort of front-office cheat code.AdvertisementJames Harden may have been robbed of a Most Valuable Player Award, regardless of how good Stephen Curry’s team was, but the Houston Rockets were a bit of a mirage, offering little beyond the bearded bon vivant. Dwight Howard, once a league darling, has faded, but the team could play more well-rounded basketball this season after adding Ty Lawson.Anthony Davis is on his way to being the league’s best player and may already be there. Whether the New Orleans Pelicans can provide him with suitable teammates is the only question.Every year, it seems, the Memphis Grizzlies are a team no one wants to face, but the window for success may be closing. Still, any team that can send out Marc Gasol, Zach Randolph, Tony Allen and Mike Conley will be good, and Brandan Wright could be a revelation off the bench.Mark Cuban and the Dallas Mavericks came out firmly on the moral high ground of the DeAndre Jordan debacle, but that will not help them fill the hole in the team that Jordan was supposed to fill.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Western Conference.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.