AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. PreviewBy Benjamin HoffmanIt is hard to imagine how the Golden State Warriors could have been more convincing last season. They quieted the critics of their flamboyant style of play by winning 67 games. When that was not enough to satisfy the doubters, the Warriors ended the franchise’s 40-year title drought by beating LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers in the N.B.A. finals.Four months later, Stephen Curry and his teammates are ready to begin the 2015-16 season on Tuesday, but they find themselves menaced on all sides by rebuilt challengers who think they have what it takes to rip the Larry O’Brien Championship Trophy from their hands. And the critics who said the Warriors’ reliance on defense, ball movement and long 3-pointers — emphasis on long — won’t work have changed their tune to “It worked last year, but it won’t work again.”The Warriors retained their core players from their championship season, but they have plenty of competition. The San Antonio Spurs added LaMarcus Aldridge and David West, and the Cavaliers will get back Kevin Love and Kyrie Irving (eventually). The Oklahoma City Thunder hope to have a full season of Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook, while the Miami Heat are looking revamped and strong.In the “What superstar have you added lately?” atmosphere of the N.B.A. off-season, the Warriors’ lack of changes, and the continued belief that shooting like theirs cannot be sustained, added up to just 18 percent of respondents in NBA.com’s annual poll of general managers picking the team to repeat, the third-lowest mark recorded by a defending champion in the 13 years of the survey.“Obviously, there’s been a lot of noise, teams retooling and trying to boost their lineups,” Curry told reporters at Team USA’s minicamp in August. “You have teams that haven’t set foot on the floor yet and are heavily favored to kick us off our throne.”This season will be entirely new for the Warriors. They will surprise no one, and teams have spent an off-season trying to figure out how they can be stopped. But Warriors Coach Steve Kerr, despite missing time to recover from back surgery, has been able to prepare his players to fully deploy his offense, something he said they did not do in his first season.Far from resting on his laurels, which include a Most Valuable Player Award, Curry said he thought he and the Warriors could still improve by embracing Kerr’s plan.“He always was telling us that second, third year is when you really take off,” Curry told reporters at the team’s media day last month. “So if we did what we did last year and we’re still learning about the system and how we’re going to go out and play it, I like our chances going into this year, too.”Advertisement