By BRETT MICHAEL DYKESOCT. 22, 2015
Here’s a look at the best games of N.F.L. Week 7, and who we think will win them.Jets (4-1) at Patriots (5-0)1 p.m. Eastern. Line: Patriots by 9After two straight road victories, the Patriots return home to Foxborough for a battle for first place in the A.F.C. East with an all-too-familiar foe: the Jets. On paper, this promises to be a matchup not unlike so many of the Patriots-Jets games in recent years, centered on a stingy, rugged Jets defense taking on a high-flying Patriots offense. Entering this game, the Patriots’ offense ranks as the N.F.L.’s highest-scoring unit, averaging 36.6 points per game. The Jets’ defense ranks as the league’s best, giving up an average of only 15 points. Something, as they say, has to give. As always, it should be a blast to watch.The matchup also features an interesting side story: Patriots quarterback Tom Brady squaring off against Jets cornerback Darrelle Revis. Revis played against Brady many times as a member of Rex Ryan’s Jets squads, but he also helped Brady and the Patriots win a Super Bowl last season. The two stars now find themselves back in more familiar roles.While the Patriots and the Jets have given us all some memorable nail-biters, the rivalry has been lopsided in the Brady/Bill Belichick era. Brady is 20-5 against the Jets as a starter in the regular season, 10-2 against them at home.AdvertisementThe game will be a homecoming of sorts for the former Patriots running back Stevan Ridley, who practiced for the first time this week after sustaining a knee injury last season. His return to health should only strengthen a Jets backfield that leads the league with 146 rushing yards per game. If the Jets can control the ball against New England, which has at times had problems stopping the run, they have a shot to spoil their rivals’ bid for another perfect regular season.AdvertisementPICK: PATRIOTSEagles (3-3) at Panthers (5-0)8:30 p.m. Line: Panthers by 3Four games into the 2015 season, the Eagles were 1-3 and fans were calling for Coach Chip Kelly’s head. Speculation ran wild about which college program Kelly might helm next year after receiving his walking papers in Philadelphia. But with two straight wins, including a 27-7 throttling of their division rival Giants, the Eagles sit atop the N.F.C. East. Their offense, which struggled mightily in its first four games, averaged 472 yards in its last two (it averaged only 294 in its first four).In short, the Eagles are looking like the Eagles many expected coming into this season. And they are doing it despite the poor play of quarterback Sam Bradford, who tossed three interceptions against the Giants and is second in the league in interceptions over all with nine. Bradford does not seem to have any grasp on what his problems are.“If I knew, I would stop throwing them,” Bradford said after beating the Giants. “It is something that I never really had a problem with in my career. I have never thrown a lot of interceptions, so this is kind of new to me.”Panthers quarterback Cam Newton, on the other hand, has looked like an M.V.P. contender of late, especially after leading his team to victory in Seattle last week with two late drives after trailing by 20-7. It should be noted that he is doing it with a group of receivers the average N.F.L. fan probably could not identify in a lineup, outside of maybe tight end Greg Olsen.PICK: PANTHERSCowboys (2-3) at Giants (3-3)4:25 p.m. Line: Giants by 4Rumors began swirling early in the week that Dez Bryant, the Cowboys’ star wide receiver, might miraculously return to the field this week after sustaining a broken foot in Week 2. The source of those rumors? None other than the Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones.“We’ll take a real good look at him tomorrow and Thursday,” Jones said in a radio interview. “It totally depends on how he’s doing. He had a good end of the week last week. He got in some really good work. He didn’t have much negative response from that work. It was strenuous work, the kind that if he can step out here and have a couple of really good days of practice then you could see him go.”The reality is that it is unlikely Bryant will be anywhere near ready to play Sunday, giving him more time to spend with the pet monkey he has adopted, which he named Dallas Bryant.AdvertisementPICK: GIANTSSaints (2-4) at Colts (3-3)1 p.m. Line: Colts by 4.5As if a 2-4 start weren’t bad enough, the Saints were personally touched by the troublesome crime wave that has made headlines in New Orleans, and nationally, of late — masked bandits have been robbing employees and patrons of restaurants and bars at gunpoint, and a wealthy French Quarter resident established a private police force to patrol the streets — when Joe Vitt, the team’s linebackers coach, tore an Achilles’ tendon and broke a wrist fending off car thieves.“Joe Vitt is on the injury report,” Saints Coach Sean Payton told the news media. “He’s on a little scooter. You’ll see him out there.”On the bright side for New Orleans, the team is coming off its most impressive outing of the season — a 31-21 victory against Atlanta — and the Colts are probably still trying to shake off the humiliation of the worst fake punt of all time.PICK: SAINTSBills (3-3) at Jaguars (1-5)9:30 a.m. (London) Line: Bills by 5.5In Comedy Central’s “Review,” the show’s protagonist, Forrest MacNeil, reviews, well, life. Each episode sees MacNeil reviewing real-life experiences, big and small, and rating them on a scale of zero to five stars. The reviews run the gamut from seemingly innocent things like engaging in a pillow fight or eating an absurd number of pancakes, to more disturbing things like divorcing or being buried alive. The results are usually hilarious, and sometimes tragic, though often still darkly funny.It might be interesting to see MacNeil review what it’s like to be an N.F.L. fan who attends the games played in London. It must be a forlorn experience. The teams dispatched to play there seem to be consistently unremarkable, the games almost always double as cures for insomnia and they typically do not mean much in the N.F.L.’s grand scheme of things.This week does not get much better. Are you ready for a sizzling Blake Bortles vs. E.J. Manuel quarterback matchup, Londoners? It’s hard to imagine Forrest giving this game more than half a star.PICK: BILLSSteelers (4-2) at Chiefs (1-5)1 p.m. Line: Steelers by 2Conventional wisdom would very likely hold that the Steelers’ success or failure in this game hinges on whether Ben Roethlisberger will be able to play now that Michael Vick is out with a hamstring injury. But the Steelers’ defense and running game seem capable of keeping the team in any game, so if the third-string quarterback Landry Jones winds up under center, you might want to think twice before betting against Pittsburgh. It does indeed look as if Jones will be the starter in Kansas City, even though Roethlisberger practiced during the week.
      Highlights from around the league.
    Jones looked good in relief of Vick last week, completing 8 of 12 passes for 168 yards and two touchdowns in a win over the Cardinals. And according to some of his teammates, he may be in a better position to succeed than Vick was when he took over.Advertisement“Landry kind of plays a lot like Ben with check downs and things like that, so he kind of knows where I’m at at times,” running back Le’Veon Bell said. “Obviously it was a little different with Vick because he didn’t always know where the check down was and he’s kind of new to the offense.”On the other side, the 2015 Chiefs seem to be even more of a lost cause without running back Jamaal Charles, who is out for the year with a knee injury. The team was held to season lows in rushing yards and points in a loss to the Vikings last week.PICK: STEELERSTexans (2-4) at Dolphins (2-3)1 p.m. Line: Dolphins by 4When they fired Joe Philbin and promoted Dan Campbell, the Dolphins went from being the N.F.L. team with a coach who most resembled a mathematician to being the team with a coach who most resembles an active player. Jacked and intense, Campbell appears to have given the team — which many thought was too wired like the mild-mannered Philbin — an immediate energy jolt, as the Dolphins routed the Titans, 38-10, on the road in their first game under the new coach. It’s now up to Campbell to keep the fire under his team lit.“The challenge now is for these guys to not start patting themselves on the back,” Campbell said. “We’ve been notorious for that around here. We get a big win, and then a lull the next week.”Brian Hoyer appears to have won the starting quarterback job in Houston after completing 24 of 36 passes for 293 yards and no interceptions in relief of Ryan Mallett last week, helping the Texans snap a three-game losing streak.PICK: DOLPHINSBrowns (2-4) at Rams (2-3)1 p.m. Line: Rams by 4In a game that pits two of the best teams in the league with losing records against each other, this looks on paper to be a quite favorable matchup for the Rams and running back Todd Gurley, who ran for 146 and 159 yards in his last two games, since the Browns currently have the N.F.L.’s worst run defense.The last three games Cleveland has played have been decided by a field goal, but this one could get ugly if the Browns do not find a way to prevent Gurley, who is looking increasingly like the back he was in college, from running wild.PICK: RAMS
                These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.            Vikings (3-2) at Lions (1-5)1 p.m. Line: Vikings by 2It took a minor miracle from the football gods by way of increasingly confusing N.F.L. rules about what constitutes a touchdown catch and what doesn’t, but the Lions finally got a win last week. Along the way, Detroit’s offense resembled the explosive unit fans have come to know in recent years, racking up 37 points and 546 yards against the Bears. It will be hard to duplicate that performance this week, however, as the Vikings have the league’s second best scoring defense, giving up an average of 16.6 points.AdvertisementThe two teams met earlier this season, a 26-16 Vikings win in which Adrian Peterson rushed for 134 yards. He has rushed for a shade under 1,400 yards in 13 games against Detroit in his career.PICK: VIKINGSFalcons (5-1) at Titans (1-4)1 p.m. Line: Falcons by 4.5Titans quarterback Marcus Mariota is hopeful he will be able to play after sustaining a sprained ligament in his left knee after taking a low hit against the Dolphins last week. But his mobility may be somewhat limited if he does play.“My knee has felt better every day,” Mariota said. “We’ll see how it goes, and hopefully I’ll be ready Sunday. I’m preparing this week like I’m going to play.”PICK: FALCONSBuccaneers (2-3) at Redskins (2-4)1 p.m. Line: Redskins by 3.5It will be interesting to see how the Redskins’ banged-up secondary will fare against the Buccaneers’ two towering wide receivers, Mike Evans and Vincent Jackson, who both stand 6 feet 5 inches. Redskins cornerback Bashaud Breeland forced two fumbles and intercepted a pass last week against the Jets, earning some praise from Coach Jay Gruden.“He’s good,” Gruden said after the game. “He’s a tough guy, a competitor, has some injuries he’s dealing with, fought through them, made a good strip and then obviously his interception.”PICK: REDSKINSGet the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Raiders (2-3) at Chargers (2-4)4:05 p.m. Line: Chargers by 4Perhaps more interesting than anything that will happen on the field this week will be what happens off the field in coming weeks with executives from these division rivals discussing the possibility of moving to Los Angeles. The ownership groups have proposed jointly building a $1.7 billion stadium in a Los Angeles suburb if new stadiums cannot be built in Oakland and San Diego.If the teams end up sharing a stadium, one of them is likely to wind up having to leave the A.F.C. West, putting an end to one of the N.F.L.’s best divisional rivalries.PICK: CHARGERSRavens (1-5) at Cardinals (4-2)8:30 p.m. (Monday) Line: Cardinals by 7.5Of the four 1-5 teams, none are more shocking than the Ravens, who appear to be a lock to miss the postseason for only the second time in eight seasons under John Harbaugh. Of little comfort to Baltimore fans is that all of the team’s games thus far have been close, winnable ones. Still, Harbaugh is not making any excuses.Advertisement“It’s disappointing to lose these close games the way we’re losing them,” Harbaugh said after last week’s loss to the 49ers. “The bottom line is we’re not good enough to win them right now.”One of the few bright spots for the Ravens in 2015 has been the play of wide receiver Steve Smith, who continues to put up great numbers. With Smith set to retire at the end of the season, some are calling on the Ravens to try to trade him to a title contender. One of them is Smith’s former team, the Carolina Panthers. Unfortunately, the two sides have not gotten along well since they split, so that’s probably an unlikely move.On the other side, the Cardinals appear firmly in control of the N.F.C. West and are 15-4 at home under Coach Bruce Arians. Quarterback Carson Palmer is having one of his best seasons — he threw for 400 yards in a game for the eighth time in his career in a loss to Pittsburgh last week. Look for them to get back on track in this one if they can get their running game, which was held to under 100 yards for the first time this season against Pittsburgh, going again this week.PICK: CARDINALSA version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Improved Team Faces Unbeaten One.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.