

      By ANDREW DAS

OCT. 26, 2015

Five candidates are on the ballot this week for the election to replace Sepp Blatter as FIFA president. The field of hopefuls includes Middle Eastern royalty, businessmen, veteran soccer administrators and at least one former political prisoner. What it does not include is clarity about who will actually win the vote at the special FIFA Congress on Friday in Zurich.
Who Is He? President of the Asian Football Confederation and one of FIFA’s eight vice presidents.Why He Can Win: A power broker with money, experience and – potentially – the support of Asia’s 46 votes, Sheikh Salman, 49, signaled that he believes he can win merely by entering the race. At the moment he is one of the two front-runners, and he is counting on support from Asia and Africa to propel him to victory.Why He Can’t Win: Sheikh Salman led the task force that navigated the move of the 2022 World Cup from summer to winter. That decision remains wildly unpopular in Europe, where top leagues now face disruptions to their league seasons and, more important, to their television contracts over several years before and after 2022. His family ties – he is a member of the family that rules Bahrain, sometimes ruthlessly – also could be a big problem. Tainted by Corruption? Not in FIFA. But human rights organizations have recoiled Sheikh Salman’s candidacy, charging that he and his family were responsible for the torture and imprisonment of pro-democracy protesters – including several soccer stars – during a violent crackdown on antigoverment demonstrations in 2011. Sheikh Salman continues to deny the accusations, telling the BBC that they were ”nasty lies.” Who Is He? Infantino is the general secretary of UEFA, European soccer’s governing body, whose executive committee unanimously put him forward as a candidate.Who Is He? President of Jordan’s soccer association.Why He Can Win:  A member of Jordan’s ruling family, Prince Ali, 39, mounted a surprisingly strong challenge to Sepp Blatter in the last presidential election, in May 2015, winning 73 votes on the first ballot before he bowed out. His campaign pressed for major reforms to FIFA’s governance, term limits for senior officials and the public disclosure of executive salaries. (Given that many in FIFA vehemently opposed every one of those things, 73 votes looks like a major achievement in hindsight.) He continues to push for a laundry list of reforms – less centralized decision-making, increases in development funds, more attention to women’s soccer – and he could appeal to the many smaller federations outside soccer’s traditional power base.Why He Can’t Win: Europe and Asia – which supported him against Blatter – now appear to be lining up behind Infantino and Sheikh Salman. That makes for difficult math for Prince Ali.Tainted by Corruption? No. But in September he said, “I do believe that anything that has happened within FIFA was known within the leadership of FIFA,” perhaps forgetting that he recently served four years on the executive committee.Who Is He? Leads FIFA’s antiracism task force as well as a monitoring committee trying to broker peace between the Israel and Palestine soccer associations. Why He Can Win: Sexwale, 62, has an appealing back story: He was jailed on Robben Island as a political prisoner for more than a decade alongside Nelson Mandela, and then made a fortune in mining and energy after his release. Africa has 54 votes in the FIFA election, the most of any confederation, and if those countries united behind him he would be halfway to victory right out of the starting gate. In a visit to New York in early November, he outlined a campaign focused on investments in women’s soccer and – in a dog whistle to voters in smaller, poorer nations – the developing world. “Football is not about the green pitch,” he said. “It’s about the brown pitch.”Why He Can’t Win: Nothing is guaranteed in a FIFA election, least of all the loyalty of African voters. But Sexwale doesn’t seem to have won many of them, and the African confederation’s executive committee has announced it is backing Sheikh Salman.Tainted by Corruption? Sexwale was a member of the bid team and the organizing committee for the 2010 World Cup, the first held in Africa. South Africa, the host, still faces questions about a $10 million payment deposited in accounts controlled by Jack Warner; United States Justice Department officials have called the payment a bribe. Sexwale has labeled it ”worrisome.”Who Is He? Former FIFA official, consultant to national federations.Why He Can Win: An insider’s outsider, or is it the other way around? Whatever. A former French diplomat, Champagne, 59, spent a decade as a close aide of Blatter’s at FIFA. That helped him cultivate relationships with its various federations, particularly in the Middle East and Africa, and he is an experienced dealmaker who knows how to work in the shadows to get what he wants.Why He Can’t Win: Champagne has not gotten much traction this time around, and his campaign seems low on both money and attention. He claims support from a host of former star players – Pele, Marco Van Basten, George Weah – but commitments from voters are what he really needs.Tainted by Corruption? No. But campaign tip: Maybe avoid trumpeting all those years as a close aide to Blatter.Advertisement