By JEFF ARNOLDOCT. 2, 2015
SOUTH BEND, Ind. —  DeShone Kizer could not pinpoint how long the reality of the moment took to sink in. There was no time to think about the transition from being Notre Dame’s backup quarterback to being its full-time starter.There was no time for emotion, either. Not when Malik Zaire’s ankle broke gruesomely under the weight of a Virginia defender. Not after Zaire was carted off the field, his season over, and Kizer, who spent last season as an understudy to Zaire and Everett Golson, suddenly took over.A version of that scene has played out six times for Notre Dame this season. After losing cornerback Shaun Crawford to a torn anterior cruciate ligament and defensive tackle Jarron Jones to a torn medial collateral ligament in preseason camp, the Fighting Irish have absorbed one injury after another.Tarean Folston entered the season as the anchor of Notre Dame’s running game, only to tear the A.C.L. in his right knee in the season opener against Texas. Zaire, who took over as the starting quarterback after Golson transferred to Florida State, was lost in the second game. Tight end Durham Smythe (knee) went down in the same game, and safety Drue Tranquill tore his right A.C.L. while celebrating a pass breakup in the Irish’s win over Georgia Tech in the third game of the season.AdvertisementDespite all of that, the No. 6 Irish (4-0) have soldiered on, undeterred, heading into a showdown at No. 12 Clemson (3-0) on Saturday night. Coach Brian Kelly’s next-man-in mantra has become less of a cliché and more of a battle cry for the Irish, who plan to remain a factor in college football’s national championship picture.Advertisement“All of those had an impact in some fashion,” Kelly said this week, referring to the injuries, “but it didn’t impact the bottom line. And the bottom line was that they were going to come back the next day, and they were going to welcome that next person into the role they needed to excel in.”Kelly, in his sixth season in South Bend, talks in terms of mission on an idyllic Notre Dame campus where tradition is found in century-old buildings, archways and golden domes.Notre Dame’s mission has been handed off to Kizer and running back C. J. Prosise, who has averaged 150 rushing yards a game since taking over for Folston.Kizer has guided the Irish to wins over Virginia, Georgia Tech and Massachusetts. He has done so by embracing the responsibility of always being ready — without time to “even feel bad,” he said, for the player he replaced.“Coach Kelly, as much as he preaches next man in, preaches even more about preparation,” Kizer said, “and in order to be the next man in and be successful with what you’re doing, if you’re preparing like that before that, then the transition period doesn’t last as long, and you’re able to get into a groove and get things rolling.”Saturday’s challenge at Clemson Memorial Stadium, known as Death Valley, thrusts Kizer, Prosise and the other new starters into key roles in hostile and uncharted territory. It is a type of environment that Kizer will experience for the first time as a starter — he made last year’s trip to Florida State, another tough place to play, as Notre Dame’s third-string quarterback.At the Seminoles’ Doak Campbell Stadium, the loudest football venue Kizer has been in, “it feels like your insides are shaking,” he said.AdvertisementKelly used piped-in crowd noise and music in practice to prepare his players for what they would face Saturday night at Clemson.Overcoming the Tigers and the remainder of the schedule will be challenging. But the Irish understand that injuries cannot be an excuse for not meeting the team’s standard.That has required Zaire, Folston, Smythe and Notre Dame’s other injured starters to take on mentoring roles, ensuring there is no drop-off at the six positions most affected by injuries.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kelly credits the lost starters for embracing both that new responsibility and his “mission” mentality. If they did not, Kelly said, his job would become increasingly difficult.But because of the trust between starters and reserves, the Irish have so far remained on track for reaching the season’s final two rounds — the national semifinals and championship game — which are permanent fixtures on the Irish football schedule posted in a team meeting room at Guglielmino Athletics Complex, where the program’s seven Heisman Trophy statues and a statue of the Four Horsemen reside in the hallway.“You don’t know when your chance is going to come,” said the senior linebacker Joe Schmidt, whose first game action came in 2012 after a starter was injured but whose 2014 season ended abruptly because of a torn A.C.L. “The older guys really work with the younger guys to make sure they’re ready for their chance.”Schmidt added, “All we care about is the team, and it’s not about one guy.”A version of this article appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Depleted Irish Refuse Crutch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.