AdvertisementSupported byAustraliaBy Huw RichardsTWICKENHAM, England — Australia and New Zealand have played each other a record 179 times in international rugby, but never before have they faced off in a Rugby World Cup final. That will change Saturday, when they play for the world championship. It will also bring rugby union in line with many other sports with a British legacy. The most recent World Cup finals in rugby league, netball and cricket have also been played between these two Pacific nations, and all have been won by Australia.The Wallabies will go into Saturday’s game on a remarkable run of success in World Cup games played in the British Isles — 19 consecutive wins, including two finals, dating to 1991.The latest victory, a 29-15 defeat of Argentina Sunday in a World Cup semifinal, showed off the qualities underpinning Australia’s success. The Wallabies put a ruthless and pitiless conclusion to this tournament’s most compelling story: the rise of the Pumas to join the game’s elite.Even in defeat, the crowd recognized Argentina’s contribution with cheers, and the victorious Wallabies provided an honor guard to salute them, too. The Pumas have reached the semifinals in two of last three World Cups, and with the country getting a Super Rugby franchise next year, Argentina’s time will surely come before long.But the present belongs to Australia, which scored four tries to none, ruthlessly picking off early Argentine errors to score two tries in the first 10 minutes, then defending superbly in the second half as the Pumas desperately sought a way to get back into the contest.“In the first five minutes we were 14 points down,” Pablo Bouza, an assistant coach for Argentina, told Reuters. “It was very tough for us to come back. We tried everything but just could not score tries. Australia defended very well. We made some mistakes that put the team under pressure.”Australia’s defensive effort, with flanker Michael Hooper and No.8 David Pocock performing their usual heroics at the breakdown, was rewarded with nine minutes to go when the two veteran wingers combined for the decisive try.Australia’s Drew Mitchell ran through a succession of would-be tacklers in a huge break across the field, sucking in so many defenders that while his final pass went astray, Adam Ashley-Cooper had more than enough time to gather the ball and accelerate to the line for a score that completed his own hat trick and killed off any Argentine hopes of a comeback.The Pumas battled on, seeking a try that would have been a small reward for their efforts and that certainly would have brought the 80,000 fans to their feet. Australia, ruthlessly focused to the end, denied them even that slight consolation.Argentina was brave and at times unlucky. It lost two important players, wing Juan Imhoff and captain Agustín Creevy, to injuries before halftime and the veteran playmaking center Juan Martín Hernández shortly afterward. Lock Tomás Lavanini was sent to the sin bin for a dangerous tackle after 25 minutes, a penalty that reduced the Pumas to 14 men for 10 minutes and looked extremely harsh.Argentina constantly tried to unleash the dazzling attacks it used to crush Ireland in the quarterfinals, with flyhalf Nicolas Sánchez, center Marcelo Bosch and wing Santiago Cordero seeking space and opportunities.Yet Argentina also contributed to its own destruction, particularly in the first 10 minutes, making errors that Australia punished with surgical precision. It could hardly have started worse. Just over a minute into the game, Australian lock Rob Simmons intercepted a pass from Sánchez and loped 40 meters to the line for a try. The Pumas could not say they had not been warned — earlier in the same frantic passage of play, Mitchell had come desperately close to an interception. Flyhalf Bernard Foley added the conversion, and Australia was up seven points within the first two minutes.Another Argentine error gave Australia its second try in the ninth minute. Cordero took a catch under pressure, but then there was a knock-on as he tried to counterattack, giving the Australians a scrum little more than 20 meters out.They struck like lightning from the set piece, with Foley sending Ashley-Cooper into wide open space on the right. With his defender sucked infield, Ashley-Cooper charged over in the corner, and Foley converted.Argentina responded to the first two tries with a Sánchez penalty but then conceded a third try while reduced to 14 men by the sin-binning of Lavanini.Australia is not a team to waste an edge in numbers, and it patiently tested an increasingly frantic Argentinian defense until an overlap developed on the left. Center Matt Giteau’s long pass sent Ashley-Cooper in for his second try in the 31st minute.And where Australia took its chances, Argentina’s attacks fell just short. Bosch was twice denied by a desperate last-gasp Wallaby defense. That Argentina trailed only by 19-9 at the break was an achievement in itself, but it left the Pumas too much to do against a team as organized as Australia.Two penalties by Sánchez cut Australia’s lead to seven, but for all of Argentina’s possession and enterprising players, it never seemed likely that it would get any closer. Then came Mitchell and Ashley-Cooper, and the game was up for the Pumas. They are underdogs and upstarts no longer, but, as Creevy admitted with striking honesty after last week’s victory over Ireland, they still have a little way to go before they can match the very best in international rugby.Advertisement