AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro FootballBy Harvey AratonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Just outside the Dallas Cowboys’ locker room, Jerry Jones was truly blue, from his conservative sport coat to his dotted tie, to his lighter shirt and darker mood. “The task is daunting,” said Jones, the Cowboys’ owner, after his team made a bagful of regretful second-half plays that made 27-20 winners of the Giants on Sunday at MetLife Stadium.A water bottle dangled from his left hand. A frown creased his craggy face when the subject turned to Dwayne Harris and his decisive 100-yard kickoff return 13 seconds after Dallas had tied the score in the fourth quarter.Harris, a former Cowboy, said he had signed with the Giants when they promised him time at wide receiver that he couldn’t get with Dallas. This was probably not a good sign for Jones from an authority much higher than Roger Goodell, the N.F.L. commissioner, perhaps evidence of a divine plot against America’s Team and Jones personally.He is 73, hasn’t won a Super Bowl since the 1995 season and may not even make the playoffs this season unless quarterback Tony Romo returns from his latest injury, a broken collarbone, before too much won-lost damage is done in the N.F.C. East.Where, granted, that might not soon be possible, given the quality of the opposition, the Giants most assuredly included.“Last year with Carolina, they got in; they got their spot,” Jones said, making a positive example of the Panthers, divisional winners with a record that was one victory south of .500. “We’ve got to think like that.”What else to think after the Cowboys dominated the Giants in first downs converted, 27-13, and total yards gained, 460-289, and wound up wondering if the law of averages had caught up to them for the gift they were handed by Eli Manning and Company in the season opener at Jones’s McMansion of a football stadium in Arlington, Tex.?Romo was upright and healthy then, throwing to the mercurial Dez Bryant and old reliable, Jason Witten, and the Cowboys’ abundance of line talent on both sides of ball clearly made them the class of the division. Then Romo went down, Bryant went out with an injured foot and the division devolved into a weekly reality series — survivor of the fittest, or lamest.“Hoped we would get some help today with the Redskins, but we didn’t,” Jones said, referring to Washington’s pulling out a 31-30 victory over Tampa Bay. That left the Cowboys at 2-4, in last place, heading home to play Seattle next week, with games against Philadelphia and Carolina before Romo’s projected return after Thanksgiving.Desperate for a lift at the position, the Cowboys started Matt Cassel at quarterback, hoping the onetime intern to the icon Tom Brady in New England could, at 33, remember how he rode the Patriots to 11 victories after Brady’s injury in 2008 and two years later took Kansas City to the playoffs.How good a story would it be, Jones figured, when he learned that Cassel, whose father was from Lubbock, Tex., had grown up a Cowboys fan in California and once dressed as Troy Aikman in a No. 8 jersey for Halloween?Upon his acquisition by the Cowboys after Romo’s injury, Cassel said he had always wanted to play for Dallas. Sunday was his first start, his chance to begin building a bridge to Romo. He ruined it with three second-half interceptions, the first which Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie returned 58 yards down the sideline for a touchdown.The second pick, by Brandon Meriweather, was on a long pass down at the goal line that wobbled as if it had come from a kid whose hand wasn’t big enough to grip the ball. The third, again by Rodgers-Cromartie, aborted another Dallas drive on a first-down play at the Giants’ 34-yard line.“That’s on my shoulders,” Cassel said. “You’d love to have some of those plays taken back and see what happens.”He had his better moments — more, in fact, than Manning — and a gorgeous throw to Devin Street for 25 yards, both feet inches from the end zone sideline, tied the game at 20-20 with 7 minutes 14 seconds left. Harris took the ensuing kickoff 100 yards, the Giants’ defense turned the Cowboys over on downs at the Giants’ 30, and the Cowboys’ last chance evaporated with a muffed punt.They resisted the temptation to totally blame Romo’s disability for their standing. On Jones’s team, there is also the element of disharmony to consider. This time it was a fourth-quarter sideline argument between Greg Hardy, the defensive end recently back from a four-game suspension related to domestic violence, and the injured Bryant, who for reasons understood only by him charged at Hardy and then chased after him when Hardy walked away.Jason Garrett, perennially beleaguered in his fragile position as the Cowboys’ coach, wrote off that extracurricular activity by explaining to reporters that football is a game of passion. Given the circumstances of their plight, Cowboys will be Cowboys.Don’t count them out just yet because, if for no other reason, they have only one more defeat than the Giants, whose collective health and future are no more secure or predictable than those of the Cowboys. Giants Coach Tom Coughlin called his team “gritty and scrappy” after its fourth victory in five games, though it came six days after a horrible showing in Philadelphia. Whatever the outcome, this figures to be a wicked and weird reality show ride, the divisional narrative subject to weekly rewrite. Jones said he was deflated by the defeat but hopeful about next week. Then he rode away on a cart they use to transport the infirm.Advertisement