By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 25, 2015
For the first time in five years, the World Series is guaranteed to reward fans who have waited a generation to celebrate.The Kansas City Royals have not won a championship since 1985, the Mets since 1986. The last matchup of such historically drought-stricken rivals was in 2010, when the San Francisco Giants beat the Texas Rangers. Neither had ever won a World Series in its current city.Since then, of course, the Giants have won twice more, and the St. Louis Cardinals and the Boston Red Sox have stepped back to the podium after just a few years away. The Royals came tantalizingly close last fall.Their loss to the Giants in Game 7, with the tying run at third base in the bottom of the ninth inning, became an instantly indelible moment in baseball history. If Salvador Perez had hit a home run against Madison Bumgarner, as he had done in the opener, the Royals would have won it all. Instead, he popped out to end the season.Advertisement“I got too excited,” Perez said this spring. “That’s why I swung at a lot of pitches up. But now I got experience. I know what happened. Maybe next time I’ll be more patient.”The Royals were convinced there would, in fact, be a next time. They fought all season to make it happen, and did it in a way that exemplified their style of play. In Game 6 of the American League Championship Series against Toronto on Friday, Lorenzo Cain scored the winning run by running from first to home on a single. Then Wade Davis struck out two hitters with the tying run at third before winning the pennant by inducing a ground ball to third.Speed, dominant relief pitching and defense — that was the formula that nearly produced a title the last time, and now the Royals try again.Some of the pitchers are new, like Johnny Cueto, Edinson Volquez and Chris Young, but the rotation is still unpredictable and the bullpen, with Davis closing instead of the injured Greg Holland, is still stingy.The lineup has the same core — Cain, Perez, Alcides Escobar, Alex Gordon, Eric Hosmer, Mike Moustakas — but is even better now, with Kendrys Morales, Alex Rios and Ben Zobrist replacing Billy Butler, Nori Aoki and Omar Infante.AdvertisementMost vexing for the Mets, perhaps, is that the Royals’ hitters have retained their essential character: They hit fastballs well and put the ball in play better than any other team. The Mets are coming off a National League Championship Series sweep of the Chicago Cubs, whose hitters led the major leagues in strikeouts. The Royals’ hitters had the fewest.The Mets believe their young starters have enough weapons to execute any type of plan. They pounded the Los Angeles Dodgers with fastballs in the first round and used more of a mix to confuse and subdue the young Cubs. If the Royals have a weakness to exploit, the Mets’ pitchers just might be able to successfully attack it because of their uncanny command.“It allows you to game-plan against a team and their strength and weaknesses,” said Michael Cuddyer, the veteran Mets outfielder. “You don’t have to go out and just say, ‘I’ve got strengths; I’m going to stick to those.’ You can dictate what you want to do based on what their offense is doing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If their offense struggles with changeups, our guys can throw the changeup for strikes. If their offense struggles with sliders, our guys can command the slider for strikes — and they can command the fastball in all parts of the zone. That’s what’s impressive about these guys.”Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Noah Syndergaard and Steven Matz have combined to go 6-2 with a 2.60 E.R.A. in the postseason, with 71 strikeouts across 551/3 innings. They were brought along carefully during the regular season, not only for their long-term health, but so they would be strong in October.“That was our whole thought, yes,” the pitching coach, Dan Warthen, said after the N.L.C.S. clincher in Chicago. “We talked about it Feb. 15, and now we’re where we want to be, and we have four more wins we have to get. It’s very gratifying.”If the Mets find a way to overpower the Royals, there may be no stopping them. But if the Royals make contact at their usual rate, they could take advantage of the Mets’ weaker defenders, like second baseman Daniel Murphy and shortstop Wilmer Flores.Murphy, of course, has made up for any possible fielding deficiencies with otherworldly offense this postseason. The five-day layoff between the N.L.C.S. and the World Series would seem to be reason for concern, but the Mets have tried to spin it positively.“I think the rest is huge for Dan,” Manager Terry Collins said. “He plays so hard every night. We all know his legs have been an issue the last few years, and now he’s rested.”AdvertisementThe Mets will need Murphy to stay hot — and hope that Yoenis Cespedes’s sore left shoulder has healed — to keep their quick-strike offense humming. They scored in the first inning in all of their games against the Cubs and cannot afford to fall behind now, given the Royals’ bullpen.Then again, while the Mets’ middle relief can be shaky, the Royals cannot be eager to face closer Jeurys Familia. Like the Royals’ Davis, Familia has not allowed a run this postseason.It should be a fascinating matchup, made more compelling by the hardships the franchises have endured since their last shining moments.Whichever team wins will surely relate to the words of a joyous David Wright after the Mets clinched the pennant.“Having gone through everything this organization’s gone through, now getting a chance to experience this,” he said, “I wouldn’t trade it for the world.”A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Royals vs. Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »