AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressManchester United and Manchester City played out a 0-0 draw in the Premier League on Sunday, while Tottenham Hotspur surged to a 5-1 victory at Bournemouth.Also, Jürgen Klopp was denied his first victory as Liverpool’s manager when Sadio Mane scored a late goal to earn Southampton a 1-1 draw at Anfield.At Old Trafford, United was closest to scoring against City when the substitute Jesse Lingard headed a high ball from Anthony Martial onto the crossbar.The point moved City back to the top of the Premier League standings. Both City and Arsenal have 22 points, but City has a larger goal difference. United remains in fourth, with 20 points.Also, Sunderland moved out of last place with its first win of the season, a 3-0 victory against its visiting rival, Newcastle. Sunderland’s win moved Aston Villa into last place on the day that it fired Manager Tim Sherwood.CITY F.C. LOSES LAST GAME Charlie Davies had a goal and an assist as the New England Revolution clinched a playoff spot with a 3-1 victory at New York City F.C.New England broke a four-game winless streak and will travel to face D.C. United in the M.L.S. playoffs Wednesday or Thursday. N.Y.C.F.C. ended its inaugural season with a three-game losing streak.N.Y.C.F.C.’s goal came on a penalty kick by David Villa in the first minute of second-half stoppage time.DORTMUND CRUSHES AUGSBURG Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang scored a hat trick and Shinji Kagawa had three assists as Borussia Dortmund routed visiting Augsburg, 5-1, in the Bundesliga. Dortmund stayed seven points behind leader Bayern Munich, which has a perfect record.Borussia Mönchengladbach defeated visiting Schalke, 3-1, in the late game.HAT TRICK FOR SUáREZ Luis Suárez scored a hat trick as Barcelona came from behind to defeat Eibar, 3-1, at Camp Nou, joining Real Madrid atop the Spanish league standings. Barcelona and Real Madrid have 21 points each after nine rounds, but Madrid remained ahead on goal difference.Atlético Madrid moved into third place by beating Valencia, 2-1, at Vicente Calderón Stadium.ROMA MOVES INTO FIRST Roma won at Fiorentina, 2-1, to move 2 points ahead of its opponent at the top of Serie A.Napoli won, 1-0, at Chievo Verona to move into second place, above Fiorentina, Inter Milan and Lazio on goal difference. Earlier, host Juventus beat Atalanta, 2-0, while A.C. Milan edged visiting Sassuolo, 2-1, as the Rossoneri’s Gianluigi Donnarumma became the youngest goalkeeper to start a Serie A match, at 16 years and 8 months old.P.S.G. DOMINATES Paris St.-Germain’s strikers enjoyed a prolific evening and left back Laywin Kurzawa scored his first goal with P.S.G. in a 4-1 win over St.-Etienne in Paris.Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Edinson Cavani and Lucas Moura scored P.S.G.’s other goals, helping their team to a seven-point lead over Angers at the top of the standings after 11 weeks.Advertisement