
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
OCT. 25, 2015
FOXBOROUGH, Mass. — In his first season as coach of the Jets, Todd Bowles continually suggests an intriguing philosophical question about survival in the N.F.L.: When does just another game became more than just another game?Answer: in Foxborough, against the defending champions.The Jets failed an important midterm exam Sunday, becoming the undefeated Patriots’ sixth victim with a 30-23 loss.Sticking to the “another day, another game” line he frequently invokes, Bowles said he was frustrated by Sunday’s loss, but not because his team lost to New England.“It’s frustrating because we lost,” Bowles said. “Nobody wants to lose, especially us.”At one level, all games are indeed created equal, even those between these two organizations, which have faced off against each other since they were members of the American Football League in the 1960s.AdvertisementWinning or losing your first game against the Patriots in the Bill Belichick era really does not carry deeper long-term implications for whoever coaches the Jets.AdvertisementIn 2000, Belichick’s first season in New England, Al Groh, in his only season as coach of the Jets, won his first game against Belichick. The Jets finished 9-7. Herm Edwards, who replaced Groh, won his first game against Belichick. The Jets finished 10-6. Eric Mangini, who replaced Edwards, lost his first meeting against Belichick. The Jets finished 10-6. Rex Ryan, who replaced Mangini, defeated Belichick in his first meeting. The team finished 9-7.Each Jets coach wound up being fired. None ever reached the Super Bowl.Now Bowles has lost his first game against Belichick and the Patriots.“It’s one game, we’re 4-2, we’ve got to get ready for Oakland next week,” Bowles said. “We can’t hang our hat on it too much.”In some ways, it was as if two games were being played Sunday.While the Jets are simply trying to instill a winning attitude, the Patriots, and Tom Brady in particular, seem to be playing on another level.In the protective bubble known as Patriots Nation, Brady can do no wrong and has done no wrong. The chants of “Brady, Brady” during the game (and the “Free Brady” T-shirts during the summer, after the N.F.L. announced its plan to suspend him for his supposed role in the football tampering scandal popularly known as Deflategate) suggest that the Patriots and their fans are motivated by more than just the prospect of victory. Revenge and retribution are equally powerful factors that are probably in play.Still, as usual in the N.F.L., the outcome of a game turns on a handful of plays. On Sunday, each team ran about 70 of them. But two stand out.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick hit Chris Ivory for a touchdown that gave the Jets a 17-16 lead late in the third quarter and the defense did its part by forcing the Patriots to punt, the Jets drove to the Patriots’ 12-yard line. But on a third-and-7 with just under 13 minutes to play, Brandon Marshall failed to come up with a well-placed pass that would have padded the Jets’ slim lead with a touchdown. Tough catch, for sure, but no tougher than at least two of the catches the high-flying Danny Amendola made for the Patriots. The Jets settled for a field goal and a 20-16 lead.AdvertisementEleven plays after Marshall’s drop came the other decisive play: Brady hit Amendola for an 8-yard touchdown pass that put the Patriots up for good, 23-20.“If I make that play, it puts our team in better position; we go up by 8 points,” Marshall said later. “You have to make those plays in games like this. It’s all on me.”Marshall said that he would be thinking about the play all week, but that the missed opportunity was going to be “my fuel to get better.”Marshall made what seemed at the time like a potentially game-saving play when he recovered an onside kick with 14 seconds left. But with one second left, he was called for a false start at the New England 37, ending the Jets’ hopes for a final play.After the game, Marshall said he should have done a better job of determining whether he was supposed to be on or off the line of scrimmage.“That’s on me,” he said.Two plays.For those of us who have trekked to Foxborough to record the Jets’ many attempts at freeing themselves from the Patriots’ headlock, Sunday’s postgame locker room was filled with a familiar lament.“They beat us fair and square,” Willie Colon said. “That’s the bottom line.”Fitzpatrick, who regained his equilibrium after losing a fumble on the game’s second play, said there was no solace in playing a close game.“We can’t really take any moral victories from this,” he said. “A loss is a loss.”And Bowles, for his part, stuck to the mantra of the season. This was a tough loss, but only because losing is tough, not because his team lost to Belichick, Brady and the Patriots.Advertisement“We should be upset we lost,” Bowles said. “You show me a good loser, I’ll show you a loser. We’re going to stew over it. We’re going to stew over it for a night. Next day, we’re going to get ready for Oakland.”The next game on the schedule is the most important game, I get that. But I’m not so sure that all games are created equal.Is Game 1 of the World Series just another game? Is the Super Bowl just another game? Is a game against a rival that has dominated you for years just a game?When does a game become more than a game?For the Jets, I’d say, right about now.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: The Stakes Rise, but a Coach Plays the Same Hand.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »