AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter KeepnewsFlip Saunders, a basketball coach and executive who 20 years ago took over the hapless Minnesota Timberwolves and turned them into a winning team, and who had recently been called back to Minnesota in the hope that he could once again turn the franchise around, died on Sunday. He was 60. His death was announced by the Timberwolves, for whom he served as head coach, president of basketball operations and part owner. The team did not say where he had died and did not specify the cause, but he had said in August that he was being treated for Hodgkin’s lymphoma. At that time, Saunders said doctors considered his condition “very treatable and curable.” But the next month, after complications arose during his treatment, which included chemotherapy, he took a leave of absence.Saunders began his coaching career just months after graduating from the University of Minnesota, where he played on a team that also included Kevin McHale, a future N.B.A. Hall of Fame inductee, and that compiled a 24-3 record in his senior year. His first coaching job was at Golden Valley Lutheran College in Golden Valley, Minn., near Minneapolis, from 1977 to 1981. He was later an assistant coach at Minnesota and Tulsa and spent seven years coaching in the Continental Basketball Association.    His N.B.A. career began when McHale became vice president of basketball operations for the Timberwolves in 1995 and hired Saunders as general manager. When the Timberwolves, who had set a new mark for futility by losing 60 games or more for four straight seasons, got off to yet another slow start, McHale fired the head coach, Bill Blair, and gave the job to Saunders, who became the team’s fifth head coach in its seven years in the league. The Timberwolves’ fortunes quickly changed under Saunders, thanks not just to his coaching but also to the emergence of Kevin Garnett, who was drafted out of high school in 1995, as one of the league’s outstanding players. The team reached the playoffs eight years in a row and, in 2004, made it as far as the Western Conference finals, although the Timberwolves lost to the Los Angeles Lakers in six games. Despite achieving a 411-326 record with Minnesota, Saunders was fired during the 2004-5 season and replaced by McHale. He went on to coach the Detroit Pistons, leading them to 64 victories in the 2005-6 season and taking them to the conference finals three straight years, but was nonetheless fired after those three seasons and was eventually hired to coach the Washington Wizards. His tenure in Washington was not successful, and he was let go early in the 2011-12 season after the Wizards had won only two of their first 17 games. The Timberwolves, who had not had a winning record or been back to the playoffs since Saunders’s departure, brought him back as team president in 2013. He was named head coach last year. Among the personnel moves he made was bringing back Garnett, primarily to serve as a mentor to the team’s younger players. Garnett had been traded to the Boston Celtics in 2007 and the Nets in 2013.Philip Daniel Saunders was born on Feb. 23, 1955, in Cleveland and was a basketball star at Cuyahoga Heights High School. He is survived by his wife, Debbie, and four children, including a son, Ryan, who is an assistant coach with the Timberwolves. Saunders’s career won-loss record in 17 N.B.A. seasons was 654-592.The league’s commissioner, Adam Silver, praised Saunders in a statement as “a beloved figure around the N.B.A.” who demonstrated “a genuine and consistent passion for his players, his team and the game.” The Timberwolves’ majority owner, Glen Taylor, had recently announced that because of his health problems, Saunders would not be back for this season, which begins Tuesday, and named Sam Mitchell interim head coach. “I have a saying I tell my players,” Saunders said in 2005, early in his tenure with the Pistons. “The game’s not black and white — it’s played gray.” He went on to explain: “You’ve got to make decisions every play, offensively and defensively. I don’t believe there’s one way to play.”   Advertisement