By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 25, 2015
The Washington Redskins trailed the Tampa Bay Buccaneers by 24 points in the second quarter on Sunday, a deficit the team had never overcome in a victory. At halftime, Coach Jay Gruden lit into his players.Something finally clicked. Quarterback Kirk Cousins completed three second-half touchdown passes, including the go-ahead score to Jordan Reed with 24 seconds left, and the Redskins came back to stun the visiting Buccaneers, 31-30, for the biggest comeback in franchise history.Cousins finished 33 for 40 for 317 yards, the three scores and no interceptions. He also ran for an 8-yard touchdown in the second quarter for the Redskins’ first points, making it 24-7 after two quarters.“It was a good lesson: Just keep playing, and you never know what can happen,” Cousins said.There were those who were wondering whether his time as the starting quarterback might be coming to an end. But he got a pair of 3-yard scores in the third quarter — one to Ryan Grant, the other to Reed — sandwiched around an onside kick, to make things interesting.AdvertisementTrailing by 30-24, Washington got the ball at its 20 with a little less than two and a half minutes left in the fourth quarter. Cousins threw on every play, going 9 for 11 for 75 yards, capped by a 6-yard toss to Reed on a slant.AdvertisementJameis Winston, the No. 1 overall pick in this year’s draft, was 21 for 29 for 297 yards and two first-half touchdowns that helped Tampa Bay build its huge lead. Doug Martin ran for 136 yards on 19 carries.PANTHERS 27, EAGLES 16 Mike Tolbert and Cam Newton each scored touchdowns on 2-yard runs, and Newton passed to Tolbert for another 2-yard score as Carolina defeated visiting Philadelphia and remained unbeaten.Jonathan Stewart ran for 125 yards on 24 carries for the Panthers.Ryan Mathews scored the Eagles’ only touchdown, on a 63-yard run.CHIEFS 23, STEELERS 13 Alex Smith threw for 251 yards and a touchdown, Cairo Santos kicked three field goals, and host Kansas City beat injury-filled Pittsburgh to end a five-game losing streak.Charcandrick West added 110 yards rushing and his first career touchdown for the Chiefs, and Eric Berry intercepted his first pass since his cancer diagnosis last December.Meanwhile, the Chiefs shut down Pittsburgh’s Landry Jones, who made his first N.F.L. start in place of the injured Ben Roethlisberger and Michael Vick. Jones threw for 209 yards and a touchdown, but he was also picked off twice and lost a fumble.LeVeon Bell ran for 121 yards for the Steelers. Antonio Brown had six catches for 124 yards, and Martavis Bryant caught his 11th touchdown pass in 12 games.DOLPHINS 44, TEXANS 26 Miami became the first team since at least 1940 to score four offensive touchdowns of at least 50 yards in a half, beating visiting Houston.AdvertisementMaking matters worse for the Texans, the four-time Pro Bowl running back Arian Foster tore his right Achilles’ tendon late in the fourth quarter and is out for the season.Foster was hurt without being hit. He was in motion and crumpled to the turf as the ball was snapped.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Foster rushed for 59 yards in the game but was averaging only 2.6 yards per carry this year.Miami led by 41-0 at halftime, making its victory even more emphatic than a 38-10 win at Tennessee a week earlier.The Dolphins had been 0-7 against Houston. Their four long scores in the first half were the most in at least 75 years, according to Stats L.L.C.VIKINGS 28, LIONS 19 Teddy Bridgewater threw for a season-high 316 yards and two touchdowns, and Minnesota won at Detroit.Adrian Peterson rushed for 98 yards as the Vikings won an N.F.C. North game on the road for the first time in three years.The Lions had an 11-point lead after Matthew Stafford threw touchdowns on their first two drives, but they blew it because they could not protect the quarterback.Minnesota had a season-high seven sacks, which also was a season worst for Detroit.RAMS 24, BROWNS 6 The rookie Todd Gurley rushed for 128 yards and his first two touchdowns, helping host St. Louis put away punchless Cleveland.AdvertisementSt. Louis had four sacks and recovered four fumbles. The Rams scored 10 points off miscues on Cleveland’s first two series, a 17-yard fumble recovery by Rodney McLeod and a field goal after the first of William Hayes’s two sacks and strips of Josh McCown.SAINTS 27, COLTS 21 Drew Brees threw for 255 yards and a touchdown, Khiry Robinson ran for two scores, and New Orleans held off a late rally by host Indianapolis.The Saints have won three of their last four. The Colts still lead the A.F.C. South despite having lost a second straight game.Brees finished 28 for 44 and was helped by a running game led by Mark Ingram, who ran for 143 yards and a score as New Orleans took a 27-0 lead.RAIDERS 37, CHARGERS 29 Derek Carr threw three touchdown passes, including a 52-yarder to Amari Cooper, and Oakland turned two interceptions of Philip Rivers into 10 points on their way to an easy victory at San Diego in what might have been the last game of the A.F.C. West rivalry played there.It was the first meeting of the Raiders and the Chargers since their owners announced plans to build a stadium in the Los Angeles area if they cannot obtain new stadiums in their home markets.Coming off a bye, the Raiders looked quicker and more efficient. Cooper, the first-round draft pick out of Alabama, caught a short pass from Carr on an inside screen and raced through the defense to give Oakland a 30-3 lead just before halftime.FALCONS 10, TITANS 7 Matt Ryan threw for 251 yards and a touchdown pass, and Devonta Freeman ran for 116 yards as visiting Atlanta held off Tennessee.The Falcons bounced back from their first loss by grinding out a road win and overcoming two interceptions. Freeman notched his third consecutive game with at least 100 yards, and Atlanta outgained Tennessee by 378 yards to 256.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Redskins Rally to Shock the Buccaneers .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.