By KEN BELSONOCT. 25, 2015
LONDON —  The Jacksonville Jaguars’ owner, Shahid Khan, likes to say that London is his team’s home away from home. Indeed, the Jaguars have played home games here in three straight seasons. Unfortunately for them, they have not played like a home team, losing to the San Francisco 49ers in 2013 and the Dallas Cowboys in 2014 by a combined 46 points.But to Khan’s relief, the Jaguars finally won here on Sunday, taking a sloppy, penalty-filled slugfest over the Buffalo Bills, 34-31, before an announced crowd of just over 84,000 at Wembley Stadium.“I’m very pleased with what just happened,” Jaguars Coach Gus Bradley said. “This is a results-driven league.”But it was not easy. The Jaguars raced out to a 27-3 lead after returning a fumble and an interception for touchdowns in the second quarter. The rookie running back T. J. Yeldon also scored a touchdown and ran for 115 yards. But after the Jaguars failed to score on a goal-line stand early in the third quarter, the Bills crept back.After a field goal, wide receiver Marcus Easley scored on a 58-yard pass from quarterback E. J. Manuel. The Bills went ahead, 31-27, with less than six minutes left when Corey Graham returned an errant Blake Bortles pass for a score.AdvertisementBut Bortles, who completed just 13 out of 29 passes for 182 yards, soon came to life and hit wide receiver Allen Hurns with a 31-yard pass near the pylon to put the Jaguars back ahead for good with just over two minutes left.AdvertisementThe game was not pretty. There were four turnovers and numerous missed opportunities. Each team was called for 10 penalties. But the Jaguars, who had won just 10 games since Khan took over the team in 2012, were happy to leave London with a victory.The loss put a big dent in Coach Rex Ryan’s plans to lead the Bills to their first playoff berth of this century.“We found a way to keep fighting, found a way to come back,” Ryan said. “Not only come back, but to come all the way back and take the lead. That’s the thing — it just kills you right now.”A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Jaguars Edge Bills, Ending a Drought in London.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.