AdvertisementSupported byBy Filip BondyWHIPPANY, N.J. — Just a few months ago, this weekend might have promised a circus of the five-ring variety: On Saturday, the former Red Bulls coach Mike Petke will return to Red Bull Arena to be honored as one of the top 20 players in franchise history. At the same time, Jesse Marsch, his replacement, will be exiled to the stands for the day’s match against Columbus because of a one-game suspension.So, yes, this could be a real mess, except that the Red Bulls are unexpectedly sitting atop the Eastern Conference standings, bound for the playoffs as a mold-breaking, frugal franchise shaped by the “Moneyball”-like analytics of Marsch and the team’s new sporting director, Ali Curtis. The fan revolt that accompanied Curtis’s surprising dismissal of Petke in January and his subsequent hiring of Marsch, which erupted  in fury at a town hall session about 10 days later, has cooled considerably.Saturday’s game is now just another key match in the Red Bulls’ drive for the league’s best record, and the Supporters’ Shield award that goes with it. But it could also be further proof that Marsch is not merely an accidental interloper.“I knew it was polarizing,” Marsch said at a training session this week, referring to his hiring. “I realized it more when we had the town hall. But I’m not in a popularity contest. I’m here to do a job. And I love this job. You’ve got to honor it the right way. I’m a soccer coach. That’s literally what I am. I’m confident in my way.”Marsch’s way — an unorthodox mix of high-press tactics, data crunching and communal therapy sessions — has been an unquestionable success with his roster of low-celebrity, lower-salaried players. After the team shed the stars Thierry Henry and Tim Cahill last winter, its payroll remained well under $4 million — the lowest in Major League Soccer. Three of the four defenders who have started most matches recently each earn less than $70,000. That sort of economics flies in the face of the M.L.S. trend of importing high-profile designated players, but the focus on value over name recognition has not hurt results. Striker Bradley Wright-Phillips, one of the lowest-paid designated players in M.L.S., has 14 goals after tying the league record with 27 last year. The team’s biggest off-season acquisition, midfielder Sacha Kljestan, makes even less, yet he is tied for fifth in the league in assists (11). And the 20-year-old defender Matt Miazga, a former Red Bulls academy player, will probably start for the United States if it qualifies for the Rio Olympics. His coach on that team predicted this week that Miazga would make his senior national team debut before the end of the year.“If you’re going to talk about stars, I think we have stars,” Marsch said. “I do. A lot of stars. A lot of players that are underrated and very effective in this league and have been successful elsewhere. There aren’t a lot of guys like Sacha Kljestan, Bradley Wright-Phillips, Dax McCarty, with the savviness they have.“I don’t want this to reflect poorly on anything in the past,” Marsch added. “But if you get the type of player who wants to engage in the group mentality, wants to give, not wants to take, then you can build something.”And build something he has. Marsch, a former midfielder who played 14 seasons in M.L.S., is known as a creative thinker, and his personal journey is an indication of that. After he was dismissed as coach of the Montreal Impact in 2012, Marsch embarked on a six-month trip of discovery with his wife, Kim, and their three children through Asia and Europe. After that, he volunteered as an assistant coach at his alma mater, Princeton, where he had learned the game from the former United States national team coach Bob Bradley.His wait for another M.L.S. job ended with a phone call from Curtis. Curtis, less than three weeks into his job as sporting director, had decided to dump Petke, a blood-and-guts guy popular with players and fans, for the more cerebral Marsch.“It’s important you have a coach who has passion and fire for what he’s doing,” Curtis said. “But at the same time, you want that coach to have the ability to connect to a variety of things that are going on in your environment.”Curtis had decided to refocus the Red Bulls — long a free-spending, star-centered franchise — around youth development and data analytics. Those priorities drew ridicule from fans furious about the Petke firing, but Curtis, who was committed to them, knew his coach had to be as well.“If you don’t have a coach who embodies those types of things,” he said, “then in five years, you get left behind.”Curtis said he had assembled a staff and players with much to prove. He included himself in that group.“I’m the only African-American general manager in this league,” Curtis said. “I look around the table at every other club, and nobody looks like me. So we have a chip on our shoulder, and we have everything in the world to prove.”Marsch’s preferred style of play is speedy, aggressive and direct. He wants his back line to push up the field as far as possible to compress the opponent. This is risky business, and it requires the correct track-backs and rotations. When things go wrong — as they did last week in a 5-2 loss to Orlando City — the high press can lead to fast-break counterattacks.The analytics that Marsch values most are more toward the team than individuals: where the team wins the ball on the field, the average line of defense, interceptions, penetrating plays, recoveries. He favors less possession, not more. “We’re the anti-Barcelona,” Marsch said. “We actually try to command the game with field position, without the ball.”“How the actual individuals fit into the system, that’s more the eye, and getting to know the person,” Marsch added. “Then we put them into the analytics and help them understand what we want to achieve as a team.”If Marsch may occasionally sound like a technocrat, he has preserved at least one part of Petke’s style: He has been thrown out of matches twice this season, including an ejection last week that led to his one-match suspension.“No reflection on the referees,” goalkeeper Luis Robles said, “but I wonder if sometimes he is using such big words they just don’t understand.”As for the fans who screamed about the coaching change in January, they will have a chance to cheer for both Petke and Marsch on Saturday. After 20 years of relative franchise futility, however, what they would like most is an M.L.S. championship. Then all would be forgiven.“Ever since we didn’t have a summer swan dive, there’s been a lot of optimism,” said Jen Muller, a leading member of the Red Bulls-centered Empire Supporters Club. “We’ve won the Shield already, with Petke. Now we want the Cup.”Advertisement