AdvertisementSupported byPatriots 30, Jets 23By Ben ShpigelFOXBOROUGH, Mass. — The game was only as big as the Jets wanted it to be, and they did not want it to be big. That was what they said all week, diminishing the importance of playing New England, and regardless of whether the Jets believed it, the rhetoric served another purpose: It would insulate them from defeat. “We’ll see them again,” running back Chris Ivory said late Sunday afternoon, after the Jets staggered in the fourth quarter and lost, 30-23, to fall to two games behind the unbeaten Patriots in the A.F.C. East. The Jets will indeed see New England again, but not until the penultimate week of the season, by which point the division could very well be decided. The Jets (4-2) arrived at Gillette Stadium seeking not validation of others’ perceptions but affirmation of their own — that they were as good as they thought they were. That the league’s best defense could flummox the league’s best offense. About eight hours later, as the sun finished blazing over the horizon, they left a little wobbly, humbled again by Tom Brady and the Patriots’ mastery. It is Brady’s quality that mitigates the Jets’ late implosion. Against a quarterback or team of lesser skill or pedigree, the Jets’ performance over the final 13 minutes might be considered a collapse. They buckled twice on critical third-and-long plays. They failed to thwart New England at 23-20 when a stop would have returned possession with a chance to go ahead. They yielded a 10-play, 68-yard drive capped by Brady’s 15-yard touchdown pass to an open Rob Gronkowski after Coach Todd Bowles opted to save his timeouts. And still, after recovering an onside kick following Nick Folk’s 55-yard field goal with 15 seconds remaining, they had a remote chance to win. They ran one play — a pass over the middle to Eric Decker, hoping to get into position for a Hail Mary — but not another: Brandon Marshall was called for a false start, and by rule, a 10-second runoff was assessed, ending the game.Just as the Patriots tried neutralizing the Jets’ running game — Ivory, hampered by a sore left hamstring, managed 41 yards on 17 carries — the Jets tried making the Patriots’ offense one-dimensional as well.Brady handed the ball off five times. Five. The Patriots did not even feign an interest in running, gaining all of 16 yards on the ground. Brady, the team leader, accounted for 15.On every snap, the Jets expected him to drop back and pass. Which he did, exploiting soft spots in zones and finding open receivers on pick plays. “I felt like we had them,” guard Willie Colon said. “I felt like we were the better team.”Through three quarters, perhaps. As the fourth began, the Jets led by 17-16. They were 15 minutes from first place in the division, from silencing a capacity crowd, from beating New England for only the second time in their last nine meetings.The Jets had been this close here before. In 2012, they lost on a field goal in overtime. In 2013, they lost by 3 points after Geno Smith threw three fourth-quarter interceptions. In 2014, they lost by 2, despite rushing for more than 200 yards, possessing the ball for nearly 41 minutes and not committing a turnover. Bowles may be new to the Jets, but he understood Brady’s wizardry at Gillette. As the interim coach in Miami in 2011, Bowles watched as the Dolphins went up, 17-0, at halftime. New England wound up winning by 3. Reminded last week of that day, Bowles smiled and said, “There are four quarters in a game.”That fourth quarter began with a missed opportunity for the Jets, who settled for Folk’s 30-yard field goal because Marshall dropped a back-shoulder pass that would have been a touchdown. “Absolutely,” Marshall said. “That is all on me.”Trailing by 20-16, the Patriots did what they do, what Brady does, even when his receivers have been dropping passes — 10 through three quarters — all day. On third-and-17 from the New England 27, the Jets dropped into a zone. Bowles opted not to bring pressure because he wanted to mix up the coverages.“You’ve got to play cat and mouse with them,” Bowles said. “You can’t give them what they want all the time.” Given time, Brady fired a 19-yard pass over the middle to Julian Edelman on what Bowles indicated was a breakdown in coverage. Brady squeezed it between linebacker David Harris, who blamed himself for not playing deeper, and the backup safety Dion Bailey, who blamed himself for not redirecting Edelman toward the corner of the zone.“It was right on the rope,” Bailey said. “As soon as I turned around.” Onward the Patriots moved, a 10-play drive ending with an 8-yard toss to Danny Amendola that put New England ahead to stay. “We should be upset we lost,” Bowles said. “You show me a good loser, I’ll show you a loser.”The early kickoff Sunday — the first 1 p.m. start for a Jets game at New England since 2007 — belied the quality of the matchup: The teams’ combined .900 winning percentage entering the game was the second highest this late in the season for a game between them since 2004, when both were undefeated heading into Week 7.For a rivalry so steeped in acrimony, the week leading up to this latest installment lacked the rancor of past years. The only trash talk emanated from, of all places, a since-deleted tweet from the Patriots’ official account: On Thursday, it posted a photo of the former Jets quarterback Mark Sanchez slamming into Brandon Moore’s backside on Thanksgiving night 2012 with the message “This seems relevant.”Except it really was not, since these are the new Jets, conditioned by Bowles to be confident without expressing it. They knew the game plan could outwit the Patriots. They just had to execute it.The only guaranteed way to stop Brady is to keep him on the sideline. And to keep him on the sideline, the Jets needed to convert third downs and control the clock. They held the ball for nearly 19 minutes in the first half, as Ryan Fitzpatrick, who completed 22 of 39 passes for 295 yards with two touchdowns and a first-quarter fumble, led two scoring drives that featured a combined 29 plays. That worked for three quarters. Just not for four. There have been losses here in which the Jets afterward looked defeated and deflated. This was not one of them. They are still 4-2, in command of a wild-card berth — but not the division. Asked to characterize the gap between his team and New England, Marshall said, “Very little.” “I think they respect us; I do,” linebacker Calvin Pace said. “Just like we respect them. That don’t win you championships, though.”EXTRA POINTSTodd Bowles said that Calvin Pryor (ankle) and Nick Mangold (neck), who left wearing a brace, were scheduled to have X-rays. Advertisement