

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
OCT. 25, 2015
PISCATAWAY, N.J. — The important thing to know about J. T. Barrett, Ohio State’s redshirt sophomore quarterback who is once again the starter after a 10-game interlude, cannot be found in Saturday night’s stat sheet.Rather, the important thing is his teammates’ comments afterward.“He wants to be like Peyton Manning,” wide receiver Michael Thomas said of Barrett.It seems the unlikeliest of comparisons. Manning has fewer rushing yards in his entire N.F.L. career than Barrett had last season. But the analogy is to substance, not style.“He’s real disciplined — a student of the game,” said Thomas, who benefited from Barrett’s presence to the tune of five catches for 103 yards and a touchdown in the Buckeyes’ 49-7 victory against Rutgers. “He’s real quiet, too, though. A conscientious guy.”AdvertisementOffensive tackle Taylor Decker, a perceptive player, said Barrett had “a really high football I.Q.”Advertisement“He’s a football-smart guy,” Decker said. “ He’s poised in there when things are kind of hectic. He can settle down, figure out what’s going on, check plays, leave us in plays, things like that.”Barrett went 14 for 18 with three touchdowns and no interceptions against Rutgers. He also rushed for 101 yards on 13 carries for two touchdowns (and one fumble lost). He left the game in the fourth quarter with the outcome sealed.No. 1 Ohio State is 8-0, 4-0 in the Big Ten, as it heads into an off week, after which come the initial College Football Playoff rankings. But the Buckeyes will face opponents more formidable than Rutgers (3-4, 1-3).Barrett put his intelligence and coolheaded demeanor on display Saturday. He has the freedom to audible into one of a package of plays, depending on what he sees as he comes to the line of scrimmage. If the other team is covering the receivers one-on-one, he can check into a pass. If he sees the opposition in zone, he can try an option run featuring one of running back Ezekiel Elliott’s fierce upfield cuts.No surprise that when Barrett faked a handoff to Curtis Samuel in the third quarter, it seemed as if not just all 11 defenders, but all 53,111 fans — or what was left of them — bit on it completely. (The play resulted in defensive pass interference.)Buckeyes players expressed their confidence in Barrett when they selected him a captain before the season.There are obvious risks in Coach Urban Meyer’s decision to go with Barrett on Saturday over the redshirt junior Cardale Jones, who came in last year after Barrett broke his right ankle in the regular season’s final game and proceeded to stomp Wisconsin, Alabama and Oregon en route to the national championship. Jones kept the starting job through training camp and through more than half the season.AdvertisementEven though Barrett ran roughshod over the Buckeyes’ opponents last year, with 938 yards and 11 touchdowns just on the ground, it took Jones with his missile arm hitting receivers deep and creating opportunities for Elliott to give Ohio State the title.Ultimately, Barrett is a point guard: His job is to distribute the ball to other talented playmakers on his team — Elliott, Thomas, running back Samuel, halfback Braxton Miller — and sometimes to make plays himself.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We have a big belief that scheme isn’t what wins games,” Meyer told reporters last week. “What wins are the dynamic players that touch the ball.”An example was Ohio State’s second touchdown of the night, which began the flood. Midway through the second quarter, the Buckeyes snapped the ball from the 50-yard line. Barrett hit Thomas on a slant at the 39, and Thomas proceeded to shed his man and outrun two other Rutgers defenders for a touchdown. It was the type of play you could go an entire N.F.L. Sunday without seeing.In college football, some players are so much more talented than everyone else on the field that the optimal strategy is to keep feeding them.No. 2 Baylor (7-0, 4-0 Big 12) and No. 5 Texas Christian (7-0, 4-0) are led by receivers Corey Coleman and Josh Doctson, who have combined for 30 receiving touchdowns in 14 games. No. 4 Louisiana State (7-0, 4-0 Southeastern Conference) has the star sophomore running back Leonard Fournette.Stanford (6-1, 5-0 Pacific-12), which rose to No. 8 from No. 10, held off Washington on Saturday, 31-14, behind Christian McCaffrey’s rushing and receiving prowess.Saturday’s two big losses involved Utah (6-1, 3-1 Pac-12), a good team with no truly dominant offensive skill players, falling to Southern California, 42-24, and dropping to No. 13 from No. 3; and Florida State (6-1, 4-1 Atlantic Coast Conference), which had its dynamic player, running back Dalvin Cook, limited to just 17 carries and 82 yards (a bad hamstring could be a culprit) in a 22-16 loss to Georgia Tech, and fell to No. 17 from No. 9.Is Barrett the better choice?For Meyer, Jones, who reads as a more typical N.F.L.-style player, was the anomaly. Throughout his coaching stops, Meyer has tended to prefer dual-threat quarterbacks for his spread offense, whether it was Miller, who changed to halfback this off-season, during Meyer’s first two years at Ohio State; Alex Smith, who was drafted first over all out of Utah; or, Tim Tebow, who won a Heisman Trophy and a national title with Florida.AdvertisementIf Meyer’s Barrett experiment does not work, the Buckeyes could struggle next month against Michigan State and Michigan, which feature better defenses. But if it succeeds, Ohio State will repeat as national champion behind a quarterback who might best be described as a cross between Manning and Tebow.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Buckeyes Pull Off a Switch, Smoothly .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »