AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: W.T.A. FinalsBy Christopher ClareyIn victory or defeat, this tennis season belonged to Serena Williams. She sparked global chatter throughout, chasing the Grand Slam all the way to the final Friday of the United States Open in September, when Roberta Vinci shockingly stopped her short.But Williams, by her own choice, is not playing at the W.T.A. Finals this week in Singapore. In her absence, the elite tournament feels less like a fitting end to a fascinating season and more like a spectacle unto itself.There is no sugarcoating Williams’s withdrawal.“A terrible blow for the W.T.A.,” said Jo Durie, a former British player who is now a television analyst. “It does devalue the event.”It remains unclear to what extent Williams’s decision was prompted by physical issues or how much the emotional fallout of her unsuccessful run for the Grand Slam played a role. She cited both as factors in her withdrawal announcement, which came more than three weeks before the W.T.A. Finals.It was no doubt a draining season. But plenty of Williams’s illustrious predecessors managed to play in tour championships to close out draining seasons, including Martina Navratilova, Chris Evert and even Steffi Graf in 1988 when she completed the so-called “Golden Slam” by winning the four major singles titles and the Olympic singles gold medal.“Not that Graf felt tons of loyalty to the tour, but she played that year and would have been Grand Slam tired,” said Pam Shriver, the former American star who beat Graf in the semifinals of those 1988 championships in New York. “Generally when I think back, Martina, Chrissie and the players I played with — everybody sucked it up and played the tour championships. So to me it’s a little bit that this generation doesn’t quite feel the same sense of commitment to the tour.”Graf, it should be noted, was 19 when she ended her 1988 run. Williams turned 34 last month, and she was seen favoring her right elbow during practice at the U.S. Open.“I mean let’s face it, Singapore is a major for the tour but it’s not a major,” Shriver said. “I totally get it. Serena is 34 and given her year, and the fact that she feels physically, emotionally and any other way tired from the effort, I get that, too.”As a result, the W.T.A. is getting an early peek at what a post-Williams world might look like someday.It is surely an incomplete picture. The eight-woman singles field in Singapore is much longer on well-established figures — like Maria Sharapova, Petra Kvitova, Simona Halep, Agnieszka Radwanska and Angelique Kerber — than new arrivals — like Garbiñe Muguruza, the 22-year-old Spaniard whom Williams beat in the Wimbledon final in July.The other first-time participants are the veterans Lucie Safarova, 28, and Flavia Pennetta, 33, the surprise U.S. Open champion, who in an interview last week confirmed her plan to retire after the Finals.Two of the game’s most promising young talents, Belinda Bencic, 18, and Madison Keys, 20, did not qualify for the event. Nor did the former No.1 players Victoria Azarenka, Ana Ivanovic and Caroline Wozniacki.It was a year when the supporting cast struggled. Apart from Williams, the only player to reach more than one Grand Slam singles semifinal in 2015 was Sharapova. But she has not played a complete match since Wimbledon because of injuries, and last month retired from her opening round in Wuhan, China, with a left forearm problem.“In my view, it has been a pretty strange year,” said Wim Fissette, Azarenka’s coach. “Outside of Serena, nobody really was able to be very consistent. It shows that the depth of women’s tennis is becoming bigger and that everybody in the top 30 is very close to each other and that outside of Serena, everybody can beat everybody.”“That is in one way not bad for women’s tennis because it’s interesting when you never know who is going to win,” he added. “But on the other hand, it’s also not great because you always are looking for big personalities and stars like you have on the men’s side. Unfortunately, that’s a bit missing now.”Singapore, in the second year of a five-year deal to host the Finals, had to make do last year without Li Na after the Chinese star retired shortly before the event. Now it must do without Williams.“Anytime you don’t have Serena that’s not a good thing,” said Steve Simon, the new chief executive of the W.T.A. Tour. “But she’s not right right now and ready to play, and she has to be to go on the court, and if she’s not, then she shouldn’t. And she’s not going to. I think right now she is trying to get ready for 2016, and her mind-set is that she wants to come back as strong as ever.”“Maybe she wants to go after that Slam again and see if she can do it,” he added. “But it will be great to have her back in ’16, and we hope she’s coming back as energized and excited as she says she’s going to be.”What is awkward for the W.T.A., though, is that Williams in fact plans to resume competing in 2015. She is scheduled to play in two stops of the International Premier Tennis League, which has teams in five Asian cities, including Singapore, later this year. Her seven-figure fees for participating will certainly help compensate for her losses from missing the W.T.A. Finals, which could include a $125,000 fine if she doesn’t make an appearance and do promotional work for the event.In the team tennis league, Williams is on the roster of the Philippine Mavericks. According to Mahesh Bhupathi, the former men’s doubles star who founded the league, she will play in Kobe, Japan, and in Manila in early December.Micky Lawler, the W.T.A. president, said it was understandable that Williams would not come to Singapore only to do promotional work for the Finals if she is ailing.She said the W.T.A. and Williams were “working on some other solution, where she does support the efforts put forth by the Singapore government and does some work throughout the year.”“We’ve got the Singaporean government investing huge amounts of resources to bring the best of women’s tennis to Singapore and having the I.P.T.L. in the region a little bit later is perhaps not the best for the sport,” Lawler added.“I think she’s injured, no doubt about it, and I think that if your body is already hurting, to fly to the other side of the world makes little sense,” she said. “What makes it hard is that at the end of the year, she’s going to want to get some match practice and play a few sets here and there, and that is perceived by the public not in the most positive light. We understand it. Yes, we don’t like it, but we understand it.”Best-of-three-set matches against the world’s best women clearly represent a different level of engagement than single sets in the I.P.T.L.’s exhibition-style atmosphere. “It’s not the same, and the athletes will tell you it’s not the same,” Lawler said.The problem for the W.T.A., of course, is that its Finals in the year of Serena won’t be the same without Serena.Advertisement