By ROB HUGHESOCT. 25, 2015
LONDON — It is not yet Halloween, but already some managers in England’s Premier League look haunted and spooked in their jobs.Tim Sherwood and Garry Monk, relatively new managers at Aston Villa and Swansea City, went into the weekend hearing stories that their jobs were on the line. And their clubs did nothing to dispel the speculation.Meanwhile, José Mourinho — who recently almost dared Chelsea by boasting “If you sack me, you sack the best manager you ever had” — lost a game once again, along with a little more of his aura of invincibility.The pressure would be ridiculous in any normal business. How can it make sense to hire a manager and then spend millions during the summer on players that fit his style, only to panic with barely a quarter of the season gone?AdvertisementIt seems to have been ever thus. Soccer, especially in England, is run by rich and powerful entrepreneurs who somehow lose their senses, once they throw their fortunes at the roulette wheel that is club ownership.AdvertisementAston Villa is the club that helped found league soccer over 125 years ago. Its American owner, Randy Lerner, initially invested heavily in a team he followed while studying at the University of Cambridge. His turnover of team managers quickened as he tried, and failed, to sell the club and recoup some of his losses.But after firing Paul Lambert in February and replacing him with Sherwood, Lerner is nearing his wit’s end. Villa’s 2-1 loss at home to Swansea on Saturday was its eighth defeat this season, and fears of relegation are already reaching across the Atlantic to Lerner’s home in the United States.“Am I going to be in the job next week?” Sherwood answered rhetorically to reporters’ questions on Saturday. “I’m not the person to ask. I feel like the cub is in a hole. I will continue trying to get the best out of the players we have.“I’ll work hard, making myself ill doing it. The players can’t do more regarding effort. They can only give us what they can give; there’s a lack of quality. We can’t turn them into superstars.”That mixed message — despair and defiance in a single voice — was reflected in the haunted eyes of the manager. The words betray his situation. Villa sold its best players during the summer, unable to hold onto them because of release clauses in their contracts. Others at the club — not Sherwood — signed their replacements, and the coach clearly feels that those new players are not adequate to fill the shoes of players like Christian Benteke, the striker now with Liverpool. On Sunday, Villa confirmed it had dismissed Sherwood.If the owner is watching and listening, he will see that the Thai-owned Leicester City was sitting pretty among the leading clubs in the league this weekend. Leicester changed managers during the summer, and the wily old Italian coach Claudio Ranieri is getting everything and more out of players who are unsung in their own land.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Saturday, when Leicester beat Crystal Palace 1-0, the only goal was scored by Jamie Vardy — again. Vardy is a player who catapulted from lower-league soccer to the top of the Premiership through the combination of sheer effort and a previously unsuspected knack for scoring, and he now is part of a very select group of players who have scored in seven straight Premier League games.That group features the names of Thierry Henry, Alan Shearer, Ruud van Nistelrooy, Daniel Sturridge and Ian Wright.AdvertisementIt does not include anyone currently at Aston Villa or at Chelsea.The Villa game had a unique twist in that two brothers scored for the two opposing clubs, the first time in over 70 years that has happened. The brothers, Jordan and André Ayew, are sons of Ghana’s greatest player, Abedi Pele.They came to England a few months ago from the French league, and after Jordan put Villa ahead on Saturday, his brother André had the last laugh with a goal near the end that broke the tie and gave Swansea three points.Instantly, the TV cameras panned to the dugouts, picking out the crestfallen figure of Sherwood and the relieved, almost elated stance of his opposite number, Monk. Crazy as it sounds, Monk was lauded three weeks ago as a young coach making the seamless transition from player to manager. Now, the whispers are growing — and are not denied by the club — that recent defeats mean his job is no longer safe.“It has been a bit of a circus, to be honest,” Monk said Saturday. “Right now I feel for Tim Sherwood. We did our U.E.F.A. pro license together. I know he’s a very good guy, a good person and the right coach for the job.”If soccer is the circus that Monk referred to, then a few short months ago, Mourinho was the ringmaster. But on Saturday, midway through his team’s 2-1 loss at West Ham United, Mourinho was ordered out of the dugout and sent into the stands.He has, all season long, been blaming referees for the turnaround that has changed his team of champions into a side struggling in the depths of the league standings. Blaming the referees, the players and the media — everyone but himself — Mourinho is in a different situation from those of Sherwood and Monk.He feels their pressure, shares their vulnerability, but in Mourinho’s case the sudden reversal of fortune is largely of his own making. The man who casts himself as the “Special One” among managers is headed for the fall that comes, inevitably, to everyone in the fickle trade of trying to manage unreasonable expectations.An earlier version of this article misspelled the given name of the manager of Swansea City in the Premier League. He is Garry Monk, not Gary.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.