AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Huw RichardsTWICKENHAM, England — In the Rugby World Cup quarterfinals, New Zealand showed it could dominate an opponent, as it rolled over France. In the semifinals, the All Blacks edged South Africa in a thriller to prove they could win the close games, too. Add it up, and New Zealand showed one of the benchmarks of a champion: the ability to adjust and do whatever is necessary to win. The All Blacks beat South Africa, 20-18, at Twickenham Stadium on Saturday and are just one win away from becoming the first World Cup champions to defend their title successfully. “Great performances don’t always look the same,” said New Zealand Coach Steve Hansen. “It can look like we did against France, and can also look like we did against South Africa.”The win over South Africa was far different from its 62-13 destruction of the French a week before in the quarterfinals, but in its own way, the result was just as scary for New Zealand’s rivals. No team in the world can match the All Blacks if they are allowed to play a wide-open game, as they did against France. Saturday’s game also showed that no team can win 91 percent of its games — as New Zealand has done since January 2010 — without knowing how to close out the defensive games, too. The Rugby World Cup had enjoyed dry weather up until Saturday, when heavy rains soaked the field, producing conditions similar to the 2003 World Cup semifinal in Sydney when New Zealand was knocked out by Australia.As in 2003, New Zealand had to deal with a ferociously physical opponent in conditions that made its own slick passing game difficult. It started the second half trailing 12-7 and a man down, with back row forward Jerome Kaino suspended for 10 minutes.New Zealand not only coped with Kaino’s absence but cut South Africa’s lead while short-handed. Daniel Carter’s 35-meter drop goal was only his seventh in 111 international matches. New Zealand makes less use of the drop than any other major nation, as it usually goes for the higher-scoring try instead. Carter’s kick, which cut South Africa’s lead to 12-10, reflected smart pragmatism by the All Blacks on a difficult day. New Zealand then took the lead, which it never lost, when the replacement wing Beauden Barrett crossed the line three minutes after Kaino’s return.Still more impressive was the way New Zealand preserved a two-point lead over the final 12 minutes. It was a definitive demonstration of how to close out a match.South Africa never threatened New Zealand’s slim lead because it was pinned into its own territory the whole time.“Rather than be scared, you back yourself to nail those moments,” said Richie McCaw, the All Blacks’ captain. “You feel pressure, but you remember that your opponents are feeling it as well.”At the end New Zealand’s victory felt much more decisive than a two-point victory. “We gave it everything, and it wasn’t quite good enough,” said South Africa Coach Heyneke Meyer, a devastated but strikingly gracious loser. “They are a great side and they handled the pressure better.” “I’ve seen this movie before, and it is bloody horrible,” said South Africa’s vice captain, Schalk Burger, a loser in 11 of his 16 matches against New Zealand. “Unfortunately for us, the All Blacks were just that little bit better.”New Zealand’s two tries, both following sustained attacks, demonstrated the skill and composure of its veterans. In the first, McCaw, who extended his record with his 147th international appearance, lobbed a high pass that gave Kaino the time and space to cross on the far right in the sixth minute.In the second try in the 51st minute, center Ma’a Nonu, playing in his 102nd test, ran at an angle to draw the South African coverage, which then allowed for a pass to Barrett to cross the line, this time at the far left corner. There were periods when it seemed that South Africa’s sheer physicality might overwhelm New Zealand. It had the edge in the battle for possession at the breakdown, winning a string of penalties converted by flyhalf Handre Pollard, who landed all five of his shots before giving way for the final 15 minutes to Patrick Lambie, who kicked a sixth.Hansen said he was concerned by a penalty count of 13-6 against his team, but he would not draw any conclusions before watching the replay. “They got a lot of points from kicks at goal, and I’ll need to have a look at that,” he said.Yet none of those penalties was kicked from closer than 30 meters, and South Africa rarely got any closer to New Zealand’s line. Its one serious chance of a try was lost in the 34th minute when wing JP Pietersen’s interception of a Nonu pass was called back by the referee Jérôme Garcès.“Eighty to 90 percent of our players will be able to play at the next World Cup,” said Meyer, who has seen several young players step up impressively since the shock of South Africa’s opening-weekend loss to Japan. “They can be among the best in the world going forward.”But in the short term, Meyer will watch his Southern Hemisphere rival vie for the title next Saturday, a day after South Africa plays for third place in what will be a cheerless anticlimax of its World Cup. “It will be mentally very tough. It means nothing to me,” said Meyer. “It is like kissing your sister.” Advertisement