
OCT. 27, 2015

How the New York Mets made their improbable run to the World Series.
The Mets in the World Series? Even now it’s a little hard to fathom, especially when you consider all the losing that preceded this season, all the angry demands that the team should be sold to someone with more money, all the predictions that had the Mets doing a little bit better in 2015 but nothing all that impressive.  But instead, here we are, with Matt Harvey pitching Game 1 for the Mets in Kansas City. How did they get this far? With some great pitching, with a trade that fell apart and was replaced by a better one, with a closer named Jeurys who stepped forward when a closer named Jenrry got himself kicked out of baseball. In the end, there was luck, and drama, and adversity (see: David Wright). And, of course, some disbelief.What follows is a medley of the season, as described in stories from The New York Times. There were high notes, low ones and everything in between. Ladies and gentlemen, the grateful Mets.Sandy Alderson held a news conference Friday morning at the beginning of spring training, his fifth as the Mets’ general manager. Naturally, he was asked about his expectations for the team. This month, he said that the Mets were capable of winning 89 games — 10 more than last season — which could make them playoff contenders. Now, he was asked if that was still his expectation. Alderson began to answer, then stopped himself. “Didn’t we go through this last year?” he said, grinning. Sort of. A year ago, around this time, he said at a private meeting with other Mets executives and team ownership that the team could win 90 games. His statement was not meant for public consumption and seemed far too optimistic, but it leaked out anyway. Sure enough, it became something of a sarcastic footnote to a season in which the Mets finished under .500 for the sixth straight season. But now Matt Harvey is back from Tommy John surgery, David Wright is healthy, and Zack Wheeler and Jacob deGrom seem poised to become 15- to 20-game winners. This time, Alderson’s prediction seems a little more realistic. Tim Rohan “Is the team capable of winning 89, 90 games? Yeah, I think the team is capable.” — GM Sandy Alderson David Wright made a backhand play on a ground ball and then threw smoothly to first for the out. Wright has made that play hundreds of times. But this time, it was a small reminder that Wright’s left shoulder was healthy again after a season of discomfort and that he was at full strength for a 2015 campaign that he has said he hopes will end the Mets’ long run of futility. But Tuesday’s game was not the only event of the day for Wright, who has been the team captain since March 2013. After he left the game and went to the clubhouse, he spotted Noah Syndergaard, the Mets’ top prospect, eating lunch while the game was still going on. According to several published reports from members of the news media who were there, Wright admonished Syndergaard for not being on the bench watching the game, even if he was not scheduled to pitch. One report, in Newsday, said another veteran player, Bobby Parnell, had emphasized Wright’s message by dumping Syndergaard’s food in a trash can. At that point, Syndergaard went outside to watch the game. Tim Rohan “Straight-up ignorance on my part, just thinking I could go in there during a game, grab a quick bite to eat. It was just a learning experience for me. Should have been on the bench.” — Noah Syndergaard For his first official day back on the mound for the Mets, Matt Harvey wanted everything to be just right. So before the game, he played D.J. As his teammates lounged in the clubhouse, he walked over to a silver amplifier that sat on one side of the room. He plugged in his smartphone, chose a song and cranked up the volume. It was Aerosmith’s “Back in the Saddle.” (“I’m calling all the shots tonight.”) Chest puffed out, knit orange-and-blue Mets hat pulled down to his brow, he strutted away to chew tobacco and spit into a plastic bottle, glancing at a video stream of the Nationals’ batting practice. When the song was over, he returned to his phone to play the Beastie Boys’ “Sure Shot.” (“You can’t, you won’t and you don’t stop.”) Then he strutted off again, in silence. He soon was back to change the song again. You’d figure that a starting pitcher, less than 90 minutes before his first game in a year and a half, would have better things to do. But that’s Matt Harvey: Even after coming back from Tommy John surgery to repair his right elbow in October 2013, he acted as if he owned the place. On Thursday, he appeared to be in charge of the Mets’ clubhouse — right down to the detail of their pregame playlist. In only a matter of time, he also took charge of the game. He was so good that he pitched six scoreless innings, throwing 91 pitches, 63 of which were strikes. He struck out nine hitters, including the dangerous Bryce Harper not once, not twice, but three times. At times, he appeared to be jet-fueled, as his pitches shot past hitters at 95, 96, even 98 miles per hour. Those questions of whether he could come back from surgery to match his pre-injury heights as one of the top pitchers in the game — answered. Juliet Macur “We’re talking about winning pennants here. When you’ve got a No. 1 guy that you can run out there and you know that, hey, if we give him two or three runs a game, he’s going to win games, we’ve got that animal.” — Manager Terry Collins The Mets’ closer, Jenrry Mejia, was suspended for 80 games after testing positive for stanozolol, an old, easily detectable steroid. In his absence, Jeurys Familia, who emerged last season as Mejia’s setup man, will now step up and become the closer himself.  in the week with what was described as inflammation in his right elbow. That condition had been expected to keep him sidelined for several weeks; instead, Mejia will be suspended for 80 games and can not return until July. It is a body blow to the Mets, who are hoping that 2015 will be a turnaround year but whose pitching staff has already been rocked by injuries. The news of Mejia’s suspension broke Saturday evening while the Mets were taking batting practice before their 5-3 loss to the Braves. “I know the rules are the rules, and I will accept my punishment, but I can honestly say I have no idea how a banned substance ended up in my system,” Mejia said in a statement issued through the players’ union. Tim Rohan “Not only do you cost yourself 80 games and don’t get paid, but you’re hurting everybody in here. You’re letting down your teammates.” — David Wright Attempting to tie a franchise record of 11 consecutive victories, the Mets spent much of the afternoon reverting to a style of play that pervaded Citi Field the last six seasons.Base runners and fielders miscalculated. Innings ended with the bases loaded. And the Mets blew an early 3-0 lead over the Atlanta Braves. What sets this year’s club apart, however, is its ability to overcome such lapses with crisp at-bats, dominant bullpen work and uncanny feats of athleticism by Bartolo Colon, who is 41 and listed at 285 pounds. So the Mets did not wither, even when old habits resurfaced, and they put away the Braves, 6-3. Murphy drove in four runs, and the Mets took advantage of erratic pitching by the Braves to win their 11th consecutive game and their 12th straight at Citi Field dating to September of last season, also tying a club best.Seth Berkman “In each ballgame, no matter what happens, I feel like somebody’s going to come through. It’s a really cool feeling to have.” — Daniel Murphy There was euphoria in the visitors’ clubhouse, of a kind not experienced in Queens since 1969. The evidence sat in the garbage: boxes and boxes of empty packages of Budweiser beer.Finally, Chris Heston emerged, dripping sweat and alcohol, dripping pride and exhaustion, walking briskly toward the interview room where he had to do the last thing he wanted to do: explain how he had just no-hit the Mets. It was inexplicable, really. His opposing starter at Citi Field on Tuesday was Noah Syndergaard, a herculean archetype nicknamed Thor, after a comic-book figure, whose 98-m.p.h. sizzler helped him become one of baseball’s most coveted prospects. Heston, at age 27, was sniffing the major leagues for the first time, and his fastball might not hit 98 m.p.h. in a wind tunnel. His style was artful, crafty, under control, but to this point, 14 games into his big league career with the San Francisco Giants, the results were a mixed bag.  Still, by the fifth inning, the Giants players were starting to sense the right things were clicking. The zeros glowed on the scoreboard. Heston was trying to join only six other pitchers that have no-hit the Mets, a list that includes Sandy Koufax, Jim Bunning, and the last to do it, Darryl Kile, in 1993. The last pitcher to have done it against the Mets in Queens was Bob Moose in 1969. The Mets had just returned home, where living had been good this season. That all melted away, inning by inning, as the Mets’ hitters came up and went down, a procession of frustration and befuddlement. As the final batter, Ruben Tejada, stood staring in the batter’s box after striking out, Heston pounded his glove and opened his arms for catcher Buster Posey’s embrace. In the clubhouse, a beer shower awaited.  Zach Schonbrun “He didn’t throw hard. But his pitches had a ton of movement that got off of our barrels.” — Michael Cuddyer Sometime during the fifth inning of a game on a soft summer evening at Citi Field, our gaze strayed from our beers and sausages to the radiant green field and then to the scoreboard.My son Nick and I noted that Clayton Kershaw of the Dodgers was throwing a perfect game against our Mets. Well, of course he was. The Great Kershaw versus the hitless wonders known as the Mets qualifies as a mercy killing. Inning after inning rolled by, and zeros piled up on the scoreboard with a metronomic certainty. A side benefit of being a Mets fan this year is that you become a specialist in the many ways a team can fail to hit. A month ago, we sat in this stadium and watched the soft-tossing Giants right-hander Chris Heston throw a no-hitter against our Mets. The last couple of Mets hitters that game did not even take a swing. Why bother? It was a workingman’s special; I was home in time for the 10 o’clock news. In the seventh inning of the Kershaw game, Curtis Granderson surprised everyone by lining a single to right field. The crowd let out a loud, sarcastic cheer, and Kershaw eventually settled for a three-hit shutout. Sandy Alderson, the general manager of a putative contending team, insists he is conducting a search for a putative hitter. For now, attention must be paid: The management has assembled one of the poorest-hitting Mets teams ever. Michael Powell “As the Mets are just three games from first place, and are blessed with golden pitching arms, however, it might be fun if someone knew how to swing a bat.” — Michael Powell The Mets finally pulled off a major deal, sending Wilmer Flores and Zack Wheeler to the Milwaukee Brewers in exchange for the highly regarded center fielder Carlos Gomez. Except, it turned out, that they didn’t. In what will go down as one of the more surreal nights in the history of the Mets, who have had many strange things happen to them in their 53 years of existence, a deal that was widely, if briefly, reported by various news organizations, including The New York Times, collapsed after it had already been confirmed by various people in baseball, including a high-ranking team executive who spoke to The Times. Baseball deals are not considered official until any medical issues concerning the players involved have been reviewed by the teams making the trade. Normally, that is a formality but in this instance questions were apparently raised that caused either the Mets or Brewers to ultimately back out of the deal. Of the three players in this deal that wasn’t, Wheeler is the one who stands out when it comes to medical questions because he underwent Tommy John surgery earlier this year and was not scheduled to pitch again for the Mets until at some point in the 2016 season. Still, there were conflicting reports last night as to whether it was Wheeler’s post-surgical situation that raised deal-killing concerns with the Brewers or whether the Mets pulled out because of some concerns of their own about Gomez’s physical condition. The first sign that something was askew with the trade came when Flores remained in the Mets’ game against San Diego on Wednesday night, which the Padres won, 7-3, despite three home runs by Lucas Duda. Normally, when a player is about to be traded he is pulled from the game to avoid any possibility of a last-minute injury that would scuttle the deal. And yet as Wednesday’s game proceeded, and the trade was reported as fact, Flores remained on the field, playing shortstop and taking his at-bats. Reporters were mystified as to why Flores was still in the game, as was just about everyone else who was watching, including all the fans at Citi Field who were reading about the trade on their cell phones. Those same fans then saluted Flores with a standing ovation when he came to bat in the bottom of the seventh inning, the clear assumption being they were watching him take his last swings as a Met. And in the top of the eighth, when Flores dutifully ran back out to his shortstop position, the television cameras that zoomed in on him showed that he was crying. He, too, thought he was gone. Except that he wasn’t. Seth Berkman “Someone came to me and said, ‘Wilmer’s crying.’ I said. ‘Why.’ Well, he got traded. To who? For what?” — Terry Collins Curtis Granderson had just sent a charge through Citi Field, lifting a three-run homer to right field in the fifth inning of the Mets’ game against San Diego, and after he rounded the bases to roaring cheers and made his way through the dugout, high-fiving his teammates, he found Wilmer Flores. Granderson pulled him in for a hug and patted his back, and Flores laid his head on Granderson’s shoulder and smiled. The night before, Flores had been wiping tears from his eyes on the field, with everyone watching his every move, after word spread that he had been traded to the Milwaukee Brewers, along with Zack Wheeler, in exchange for center fielder Carlos Gomez. But the deal had fallen through, and now Flores had to live with the fact that the Mets had tried to trade him. And the Mets, in turn, had begun to do what they could to make him feel wanted. Granderson’s gesture helped. And the mood became even brighter as the Mets built a 7-1 lead an inning later. And yet whatever good feelings there were slowly, amazingly imploded. The Mets, amid two ninth-inning rain delays that together lasted nearly four hours, managed to blow the lead and the game. If Wednesday night’s confusion over the trade that wasn’t had left the Mets and their fans feeling out of sorts, Thursday’s late-game meltdown probably made them feel as if they needed a weeklong break from baseball. Or maybe two weeks.  Tim Rohan “That’s all part of the game. He understands that. It just was a shock to him last night.” — Terry Collins on Wilmer Flores.David Wright was conducting a group interview near his locker, and the clock over his right shoulder read 3:53, seven minutes from the trade deadline. It was then that a reporter informed him that news was circulating that the Mets had acquired Yoenis Cespedes, the Cuban-born outfielder with the powerful bat and arm and the ability to electrify a crowd. A big smile spread across Wright’s face. “We’ve been through this before,” he said, still grinning, a knowing reference to the Mets’ trade for Milwaukee center fielder Carlos Gomez that had fallen through just two days before. This time, though, there was no retreat. General Manager Sandy Alderson walked into a Citi Field news conference room a short while later to announce that the deal was official, making clear that the Mets, a team that has not been in the postseason since 2006 and has not even had a winning season since moving into its current stadium in 2009, is serious about contending right now. “We believe we’re in position to compete through the rest of the season for a playoff spot,” Alderson said, “and we’re going to do everything we can to ensure that competitive level.” The Mets made that point in a particularly emphatic way because the 29-year-old Cespedes is one of the game’s more exciting players. Everything he does is energetic, from his violent swings to his bat flips, from his big throws to his bigger home runs. He has twice won the All-Star Game home run derby, including the one held in 2013 at Citi Field. More than anything, he should add some oomph to the Mets’ lineup. The Mets went into Friday’s game having scored the fewest runs of any team in baseball.  Tim Rohan “Give him credit. He said he wanted to be aggressive. He said we’re trying to win now. When you make moves, it backs that up.” — David Wright, on Sandy Alderson making a trade. It was around 11 p.m. when Terry Collins predicted the future. Collins, the Mets’ manager, approached the bench coach, Bob Geren, in the bottom of the 12th inning of the Mets’ important, emphatic 2-1 win over the Washington Nationals at Citi Field. The game was tied at 1-1, and the Mets were about to bat. Collins told Geren that someone was going to hit a home run that inning. “When the ball left the bat,” Collins said after the game, “I said, ‘And it had to be him.’ ” He was, of course, referring to second baseman Wilmer Flores, who had just hit his first career walk-off home run and drove in both runs to power the Mets’ win. Flores — who two nights ago cried on the field during the Mets’ loss to the Padres because he thought he had been traded — said he did not remember what he was thinking as he rounded the bases. “Can it happen at a better time to a better person in a bigger situation than that?” Collins said. “It’s unbelievable.” Flores’s home run and the win were critical as the Mets try to overtake the Nationals in the National League East. Before the game, rap music thumped loudly from Curtis Granderson’s locker, and Granderson seemed very happy. It was, he said, “a feel-good Friday.” Indeed, the Mets had reasons to feel good, even before Flores’s home run. Their ace, Matt Harvey, was set to take the mound. Their promising catcher, Travis d’Arnaud, had been activated from the disabled list and was scheduled to start for the first time since June 20. Their captain and leader, David Wright, said he could play in a minor league game next week as he continued to rehabilitate from spinal stenosis.  And then there was Flores. As he approached home plate after hitting the winning home run, he threw his helmet into the infield grass, pounded his chest twice and jumped into a horde of cheering teammates as the stadium erupted in celebration. Rob Harms “That’s one of the best walk-off homers I’ve ever seen, considering everything.” — Michael Cuddyer Lucas Duda watched the ball soar into the night, his mouth agape, listening as the Citi Field crowd reacted. The fans had shot out of their seats, throwing their arms up as if they were on a roller coaster. As the ball ricocheted off the facing of the second deck, they roared. The home run was the Mets’ third in a span of four batters. Duda, usually a reserved person, smiled widely as he crossed home plate, and the fans kept standing, roaring, chanting. Wanting to make a statement in a pivotal series, the Mets played as complete a game as they had all season. Noah Syndergaard pitched brilliantly for eight innings, recording nine strikeouts. The offense had the timely outburst, punctuated by Duda’s shot. Tyler Clippard pitched a clean ninth. The result — a 5-2 victory Sunday — finished off a three-game sweep of the Nationals and pulled the Mets into a tie with Washington atop the National League East. And a day later, on Aug. 3, the Mets beat the Miami Marlins, claimed first place for themselves and set their sights on their first division title in nine years. Tim Rohan “It’s so much fun to be a Met right now.” Noah Syndergaard Imagine if David Wright’s leadership powers worked this way all the time. With his first swing after coming off the disabled list, Wright launched a home run into the second deck of Citizens Bank Park. His teammates followed his example to absurd lengths: They set single-game Mets records for homers and extra-base hits in a 16-7 thrashing of the Philadelphia Phillies. This is the vision Wright embraced three years ago, when he committed his career to the Mets through 2020: dominant pitching, a better lineup and a chance to play in October. Even on Monday, when Jacob deGrom had his worst career start, the Mets responded by doing what the best teams do. They pounded on the weak. After gorging on Colorado pitching over the weekend, the Mets clubbed eight homers and 15 extra-base hits off the Phillies. Wright was like a father returning from a long business trip to find that his baby, who was crawling when he left, was suddenly sprinting around the backyard. “We’ve got one of the best pitchers in baseball pitching for us; he doesn’t have his best night, and we just know that we’re going to win the game,” Wright said. “That’s the type of confidence you can’t tell somebody to have. You can’t force it upon somebody. You just have to get good at winning. It seems like this team is getting good at winning.” Wright was only 23 when the Mets last made the playoffs, in 2006. With the Phillies’ trade of Chase Utley to the Dodgers last week, Wright became the longest-tenured major leaguer to play all of his career games with one team — 1,517 through Monday. He is the forever Met, the franchise leader in almost every hitting category: hits, runs, total bases, runs batted in, walks, strikeouts, offensive wins above replacement. He is by far the best Met to have never appeared in the World Series. Now the Mets have their most realistic chance in almost a decade, and the possibility of Wright’s being inactive for it was cruel.  Tyler Kepner “You watch it on TV, and now to be a part of it, you understand. This team seems to be on a mission.” — David Wright Over the winter, as the Mets prepared for Matt Harvey’s first season back from Tommy John surgery, General Manager Sandy Alderson and Scott Boras, Harvey’s agent, discussed how the Mets would handle Harvey’s health. “I told him as the doctors go along, there’s going to be an innings limit,” Boras said Friday as he recounted the conversation with Alderson. “He goes, ‘We understand there’s an innings limit.’ ” But five months into the season, a sharp disagreement emerged over that limit, how much Harvey should pitch in the final month of the campaign and whether he should pitch in the postseason, which the Mets are poised to make for the first time in nearly a decade. While the Mets are likely to have the final say in the matter, the dispute could have repercussions, perhaps souring their relationship with the most powerful agent in baseball and perhaps making it even harder to re-sign Harvey when he becomes a free agent in several years. After word of the disagreement was first reported by Jon Heyman on CBSSports.com, Boras went on something of a media blitz, contending that Dr. James Andrews had recently recommended that Harvey’s innings be capped at 180 for the year — he is already at 166 1/3 — and that if the Mets did not abide by the doctor’s wishes they would, in Boras’s words, be putting one of their star pitchers in “peril.” “I’m not saying what the Mets can or can’t do,” Boras said in a phone interview. “That’s not my job. I’m letting them know what the medical opinion is, and that’s it. And when they receive notice of the medical opinion, who’s accountable for that?” Despite Boras’s contention that 180 innings should be the limit, which would effectively keep Harvey out of the postseason and limit him the rest of this month, the Mets gave no sign on that they would abide by Boras’s wishes. Alderson said that he also contacted Andrews and came away with a different conclusion. “What I heard from Dr. Andrews doesn’t line up with what Scott is saying,” Alderson said.  Tim Rohan “The main thing is to do what’s best for Matt’s career. He really wants to play, and they’re in the playoffs. But it’s their problem.” — Dr. James AndrewsThe Mets poured into the clubhouse, high-fiving each other and cheering louder than they had after any win this season after they had overcome a six-run deficit to beat the Nationals, 8-7, Tuesday night. Then they sat at their lockers, still buzzing, and waited until Kirk Nieuwenhuis came off the field from his postgame interview. Michael Cuddyer awarded Nieuwenhuis the championship belt, a tradition he started to honor the player of the game for Nieuwenhuis’s pinch-hit, go-ahead home run off Jonathan Papelbon, the Nationals’ closer, in the eighth inning. Nieuwenhuis held the belt high, like the heavyweight champion of the world, and the clubhouse erupted in cheers again. “We’re going to have fun with it,” Nieuwenhuis said of the Mets’ pennant race with the Nationals. “We’re going to make sure to relax and play like we have nothing to lose.” The contrast between the two teams could not be more stark. As Nieuwenhuis rounded the bases, expressionless, Papelbon paced the mound and rubbed the baseball so hard it looked as if he wanted to rip off its seams. When Yunel Escobar grounded into a game-ending double play, the Mets’ infielders converged, screaming at the top of their lungs. This was the Mets’ largest comeback this late in a game since 2001, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. It may very well have been their biggest win of the season. It extended their lead over the Nationals in the National League East and left them with only four more games against the Mets to catch up. The Mets may have also broken the Nationals’ spirit. Tim Rohan “What a game. Just, what a game.” — David Wright After the final game of the season on Sunday, a 1-0 victory over the Washington Nationals, the Mets gathered in center field at Citi Field, waving and tipping their caps to fans holding signs and banners celebrating the team’s division title. Ricky Bones, the bullpen coach, tossed baseballs into the crowd. Ever since the Mets clinched the National League East eight days earlier, they looked a bit distracted, caught in an awkward spot, trying to rest their veterans and clinch home-field advantage simultaneously. Basking in the crowd’s cheers, the Mets looked relieved. Jeurys Familia had recorded his 43rd save this season, tying the franchise record set by Armando Benitez in 2001. Jacob deGrom had ended the season with 205 strikeouts, becoming the 11th Mets pitcher to reach 200 strikeouts in a year. The Mets had finished the season 90-72, their first 90-plus-win season since 2006. Now they could focus on playing the Dodgers in a National League division series set to start Friday in Los Angeles.  Tim Rohan “Let’s go beat L.A.” — David Wright, to the crowd at Citi Field. Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada lay face down in the dirt near second base, motionless, as the Dodger Stadium crowd erupted. The Dodgers’ Chase Utley had just slid hard into him, breaking up what might have been a potential inning-ending double play by submarining Tejada and sending him flying into the air and to the ground hard on his back. As Tejada lay there, still motionless, the Mets surrounded him as the umpires reviewed the play. The slide had been violent, with the Dodgers trailing by a run in the seventh inning. As Tejada was carted off the field with a broken leg, the umpires determined he had not touched the base. Utley, who had initially been called out, was now safe. Instead of getting two outs, or even one, the Mets had recorded zero outs on the play. Manager Terry Collins quizzed the umpires, but the reversal stood. The Dodgers took advantage of the opportunity by scoring three more runs en route to a 5-2 victory, beating the Mets in demoralizing fashion and tying the National League division series at one game apiece as it heads back to New York for Game 3 on Monday. That slide cost the Mets not only their starting shortstop but valuable momentum in a best-of-five-game series. “Only Chase knows what the intent was,” David Wright said. “I have a problem with the play on a number of different levels — one being the slide itself. In my opinion, he wasn’t anywhere near the bag. With that being said, he didn’t even touch the bag.” Utley took his time returning to the clubhouse after the game to speak with reporters, and when he finally arrived, he denied any wrongdoing. Tim Rohan “I feel terrible he was injured. I did not intend to hurt him whatsoever. I was just trying to break up the double play.” — Chase Utley Zack Greinke glared out to right field, shook his head and massaged a baseball, trying to figure out what he had done wrong. Daniel Murphy had turned on a low fastball, sent it screaming into the seats and flipped his bat aside, as if he knew all along that the ball was gone as the Dodger Stadium crowd watched in stunned silence. Murphy, the Mets’ workmanlike second baseman, rounded the bases with a stoic look, his jersey covered in dirt. The Mets’ dugout exploded in cheers. Jacob deGrom, their starter, looked relieved. And Mets fans everywhere could exhale. Murphy’s sixth-inning solo blast will forever be remembered in Mets lore. It lifted them to a 3-2 win over the Los Angeles Dodgers and over Greinke, perhaps the best pitcher in the major leagues this season, in the winner-take-all Game 5 of this National League division series. “Adjectives are going to fall short of how this feels right now,” Murphy said in the middle of the Mets’ clubhouse as he was drenched by teammates spraying champagne every which way and yelling at the top of their lungs. This group of Mets had already won the franchise’s first division title since 2006. Now, despite having to face the Dodgers’ aces, Greinke and Clayton Kershaw, two times each in a five-game series, the Mets advanced to the league championship series to face the Chicago Cubs. The Mets need four more wins to reach their first World Series since 2000.  This was their first winner-take-all game in nine years, their first since Carlos Beltran struck out against the Cardinals’ Adam Wainwright to end the 2006 N.L.C.S. That was a flash point in Mets history — most fans could tell you where they were when that happened.  Tim Rohan “Is he the manager of the year? I don’t know. I’m not voting. But I think so.” — Sandy Koufax, on Terry Collins Miguel Montero, the Cubs’ catcher, escorted his pitcher, Jake Arrieta, back to the mound, consoling him as Mets fans rejoiced around them. Arrieta had just tried baiting Daniel Murphy into chasing a curveball down and in. Murphy bent down, his left knee nearly touching the ground, and golfed it with a flick of his wrist into the right-field seats. Murphy raised a clenched fist as he rounded first base, pointed to the sky as he crossed home plate, and then screamed and pumped his fists. As Arrieta tried regaining his composure, the crowd chanted Murphy’s name, and he came out for a curtain call. This is the kind of reception one receives after homering in four consecutive playoff games, off four of the best pitchers in baseball: Clayton Kershaw, Zack Greinke, Jon Lester and now Arrieta. The Mets’ young pitching staff has received a lot of credit, and Noah Syndergaard pitched an impressive game Sunday night, but the Mets have beaten each of those four pitchers this postseason thanks in large part to Murphy and his heroics. His legend grew larger as he led the Mets to a 4-1 win over Arrieta and the Cubs in Game 2 of the National League Championship Series, taking a two-games-to-none lead as the series shifts to Chicago. “We’re having a whole bunch of fun right now,” Murphy said during his postgame press conference, making postseason baseball sound as if this were a July series in San Diego.  Tim Rohan “I still made some good pitches to him, but any time the ball has some height and he’s able to get the barrel to it, it seems like now he’s doing damage.” — Jake Arrieta, on Daniel MurphyThe baseball globe spins differently now. It obeys the whims of a blue-and-orange team with a hapless history marked by spikes of the amazing. This is the latest, and it is overwhelming in its totality. The Mets reached their fifth World Series on Wednesday night at Wrigley Field, completing a four-game sweep of the National League Championship Series with an 8-3 victory over the Chicago Cubs. The Mets, who never trailed in the series, will visit the Kansas City Royals or the Toronto Blue Jays for Game 1 on Tuesday. Long after Jeurys Familia struck out Dexter Fowler to clinch the pennant, the Mets returned from their clubhouse to celebrate on the field with family. The Cubs fans had cleared out by then, and a throng of Mets fans, several rows deep, crowded around the dugout to chant the players’ names and cheer. “This is a long time coming,” said David Wright, the team captain, who signed with the Mets at age 17, in 2001. “I’m glad that I got a chance to kind of experience some of the misery with them along this road, because that champagne tastes a lot sweeter having gone through that, let me tell you.” The Mets will hope that their sudden star, Daniel Murphy, brings his gilded bat to the World Series. Murphy homered for the sixth game in a row, a slugging streak that set a new major league postseason record. He had four hits in Game 4 on Wednesday and torched the Cubs for four home runs and a .529 average in the series. This will be the first World Series at Citi Field, which opened in 2009 — the first of six losing seasons in a row for the Mets, who slashed payroll, groomed prospects and preached patience to their fans. “Watching the fans like this — this is what I’m getting the most kick out of and the most fun, watching the fans enjoy this,” said Jeff Wilpon, the chief operating officer, on the field after the game. “We got four more wins now. Four more.” Tyler Kepner “Baseball is my whole life; I started playing when I was 4 or 5. I’m sitting there and thinking: ‘Holy crap. Now you’re in the World Series.’ ” — Terry CollinsAdvertisement