
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
OCT. 2, 2015
PITTSBURGH — In May, the ever-confident Michael Vick wondered whether he had finally come to the end of the road. Vick had parted ways with the Jets after a dismal season and was left to wonder if any team would take a chance on an aging quarterback who, once upon a time, had been the most electrifying player in the N.F.L.So Vick waited, maintaining a rigorous workout regimen and telling a reporter, “I just want to stay ready and confident when opportunity knocks.”Opportunity tapped at his door in August, and Vick was signed by the Pittsburgh Steelers after their backup quarterback, Bruce Gradkowski, was lost for the season. Then on Sunday, opportunity knocked down Vick’s door: Ben Roethlisberger was lost for four to six weeks with a knee injury.Suddenly, Vick, who had not started an N.F.L. game since last November, was being asked to save a season.At 35, does the Comeback Kid have one more comeback in him? Raucous Steelers fans were asking the same thing Thursday when Vick made the first of what could be more than a month of starts, against the Baltimore Ravens.AdvertisementUnfortunately for Vick, the Ravens spoiled his debut. But only because the Steelers — and Vick — gave them chance after chance.AdvertisementA fumbled snap. A missed field-goal attempt. And another. Twice in overtime, Vick had chances to put the Steelers in position for a winning field goal. The first ended when he was stopped on a fourth-and-2 run. The second was lost when he overthrew Antonio Brown on fourth-and-1. Vick said that that pass in particular was “going to haunt me for a long time.”“There were a lot of plays I could have made that I didn’t make,” he said, adding: “We just have to get better. We got to get better from week to week until 7 gets back.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No. 7 is Roethlisberger. But at 2-2, Pittsburgh may not have that long.In many ways, Vick’s performance was a compendium of his career: lots of excitement, chills and thrills, great plays and questionable plays. But, ultimately, a less-than-satisfying finish.“He’s electrifying,” Baltimore linebacker Elvis Dumervil said. “He’s still quick, still fast. He was a problem.”But for one night at least, he was a solvable problem.I have seen a number of Vick’s comebacks. In a career that now includes four franchises and 13 seasons, Vick has come back from injury. He has come back from losses. He even came back after a stunning fall from grace — a prison term for his role in an interstate dogfighting ring — to win the N.F.L.’s Comeback Player of the Year Award with Philadelphia. But Vick, for all the excitement he generated, never closed the deal. He never carried any of his teams to the Super Bowl.In his prime, Vick was a human highlight reel, often one of the best athletes on the field — a player counted on to do everything. This is not the case in Pittsburgh, where the offense relies more on an All-Pro receiver (Brown) and an All-Pro running back (Le’Veon Bell). The Steelers’ defense, creeping back to its former dominance, will do the rest.But Vick will have to hold it all together, to save the season until Roethlisberger returns.“It’s a great opportunity for me because I don’t know if I will have this opportunity ever again,” Vick said this week. “Just a month ago, I was waiting to sign with a team. Now I feel like I have a chance to go out and play freely and enjoy the game, enjoy this moment.”AdvertisementVick was injured when he lost his starting job to Nick Foles in Philadelphia. He was signed by the Jets to mentor Geno Smith, but eventually replaced him — passing for 604 yards and three touchdowns in 10 forgettable games.That was not how Vick wanted to be remembered and why Thursday was a frustrating night for Pittsburgh but a heartening evening for Vick. His numbers were solid: 19 of 26 for 124 yards with a touchdown and no interceptions, as well as 33 yards rushing and a key block on an 11-yard touchdown by Bell.Ultimately, that kind of contribution may be enough for the Steelers. Vick made mistakes, but he did not play like a backup quarterback. That was what made Thursday’s final score so disappointing.“Trying to fill in for Ben is a difficult task, but I was up for it,” he said. Referring to the loss, he said, “I haven’t felt this pain in a long time.”Whether it’s Peyton Manning in Denver, Alex Rodriguez with the Yankees or David Wright with the Mets, I have a soft spot for the comeback story. I’m pulling for Vick, the Comeback Kid, to have one more.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Yet Another Comeback Attempt in a Career of Them.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »