By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 2, 2015
When the Yankees play in their wild-card showdown on Tuesday, many will no doubt recall the team’s most famous one-game do-or-die affair, Game 163 in Boston in 1978, when Bucky Dent hit a three-run homer over the Green Monster to win the division title.But two years before Dent was born, the Yankees were involved in a similar make-or-break game. It came on the final day of the season and capped a pennant race with enough drama to rival that of 1978.The 1949 American League race included a big blown lead, a disputed call and a superstar leaving his hospital bed to help rescue his team.The Yankees took the league lead on opening day and at first looked unlikely to relinquish it. On July 15, they were up by six and a half games, and fans could be forgiven for looking forward to the World Series.AdvertisementBut the lead gradually dribbled away. Despite more than their share of injuries, the Yankees had a good August, finishing the month 17-12. But the Red Sox were better, at 23-8. September was much the same story.AdvertisementIt did not help that the great Joe DiMaggio was out for three critical weeks with pneumonia. (He had also missed the first two months of the season with a heel injury.)On Sept. 25 the lead was gone, after the Red Sox beat the Yankees, 4-1, at Fenway Park behind Ted Williams’s 43rd home run and a four-hitter by Mel Parnell.Still hopeful Yankees fans thronged Grand Central Terminal to greet the team as it arrived that night from Boston on Track 17. “So aggressive were the fans in their efforts to reach the ball players,” The New York Times wrote, “that the police and station guards had to escort several of the team to side exits to avoid accidental injury to the already crippled squad.”The optimistic fans had their hopes dashed the next night at Yankee Stadium. The Sox took over first place with a 7-6 win, Johnny Pesky scoring on a squeeze by Bobby Doerr.The call of safe at the plate incensed the Yankees. Outfielder Cliff Mapes, who had not even played in the game, confronted the plate umpire, Bill Grieve, afterward, and the two had to be separated. “How much did you bet on the game?” Mapes yelled.The umpire Cal Hubbard (described as “exasperated” by The Times) opined: “How can a team that walks two men, makes an error and then fails to cover first base on a play blame the umpires for losing? Bah!”Yankees players and Manager Casey Stengel were fined a total of $500 for their intemperance.The Yankees won two of three against the Philadelphia Athletics, and the Red Sox matched that in Washington. With two games to play, Boston still led by one game.AdvertisementThe tension in the pennant race riveted both cities. In an article on reaction in New England to the Soviet Union’s getting an atomic bomb, The Times wrote: “People appeared almost unanimous in their opinion that if the Russians had the atomic bomb and intended to use it, there was nothing that they, individually, could do about it. A more immediate pressing concern was whether Ted Williams of the Boston Red Sox would hit any home runs against the New York Yankees.”Pneumonia had put DiMaggio in the hospital, and he had lost 18 pounds, but he decided it was time to return. The Yankees proclaimed it Joe DiMaggio Day, and for an hour before the game, he was lauded and showered with gifts, including 300 quarts of ice cream and a speedboat.His brother Dom, who played for Boston, stood at his side, at times helping him to stay upright. DiMaggio was penciled in at the cleanup spot.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Red Sox jumped into the lead, 4-0, chasing starter Allie Reynolds in the third inning. But the Yankees’ ace reliever, Joe Page, held them scoreless the rest of the way, and the Yankees fought back to tie it, with DiMaggio scoring the first run after hitting a ground-rule double. The tie was broken in the eighth inning when the unsung left fielder Johnny Lindell homered, and the Yankees hung on to win, 5-4.The pennant race was tied with one game to go. The final game, on Oct. 2 in Yankee Stadium, would determine whether Boston or the Yankees played in the World Series.The Yankees grabbed a 1-0 lead in the first, thanks to a leadoff triple by shortstop Phil Rizzuto. Starter Vic Raschi, known as the Springfield Rifle, held the slim lead. In the eighth, the Yanks seemed to lock up the game with four runs, including a Tommy Henrich home run.But the Red Sox’ season was not quite done. In the ninth inning, Doerr socked a two-run triple over the head of DiMaggio, who had not looked his best running or throwing in the outfield.At that point, DiMaggio, who was 0 for 3 since a first-inning triple, took himself out of the game, complaining of shin pain. “Gosh, we had only a three-run lead, and I didn’t want to hurt the club by falling on my face if another fly had been hit to me,” he said.AdvertisementThe Sox got one more, but Raschi knuckled down and got the outs that won the game, 5-3, and the pennant. The Red Sox had lost by a single game for the second straight year.In the National League, the Brooklyn Dodgers ensured a Subway Series by winning their pennant on the final day as well. In the Series, DiMaggio was only 2 for 18, but the Yankees won, four games to one, the first of five straight World Series titles for the Bombers.For the Red Sox, who had come so close to glory, the future was not as bright. Boston would not make its next World Series appearance until 1967 and would not win its next World Series title until 2004.Now the Yankees again face a season coming down to a single game. It may be decided by Alex Rodriguez, not Johnny Lindell, and Masahiro Tanaka, not Vic Raschi, but as usual with the Yankees, the weight of history will not be too far away.A version of this article appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Do-or-Die Game Before Bucky Dent Was Alive .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.