By BEN SHPIGELOCT. 26, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  The Jets do not like the routine, but they are familiar with it. They play New England, they lose to New England, and then they assemble the next day to discuss what they did wrong while losing to New England.From season to season, the reason changes, although it is always some toxic cocktail of blown coverages and dropped passes, communication lapses and red-zone inefficiency. The margin of defeat fluctuates, too, though it is usually small. Three combined points last year. Seven on Sunday, when, after a false-start penalty on Brandon Marshall, time ran out on the Jets 37 yards away from the end zone.“There are no statements when you lose,” Coach Todd Bowles said. “We’ve got to win games. We’re not in this thing to play close games.”The Jets have won their four games by an average of 15 points and absorbed both losses, including Sunday by 30-23, by a touchdown. It is not their fault, but until being shredded by Tom Brady, they had not played a high-scoring team. Besides No. 1 New England, only the Dolphins among the Jets’ opponents rank above the league average, and they sit at ninth only because they scored 44 on Sunday against Houston.AdvertisementSo far, the Jets have muzzled Johnny Manziel and Andrew Luck, Sam Bradford (in a loss) and Ryan Tannehill and also Kirk Cousins. Presented with a quarterback of Brady’s caliber, who was operating an offense that refused to integrate the run, the Jets’ defense crumpled.AdvertisementBrady was so efficient that of his 20 incompletions, according to Pro Football Focus, 14 were dropped, deflected at the line of scrimmage or tossed away on purpose. Against the Jets, Brady mounted six scoring drives, the last two of them 10-play touchdown masterpieces of 80 and 68 yards that served an important function. The Jets did not learn anything Sunday so much as relearn.They were reminded that favorable statistical oddities do not translate into victories: They lost despite gaining more first downs and more total yardage; holding a six-minute edge in time of possession; and allowing all of 1 yard rushing to running backs.They were reminded how the Patriots prey on their mistakes. Brady is too smart not to detect and exploit them, and so are his receivers.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Once Julian Edelman noticed Dion Bailey turning his hips in coverage on the pivotal third-and-17 play in the fourth quarter, he zipped inside and caught a 27-yard pass. Once Brady recognized that the Jets were blitzing on New England’s final scoring drive, he waited for the rush to reach him before flipping a pass to Rob Gronkowski, who ran into the end zone untouched. In the fourth quarter, Brady completed 14 of 17 passes for 150 yards and two touchdowns.“You know they’re going to rally,” guard Willie Colon said. “They’re going to make the plays they need to make. You can’t leave points out there. You can’t even leave plays out there.”On conference calls Monday, Bowles and a few players lamented opportunities missed. Foremost among them, that third-and-17 debacle — “we felt very confident about what we wanted to do at that point,” cornerback Darrelle Revis said — but also the Jets’ first two field-goal drives. On the first, they had three chances to score from inside the 4-yard line but could not. On the second, Marshall dropped what would have been a 12-yard touchdown.“When you have a chance like that to put the knife in them, you’ve got to do so,” Colon said. “If not, then they’re going to turn around and do it to you. And that’s what happened.”AdvertisementIn Bowles’s rookie season, it has been both a rapid ascent and a slow march for the Jets. Already they have equaled their win total from 2014. Each victory has legitimized their expectations and established their credibility. And yet they are still trying to narrow the distance between them and the Patriots, who beat them for the third straight time and the eighth time in nine games.In the standings, the Jets, at 4-2, still sit in an enviable position, which they recognize. They have asserted their superiority against lesser teams, and their next seven opponents are a combined 18-28, with only one, the Giants, above .500. But that record is somewhat misleading.Oakland, next on the docket, is emerging. Miami, after changing coaches, is thriving. And Buffalo, however discombobulated it might look, is loaded with talent and will be amped for a divisional matchup and Rex Ryan’s return to MetLife Stadium.“It’s a process to make progress,” Bowles said. “We made progress, but not enough. We got to turn those losses into wins.”EXTRA POINTSAll tests on Nick Mangold’s neck came back clean Monday, said Todd Bowles, who was not ready to speculate on Mangold’s availability for Sunday’s game at Oakland. “I just know it’s not as bad as we thought it was,” Bowles said. Mangold went into the locker room late in the fourth quarter and left afterward wearing a neck brace.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page F7 of the New York edition with the headline: Tests for Jets’ Mangold.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.