AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzKANSAS CITY, Mo. — One of the severely tested theorems of this postseason is that when bad things happen to Ryan Madson, good things happen to the Kansas City Royals.When Madson gave up two home runs, putting the Royals four runs behind the Houston Astros and just six outs from elimination, it set the stage for a dramatic rally and an eventual American League division series victory.When Madson surrendered a tying home run to the Blue Jays’ Jose Bautista on Friday night, it served as a prelude to Lorenzo Cain’s dash around the bases and closer Wade Davis’s high-voltage escape in the league championship series clincher against Toronto.“Maybe it did happen for a reason,” Madson, a right-handed reliever, said with a smile.Neat, linear explanations have rarely followed Madson in recent years, when his big free-agent payday blew up and his right elbow blew out, leaving him settled into retirement at this time last year, doting on his five children and driving around with a portable mound, giving pitching lessons to teenagers near his home in Temecula, Calif.One lesson with a promising young high school pitcher set Madson, 35, on a path toward Kansas City.After having thrown a total of one minor league inning in the previous three years, he has emerged as a vital cog in the vaunted Royals bullpen.As he began to work with the prospect, Johnny Morrell, Madson taught him about some of the changes he made to his delivery during a lengthy rehab, which included a failed stint with the Los Angeles Angels in 2013. Madson, who had gained 30 pounds — mostly in his legs and back — had overhauled his mechanics trying to ease the strain on his pitching elbow.As he played catch with Morrell and occasionally threw off the mound, Madson began to think he could still pitch. When his son turned on a ballgame last summer, and Madson watched the cat-and-mouse game between pitchers and hitters, he began to miss it.“I probably wouldn’t have had the spark to get back into it,” Madson said of the workouts. “I probably would have waited and procrastinated and been content with being at home raising the kids. Nobody was reaching out to me. I’d say there was a 90-95 percent chance that, no, I wouldn’t be here.”So Madson called a Royals adviser, Jim Fregosi Jr., who had signed Madson out of high school in 1998 for the Philadelphia Phillies and had always told him to call if he needed anything. He asked if he could come to training camp.When Manager Ned Yost was asked what he expected from Madson, he said: “Nothing. Nothing.”Yost said he looked at the camp roster and spotted Madson and Joe Blanton, who was out of baseball last year almost all of last season, and wondered, “What are these guys doing here?”A few years ago, nobody would have wondered that. After 2011, when Madson had 32 saves in 34 chances for the 102-win Phillies, he hit the free-agent market. His agent at the time, Scott Boras, was negotiating a contract to remain with the Phillies.“I remember seeing my name and a four-year, $44 million contract on the bottom of the TV,” Madson said. “It said we’d agreed to terms on it. That’s where things went awry.”Madson said Boras told him the Phillies reneged on a verbal agreement. Ruben Amaro Jr., then the team’s general manager, told Madson they had never agreed on a fourth year. The day after the agreement fell apart, the Phillies signed Jonathan Papelbon to a four-year, $50 million contract.Madson settled for a one-year, $8.5 million deal with Cincinnati. He regrets not being more involved, saying he would have accepted three years.“That was the toughest,” said Madson, who earned $1 million this season with incentives. “I’ve made some money prior to that and I’ve made some money post that, but to have that contract for a guy from Moreno Valley, Calif., to make $30 million — movie stars make that. That’s ridiculous. So I lost that. It was the worst thing that ever happened to me, as far as baseball goes, maybe in life. That started the whole journey.”Barely a week into spring training with the Reds, Madson’s elbow gave out.Dr. James Andrews performed Tommy John surgery, and Madson signed with the Angels the next season. But his fastball never got past 93 miles per hour without any pain the next day. He pitched one inning for an Angels minor league affiliate and was released in August.“You’re like, ‘Why doesn’t it just work?’ ” Madson said. “It was the first time I had the sense that this game could be over for me.”Johnny Cuello, a teammate with the Angels, badgered Madson about a clinic in Phoenix that did work with biomechanics. Madson was hooked up to sensors that sent electrodes through his muscles, forcing him to relearn how to pitch. After three months, he performed for about 20 scouts in January 2014, but nobody offered an invitation to major league camp.So Madson went home.As he retreated to the dugout Friday night, after allowing Bautista’s home run, he felt the weight of his journey. When Madson had served as a successful setup man for the Phillies during their 2008 World Series title run, he had pitched without anything on his mind but the next pitch.“I was in the fight,” he said. “I was in the fire.”Now, though, it is different.“I’m wrapping everything I’ve been through into each of those games,” said Madson, who had a 4-2 record and a career-low 2.13 earned run average in the regular season.“I had a whole season to prove it, but now I feel like everything’s been doubled up into these high-profile games,” he said. “It hasn’t boded well for me. That’s where I need to learn my lesson.”So Madson, whose family will be at Tuesday’s opener along with Morrell, will try to breathe deeply, and maintain the proper mechanics so that his old habits do not leak back, like the fastball to Bautista, meant to be delivered low and away, that arrived letter high.It would be nice, he says, to have a role in these stirring playoff victories — other than setting the stage for them.Advertisement