
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 26, 2015
KANSAS CITY, Mo. — Mike Moustakas laughed, softly, an instinctive response from a man who tries to hit baseballs for a living. His team, the Kansas City Royals, tends to struggle against soft-tossing pitchers but handles fastballs well. The Mets, he was reminded, have a hard-throwing rotation. Might that give the Royals an advantage in the World Series?“I guess,” Moustakas said, looking up from his interview table at Kauffman Stadium on Monday. “I don’t know if you’ve ever tried to hit 99 miles an hour. It’s not easy to hit 91 miles an hour when it’s sinking off the table, either.“Never has been, never will be — and making it a little bit harder is guys throwing 99 miles an hour with sinkers, sliders and cutters. We’re going to have to put good at-bats together, try to find ways to score some runs and do what we do.”What the Royals do — better than any other team in the major leagues — is not strike out. That makes them the precise opposites of the Chicago Cubs, whose hitters led the majors in strikeouts. The Mets manhandled the Cubs in the National League Championship Series, never trailing in their four-game sweep. The Royals are a different challenge.AdvertisementMatt Harvey, who will face Edinson Volquez in the World Series Game 1 on Tuesday, struck out nine Cubs in seven and two-thirds innings of the N.L.C.S. opener. Harvey displayed much more than fastball command against the Cubs, and that will be essential again.Advertisement“For us, it’s mixing our pitches and not relying on effective velocity, but going over the scouting reports, finding out what works against this team specifically,” Harvey said. “We knew going into the Cubs series what they were about, and we’ve done our homework here.”The Royals ranked 24th out of 30 teams in homers this season, but the Mets’ Kelly Johnson has seen the damage they can do in October. Johnson played for Baltimore last fall, when the Royals slammed four homers in the first two games of the American League Championship Series en route to a sweep.“I’m not going to go and say they’re just this contact team, because Daniel Murphy was just a contact hitter about two weeks ago,” Johnson said, referring to the Mets’ second baseman, who has homered in a record six postseason games in a row.“You just don’t know what’s going to happen. These guys get big hits; they’ve hit a lot of home runs in this postseason already. They’ve got guys that can do it. You’ve got to treat it like any one of these guys can go deep.”The Royals have 15 homers in 11 games this postseason; the Mets have 14 (half by Murphy) in their nine games. But the Royals have averaged only 6.5 strikeouts per game, compared with 10.4 per game for the Mets.Second baseman Ben Zobrist, who joined Kansas City in a July trade, said he had not thought much about the Royals’ approach until last season, when he faced them with Tampa Bay. The Royals made an indelible impression.“It was just a nightmare,” Zobrist said. “We had some great pitchers in Tampa Bay, and they just kind of beat us up. And it wasn’t beating us up with the long ball; they might have hit a few, but every guy’s hitting the ball hard. We’re like, ‘O.K., when’s somebody going to roll over or hit a pop-up or strike out?’ They just keep coming.”AdvertisementThe Royals struck out only 973 times this season; the closest team, Atlanta, had 1,107. The trade-off was that their plate appearances tended not to last long. The Royals averaged 3.7 pitches per plate appearance, tied with Miami for the fewest in the majors.Dale Sveum, Kansas City’s hitting coach, said the Royals simply adapted to their spacious ballpark. If they played at a smaller field, like Houston’s or Toronto’s, he guessed, they would hit perhaps 60 more homers. At Kauffman Stadium, a team built on speed can take advantage of wide outfield gaps — but not if it whiffs.“I never saw a strikeout turn into a double,” Sveum said.The Royals’ ability to spoil good pitches by fouling them off tends to be overstated. The team was actually just below the league average in its ratio of foul balls to overall pitches. But as a general rule, the Royals like to swing. They believe it makes no sense to give pitchers free strikes early in the count.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We feel the best pitch you’re going to get is the first couple of pitches within the at-bat, so you might as well go up there and try to be aggressive,” first baseman Eric Hosmer said. “With the stuff these guys are featuring nowadays, you can’t afford to put yourself in a hole.”Given how hard the Mets’ starters throw, Hosmer said, you might expect them to attack with fastballs and then snap off a hard two-strike slider. Watching them on video, he said, made him realize the difference.“Especially the last series against Chicago, you can really see that these guys have the ability to pitch backwards,” Hosmer said. “They can throw their off-speed over for strikes, and they can throw their fastball late in the count. I think that’s what makes them a lot tougher is they have the ability to change their game plan based on whatever they want their game plan to be.”The Mets think they can execute any game plan, and Jacob deGrom, who will start Game 2, saw a benefit to facing a free-swinging lineup.“If they put the ball in play early and get out,” he said, “that helps keep me in the game longer.”AdvertisementAnd that, above all, is what the Mets want in this World Series: as many innings as possible from their dazzling rotation. While the Royals rely heavily on their bullpen, the Mets want Harvey, deGrom, Noah Syndergaard and Steven Matz to stay on the mound until Jeurys Familia comes in for a save. They are confident in their middle relievers, Manager Terry Collins said, but their formula hinges on dominance from their starters and closer.“The ideal situation is, tomorrow night, to have Matt hand the ball to Familia,” Collins said. “If we can do that, we’re in good shape.”The Royals will swing, and swing often, to make sure that does not happen.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page F1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Crown in Sight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »