AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Michael PowellKANSAS CITY, Mo. — Last week, Jerry Dipoto, the new general manager of the Seattle Mariners, engaged in the time-honored practice of cashiering his team’s manager.So Lloyd McClendon went tumbling out the door and Major League Baseball’s 30 teams were left with a single minority manager, Fredi Gonzalez of the Atlanta Braves.Baseball does singularity well. It has a single black team president and a single Latino majority owner. Its playing ranks are richly more diverse, as 38 percent of its players are black and Latino, including the Mets’ star slugger, Yoenis Cespedes, and the Royals’ track star of a center fielder, Lorenzo Cain.You put this question of hiring to Commissioner Rob Manfred, who was in town for the World Series and chatting with the news media. Hola, big man: What’s going on here?“There is a certain cyclical nature to this,” Manfred said of the dearth of black and Latino managers. “You’re going to have peaks and valleys within what is a very small sample.”Perhaps this is so, although this particular hiring valley resembles the floor of Death Valley. This is an industry sliding backward, its emergency brake not engaged. In 2002, and again in 2009, there were 10 black or Latino managers.Now, just to repeat, there is one.Ken Rosenthal wrote a thoughtful column the other day for Fox Sports, and suggested that some of this owed to the current front-office vogue for managers who have no experience whatsoever. The smart young men in the front office, so goes the thinking, desire managerial empty vessels into which they can pour their statistics and equations.The new manager of the Mariners, Scott Servais, for instance, has not coached or managed at any level.This hurts and devalues a longtime white veteran in the minors no less than a black or Latino candidate. Although it is worth noting that of the empty vessels so far chosen as managers, all are Caucasian.Manfred was asked whether an “old boys’ club” in the front office might account for the lack of diversity. He smiled genially.“There has been so much change in the general manager rank,” he said. “It’s hard to look at our group of general managers and talk about it as an old boy network because they ain’t very old.”It also ain’t diverse.It’s salutary that baseball’s front offices are throwing open doors to young men with excellent degrees. A change of the demographic guard can be refreshing. Based on their hiring record, however, this new guard is deeply inclined toward hiring people who look quite a bit like the faces they see in the mirror each morning.The Mets have a large contingent of Latino players, and they work hard to master English, and the white and Latino players seem to work well with each other, although each tend to self-segregate after games. The Mets have assigned a Latina interpreter, and the bullpen coach Ricky Bones, who is Puerto Rican, helps out. None of the Mets’ bench and base coaches are Latino. One is black.The Kansas City Royals have an Asian-American bench coach, and a Latino catching coach. The remaining eight coaches, including the pitching coach and third-base coach (traditionally first among equals), are white.The question of the managerial second chances is no less important, as we learn as often from our stumbles as from our successful sprints. Terry Collins, whose baseball career stretches back 45 years and who had two previous managing stints, is eloquent on the question of what he’s learned from past mistakes.“I think the fact is that I changed the way I went about things,” he said Monday. “I don’t take everything as personal as I once did.”Collins’s opposing manager, Ned Yost of the Kansas City Royals, tripped and fell and got a second chance. He managed six years with the Milwaukee Brewers and compiled a .477 winning percentage. Now he’s in the World Series for the second year running.By way of comparison, the Mets fired Manager Willie Randolph seven years ago. He had a career winning percentage of .544, with a high of 97 wins in 2006. You don’t have to pretend he was a managerial sage to note that his was a strong rookie foray.He has not managed since.You can play this game with almost any successful team. Run your finger down the row of players who struck you as leaders and who are now are retired. I chose the Cleveland Indians of 1995, a team that won 100 games.Omar Vizquel, the clever and nimble shortstop and All-Star, has coached. Tony Pena, the brilliant catcher, would manage the Royals for a little more than three years. Sandy Alomar, the other terrific catcher, remains a bench coach, hoping one day. Kenny Lofton, considered one of the smartest ballplayers of his day, is out of baseball.Not a current manager among them.Toward the end of Manfred’s news conference, you raised that question again. Is it really possible to treat the dearth of managers of any color as just statistical background noise? Doesn’t that strain credulity?He noted that teams are required to interview black and Latino candidates.“Our clubs go out pursuant to the requirements that we’ve imposed,” he said. “I really, genuinely believe that they hire who they feel to be the most qualified person for the job. That’s the American Way.”The American Way is an intriguing phrase, and with all due respect and a look at our often tragic racial history, not invariably encouraging.Email: powellm@nytimes.comAdvertisement