By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 26, 2015
KANSAS CITY, Mo. —  The last time the Mets played in the World Series, everything was finished by now. When Mike Piazza flied out to end the fifth and final game of the 2000 World Series, it was Oct. 26.This year’s World Series, which is set to start Tuesday night at Kauffman Stadium, will extend to Nov. 4 if it reaches a seventh game. It would be the fourth time the World Series had spilled over into November, after 2001 (when the Sept. 11 attacks pushed back the schedule), 2009 and 2010.An easy solution would seem to be to start the regular season earlier and play the first week of games in warm-weather cities and domed stadiums. Commissioner Rob Manfred said he did not like the idea of playing in November but suggested that he had no choice.This year’s regular season began on Sunday night, April 5, rather than a week earlier, on March 29. Major League Baseball deemed that date too early to start, despite having domed stadiums in Toronto, Milwaukee, Seattle, Arizona, Miami, the Tampa Bay area and Houston, and several outdoor stadiums where late-March weather would probably not have been a problem.Advertisement“This calendar is the worst calendar for us in having to make a decision between starting quite early, in March, or rolling into November, like we decided to do,” Manfred said.AdvertisementHe added: “Starting early in March is no picnic, either. And I know people always talk about warm-weather schedules. Making those warm-weather schedules work is more difficult as a political matter than you might imagine. The warm-weather cities don’t want all those early dates when kids aren’t out of school, and it has ramifications among those franchises.”Manfred said that rain could affect Game 1 of the Series.“My understanding of the forecast is that we have a challenge early in the day,” he said. “We’re hopeful that by game time that we’ll be able to play.”PREPARING FOR VOLQUEZ The Mets chose Kelly Johnson to be their designated hitter against the Royals’ Edinson Volquez in Game 1. Johnson is 4 for 14 with three walks in his career against Volquez, who allowed only 16 home runs in 34 games in the regular season.“He’s got a pretty good sinker, he pitches down, uses a pretty good changeup and slider,” Johnson said. “I think the fact that he really just doesn’t give up home runs is a big thing, and that’s going to tell me we need to get on base, put the ball in play and put some pressure on him. If we get a chance at a big inning, we’ve got to take it.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Royals Manager Ned Yost said Johnny Cueto would follow Volquez in the rotation. When the Series shifts to New York, Yost said, Yordano Ventura will start Game 3, and Chris Young will start Game 4. Yost said he wanted Cueto to pitch Game 2 so that he could pitch a potential sixth game in Kansas City.“We think that gives us a bit of an advantage, having Johnny pitching at home in front of our home crowd,” Yost said. “They really, really give him a lot of energy. He’s pitched his best games here.”Cueto threw an eight-inning gem at Kauffman Stadium to win the decisive game of the Royals-Astros division series, but he allowed eight runs in two innings when he started Game 3 of the American League Championship Series in Toronto.AdvertisementLITTLE WORLD SERIES EXPERIENCE The Mets could add infielder Juan Uribe to their World Series roster, giving them a more experienced backup infielder than Matt Reynolds, who has never played a game in the major leagues. Uribe has missed a month with a chest injury.If the Mets activate Uribe, who played in the Series for the 2005 Chicago White Sox and the 2010 San Francisco Giants, he will be the only player on the active roster who has played for a World Series winner. Curtis Granderson was the only Met on the roster in the last playoff round who had played in the World Series. He was a member of the 2006 Detroit Tigers, who lost to the Cardinals in five games.The Royals’ A.L.C.S. roster included one player who had been a World Series champion: reliever Ryan Madson, who played for the 2008 Philadelphia Phillies.CESPEDES SAYS HE’S READY When Yoenis Cespedes took batting practice over the weekend, he still felt discomfort in his left shoulder. He said he thought he had hurt it while doing push-ups at Wrigley Field during the National League Championship Series.But when Cespedes woke up Monday, his shoulder felt fine — or at least fine enough for him to play in his first World Series. He had joked to reporters at one point that he would get a new shoulder if it meant he could play.“The only thing missing to get to 100 percent is the hours left until the game starts,” Cespedes said through an interpreter during World Series media day. “I’m ready.”Cespedes, who is making his third postseason appearance in his fourth major league season, has gained a reputation for performing well in tense moments. In 19 career playoff games, he has a .311 batting average, seven extra-base hits and 13 R.B.I.“I have no concern,” Manager Terry Collins said of Cespedes’s status for Game 1. “He feels great. I just saw him. He feels fine.” TIM ROHANWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »