AdvertisementSupported byTV SportsBy Richard SandomirThink of the expectations raised by this partnership: the N.F.L. behemoth and Yahoo, with its strong sports presence and more than one billion users worldwide, uniting to stream a single game to 185 countries. You had to wonder how many Europeans and Asians, as well as Americans, were going to watch this webcast of the Jacksonville Jaguars-Buffalo Bills game Sunday from London.It would have been better to cast marquee teams like Green Bay and New England as digital guinea pigs for Yahoo, not the 1-5 Jaguars and the 3-3 Bills. But it’s still N.F.L. football, right?Most of the results were announced Monday and can be viewed in two ways.As an experiment, the webcast was a success for Yahoo and the league. It commanded a substantial global audience of 15.2 million unique users.“It exceeded all our expectations,” said Adam Cahan, Yahoo’s senior vice president for product and engineering.The record for a streaming audience at WatchESPN — an ESPN digital entity that only streams sports — is 3.5 million unique users, in the United States, for a 2014 World Cup match between Belgium and the American national team.Yet, looked at in a different way, the audience for the N.F.L.-Yahoo venture does not look stupendous. After a mathematical conversion that Yahoo disputes, the 15.2 million unique users turns into the television equivalent of 2.36 million average viewers, about 1.6 million in the United States. Turns out the world did not go especially gaga for the Jaguars and the Bills. Maybe it’s just not ready for Rex Ryan.Then you realize that a unique viewer is one who has watched a minimum of three seconds of a program, a low bar of entry. It is a certainty that most people, if only displaced Bills and Jaguars fans, stuck around for more than three seconds. Television viewers need to watch one to six minutes to be counted by Nielsen. So Yahoo’s figures might have been fattened by those who did not stay after a few seconds (true fans they were not) or by a feature on Yahoo’s sites that automatically started a game stream, whether the user wanted it or not.But streaming is still an adjunct to television viewing, a way to reach an increasingly mobile audience that does not want to nestle before a big screen for three hours. Stripped of a large television audience — the game was seen only in the teams’ home markets in the United States, unlike CBS’s recent broadcast of a game from London that had 9.9 million viewers — the streaming numbers do not look like a big-time N.F.L. mega-number. Think of how snappy this looks: Last year’s Belgium-United States World Cup match had a TV audience of 16.5 million on ESPN, plus 3.5 million unique users — or 1.1 million average viewers — watching the stream.David Coletti, ESPN’s vice president for digital research and analytics, said that Yahoo’s achievement Sunday was “very impressive” and that it demonstrated the comfort with which sports fans used devices to watch games. But, he said, “I think what we see is digital streaming is an incremental audience to television, a best-available screen in many cases, but it’s not a replacement right now.”However you measure the digital audience for the Bills-Jaguars game, Yahoo appears happy.“We showcased the Internet experience, with its true reach, with a highly capable, continuous broadcast,” Cahan said. “It rivaled a broadcast experience. It says that the Internet was ready to experience this sort of thing.”Yahoo wants to carry more N.F.L. games digitally to go with its webcasts of concerts that it shows through a deal with Live Nation. In the deal’s first year, it generated 135 million live streams of concerts. Sunday’s game alone generated 33.6 million streams. But Yahoo cannot count on more games. It has no contract beyond Sunday’s game and will have to compete with its digital rivals for future games, whether on an annual basis or for a package over several years.It is the sort of future deal-making that gives N.F.L. executives so much joy amid their troubles with concussions and domestic violence. The league is in a second one-year deal with CBS to produce a full season of “Thursday Night Football” and broadcast eight games for about $300 million. The CBS association has increased viewership. Having shown the viability of football on Thursday nights, the N.F.L. can choose when to auction a multiyear contract worth billions. An eventual streaming deal might not be as lucrative as a TV deal, but never underestimate the league’s ability to extract maximum money when it plays Yahoo off Google or Facebook or Apple for a long-term contract.Email: sandor@nytimes.com Advertisement