By TIM ROHANOCT. 26, 2015
During the Mets’ National League championship celebration in the cramped visitors’ clubhouse at Wrigley Field, Jeff Wilpon, the team’s chief operating officer, raised an oversize bottle of Champagne.“Ready?” he shouted.Wilpon twisted the cork, but it would not budge. He shook the bottle and tried with his other hand, to no avail. Using his shirt to help his grip, the equipment manager, Kevin Kierst, dislodged the cork. Wilpon raised the bottle triumphantly, threw his head back and took a big swig.Then he carried the bottle around the room, as if he were at a keg party, pouring Champagne down the throats of David Altchek, the team doctor, and Tim Teufel, the third-base coach, and on the head of the unsuspecting pitching coach, Dan Warthen. At one point, Wilpon, 53, slung the bottle over his shoulder, like a lumberjack carrying an ax.Amid the clubhouse bacchanal, Wilpon’s father, Fred, the Mets’ principal owner, had retreated to a quieter place. Though he might have felt that some amount of gloating was in order, he refrained from doing so, just as his son did. Their restraint was noticeable.AdvertisementAfter all, fans and the news media have ridiculed the Wilpons in recent years, portraying them as broke and misguided, unable or unwilling to pay the bills that produce a winning team. Now, suddenly, here the Mets are, charging into their first World Series since 2000, having brushed aside the Chicago Cubs in the National League Championship Series and showing signs of a franchise that could be a fixture of October baseball for several years.AdvertisementIn a city long familiar with alternately vilifying and celebrating a baseball team owner — think George Steinbrenner — the Mets’ owners may get to enjoy their own turn of public opinion and a chance to crow.“Fred is not that kind of person,” said Bud Selig, the former commissioner, who has known Wilpon for about 35 years. “And I don’t think he would do that. I’m not like that, either. But I think I would gloat before Fred.”Fred Wilpon arrived on the scene in the early 1980s as a small part of the Mets’ ownership group and gradually became the lead voice. He enjoyed a favorable public image, and to some degree that was because he seemed smart and reasonable in comparison to his counterpart in the Bronx, Steinbrenner, who was then at the height of his bombastic and erratic behavior. It helped, too, that for much of the 1980s the Mets were good.Then, in the early 1990s, the Mets hit bottom. Not only were they bad on the field, but they were also a miserable bunch in the locker room. Vince Coleman threw a firecracker that injured fans in the Dodgers’ parking lot; Bret Saberhagen sprayed bleach at reporters.In August 1993, Wilpon intervened. “Our club is in last place, and we have been plagued all season by a series of embarrassing off-the-field problems that have understandably subjected us to local and national criticism,” he said. “But that will change.”That was two decades ago. Now 78, Wilpon rarely asserts himself publicly. Instead, he has increasingly moved out of public view — almost always allowing Jeff to be the most visible member of the ownership group.For the first half of this decade, it did not matter which Wilpon was front and center. Neither was spared from the furious response to the team’s struggles on the field and financial tribulations off it. The ownership group had lost millions of dollars in the Bernard L. Madoff fraud scheme; they were ultimately deemed to be both victims and beneficiaries.The prevailing sentiment was that the Wilpons needed to spend more — far more — to build a team capable of competing. In other words, they needed to act big market, like the Yankees. And if they could not, well, they should sell the team.AdvertisementWilpon read the tabloids. He was aware of the backlash.“If you own a ball club in New York, you might as well shut off the TV, cancel the newspaper subscriptions,” said Ron Darling, a pitcher on the Mets’ last World Series-winning team, in 1986, and now an analyst for the Wilpon-owned SNY cable network. “It’s just always going to be like that. That’s what it buys you. It buys you a lot of attention.”This spring, the discontent led some Mets fans to purchase a billboard near Citi Field demanding that the team be sold. The Wilpons were unswayed, and the team’s late-season surge has tamped down those sentiments.Throughout this playoff run, Fred Wilpon has seemed more visible, particularly on the field during batting practice, sometimes visiting with players near the batting cage. And then he is ushered off the field by a public relations staff member in order to stave off questions from reporters.During one batting practice visit this postseason, the rookie outfielder Michael Conforto shook Wilpon’s hand and treated him with great deference. Wilpon, Conforto said, lectured him about not getting caught up in the largeness of the moment.Daniel Murphy has been with the Mets since the organization drafted him in 2006, and he said he and Wilpon had talked about their families. But, Murphy said, “We don’t see each other enough to really know each other.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Meanwhile, Jeff Wilpon oversees the day-to-day operations of the team. At the trade deadline at the end of July, Jeff Wilpon sat in the Mets’ war room as Sandy Alderson, the team’s general manager, and his deputies mulled their options. Over several days, they acquired a setup man (Tyler Clippard), valuable bench players (Kelly Johnson and Juan Uribe) and an elite outfielder (Yoenis Cespedes).In each instance, Jeff Wilpon gave the final go-ahead.“Tremendous support,” Alderson said. “We were close. They recognized that we had some weaknesses, and they supported us.”AdvertisementKeith Hernandez, who, like Darling, played for the 1986 team and now works for the Mets’ cable network, said: “We would’ve been playing typical August and September games if we didn’t get those four guys. If we don’t get those four players, forget it.”But they did, and in the final two innings of the series-clinching game at Wrigley Field, Jeff Wilpon sat in the first row with his father and counted down the outs. At one point, Fred turned to Jeff and asked him how old he was when the Mets won their first World Series, in 1969. Jeff was 7 then.He and his father had watched that clinching game together, too, at Shea Stadium. Jeff could recall how frightened he had been, watching the fans rush the field in jubilation and rip up grass to take home as a souvenir.After the Mets’ closer, Jeurys Familia, recorded the final out at Wrigley, and the celebration ensued, Fred Wilpon joined his son for the trophy presentation, praised his players in a brief TV interview and then drifted into the background. It was one of the few times he has spoken publicly in recent years.As the celebration carried on, Jeff Wilpon conducted several interviews, crediting the front office, the coaches, the players and the fans. Asked about his father at that moment, he had a quick response.“Go talk to him,” the younger Wilpon said. “He’s loving it.”Kitty Bennett contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page F1 of the New York edition with the headline: They Also Own the Moment .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »