AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Harvey AratonAnother N.B.A. season is scheduled to begin Tuesday night, but not much has changed from the last one. The Western Conference is again loaded with up-tempo, star-laden teams. Superficially at least, the East is about the luminary named LeBron James and his quest for a sixth straight league finals appearance.One longstanding mystery of the N.B.A. universe is the freewheeling style that took root in the West while the East embraced a more methodical brand of ball. Along conference lines, the geographical word association would be: Out West — Los Angeles, Denver, Phoenix and Golden State. Back East — Boston, Detroit, New York and (pre-LeBron) Miami.There have been exceptions, but by reputation the West has traditionally elevated the game as a more aesthetically pleasing form of entertainment while the East has prided itself as survival of the brawniest.Ask Rod Thorn, who has been around the pro game since 1963, why that is, and he says, playfully, “Well, you know, the Western part of the country is more about open spaces, and the East has the congested, more urban cities.”Seriously, he doubted that athletic art had been imitating life. More likely, he said, “it has to do with the makeup of the coaches.”Then again, Mike D’Antoni was an innovating celebrity with his precision fire drill of an offense in Phoenix but a failure with it in New York. And Pat Riley coached Magic Johnson and the Showtime Lakers to four championships in Los Angeles, but when he moved into Madison Square Garden with the Knicks and later to Miami, his teams nearly qualified for the Olympics in Greco-Roman wrestling.The East-West divide probably originated in the early 1980s with the league’s ultimate rivalry: those Johnson-and-Riley Lakers — whose architect was the aptly named Jerry West — and Larry Bird’s lunch-pail Celtics. Those franchises were already the most historically successful, and as Thorn said, “this has always been a copycat league.”He added that after Golden State won the championship in June, led by Stephen Curry’s single-season record barrage of 3-pointers and with a high-voltage pace that had N.B.A. advocates in full-throated cheer, we should expect the game to continue trending in the direction that credentialed old-school folks like Phil Jackson and Gregg Popovich generally loathe.But to cling stubbornly to the past is to fade away with it. In an effort to eradicate the image of them as so 1990s, the Knicks say they are planning to play a faster version of Jackson’s beloved triangle offense this season.Popovich years ago recalibrated his once-plodding offense to feature the pace-pushing skills of Tony Parker. In winning the 2014 finals over Miami, the Spurs launched more 3-pointers (averaging 23.6 per game) than any title-winning team in history — until Curry and the Warriors fired them up at a clip of 31 a game in disposing of James and his Cleveland Cavaliers last June.“We all know if you don’t shoot the 3, you’re probably not going to win,” Popovich said last spring. “Everybody in the league shoots the 3-point shot well and knows the importance. I still hate it.”Shooting the 3 at last season’s rate — an average of 22.5 per game — does not require a commitment to a speedball game, as teams increasingly space the floor in their halfcourt offenses and use drive-and-kick penetration to free up long-range marksmen. But Thorn said the spread of up-tempo play around the East was inevitable.“It used to be that no matter how fast teams played in the regular season, the feeling was that the game would slow down in the playoffs,” Thorn said. “With Golden State playing the way they did, I’m not so sure people are thinking that anymore.”He knows that Jason Kidd isn’t buying into any old East-West divergence as he begins his second season as the coach in Milwaukee. The Bucks are blessed with one of the game’s best young end-to-end athletes in Giannis Antetokounmpo, along with Jabari Parker, expected back soon after knee surgery last winter, and point guard Michael Carter-Williams.With the addition of Greg Monroe to score and pass from the post, Kidd’s team, which opens its season at home Wednesday night against the Knicks, could pose an intriguing challenge to James and the Cavaliers, along with last season’s contenders Chicago, Washington, Atlanta and Toronto.Thorn will be in Milwaukee for the opener. After retiring from the N.B.A.’s executive office last spring at 74, he thought he was out until Kidd pulled him back in, hiring him as a consultant.Kidd was part of Thorn’s second-most-impactful player transaction as a team front-office executive (next to drafting Michael Jordan in Chicago) when Thorn brought Kidd — a pass-first point guard — to the Nets in 2001 from Phoenix in a trade for Stephon Marbury. With the ball in Kidd’s hands, the Nets made two consecutive finals, mixing a quicker pace with a version of the Princeton halfcourt offense.Curry and the Warriors may be the rage, but none of their four playoff opponents last season were at full strength, and Thorn is old and wise enough to know that embracing one style does not, or should not, necessarily negate another.Before the playoffs began, West, now a Warriors consultant, told Thorn that the one team he feared was the Spurs. “Jerry thought they had the size and ability to control pace in a way the other teams couldn’t,” Thorn said.To that end, the Spurs are stronger inside with the additions of LaMarcus Aldridge and David West. In Oklahoma City, what restores the Thunder as a serious threat, beyond the presumed health of Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook, is the front-line athleticism provided by Serge Ibaka, Steven Adams and Enes Kanter, the kind of low-post scorer the team has lacked.Even by old East-West standards, Thorn noted, the truly great teams are those not easily typecast, as demonstrated by Jackson’s six title teams in Chicago and five with the Lakers.“Go back to those Bird teams — they didn’t have fast guys, but they knew how to run a pretty good fast break,” Thorn said. And the Showtime Lakers, he added, could always “slow the game down and throw it inside.”He referred to Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, the league’s career leading scorer.Advertisement