AdvertisementSupported byBy Christine HauserJust before 7 a.m. Sunday, Debbie Stephens, a renowned American equestrian, arrived at her horse barn in Palmetto, Fla., to check on paperwork and prepare for the day’s lessons.Suddenly, one of the barn workers appeared with unsettling news: The latch on the stall of a prized Grand-Prix-level show jumper had been tampered with, and the horse was nowhere to be found.Within a half-hour, there were signs of an unusual crime, then a brutal discovery: The horse had been led from its stall and taken far from the barn, where it was carved up so professionally that the authorities are investigating it as a case of animal cruelty carried out by an expert butcher for meat.“He had been filleted,” Ms. Stephens, the horse’s owner, said in a telephone interview on Monday. “The slices were so deliberate and so well done that the moment you saw it: This was a professional.”The discovery of the horse, named Phedras de Blondel, in a remote pasture near woods at Imperial Farms Equestrian Center added a new element in a string of recent crimes involving the killings of stolen livestock for meat in Florida.Most of the killings involved horses being stolen and slaughtered in the southeastern part of the state, most recently in a slaughterhouse in Palm Beach County. In more rural Manatee County, in Central Florida, there have been about one or two instances a year of cows being rustled and slaughtered, said Dave Bristow, a spokesman for the county sheriff’s office.But the killing of Phedras was the first time Mr. Bristow could recall that a horse had been butchered in the county, and the authorities are investigating whether there are links to the other cases, or signs of an underground market in horse meat that is expanding.It is illegal to slaughter horses for meat in Florida, which is home to top equestrian riders, breeders and events. Mr. Bristow said it was not clear whether the Imperial farm had been singled out. The sheriff’s report on the killing said the crime was also being treated as a case of burglary and grand theft.Ms. Stephens is an acclaimed Grand Prix show jumping competitor. In a career that has spanned decades, she is known for setting an outdoor high jump record of 7 feet 8 inches in 1983.She runs Centennial Equestrian Farm, one of several based at the Imperial horse complex. The complex is owned by her husband, Steve Stephens, a top show course designer and champion rider.Ms. Stephens said she had recently purchased Phedras, a 12-year-old chestnut gelding, from a breeder in France, planning to ride him while she developed the skills of another, younger horse who could eventually take over as her primary mount in the Grand Prix, show jumping’s most prestigious and dramatic event.She had been planning to ride Phedras for the first time in a Grand Prix competition in Wellington, Fla., next month.Phedras had arrived at the farm in Florida on Friday, with a proven track record as a competitor in Europe.He was not the tallest of the 36 horses boarded at Imperial. But of the tall horses, he was the fattest, weighing up to 1,500 pounds, Ms. Stephens said. The authorities think that is why he was chosen for butchering.Sunday morning, the worker went to Phedras’s stall to give him grain. The latch was bolted into the door but unchained; someone had neglected a crucial part of a two-step method that was the barn rule when closing stall doors.“Your new horse is missing,” Ms. Stephens said she was told. “I said, O.K.”Ms. Stephens, who said she was not a “panicker,” set off on foot to look for Phedras around the farm, which covers more than 31 acres of rambling paddocks, training rings and pastures where a dozen other horses are kept. Sixteen people live on the compound, including grooms, stable hands and members of families who keep horses there.As her assistant and others looked around on foot, Ms. Stephens decided to drive to the road, thinking Phedras might have run off. As she drove, she noticed a broken fence in a remote paddock. She told her assistant to take a look, and then Ms. Stephens heard screams.“She said he was dead,” Ms. Stephens said.Phedras’s carcass was found lying partly against the fence and the ground. The head and neck were intact, but the legs were gone from the shoulders, and the cuts in the torso were smooth and deliberate.“They literally filleted his shoulders,” Ms. Stephens said.The police arrived. Surveillance cameras were scrutinized, but they yielded no clues, she said. A length of yellow nylon rope was found, believed to have been used as a makeshift halter to lead Phedras from the stall. A set of footprints — and hoof prints — could be traced through bushes and a field, in what appeared to be the track of at least one thief, she said.Ms. Stephens said there was a spatter of blood on what would have been the way to the place where Phedras was slaughtered. A necropsy showed that a knife had been plunged into the right side of the horse’s ribs, puncturing the aorta, and officials think there was a struggle before the horse fatally weakened.“They knew where to put the knife,” Ms. Stephens said.A statement from the sheriff’s office said the theft and slaughter were believed to have happened between 8 p.m. Saturday and 7 a.m. Sunday.Ms. Stephens said she had found Phedras through an agent. She had ridden him for the first time in France before bringing him to the United States. She declined to disclose what she had paid for him but said he was not insured.“When I tried him, it was a click,” she said. “We just had to become a team. He was everything I was looking for.”Advertisement