By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 26, 2015
Wait, the Carolina Panthers are still undefeated?A team that was widely derided last year after making the playoffs with a 7-8-1 record from the terrible N.F.C. South is one game away from matching that win total already. Yet despite the first 6-0 record in franchise history, the Panthers feel far from perfect.Cam Newton was a tepid 14 for 24 for 197 yards Sunday night in a 27-16 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles and threw three interceptions. That performance was not out of character for him this season. Of the 43 quarterbacks who have started a game this season, Newton ranks just 31st in adjusted yards per pass attempt. He has six wins, but only one 300-yard passing game.Part of Newton’s value has always been his ability to run, and he ranks second to Russell Wilson this year with 245 yards rushing. But he is averaging only 4.5 yards a rush, well below the other mobile quarterbacks and by far the lowest average of his career.The Panthers have not dominated on the scoreboard. Their victories have come by an average of 9 points, for a plus-52 point differential. That figure trails the undefeated Patriots, Packers and Bengals (as well as the 4-2 Cardinals), though it does top the Broncos, another undefeated team that has not dazzled so far. Over all, the team’s offense ranks only 23rd in yards per play.In contrast, the defense has been sharp, especially against the pass. It ranks fifth in points allowed and third in yards per play allowed behind Denver and the Jets. Newton’s adjusted yards per attempt figure of 6.3 looks poor until it is compared with the league-leading 4.6 figure that the Panthers’ defense is allowing. Carolina has essentially turned every quarterback it faces into Matt McGloin.AdvertisementCornerback Josh Norman has four interceptions, already a career high, which ties him for the league lead. The team has nine, two off the league lead.AdvertisementThe Panthers are also excelling at some of the little things. They have lost only one fumble, and have the fourth fewest penalty yards. Both of those statistics, though, are traditionally subject to significant fluctuations over the course of a season.Carolina has also been helped by its schedule, which has been one of the easiest in the league. None of the six teams it has beaten has a winning record.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Carolina’s first four opponents, Jacksonville, Houston, New Orleans and Tampa Bay, were not expected to be very good. But most prognosticators would have expected trouble in Games 5 and 6 against Seattle (12-4 last year) and Philadelphia (10-6). Carolina was lucky to catch both of those teams in (so far) down years.Next week, the Panthers face another good team on hard times, the Colts, who are 3-4. Then they finally face a really stern test, the unbeaten Packers. But again the schedulemaker has smiled: Both games will be at home.Still, there is plenty of skepticism over whether Carolina is suddenly an elite team. The Patriots and the Packers remain the bookmakers’ favorites for the Super Bowl, and Carolina also ranks behind unbeaten Cincinnati and Denver, as well as Seattle, which is 3-4 but still earns respect from bettors off last year’s Super Bowl appearance.Indeed, despite its impressive start, Carolina is far from guaranteed even a division title. The Falcons have just one loss, and in a scheduling quirk will play both of their games against the Panthers in the last four weeks of the season.It would be an odd twist were Carolina to finish, say, 12-4 and wind up in the same spot that the 7-8-1 team did last year, as a wild card.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.