By ROB HUGHESOCT. 26, 2015
LONDON — Some 137 years ago, Karl Benz invented the first gasoline-fueled automobile. Hot on the heels of that, the two major clubs of Manchester began their intercity derby contests that, to this day, rank near the top of what matters in English soccer.Alas, the 170th Mancunian derby proved to be a goalless tactical shutout that was as barren as any in that long history. Manchester City actually crept back atop the Premier League standings, by virtue of having a better goal difference than Arsenal, but that is the one meager achievement wrung out of Sunday’s game at Old Trafford.What caused such a dour stalemate in one of the world’s most iconic stadiums, which is otherwise known as the Theater of Dreams?Managers dictate the safety-first tactics, and on this occasion the presence of $750 million worth of playing talent might be just too foreign to get caught up in the parochial Englishness that once upon a time propelled the derby to a frenzy of excitement.AdvertisementThat three-quarter-of-a-billion-dollar lineup is imported from a dozen foreign countries. Players such as Bastian Schweinsteiger for United and the Brazilians Fernandinho and Fernando for City are too experienced, too worldly perhaps, to get carried away by the expectation of a 76,000 sellout crowd on a fine autumnal English Sunday afternoon.AdvertisementKeep it tight, yield nothing, and do not lose is the same in any language, and from the way that the teams were set up by United’s Dutch coach Louis van Gaal and City’s Chilean Manuel Pellegrini, the message was negative from the start.The previous 10 derbies had been littered with 41 goals. Since Abu Dhabi’s royal family had purchased City in 2008, the overwhelming supremacy that United used to enjoy in these Manchester affairs had been at times reversed. City had won, 6-1, on United’s home turf four years ago, sending tremors through the history of the occasion, and, very obviously from the outset on Sunday van Gaal’s instruction was that there was to be none of that.He is, this Dutchman, as tactically astute as a closed fist. He knows that, aside from the exciting French teenager Anthony Martial, he has not bought many players with natural quickness, and he prefers his team to “keep a shape,” which translates into keeping a grip any inventiveness the opposition might spring.For Pellegrini, getting drawn into this type of negativity is unusual. His preference wherever he has coached is for a more open game, for wingers pressing high up the field, and for creative players in the center.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Something dulled the City manager this time around. In part it was the lack of his finest playmaker, David Silva, and his predatory striker, Sergio Agüero. But still he has Raheem Sterling and Kevin De Bruyne, two adaptable wingers he had improvised with during the absence of Silva and Agüero.Still, he has Wilfried Bony, an attacker expensively bought, and Yaya Touré, who can convert to an offensive role, and Jesús Navas, a winger of searing speed.He tried them, but they were subdued on Sunday. We might praise van Gaal for having the answers to those combinations, or tell the truth. Which was? That van Gaal congested the midfield with Schweinsteiger and Morgan Schneiderlin side by side — and so Pellegrini squared up to that with his own two athletic stoppers, Fernandinho and Fernando, who are more given to perspiration than inspiration.It all amounted to prevention. The one truly inventive pass of the first half, from De Bruyne, was chased by Touré, but he turned into a cul-de-sac blocked by the defender Marcos Rojo.AdvertisementUnited mustered no shot on goal before halftime, and no real threat until the 62nd minute, when the City goalkeeper Joe Hart came to the edge of his penalty area to block with his legs an attempt from United’s Juan Mata.Late, very late in the afternoon, space did open up. Twice, United might have stolen the victory from a rarity on this field, a player brought through its youth system. Jesse Lingard flicked the ball over the advancing goalkeeper, but onto the crossbar. Moments later another substitute, the towering Belgian Marouane Fellaini, headed the ball down and Chris Smalling swiveled and shot, forcing Hart to drop sharply down to his left to save.The chances went, the status quo of caution prevailed, and the Manchester teams shared what they set out for, a point apiece. A manager’s game, not a fans’.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.