By BRAD SPURGEONOCT. 26, 2015
AUSTIN, Texas — With his victory at the United States Grand Prix, Lewis Hamilton became the first Briton to successfully defend a Formula One championship and joined Jackie Stewart as the only British driver to win three titles.But more important for Hamilton this season is how he won the title, and how he has turned around a faltering career.Hamilton rose from humble beginnings in Stevenage, England, and was groomed from childhood to be a driver. He won his first world title in 2008 at the age of 23 with the McLaren Mercedes team, just 10 years after Ron Dennis, the director of that team, signed him into its young driver program.When he was a 10-year-old go-kart driver, Hamilton first met Dennis and told him he wanted to be a world champion on his team.Advertisement“For any driver it’s the pinnacle,” Hamilton said Sunday after wining the race and the title. “There’s no further you can go.”AdvertisementHamilton’s third title also tied him with the driver who inspired him as a child: Ayrton Senna, who won all of his titles at McLaren.“It was always to get the three that Ayrton had,” he said of Senna, the Brazilian driver who was killed in a racing accident in 1994. “He was the guy that inspired me as a youngster.”Only one current driver has more titles than Hamilton. Sitting next to him during the postrace press conference was Sebastian Vettel, the German driver at the Ferrari team, who has four titles. By finishing third on Sunday — after starting 13th — Vettel missed out by just 0.5 seconds on keeping his own title hopes alive this season.Hamilton’s joy was equaled only by the disappointment of his teammate, Nico Rosberg. For the second year in a row, the German driver has raced in the best Formula One car on the grid, and for the second year in a row he has failed to win the title. Just before mounting the victory podium after finishing second, he threw a cap at Hamilton in frustration, perhaps not realizing that the television cameras were picking it up.Rosberg’s frustration was emphasized by the fact that he had thrown his own last chance at a title away, as he had been leading the race before a mistake with 10 laps to go handed the lead, the victory and the title to Hamilton.“I just got wheel spin. It’s never happened to me, ever. Not even in testing or racing, never, ever something like that,” said Rosberg. “I can’t explain it; it’s unbelievable. It was really tough at the time, to lose the lead like that and to lose the win.”It was also another defeat that goes back to childhood: The two drivers have known each other since they were boys and used to race as teammates at the same go-karting team.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even then, Hamilton won the title, not Rosberg.Hamilton last year said that Rosberg — who was raised among wealth in Monaco as the son of the former Formula One world champion Keke Rosberg — did not have the same hunger as he did as the son of a lower-middle-class family in England.AdvertisementBut Rosberg’s deflated look after the race told a different story about his drive and motivation.Stewart, the former three-time world champion, was at the race Sunday and commented about Hamilton’s talent before the start. “I think he’s the fastest Grand Prix driver today,” said Stewart. “I think one or two have the edge in other areas.”Hamilton has won four of his five races in the United States. His second career victory came in 2007 at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway at the U.S. Grand Prix of 2007, the last Formula One race in Indianapolis, and he then won the inaugural U.S. Grand Prix in Austin in 2012 before winning again last year.His success is also a lesson that persistence, self-confidence and good career choices pay off.In his rookie season in 2007, he lost the Formula One title by one point in the final race of the season, to Kimi Raikkonen of Ferrari. The next year, he won the title by one point in the final race of the season, edging Felipe Massa of Ferrari.For the next five seasons, he never came close to winning the title. Jenson Button won at the briefly dominant Brawn team in 2009, and the next four seasons brought the rise of Vettel as the new young star of the series, as he won four titles in a row at the Red Bull team. Hamilton’s career went into a descent, and many thought he would be a single-title driver like so many before him.That feeling was enhanced when Hamilton was criticized after leaving McLaren in 2013 to join Mercedes, a team that had struggled for three seasons with Rosberg and Michael Schumacher driving. There seemed little chance that Mercedes would ever succeed.But with the introduction of the new hybrid engine regulations last year, the Mercedes program came to maturity. The team built the best engine on the circuit, and it has dominated the series since then, reinvigorating Hamilton’s career.“While I get to enjoy driving a Formula One car, this is really a platform for me to inspire young people,” Hamilton said. “And I hope that if there is anything inspiring from today it’s just that: Never give up on your dreams, on your hopes and on your desires. Just keep working at it.”It was probably Hamilton’s most impressive of his 10 victories this year, with three different leaders during the race and multiple lead changes. Hamilton briefly dropped to eighth position and out of title contention before he rose back up to win.“A terrific way to win the championship,” said Damon Hill, a former world champion. “It put us on the edge of our seats the whole way through.”An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to Lewis Hamilton’s performance in 2008. He won the title by one point in the final race of the season; he did not win the race by one point.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.