AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerKANSAS CITY, Mo. — For nine innings of the sublime opener of the 111th World Series, the Mets played the Kansas City Royals’ game to near perfection. They put the ball in play. They stole a base at a critical moment. They made no errors. Their bullpen held down the opponent.And then, with one out in the bottom of the ninth inning, Jeurys Familia left a fastball up in the strike zone to Alex Gordon. The Mets blew a save. They started striking out, again and again and again, held scoreless for the last six innings by the Royals’ bullpen. They trudged off the Kauffman Stadium field with a loss.The Mets still have never won Game 1 of the World Series, this time falling by 5-4 in 14 innings. Two of the Mets’ other four World Series have turned out victorious. But it never comes easily, not for this team and not against these Royals.“Every time it seemed like we got momentum,” David Wright said, “they just clawed right back and took that momentum back.”18 PhotosView Slide Show ›Richard Perry/The New York TimesThis is what the Royals do. Against Matt Harvey, they struck out just twice and erased a two-run lead. That came between the symmetrical bookends of their night on offense — after the first pitch and the last, Alcides Escobar scored standing up. The first was an inside-the-park home run. The last was on a sacrifice fly by Eric Hosmer.Hosmer, a two-time Gold Glove winner, had made a critical error that gave the Mets a lead with two outs in the eighth. The ball was hit by Wilmer Flores, a player maligned for his defense at shortstop. He saw nothing unusual about it.“It was a routine ground ball,” Flores said. “I thought he was going to get in front of it, and that was it.”But that was not it. Hosmer never got in front of it, and could not backhand it. Juan Lagares, who had singled and swiped second — and later bunted for a hit — scored on the play. After Addison Reed’s perfect seventh inning, Tyler Clippard got two outs, and Familia two more.The problem was that he needed four outs. Familia had not blown a save since July 30, in the infamous Justin Upton game against San Diego in the rain. That was before the Mets’ season turned, before the Yoenis Cespedes trade and the sweep of the Washington Nationals that propelled the Mets to a joy ride straight through the National League Championship Series.Wright mentioned Wrigley Field, where the Mets clinched the pennant, in response to a question about his flyout in the 14th inning of Game 1. He knew it would not be a homer at spacious Kauffman Stadium, Wright said. This was not Chicago, where the ball can fly.Familia might have felt comfortable giving up a fly ball to straightaway center in this ballpark, where the wall is 410 feet from the plate. But he knew Gordon had crushed it. Off the bat, the game was tied.“Tonight, I made a mistake,” Familia said. “I left a fastball up in the middle, and he made a good swing on it. I’m not surprised.”Manager Terry Collins was; he used the word shocked. Familia’s pitches tend to move so hard, so low and late, that he rarely gives up homers. The Royals, as a team, do not hit many. But Gordon did not miss it.“Their team, one of the things we know about them is they’re never down and out,” Collins said. “We’ve got to put them away. We’ve got to do a better job.”Gordon’s was the first game-tying homer in the ninth inning of the World Series since Scott Brosuis’s miracle blast for the Yankees in the fifth game against Arizona in 2001. Gordon said he had noticed Familia quick-pitch the previous hitter, Salvador Perez. He anticipated the tactic.“I wanted to make sure when I got in the box, I was ready to hit,” Gordon said. “And he tried to quick-pitch me and left the ball right there to hit.”Gordon, 31, is the Royals’ team leader, their longest-tenured player, their version of Wright. He was not the only hero — in a game this long, there were many — and Wright was not the only goat.But Wright did make the error that put Escobar on base to lead off the 14th. Wright made a terrific catch to rob Perez in the fourth, and he had two hits. But the record will show that the run that ended his first World Series game was unearned, because of his mistake.“As an infielder, you try to get the short hop or the long hop,” Wright said. “But that one, I just didn’t have time to back up to get the long hop, and I didn’t have time to come in and get the short hop. Just got the in-between hop, and you’ve just got to hope it finds a way into your glove.”It did not. It struck Wright’s wrist, then his midsection. He could not gather the ball in time to make the strong, accurate throw he needed to catch the speedy Escobar. Ben Zobrist singled through the hole, an intentional walk loaded the bases, and Hosmer’s fly ball won the game.Zobrist did not arrive until July, in a trade from Oakland. He might leave as a free agent this winter. Actually, he might leave at any moment if his wife, who is due with a baby in early November, goes into labor. But as long as he is here, Zobrist is an integral part of a relentless team.“Just a constant belief that something good is going to happen, no matter what it looks like toward the end of the game,” he said. “This team just has a knack for finding a way to come back and finding a way to win. There’s something special inside of these guys.”The Mets could say the same thing. They won the team’s first pennant in 15 years, earning it by toppling the Dodgers’ aces and overpowering the young Cubs. The Royals are a different challenge, a deep and resourceful team eager to finish what they could not last fall.The Mets matched their style of play for a while on Tuesday. But the Royals were the Royals in the end.Advertisement