AdvertisementSupported byRoyals 5, Mets 4 (14 innings)18 PhotosView Slide Show ›Richard Perry/The New York TimesBy Tim RohanKANSAS CITY, Mo. — Less than an hour after the Mets had lost Game 1 of the World Series to the Royals in perhaps the most dispiriting and exhausting way imaginable, Jeurys Familia and a few teammates sat around a table and ate barbecue in silence. They kept their heads down, rarely looking up to acknowledge one another.When his teammates left the table and Familia had finished eating, he leaned back in his chair and took a swig of orange soda, frowning. He showered and returned to his locker where a swarm of media were waiting.Familia, the Mets’ closer, had allowed a ninth-inning, game-tying home run to the Alex Gordon that had sent the game into extra innings. Familia and everyone in the Mets’ clubhouse still seemed in shock. It was the first home run Familia had allowed in a save situation since July and the first run he had allowed in nine playoff appearances.Five innings after Gordon’s heroics, the Mets lost, 5-4, in 14 innings, tied for the longest game in World Series history.“Tomorrow is a new day,” Familia said. “You try not to think about it.”Follow World Series Game 2 live updates here.But tomorrow had already come. The game had lasted 5 hours 9 minutes, and it had featured so many twists and turns that whoever lost would feel more disappointed for having played so long and having had the efforts wasted.This was also the Mets’ first Series in 15 years, so, of course, the night had an odd feel to it. Before the game, reports surfaced that the father of Edinson Volquez, the Royals’ starter, had died in the Dominican Republic; he was not notified until he exited the game after the sixth inning. At one point, the Fox broadcast went off the air due to technical difficulties.This season, the Mets had four of the top 20 pitchers who threw the most pitches over 95 m.p.h.And the teams played nine more innings after that all happened.Matt Harvey’s first pitch, a 95-mile-per hour fastball, was crushed by Alcides Escobar deep to left-center field. The rookie left fielder Michael Conforto and center fielder Yoenis Cespedes both sprinted toward it, but at the last second, a few feet away from the ball, Conforto pulled up.Afterward, Conforto said he thought he heard Cespedes call for the ball.“Whoever’s there, you’ve got to catch the ball,” Conforto said. “You’ve got to make the play. I think we were both there. I definitely had a chance to make a play, and I pulled up.”With his back to the ball, Cespedes nonchalantly stuck out his glove and tried to catch the ball underhanded, to no avail. The ball ricocheted off his leg and kicked away from the two of them. Escobar peeked up as he rounded second base and made it home, standing up, for the first World Series inside-the-park home run hit since George Haas hit one for the Philadelphia Athletics in 1929.It was a rude awakening for the Mets. Since the Mets’ division series, they had never trailed in the series. As Cespedes retook his position, he bent down and went through a series of stretches, as if he were trying to pretend the game had not started.For all the Mets had heard about the Royals, the play symbolized their aggressive style of play. After losing Game 7 of the World Series last year to Madison Bumgarner and the San Francisco Giants, the Royals had worked their way back to the World Series with a relentless offense.The Royals worked Harvey for five hits and three runs in six innings, but it was also clear Harvey was not his usual self. His fastball only sat around 94 miles per hour, and he recorded two strikeouts. Perhaps he was feeling fatigued after surpassing the 200-inning threshold for the first time in his first season back from Tommy John surgery.When Harvey exited the game, the score was tied 3-3.Volquez held the Mets hitless for the first three innings as the crowd chanted his name. A Fox reporter tweeted that the network would not announce the news of his father’s death. But after Volquez exited the game after six innings, having allowed three runs, he was alerted.“Most guys didn’t know,” Gordon said. “I found out in I think it was the 14th inning, right before we won the game.” Referring to Royals Manager Ned Yost, Gordon said, “I was standing next to Ned and he told me, he said, ‘Let’s win this game for Volquez, and explained what happened.’ ”The game only got more strange.In the eighth, Kelvin Herrera, the Royals’ hard-throwing setup man, was on the mound when Juan Lagares sparked a rally. He battled Herrera in a nine-pitch at-bat that ended with a single. He stole second base on Salvador Perez, one of the best catchers in baseball. Wilmer Flores then hit a chopper to first base, and Eric Hosmer, a two-time Gold Glove winner, tried to backhand the ball and missed, allowing Lagares to score the go-ahead run.Herrera threw his head back in disbelief. On the 29th anniversary of the Mets’ clinching the 1986 Series, which turned when Bill Buckner let a ball slip through his legs, it seemed eerie that this series might be defined by an error made by a first baseman.But with one out in the ninth, Gordon lifted a 97-m.p.h. Familia fastball to center field. Familia turned and watched the ball soar back over his head over wall for the tying run. Gordon pounded his chest as he crossed home plate.Asked if the Mets expected to win in the ninth, with Familia on the mound, Kelly Johnson said: “Of course. Maybe it’s not fair to him, but that’s the standard he’s set. You expect great things from him. I mean, he still is great.”After that, the Mets looked debilitated. They struck out eight times in the first three extra frames. David Wright struck out with two runners on in the 10th, wasting their best opportunity. Wright also made an error to start the 14th. Three batters later, Hosmer hit a sacrifice fly to finally end the game.“We were one hit away, one play away from winning that game,” Wright said.Advertisement