By RICHARD SANDOMIROCT. 28, 2015
For four minutes, Game 1 of the World Series disappeared from the air. When it returned, baseball’s increasing dependence on technology was starkly visible.Fox temporarily lost power on Tuesday night in Kansas City, Mo., a technical meltdown that might have felt familiar to anyone who has been flustered by a crashed computer. That it happened in an extraordinarily public way and affected the game on the field, however, gave it the urgency of a crisis.The game concluded in 14 innings, as the Royals won, 5-4, but only after Fox, which paid about $500 million for the broadcast rights to the World Series, resolved a glitch that sent millions of television viewers scrambling for alternatives at both ends of the technological spectrum: the Internet or the radio.It happened before the Royals came to bat in the bottom of the fourth inning, at 9:18 p.m. Eastern. Fox’s Joe Buck was reading a promo for “The Grinder,” a sitcom, when the picture disappeared.Advertisement“We apologize for technical difficulties with our #WorldSeries broadcast. We are working on fixing the issue ASAP,” Fox tweeted at 9:21 p.m.AdvertisementThe problem had affected the most modern component of the game: replay.Major League Baseball instituted the video-replay system last year, allowing teams to challenge calls on the field they believe are wrong. But to decide whether to make such a challenge, managers need access to the TV feed.Mets Manager Terry Collins went on the field to alert umpires to the absence of replay in his team’s clubhouse; Joe Torre, M.L.B.’s chief baseball officer, learned that both teams were without replay. The teams agreed that they would continue without video replay until the system was fixed.A play later in the game revealed how important replay can be. The Mets’ David Wright hit a one-out single in the ninth inning and was called safe on a steal of second base. With the replay cameras apparently having been restored, the play was reviewed and Wright was called out.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That left Daniel Murphy up with the bases empty and two outs. He flied out to end the inning.The disruption was not as severe as the blackout two years ago at the Super Bowl in New Orleans, which plunged the Superdome into darkness and delayed the game for 34 minutes.Later Tuesday night, Mike Davies, Fox Sports senior vice president for field and technical operations, said that a “technical fault” in Fox’s system of redundant generators caused the failure. “Typically, if one generator goes down, the other one keeps running,” he said. But this time, both went down.Without the ability to transmit the game, Fox switched to its Los Angeles studio where the host, Dan O’Toole, knew nothing more than that Fox had technical problems. After a few minutes there, where O’Toole, Dontrelle Willis and Eric Karros discussed the game to that point, the broadcast returned at 9:22.But Fox’s Buck, Harold Reynolds and Tom Verducci were not heard. Now, viewers were watching the MLB International signal of the game, which was being called by Matt Vasgersian and John Smoltz.AdvertisementDuring that four-minute glitch, seemingly nothing besides Kendrys Morales’s strikeout was missed — a strikeout that no one in the United States saw unless they were at the game.Meanwhile, as Fox struggled to restore its feed, MLB International went off for 25 seconds, and viewers went back to the Fox studio in Los Angeles at 9:38 where O’Toole, informed viewers that the Fox feed was about to return.When the game returned, it was the MLB International signal again. Two strikes to the Mets’ Curtis Granderson had been missed.Finally, at 9:44, Fox had its signal back — and the announcers had to return to their original seats. The blackout had compelled Fox to move Buck, Reynolds and Verducci to the game over MLB International’s feed in MLB International’s booth, moving the international-feed announcers out. The Fox crew did that for 38 minutes until Fox rebooted its transmission.Before the game was over, Fox issued a statement, saying, “The issue was immediately addressed, although it resulted in the audience missing one at-bat during the time needed to switch to carriage of Major League Baseball’s international feed, powered by a different generator on site.”As the broadcast went to a commercial break after the 10th inning, Buck said: “We’ve got a bag full of quarters for our generator. We can play all night long.”A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: World Series Drama: A Four-Minute Blackout.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »