By HARVEY ARATONOCT. 27, 2015
CHICAGO —  In front of a president who has run his final campaign, the Chicago Bulls unleashed their up-tempo offense with a season-opening 97-95 victory over LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers on Tuesday night at United Center.With President Obama, Chicago’s own, at courtside and clearly in their corner, the Bulls held off a late charge from the short-handed Cavaliers, powered by James, who led all scorers with 25 points and added 10 rebounds and 5 assists.After James put the Cavs ahead, 83-82, for the first time in the second half, Nikola Mirotic hit a baseline runner over Tristan Thompson and J. R. Smith and converted a 3-point play.The Bulls never trailed again, but after building an 8-point lead, they had to withstand two 3-point shots by Kevin Love and did not secure the victory until Jimmy Butler tipped away an inbounds pass headed for James with 1.9 seconds left.Advertisement“They threw the ball over the top, got a piece,” Butler said. “The whole world knew the ball was going to LeBron.”AdvertisementDerrick Rose, wearing a protective mask after having surgery for a training-camp injury to his eye, scored 18 points and shot 8 for 22, while Mirotic led the Bulls with 19 and Butler had 17.As if opening night did not present its annual range of emotions, the presence of the president was felt hours before he sat down in the front row, opposite the Cleveland bench, arriving fashionably late, with 2 minutes 40 seconds left in the first quarter and the Bulls ahead, 17-15.“You can tell he’s going to be in the building by all the suits running around,” Love cracked after the morning shootaround.Before his first regular-season game as Bulls coach, having replaced Tom Thibodeau, Fred Hoiberg was thrilled that Obama understood the magnitude of the occasion. “Nice of him to come see my debut,” Hoiberg said.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For his part, James was pleased that the president was not in front of a television somewhere, watching Game 1 of the World Series.“He loves the game of basketball; we all know that,” James said. “It’s an honor for me to be a part of a venue and a spectacle that the president would like to come out and watch.”Obama attended a Bulls game in Washington in his first term, which Rose fondly recalled, and a United States Olympic team exhibition game against Brazil before the 2012 Summer Games in London. James scored 30 points in that one, and he, of course, had a couple of meetings with Obama at the White House after consecutive championships with Miami.AdvertisementHe also shared an event with Michelle Obama last week, addressing thousands of children at an education forum at the University of Akron. Over the summer, James’s foundation announced that it would fund college scholarships for hundreds of Akron-area children.Back to his day job, albeit with night hours, James pronounced himself fit after being plagued by back problems during the preseason.With no timetable for the return of Kyrie Irving, who fractured his knee during the finals last June, with Iman Shumpert injured and with Thompson only recently resigned as a free agent, the last thing the Cavaliers needed was to open without James.David Blatt, their second-year coach, promised no miracles. “We’re missing the players, and that does cost us time and probably will cost us comfort and the flow in our rotation,” he said.The Cavaliers began well enough, with James showing no ill effects, except for a wobbly-looking jump shot. But after the Cavaliers led in the moments before Obama’s arrival, the Bulls went on a 17-2 run — pushing the ball at every opportunity as advertised in the post-Thibodeau era — to finish the quarter with a 9-point lead, 11 of their 26 points from Mirotic.James continued to assert himself, with 13 points in the half for a team shooting 32 percent. Near the end of the half, he seemed to want to give Obama an eyeful, drawing Joakim Noah out on the left wing, in front of the president, but missing from 25 feet.On the Cavs’ next possession, it was Butler’s turn to check James in the same vicinity. James dribbled around an Anderson Varejao screen and made a 3-pointer from behind the key.He kept attacking in the second half but came up short, and a happy president left the building.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page F7 of the New York edition with the headline: With President in Their Corner, Bulls Hold Off Comeback by Cavaliers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.