AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellNEWARK — The winless Columbus Blue Jackets trailed by a goal entering the third period of a game Saturday against the Colorado Avalanche, so their coach, John Tortorella, all of three days into the job, thought it was time to march into the dressing room and deliver a pep talk.Columbus rallied to win, ending a bewildering eight-game losing streak.“You can’t not like the guy — you hold him in such high regard,” Scott Hartnell, the Blue Jackets’ veteran forward, said before the Blue Jackets broke a scoreless tie with two goals in 35 seconds in the third period Tuesday to beat the Devils, 3-1. “He’s empowering. He wants us to believe in ourselves. He wants us to go out and do it.”Tortorella had already made it clear last week upon meeting the Blue Jackets, the fourth N.H.L. team he has coached, that he would be looking for accountability from every player. Nothing new there. But he also said he would be looking for something else, feedback, something rarely associated with Tortorella.“He came in and said he wanted to listen,” said Alexander Wennberg, a Blue Jackets forward. “He’s a new guy in the room.”Columbus General Manager Jarmo Kekalainen said, “I think we’re getting a new and improved version of John Tortorella.”For now, the Blue Jackets, who have the league’s worst record, would be thrilled to simply gain some traction. After he fired Todd Richards last week, Kekalainen hired Tortorella because he thought he could get the Blue Jackets to play their best.Tortorella, 57, has chiseled out his career by getting his teams to play with grit — by throwing themselves, even if they are stars, in front of opponents’ shots before they reach the goaltender. The Blue Jackets blocked 26 shots in their first two games under Tortorella.During stops with the Tampa Bay Lightning, the Rangers and the Vancouver Canucks, Tortorella also earned a reputation as being too blunt and hardheaded — even though Kekalainen said former players told him Tortorella was the best coach they had had.Tortorella said he still considered himself a work in progress. He was fired twice in less than 12 months: the first in 2013 by the Rangers, who went to the Stanley Cup finals under Alain Vigneault the next season, and the second in 2014 by the Canucks, who missed the playoffs in Tortorella’s only year in Vancouver.“I’m always trying to change, no matter what the perception is that I’m just some sort of idiot that won’t change,” Tortorella said Tuesday. “I’m always trying to learn about the game; I think, as a coach, if you don’t, it’s going to go by you.”He then said: “I think there is a little bit of perception out there that it’s my way or the highway, and that’s totally false. I love listening to the players because they see the game differently and I learn from them, so that’s what we’re trying to do.”After what Tortorella labeled an “ugly” victory Tuesday, he said he still had a lot to learn about his new team. He pushed the Blue Jackets hard in practice Monday, so they were sluggish Tuesday. “I just gave them too much too quickly,” he said, “but we have to get there.”The Blue Jackets, ravaged by injuries, started slowly last season under Richards, en route to a dreadful 6-15-2 start. They missed the playoffs but won 12 of their last 13 games, and entered this season with high expectations.Kekalainen said Tortorella — who has a winning record and won the Stanley Cup with the Lightning in 2004 —could be “rough around the edges every once in a while.” But he said that he trusted his sources, who were positive. The Blue Jackets have been nagged by physical ailments: Ryan Johansen, their second-leading scorer last season with 26 goals, missed games Saturday and Tuesday with what the team is calling an illness. But the team has bought into Tortorella’s methods. William Karlsson, a center, said Tuesday, “It doesn’t feel good to get a shot at you, but when the guys pat you on the back, it makes up for it.”After watching video of the Blue Jackets’ first two games under Tortorella, John Hynes, the Devils’ first-year coach, said: “There are some similarities to the things he did in New York. He’s a very good teacher and a demanding guy, so the style of play will change pretty quickly for them.”Advertisement