
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 27, 2015
KANSAS CITY, Mo. — Alex Gordon signed with the Kansas City Royals a decade ago, during the final week of the worst regular season in franchise history. The Royals of 2015, winners of the last two American League pennants, would scarcely recognize that team. It endured three managers, led the majors in errors, and staggered to 106 losses.“Throughout the losing years we had, it was like all the highlights that you saw on the big board or the TV were all about the ’80s,” Gordon said. “We really didn’t have anything to celebrate until now. It’s good to make your own history and your own memories.”Gordon, 31, is the longest-tenured player on the Royals, a left fielder with a close bond to the team that drafted him second overall from the University of Nebraska in 2005. Gordon grew up in Lincoln, Neb., and went to Royals games when he visited Kansas City in the summer. One of his brothers is named Brett, after the greatest player in franchise history.Gordon tried to play George Brett’s position, third base, until the Royals sent him to the minors in 2010 to learn left field. Gordon, who was then hitting .194 and had spent parts of four seasons in the majors, worked hard to master it. He has won four Gold Gloves in a row.Advertisement“This organization has seen him go through his struggles and has seen him win Gold Gloves, and there really wasn’t much of a change, personality-wise, when he was going through both times,” said first baseman Eric Hosmer, who is five years younger than Gordon.Advertisement“When you see a guy like that, the way he carries himself, being a young guy coming up, you just kind of look at the way he goes about his business and try and model it as much as you can.”
CreditRichard Perry/The New York Times        The Royals have grown up around Gordon, enduring losing seasons through 2012 before coalescing as a speed/defense/bullpen/contact-hitting force. Gordon summed up the offensive philosophy succinctly at Monday’s workout.“Just make it as stressful as we can for the pitcher, every at-bat,” he said.Ned Yost, the manager since 2010, said Gordon’s transition to left field helped establish the kind of team the Royals wanted to build. Defense would be a priority, and homegrown players would be essential.Hosmer, third baseman Mike Moustakas and reliever Luke Hochevar were all top-five overall draft picks, like Gordon. All have been major contributors and learned from his example.“Everybody in that locker room looks up to him,” Yost said. “Everything he does is to be ready to play a baseball game, from the food he eats to the exercises that he does early in the weight room to the preparation before the game. His routine is impeccable, and guys see this.”In some ways, Gordon is the Royals’ version of the Mets’ David Wright, a multi-time All-Star with perspective from the lean years who has never played anywhere else. Though Gordon does not have the formal title, as Wright does, Moustakas called him the team captain.“He leads by example,” Moustakas said. “He does the right things every single day. You can literally start your day off or figure out where you’re supposed to be by what Alex Gordon’s doing. At 2:15 he’s there, at 2:30 he’s here. It’s just clockwork every single day.”AdvertisementAround 10:15 p.m. last Oct. 29, Gordon came to bat at Kauffman Stadium with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 7 of the World Series. The San Francisco Giants’ Madison Bumgarner had retired the previous 14 Royals, stretching back to the fifth inning. Gordon lashed a single to center that eluded Gregor Blanco, enabling Gordon to dash all the way to third.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The World Series had not ended with the tying run on third base in Game 7 since 1962, when the Giants’ Willie McCovey famously lined out to the Yankees’ Bobby Richardson. This time, Salvador Perez popped out to Pablo Sandoval.“It lingered a little bit,” Gordon said. “Made me do a couple of extra sprints in the off-season, try to get faster.”Gordon — who probably would have been out easily at the plate had he tried to score — said the loss motivated the Royals throughout the off-season, a common refrain around this team. It clearly inspired the fans, who set a franchise record with an average crowd of 33,439. That is about twice the attendance from the year Gordon was drafted, when the Royals averaged 16,928 fans.“It felt like last year’s postseason all year,” Gordon said, adding later, “I just remember during the year looking at guys, saying, ‘This is great.’ It’s like a Tuesday night, and it’s sold out. The atmosphere is unbelievable.”Gordon’s days here may be ending. He holds a $14 million player option for 2016, but good players almost always choose free agency, where they could clearly command a more lucrative guarantee.Gordon said he told his agent this spring that he did not want to talk about his contract during the season, and he has not dwelled on it. But he would like to keep a good thing going.“This is my second home,” Gordon said. “I’ve been here for eight years. Obviously, I’d like to spend my whole career here. Not many guys can say that. It would be pretty special if I could. If that changes, it’s just the way it goes. But this is definitely where I want to be.”A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page F3 of the New York edition with the headline: Gordon Making Memories To Celebrate .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »