By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 27, 2015
The Giants’ pass rush has been one of the worst in the N.F.L. this season, ranked 31st in a 32-team league. But the defensive front line will soon — or relatively soon — be getting a boost from Jason Pierre-Paul, who has kept his distance from the team since an unexplained Fourth of July fireworks accident mangled his right hand.The Giants and Pierre-Paul, whose right index finger was amputated, came to terms on a new contract Tuesday night that will put the player back on the practice field. When Pierre-Paul, a onetime rising star at defensive end who has not worn football gear in about 10 months, will be ready to play in a game is unknown, but Nov. 29, after the Giants’ bye week, is a reasonable guess.The Giants have been granted a two-game roster exemption for Pierre-Paul, which means the earliest he could be expected to play is Nov. 15 against the New England Patriots. Pierre-Paul, 26, will need a considerable amount of time to get back into football shape and to determine how he is going to play a fierce position where hand fighting is crucial to success while missing a finger and recovering from unspecified injuries to his thumb and middle finger. Pierre-Paul also has to learn the new defense installed in the off-season by the coordinator Steve Spagnuolo.“I’m very excited to be back,” Pierre-Paul said in a statement released by the team. “I’m getting ready to do what I have to do. I’ve been training down in South Florida with my trainer. Every day, I got up at 7:30 and lifted weights, I’ve been doing what I have to do to stay in football shape.”AdvertisementAsked how he felt, Pierre-Paul answered: “I feel younger.”On his Twitter account at about the same time, Pierre-Paul referred to his ordeal after the accident as “a humbling experience.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said: “It is just good to have Jason back in our building. You can feel his energy and his desire to overcome what he has had to endure since July. His spirit is undeniable, and he is anxious to get to work.”AdvertisementThe terms of Pierre-Paul’s new one-year contract were not immediately known, but it will be worth substantially less than the nearly $15 million he was set to earn had he signed the contract due him when the Giants designated him as the team’s franchise player in the spring. Pierre-Paul did not sign that contract and has been in limbo ever since the accident. With Pierre-Paul likely to play six or seven games this year, his new salary will be reduced accordingly, with the contract laden with incentives based on his production.How much of an assist Pierre-Paul, a two-time Pro Bowl selection, can give the Giants’ defense is unclear. His performance as a pass rusher had been declining in the last two seasons. Pierre-Paul was strong against the run, but he was notably less productive getting to the quarterback against top-notch teams with quality offensive lines. But on a team that has only nine sacks in seven games this season, Pierre-Paul could lend credibility to a defensive unit even if he is just a fraction of the player who had 42 sacks in his first five seasons with the Giants, including 16 ½ in 2011.Before this week, the Giants had not seen Pierre-Paul since Labor Day, when they deemed his rehabilitating right hand unfit to withstand the rigors of pro football. Monday, the Giants doctors and executives examined his hand again and came to a different conclusion.Throughout the summer, Pierre-Paul’s whereabouts and the condition of his hand have been uncertain. Another unpredictable episode will unfold as Pierre-Paul tries to revive a once glittering career.“I’m just here to help the team out,” Pierre-Paul said. “I’m blessed to play the game, and I’m excited about the opportunity to play again.”A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page F6 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants and Injured Pierre-Paul Reach Agreement on New Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.