By JODIE VALADEOCT. 27, 2015
CHARLOTTE, N.C. —  Two days after Nascar’s playoffs narrowed to eight drivers, headlines remained focused on two main subjects. A controversial finish Sunday at Talladega Superspeedway had many wondering whether the reigning champion, Kevin Harvick, should be advancing. And Joey Logano won his third straight race in an impressive display of dominance that made him a favorite for the championship.Far from the spotlight, Jeff Gordon smiled and called himself “the underdog.”Gordon, one of Nascar’s most decorated drivers and a four-time Cup champion, is four races from retirement. But he is still in the hunt to walk away from it all with a title — and no one is talking about it.“We’re still under the radar,” Gordon, 44, said Tuesday. “I don’t think anybody expects it to happen, and we like it that way.”No one, perhaps, expected Gordon to make it this far, to the so-called eliminator round that features eight drivers in contention for the Sprint Cup. After three races, the field will be reduced to four drivers for the season finale at the Homestead-Miami Speedway.AdvertisementGordon announced before the start of this season that it would be his last. Sometimes good (third at Talladega) and sometimes miserable (42nd at the Brickyard 400 at Indianapolis), Gordon has typically been somewhere in between. He has an average finish of 14.7, and this is only the third season in the last 20 years in which he has not won a race.AdvertisementBut when the Chase for the Sprint Cup began six races ago, something began to click for Gordon and his No. 24 Chevrolet team. When previously he had been finishing 15th with a 10th-place car, he said, “What we’ve been doing lately is taking what could have been 15th and turning it into an eighth or a 10th.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added, “We actually bonded and grew from it, and that’s why I think we’re one of the strongest teams out there.”Gordon and his team are fully aware that he is going into the final four races of his career with a shot at winning a championship in his last season. The attention to detail has been more rigorous, the focus a bit more precise.“There’s probably even a little added motivation because these are my final four races,” Gordon said. “I think everybody wants to see us advance to that next round and into Homestead and have a shot at it.”Despite ranking third in points and having previous success at the four remaining tracks, he views himself as one of the biggest underdogs among the eight remaining drivers.“We have not shown the strength that other teams have that are still in this thing,” he said.Even his fellow driver Kyle Busch, an admitted childhood fan of Gordon, is not so sure of Gordon’s chances of beating Harvick or Logano at Homestead.“Just straight-up race, to do that? Beat them? I don’t see that,” Busch said.But Gordon can picture the storybook ending.“I can imagine it, and that’s why I haven’t allowed myself to really go there,” he said. “There’s too much racing left to happen. You can’t help but get a smile on your face that we’ve made it further than maybe we even anticipated. And it gives you the feeling that, ‘Hey, maybe this could be our year.’ ”AdvertisementHe just prefers if no one talks about it. For now.“That will be a lot of fun to talk about when Homestead is over,” Gordon said. “But I can’t talk about it now because we just have too much work ahead of us.”A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page B18 of the National edition with the headline: Gordon Enters Final Four Races of His Career With Shot at Nascar Title.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.