AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaGREENBURGH, N.Y. — Kristaps Porzingis was not around last season when the Knicks were plunging to the depths. But he said he could relate. His team in Spain was not exactly vying for a championship, and he dealt with his share of dysfunction.“We had a similar situation in Spain,” Porzingis said. “Maybe not as bad. But you realize how hard it is to win.”This is not a foreign concept to people who have been employed by the Knicks in recent seasons. Nor is this news to fans who have paid to witness their struggles. The Knicks were equal parts punch line and roadkill in losing 65 games last season, a franchise record for futility.On Tuesday, though, the Knicks were undefeated as they looked ahead to Wednesday’s season opener against the Bucks in Milwaukee. Gone were all the losses, replaced by optimism and opportunity. Derrick Williams kept repeating the word “excited,” going so far as to describe his fresh start with the Knicks as a “dream come true.”At practice, some things felt the same. Coach Derek Fisher, for example, declined to disclose his starting lineup. But Williams and Porzingis were among the new players who had fostered hope. Porzingis, the team’s top draft choice and the presumptive future of the organization, said he was relying on the team’s veterans to help him keep his emotions in check.“They just tell me not to rush,” Porzingis said. “It’s a long season, so don’t try to do everything in the first game and have the best game of my life. I have to remember that I’m going to need all that energy, and to keep myself focused for a long season.”The Knicks do not have a charitable schedule to start the season. Twenty-four hours after facing the Bucks on the road, the Knicks will face the Atlanta Hawks at Madison Square Garden. Their first six opponents reached the playoffs last season.“We’re going to find out a lot about where we are now, right from the start,” Fisher said.The team listed Arron Afflalo (hamstring) and Kevin Seraphin (knee) as doubtful for Wednesday’s game. Afflalo, who labored with a hamstring strain throughout the preseason, appeared to reinjure himself last week in the Knicks’ final exhibition, a lackluster loss to the Boston Celtics.But the Knicks were 4-2 in the preseason, showcasing an up-tempo style on offense. While it is difficult to glean much from exhibition games, their defense also appeared to be improved thanks in part to Robin Lopez, who signed as a free agent.Charles Barkley, who, in his role as a studio analyst for Turner Sports, spent a good deal of energy last season publicly eviscerating the Knicks, is bullish on the team’s refurbished roster. In a conference call this week, Barkley described the Knicks as one of his “sleeper teams” and predicted that they would make the playoffs. In fact, he guaranteed it.“I think Phil Jackson has done a good job getting good, quality players,” Barkley said. “They have actual N.B.A. players on their squad this year to go along with Carmelo Anthony.”Barkley rattled through some of the key acquisitions: Lopez, Afflalo and Williams among them. As for putting the Knicks in the playoff chase, Barkley has company. In another conference call, the ESPN analysts Jeff Van Gundy and Mark Jackson said the Knicks could vie for a spot.“This is a team that I don’t think is a long shot to make the playoffs,” Mark Jackson said.Fisher has avoided talking about expectations. He said he expected the Eastern Conference to be improved this season and cited the Miami Heat and the Indiana Pacers — two teams that were weakened by injuries last season and missed the playoffs.“I’m really not worried about where we end up,” Fisher said. “I think our team is focused more on the process.”His players have adopted the same approach — which, in fairness, is easy to do when they have yet to play a game. Williams, a former No. 2 overall pick, averaged 16.2 points a game and shot 56.7 percent in the preseason, but he preached patience. Chemistry can be fickle.“It can take a couple games,” he said. “Sometimes it takes a month.”Fisher said he was eager to see how his team would handle adversity. Because he knows adversity is coming. He is just hoping for less of it this season.Advertisement