By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 27, 2015
KANSAS CITY, Mo. —  In the World Series matchup between the Mets and the Royals, Kansas City enjoys one distinct advantage. While the Mets do not have any life-size statues of people significant in their history, the Royals have four.Four to nothing in life-size statues. A shutout.In the plaza beyond the right-field seats at Kauffman Stadium, the Royals have bronze statues of Frank White and George Brett, who played for them; Dick Howser, who managed them to the World Series title in 1985; and Ewing and Muriel Kauffman, their original owners. All are bursting in lifelike poses, almost jumping off their pedestals.The Mets have a giant red apple and Mr. Met.Those items have a cherished place in Mets history, to be sure. But the Mets have yet to join a trend of teams commissioning large bronze statues of former players, managers, executives and broadcasters, as teams in cities like Boston, Pittsburgh, San Francisco, St. Louis, Cincinnati, Seattle, Chicago and Philadelphia have done.“I think a Mets statue or two would be fantastic in New York, and I would be honored to make one for them,” said Harry Weber, who created three of the four statues at Kauffman Stadium.AdvertisementThat is a little like asking the general manager of the Royals to make roster choices for the Mets, but Weber has bronze statues in St. Louis and Boston as well as Kansas City.AdvertisementThe Mets, who have a committee to decide these things, have chosen a policy of restraint in honoring former players. Even retiring a number is something the Mets make their players earn indisputably.Tom Seaver (No. 41) is the only former Mets player to have his number retired. The numbers for Casey Stengel and Gil Hodges, former managers, have also been retired. Many assume the former catcher Mike Piazza will someday have his No. 31 retired, along with the current third baseman David Wright’s No. 5.Across town, the Yankees are running short of digits to give to their current players because so many have been retired. The team has been accused of overdoing it (not for Babe Ruth and Joe DiMaggio, but maybe for Andy Pettitte and Jorge Posada), and some believe it has become merely a marketing scheme for the franchise.Yankee Stadium is also home to Monument Park, and an imposing life-size statue of the former owner George Steinbrenner stands at the entrance to the front offices.But many Mets fans yearn to see a full statue of Seaver (he has a bronze bust in the Seaver entrance to Citi Field), and who would argue if the Mets commissioned a bronze statue of Gary Carter or one of Bob Murphy and Ralph Kiner to place in front of the stadium?The Mets like the way their stadium is now, but they have listened to fans before. After Citi Field opened in 2009, many complained that Mets history was not well represented. Since then, the team has opened a Mets Hall of Fame to wide acclaim. It even houses a small statue of Stengel and plaques for many excellent Mets players.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to Weber, 73, a sculptor based in Missouri, commissioning big statues is not done lightly. Each one costs $100,000 to $150,000, and the process — known as lost-wax casting — is lengthy, requiring six to nine months. “At its core, it’s been done the same way for 2,000 years,” Weber said.AdvertisementFirst, sketches are made, then a full-size clay model. That is sent to a foundry, which produces two halves of the statue from the molds. The two casts are sent back to the artist, who welds them together and adds a patina to give it that shiny bronze color and texture.The cost of the bronze alone is about $28,000 to $30,000, and statues can weigh 600 to 1,200 pounds.Weber said he honed his artist’s skills while serving as a river patrol boat officer in the United States Navy in Vietnam from 1966 to 1967. Later he moved to New York and saw the Mets play at Shea Stadium twice.“Obviously, I’d love it if they added some statues at the new stadium,” he said. “A lot of younger fans have never seen the great players from years ago. It really enhances the whole experience for a fan.”Weber made the statues of White turning a double play and Howser standing on dugout steps. He also made the one of the Kauffmans, which replaced an older one by the Kansas City artist Tom Corbin that stood at the stadium from 1999 to 2012 before it was moved to the Kauffman Foundation headquarters here. Kwan Wu, another artist who lives in the Kansas City area, did the Brett statue.Corbin, whose sculptures are shown in New York, also designed the Howser Trophy, which is given to the college baseball player of the year. Corbin, too, encourages the Mets to add some bronze to their stadium.“I would love to help them out,” he said with a laugh.The Mets and the Royals, who both came into existence in the 1960s, do have one art form in common. They each have those gold cylindrical ornaments, the ones dotted with little gold pennants.They are World Series trophies, and for now, the Mets lead in that all-important category, two to one.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page F1 of the New York edition with the headline: Unlike Royals, Mets Are Slow to Put Heroes on a Pedestal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »