By RYAN GOLDBERGOCT. 2, 2015
Criquette Head-Maarek is not one to say, “I told you so.” But she would be forgiven if she had after Trêve, the filly she trains, won her second consecutive Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe last October.The French filly had been written off after three defeats after her first Arc triumph, in 2013. But Head-Maarek never lost faith. Time and again, she said Trêve would win once more — that is, she said, “if I can get her right again.”Head-Maarek did just that, of course. Ignored at odds of 11-to-1, Trêve shot up the inside around Longchamp’s final bend in the Arc last year and left Europe’s and Japan’s best behind. She became the first horse to win back-to-back editions of the prestigious European race since 1978 and only the second filly in history to do so.It looked like a fairytale ending before what was expected to be retirement for Trêve, who had suffered foot and back problems all season, making her second Arc victory perhaps even more remarkable than her explosive 2013 success.AdvertisementBearing in mind these injuries, Head-Maarek thought that a shot at a third Arc triumph — something no dual winner had ever tried — was impossible. Anything other than retirement had never been seriously considered, she said.AdvertisementThat was the day after the race. The next morning, Trêve’s owner, Sheikh Joaan al-Thani, and his father, Sheikh Hamad al-Thani, the former emir of Qatar, paid a visit to his stable star. With Head-Maarek that day was her father, Alec Head, a legend in French racing who had bred Trêve and trained four different Arc winners. (Sheikh Joaan bought Trêve from the Heads after her 2013 Prix de Diane victory.)Sheikh Hamad asked Alec Head what he would do with Trêve. “And Papa said: ‘I would keep her in training. When a filly is good at 4, she’s even better at 5,”’ Head-Maarek recalled. To which Sheikh Hamad replied: “That’s a very good idea. Let’s keep her in training then.”A very pleased Head-Maarek began planning a campaign unlike any other in the annals of French racing. Now, a year later and with all that can go wrong with horses, that Trêve finds herself on Sunday going for a third Arc — and as a heavy ante-post favorite, after three overwhelming victories this season, even if the competition now gets deeper — is nothing short of incredible.French racing has done its utmost to bring Trêve’s exploits to a public not usually much interested in the sport. Trêve has her own website, FollowTreve.com, where she “describes” her days and how she feels, accompanied by photos and race videos and biographies of the team around her. Posters at Longchamp promote this “Monumental” occasion, and France Galop, the French racing authority, recently released a short film of Trêve galloping past Parisian landmarks, including the Arc de Triomphe and Eiffel Tower.Looking back, Head-Maarek, 66, takes pleasure in recognizing the foresight of her father, who just turned 91. “My dad had no doubt,” she said. “And he was right — everything is proving it.”Trêve is the crowning achievement of the Head family’s success. The excellence began with Willie Head, Alec’s father, who trained two Arc winners. Alec’s oldest son, Freddy, a champion jockey and now a trainer, rode three of his four Arc winners for the family — one for Willie (when Freddy was 19), one for Alec, and one for Criquette (with Three Troikas, another filly, in 1979). Head-Maarek remains the only female trainer to win the Arc, and Freddy is the youngest winning jockey.Head-Maarek received deserved accolades for her training job last season. She felt certain that Trêve’s injuries, not a loss of quality, were responsible for her defeats. They were not poor efforts, but they were surprising for what was missing.AdvertisementHead-Maarek has compared Trêve to the Road Runner from the Looney Tunes cartoons, a bird whose legs spin, whipping up dust, until he shoots forward like a rocket. For Trêve, who likewise accelerates in a flash, her discomfort prevented her from sinking to the turf and uncoiling her own motor. Nonetheless, Head Maarek said she had “always believed in her,” adding that the horse “has an incredible fighting spirit.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Head-Maarek had to make tough decisions. She lobbied to replace the jockey Frankie Dettori, aboard Trêve in her first two defeats, with her old rider, Thierry Jarnet. (Dettori was Sheikh Joaan’s contract rider.) But Jarnet and Trêve mustered only fourth in the Prix Vermeille, her Arc tune-up in September. It was her worst finish ever. Some figured she had lost her edge for good, even arguing that racing her in the Arc was not only hopeless but unfair to the filly.Head-Maarek, however, felt that Trêve, sidelined all summer, needed the race. It was three weeks to the Arc. “I could feel she was coming on,” she said, recalling that she had told Sheikh Joaan that she was sure the horse would “be back in good form in three weeks.” She added, laughing, “I think he let me run her because he didn’t want to disappoint me.”Fifteen days before the Arc, Trêve breezed at one of Chantilly’s scenic gallops, as Alec Head watched with his daughter.He had been skeptical about her chances to win and had even said that the “shadow of Trêve” had gone to post at Royal Ascot that June when she finished third in the Prince of Wales Stakes. But at Chantilly that day, Head-Maarek recalled, “He turned to me and said, ‘We’ll win the Arc.”’And how does her father feel now? “I think he’s in the same mood,” she said with a laugh, before adding, “We owe him everything — the filly and myself. I wouldn’t be there and the filly wouldn’t be there, because he made the mating! So she’s like a sister for me.”In contrast to last season, Head-Maarek was not going to let Trêve leave France this year. In the winter, she sent Trêve to the place where her life began: Haras du Quesnay, the Heads’ farm near Deauville, on the Normandy coast.Alec Head had purchased the farm, built by the American William Kissam Vanderbilt around the turn of the 20th century, in 1958 after it had fallen into disrepair.His mating for Trêve — he bred his mare Trevise to the Epsom Derby winner Motivator — was one of his last official decisions before he turned the farm over to his four children. Some of the best horses of his life, as a trainer and breeder, are stamped on Trêve’s pedigree: Riverman, Lyphard, Anabaa. The family had decided to sell Trêve as a yearling, but, fortunately for this story, she fell well short of her modest reserve and so Head-Maarek had took her home for €22,000.AdvertisementFor four months this winter, Trêve prospered, spending eight hours each day in the paddocks of Le Quesnay, with no weight on her back. “She was healed of all the little problems she could’ve had,” Head-Maarek said. “And as a 5-year-old, she has grown into a very nice filly, very strong. They grow until they’re 5 or 6, so she was not finished yet.”In her three starts this year, Trêve has never looked close to defeat. The script could not be more different from last year’s, but Head-Maarek is unchanged.“I’m not a nervous person,” she said. “I’m very relaxed, very quiet, I try to do the best I can with my horses and bring them into a race at their best. I’m sure she’s going to make the show and if she gets beat, she’ll get beat by a better horse than her. She’s really back to her best.”A version of this special report appears in print on October 3, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.