AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonCANTERBURY, England — Along Palace Street, a stone’s throw from the cathedral here, the few residents out on Sunday night were wandering home from the pub. With the workweek ahead, the city was settling into bed.But in a small apartment above a tandoori shop on the quaint street, Louis East, Ben Ashton and Lewis Addley were ordering pizza and soda and preparing for a full night of soccer, starting with a match kicking off nearly 4,000 miles away, in Ohio.East, Ashton and Addley — three British journalism students in their early 20s — curate mlsgb.com, one of the few websites in England devoted to Major League Soccer. And Sunday was a big day, with playoff berths and seedings at stake on the final day of the M.L.S. regular season.East, Ashton and Addley chatted about the injuries and roster choices in the day’s featured match — D.C. United’s visit to Columbus — and also about the small bets they had made on the match (and others) with the local bookmaker.The question was why: Why stay up late to watch games many time zones away in a league that is barely two decades old, when many of the world’s best players are here at home and televised in prime time? Yet in a country consumed with Premier League soccer, following the American version has the same outsider appeal that once drew Americans to the European game.East, Ashton and Addley say they prefer M.L.S. precisely because it is not the Premier League. The games are more wide open and the outcomes less predictable, they said, and recent imports like Didier Drogba, Steven Gerrard and Sebastian Giovinco have elevated the level of play.“There was a gap there to link M.L.S. and England and the U.S. and the Premier League,” East said. “With soccer growing in the U.S., I don’t see why it couldn’t be popular here, too.”East and his friends also prefer M.L.S. for precisely the reasons its critics deride it: a playoff system that gives at least a dozen teams a chance at the title; the parity of a two-conference system; and the lack of relegation, which in other countries can banish a fan’s favorite team out of the top flight for good. In comparison to the staid leagues of Europe, which are often dominated by a handful of top teams, those features add to the excitement, they said.“One of the things that’s more enjoyable is there’s so much they can do to improve the league,” said Addley, who, like his friends, has never seen an M.L.S. match in person.It is unclear how many British fans follow Major League Soccer. The league does not keep track, and Sky Sports, which broadcasts a minimum of two games a week under a new rights agreement, declined to share viewership numbers.Still, there is clearly some appetite for American soccer, even if pub owners refuse to turn on the games when East and his friends ask them. East said that their website, which started in May 2014, has received 1.2 million unique visits so far this year. As editor, he directs five volunteers who produce a stream of commentary on M.L.S. and, in a nod to unavoidable passions, the Premier League. (East supports Tottenham Hotspur, while Ashton and Addley root for Arsenal and Chelsea.)The three soccer savants were active on Twitter during Sunday’s matches, the first of which was a 5-0 whitewash by Columbus. They exchange messages with fans in North America and, much to their delight, have communicated directly with the players, something unheard-of in Britain.While it is unclear who precisely follows M.L.S. in Britain, the presumption is that many of the fans are millennials, the same demographic that has a lot of followers of the Premier League in the United States. Both sets of young fans gravitate toward fresh content, and thanks to social media and ubiquitous connectivity they can find like-minded fans everywhere.“Years ago, there was a real intrigue with the N.F.L. in the U.K. and Japan because football personified what America stood for, and big guys, cheerleaders and pomp and mascots spoke to how a guy in London or Tokyo thought about America,” said the M.L.S. commissioner, Don Garber, who once worked at the N.F.L. “But we are a new league for a new America. It’s very young, very global, very digitally connected. Now there’s a perception in the U.K. that that is what they think of America today.”Unlike the N.F.L., M.L.S. does not sell an Internet streaming package in Britain. For a while, East and his friends watched unlicensed game feeds online. M.L.S. games on Sky Sports require a subscription fee that they cannot afford. So East borrowed a password from his girlfriend’s father, downloaded the Sky Sports app on his PlayStation and hooked the game console to a flat panel screen. The picture was grainy and the Wi-Fi signal occasionally hiccupped, but it was live soccer, from Ohio.The Sky Sports broadcasts are Spartan. There is no pre- or postgame show, and highlights of Premier League matches fill the five-minute gap before the games kick off at 9:05 p.m., one hour later when clocks are on summer time. Then two announcers — one British, one American — suddenly come on air, but are never seen. They call the game from a studio as the live feed rolls.Gary Hughes, who runs soccer programming for Sky Sports, said his company signed a four-year deal with M.L.S. so it could show live games in the summer, which is the off-season for European leagues. That well-known stars now play in North America only adds to the appeal, and M.L.S. has tried to be accommodating: In August, it agreed to move up the kickoff of a highly anticipated match by an hour so Sky could show it in prime time.“Obviously, the Premier League is king,” Hughes said.But, he added, “with the growing popularity of M.L.S. and the bigger names going over, it’s going to get bigger.”Hughes dismissed the critics in Britain who viewed M.L.S. as a “retirement league,” saying, “I think football fans are interested in football.”Indeed, this year, M.L.S. video clips have been viewed nearly 5.5 million times on skysports.com, more than those for tennis, rugby league and the N.F.L., but fewer than clips of domestic soccer, boxing, Formula One, cricket and golf.On Monday, with the regular season complete, mlsgb.com quickly filled with stories on Giovinco, the former Juventus star now with Toronto F.C.; the Red Bulls’ winning the Supporters’ Shield as regular-season champions; and playoff previews.With a dozen teams in the playoffs — 60 percent of the league — now fighting for the M.L.S. title starting Wednesday, East and his friends will have a lot to write about in the coming weeks.“In the Premier League, teams compete for one or two places at the top, but in the M.L.S., all the teams are fighting for 12 spots,” Ashton said. “There are so many potential outcomes.”Advertisement