AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanKANSAS CITY, Mo. — In the Mets’ war room during the 2006 draft, among the team’s officials in attendance was a relatively young area scout named Steve Barningham, whom the organization had hired about seven months earlier to search for talent in northern Florida.As the draft wore on, and scouts around the room made cases to draft players they had spent months following and evaluating, Barningham kept nagging the Mets to draft Daniel Murphy, a sweet-swinging hitter who hailed from Jacksonville University.Barningham knew it was a tough sell. Scouting directors tend to prefer players who fit cookie-cutter profiles — players with big power or a stellar glove or blazing speed — whose future is easy to project. And Murphy was a fair defender, a fringe runner who did not hit for power. But as Barningham kept trying to tell his superiors, Murphy could flat-out hit.Finally, Sandy Johnson, the special assistant to the general manager, asked Barningham how much it would take to sign Murphy. Fifty thousand dollars, Barningham replied.“It’s worth $50,000 to find out if this guy can scout,” Johnson said.The Mets picked Murphy in the 13th round. In retrospect, nine years later, that move is among the most important in recent Mets history. This month, Murphy — not Babe Ruth or Reggie Jackson — became the first player in baseball to hit home runs in six consecutive postseason games as he led the Mets to their first pennant in 15 years. With the Mets starting the World Series here Tuesday against the Kansas City Royals, Murphy was one home run away from tying the record for home runs in a postseason, which was eight, set originally by Barry Bonds.And Barningham, who is still a scout in the Mets organization, was in the stands watching. Barningham and Murphy have become friends throughout the years, and at Murphy’s invitation, Barningham has accompanied him throughout this postseason run, there to listen when Murphy needs to vent or break down an at-bat. Other than Murphy’s brother, Jonathan, no one else may know his swing as well as Barningham, the Mets scout who signed him.“He’s family,” Daniel Murphy said.The first time Barningham saw Murphy play in person in college, he recalled, Murphy had four hits, all to the opposite field. The next day, Barningham went to batting practice, and Murphy kept spraying hits to left field, center field, left field, center field. Barningham was the only scout in the stands; he spoke to Murphy before he took his final round of swings.“ ‘Hey, I don’t want to mess you up,’ ” Barningham recalled saying, “ ‘but I’m writing this report, and I need know if you can pull the ball. Can you do me a favor and kind of turn it loose in the next round?’ Daniel took his next 10 swings and hit eight of the balls over the lights in right-center field. I was sold. It was like, ‘This guy can do anything he wants with the bat.’ ”After that, Barningham began calling Murphy about once a week to check in. Murphy could recall every at-bat in great detail, from the pitch sequence to his thought process. Barningham had never heard a player talk about hitting so cerebrally, so obsessively. After a while, Barningham did not have to call Murphy — Murphy would pre-emptively call him.At the time, Barningham was still relatively new to scouting. His own career, in the Texas Rangers organization, had fizzled early on. After having shoulder surgery as a player, he ruled out coaching because he could not throw batting practice. He took a job as a scout with the Oakland Athletics and spent a few years there, learning on the fly. Paul DePodesta, the Mets’ current vice president for player development and scouting, was an early mentor.The Mets hired Barningham around December 2005, giving him a late start for the scouting season, just seven months before the June draft. When Barningham lobbied to take Murphy in the war room, surrounded by the Mets’ top baseball minds, he felt his job was on the line.“To Steve’s credit, he fought for him,” said Omar Minaya, the Mets’ general manager at the time.Now they were linked: If Murphy succeeded, Barningham would get credit for finding him. Until then, the most famous player from Jacksonville University might have been Tom McMillan, a 5-foot-9 shortstop who played two games for the Seattle Mariners in their inaugural season, 1977. Or Paul Runge, an infielder who hit four career home runs for the Atlanta Braves during the 1980s.And so the phone calls kept coming. Barningham talked to Murphy about his diet, his approach, what to expect at each level. Mostly, Murphy just wanted to talk over his at-bats, a continuation and progression of the same conversations they started while he was in college.As Murphy reached the majors, and as he experienced several position changes, a few devastating injuries and six consecutive losing Mets seasons, they stayed in touch. For nine years, Murphy and Barningham have carried on a never-ending conversation on hitting. Murphy even wants to talk about hitting at Thanksgiving; Barningham is now an annual guest.How the New York Mets made their improbable run to the World Series.“I feel like that’s his release,” Barningham said. “If he talks about it, he can get himself into a good place. I felt like my job was to keep him positive and get him ready for the next day.”This postseason, though, just like everyone else, Barningham has watched Murphy in disbelief. Murphy never became a speedster, an ace with his glove or a power hitter. He sacrificed the power, at least, to hit for a higher batting average. As Barningham put it, “he wanted to be Tony Gwynn.” In seven seasons with the Mets now, Murphy has batted .288, made one All-Star team and hit no more than 14 home runs in a season.The difference during this playoff run, Barningham points out, is a mechanical tweak that Kevin Long, the Mets’ first-year hitting coach, made in Murphy’s swing that has allowed him to attack pitches more forcefully.“He’s getting balanced early and keeping his front side loaded, which is creating more bat speed than ever before,” Barningham said. “For a guy that always had bat control, if you combine bat speed with bat control, it’s just lethal.”In the car ride after playoff games, as always, Murphy wants to talk about hitting, certain at-bats he cannot get over. These days, Barningham does not have much advice. He just listens.Advertisement