AdvertisementSupported byBy Sarah LyallLike many people taking part in the New York City Marathon on Sunday, Susanna Phillips Huntington has never run an entire marathon before. As a competitive runner, she makes an excellent soprano, which happens to be her day job.“I think they help each other,” she said recently of running and opera singing, both of which involve long hours of intense exertion in taxing conditions and an intimate awareness of the body’s many fluctuations. “You always have to be doing a full-body scan. You think: How does this feel? Are your shoulders relaxed? Are you going too fast, are you going too slow, are you breathing?“Are you going to have a heart attack?”Runners enter the New York City Marathon for many reasons, mental, physical and fanciful: to try to win, to try to finish, to try to raise money for charity, to try to raise their own flagging spirits, to support their friends, to impress their spouses, to revel in the singular charms of the city’s five boroughs, to see if they can, to say they did.Phillips Huntington, 34, is doing it for the challenge, but also, as a useful ancillary goal, to improve her physical conditioning and build on the stamina and breath control that are so crucial to her singing. “It’s not just your voice; it’s your body,” she said. “You’re physically and mentally on for four and a half hours.”And so, as she trains for the marathon, she’s also training, in a way, for her next opera roles, this winter at the Metropolitan Opera: Musetta in “La Bohème” and Rosalinde in “Die Fledermaus.” (More urgently, she will also be singing the national anthem before the race starts on Sunday.)Like baseball starting pitchers, opera stars have to rest for several days between performances. Like runners, they have to know how to breathe properly. The goal in both pursuits, Phillips Huntington said, is to breathe in an energetic, controlled, clean way. “It’s like a good barbecue, low and slow,” she said.Are you training for the New York City marathon? Share your photos and see other runners’ routines on Instagram by searching #NYTMarathon.“You know when you’re stacking your breath?” she went on, describing something akin to hyperventilation, but without the panic. “You breathe in too quickly, before you’ve finished breathing out. It’s very bad and you can’t perform properly if you do that.” While some runners prefer a rhythm of breathing in for two counts and out for three, “I pretty much stick to an even intake and exhalation of air,” she continued — two counts in, two counts out, or three in, three out, varying it every few minutes so as not to favor one foot over the other.Phillips Huntington has always been athletic. Growing up in Huntsville, Ala., she played the usual sports: basketball, softball, soccer, tennis. She did not know that she wanted to be a singer — “opera star” is not a common career choice among the population of Huntsville — but applied to music programs at the suggestion of her high school guidance counselor, who knew she enjoyed performing in the choir. (The choir had seven people in it. It was a small school.)She enrolled in the Juilliard School and moved to New York. She took up running as a pursuit in itself when she discovered that the available school-sponsored athletic opportunities had dwindled to, basically, none. “As great as their orchestra is, they don’t have any sports teams,” she said of Juilliard.Because singers have to stay healthy and avoid respiratory infections, and because she feels that “it’s weird to breathe in cold air,” she keeps indoors during the winter. “I make friends with the treadmill,” she said.She is an independent singer, meaning she is not employed by any one opera company, and spends about six months of the year on the road, for jobs that can last a few days or a few months. This year, for instance, Phillips Huntington sang in Boston, Frankfurt, Santa Fe and San Francisco; most recently she performed in Beethoven’s “Missa Solemnis” with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra at the Sydney Opera House in Australia.All that traveling makes for an erratic and sometimes lonely training schedule, requiring a lot of self-motivation. Luckily, there is the Internet. Phillips Huntington, who in the last few years has been running about 15 to 20 miles a week on her own, is following the New York Road Runners online marathon program. Each week, she gets an email with day-by-day instructions: generally shorter, faster runs on weekdays; longer runs on weekends; hills, intervals.“I’ve done about 85 percent of it,” she said, running 18 miles at her longest, as per the online recommendations. Though she runs faster over shorter distances, for the marathon she is aiming at a pace of 10:40-to-11-minute miles. “Slow and steady,” she said. “My goal is under five hours.”Cynthia Hoffmann, Phillips Huntington’s longtime voice teacher, said that she had seen improvements in her pupil’s breathing, stamina and body awareness as a result of her training. “Her ability to sing longer phrases has increased, and her overall energy is stronger,” Hoffmann said.Using Alexander Technique principles, Phillips Huntington is also paying attention to balance in her body as she runs — to the way her spine interacts with her head, neck and torso. This helps both running and singing. “Even the sense of stepping onto the center of the foot, not just the outside, can affect the muscles of the inner thigh, which can influence the diaphragm’s descent,” Hoffmann said.Good physical conditioning is essential for opera as well as for marathons. While the best marathon runners are often sinewy and whittled down, all bone and muscle for maximum bodily efficiency, opera singers depend on larger frames to sustain the volume and resonance their voices need.“We tend to be taller, broader, big-boned people,” Phillips Huntington said. “We use our body as a resonator and support.”That’s why most opera singers are not small, though the old cartoon cliché — the enormous lady in the massive steel-girded gown who belts out arias while being hauled around stage by a smaller, slightly alarmed-looking man — is now outdated, especially with performers emphasizing the dramatic elements of the performance as well as the singing.So Phillips Huntington is not interested in being overweight. As part of her training, she avoids bread, pasta and the like in favor of lean protein, fruits, vegetables and nuts — a kind of Paleo-type menu, she said. At 5 feet 10 inches, she has lost about 30 pounds in the past year, but says the number is irrelevant.“I’ve never really been obsessed with weight,” she said. “I don’t think I’ll ever be considered ‘thin,’ but I wouldn’t be as good a singer if I couldn’t physically sustain what I needed to do. It’s not about a number. It’s about feeling good in your body and yourself, finding the good place for you.”A few years ago, she consulted a personal trainer. “I was hyped up to be able to do push-ups,” she said. “But then I started to develop muscles in my shoulders and neck, and it started to affect my singing. I got tight and couldn’t relax in that area.”Opera singers, she went on, cannot be like sprinters or ballet dancers, with their supertight cores — they need to be able to relax and expand, not tighten and compress. “I’m not going to sacrifice my musical body in order to do this,” she said of the race.Phillips Huntington was married recently, and on Nov. 1 will be running with her husband, David Huntington, a lawyer and marathon veteran. She doesn’t sing while she runs, unless you count occasionally humming along with her iPod, but her husband belts out songs like James Taylor’s “Sweet Potato Pie.” “He’s not a trained opera singer,” she said, “but he stays on key.”But then, of course, she is not a trained marathon runner.“Let’s be clear,” she said. “There’s no danger — the elite runners don’t need to fear me. I want to do the best that I can, which for me means crossing the finish line.”Advertisement