By VICTOR MATHEROCT. 27, 2015
With seven weeks of the N.F.L. season in the books, five teams remain undefeated. In sorting them out, we can turn to a simple but accurate measurement of a team’s strength: point differential. Teams that win games by large margins are, of course, generally better than those that are winning mostly close games.By this measure, the defending champion New England Patriots rank first among the unbeatens, at plus-87, aided by a 51-17 shellacking of the Jacksonville Jaguars in Week 3. Next are the Green Bay Packers at plus-63 and the Cincinnati Bengals at plus-60.Lagging are two unbeaten teams that show some clear flaws, especially on offense, the Carolina Panthers at plus-52 and the Denver Broncos, who have won their six games by margins of 6, 7, 12, 3, 6 and 3 points, for a plus-37 that looks as if it should belong to a 4-2 team.But to find the top team in football by this metric, we must look beyond the unbeatens. Unexpectedly leading the point differential chart are the Arizona Cardinals, who are 5-2 but stand at plus-96 after a 26-18 win over the Baltimore Ravens on Monday night.The Cardinals’ losses came by 2 and 12 points. Their wins have been mostly comfortable, including scores of 42-17, 48-23 and 47-7.AdvertisementThe Cardinals’ 11-5 season last year, their best since moving to Arizona, is largely forgotten, perhaps because they ignobly lost to a 7-8-1 Panthers team in the first round of the playoffs. This season, Carson Palmer is near the top of most quarterback statistics, Chris Johnson is second to Devonta Freeman in rushing yards and receiver Larry Fitzgerald is rejuvenated at age 32. On defense, the Cardinals lead the league in interceptions with 12 and rank fourth in a crucial statistic: adjusted yards per pass allowed.AdvertisementOld-school fans are sometimes skeptical of statistics like point differential. To them, victories are the only thing that matters, and teams that win close games have grit and heart. Some are even skeptical of teams that win a lot of blowouts, feeling that they are untested.But in football, as in other team sports, point differential is actually a better predictor of success than wins.In late July, fans paying attention to the point-differential column knew the Toronto Blue Jays (plus-94) were stronger than their 50-51 record indicated. Indeed, the Jays were outstanding the rest of the season, going 43-18.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But before you start planning a Cardinals Super Bowl party, it should be noted that point differential cannot tell the whole story. Schedule strength is a key factor that it does not account for. And the Cardinals have played an easy schedule.Jeff Sagarin, the dean of sports rankers, rates the Cardinals only fifth, behind four unbeaten teams, partly because he judges their schedule to be only the 28th toughest. FiveThirtyEight’s Elo ranking has the Cards only seventh and projects they will end up 10-6.But point differential does highlight teams that may be unfairly served by their record. Notably this year, the Seattle Seahawks and the Philadelphia Eagles are 3-4 but have positive point differentials. Oddsmakers reflect this, making the Seahawks the fourth or fifth favorite to win the Super Bowl, despite their losing record.So who is at the bottom of the point differential table?It is not Monday night’s losers, the Ravens. They are a disappointing 1-6 but have only a minus-27 because every loss has been by 8 or fewer points. The Tennessee Titans (1-5) also look like a decent team by this metric, sitting at only minus-20.Less impressive are the 2-5 Jags (minus-60) and the 1-6 Lions (minus-61).But the 2-5 49ers take the prize at minus-77, including an ugly 47-7 loss to, yes, the Cardinals.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page F2 of the New York edition with the headline: Set Aside Victories: Margin Is a Potent Measure of Team Strength.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.