AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — The Champions League is awash with money, but it could be headed to court over an issue involving petty cash and freedom of speech.UEFA, the European authority that owns the tournament, said in its latest statements that 32 clubs shared more than a billion dollars last season for playing in the event. Barcelona, which won the Champions League final in Berlin, received 61 million euros, or about $67 million, in prize money. Manchester City was one of six other teams to receive more than $50 million for taking part in the 2014-15 tournament.But both clubs are fighting UEFA over proposed penalties for what they see as free speech by their fans. Barcelona, at its annual general assembly on Sunday,warned that it would fight UEFA all the way to the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France, after the club was fined twice because fans showed the Catalan flag — the Estelada — during recent Champions League games.The issue with City is that its supporters held their blue scarves aloft while whistling and booing through the Champions League anthem at their last home game in the event.The fines to Barcelona are relatively small. UEFA imposed a €30,000 penalty for flags that were shown at the Champions League final in Berlin last May, and a €40,000 fine when the fans repeated that action during a group game against Bayer Leverkusen last month.The City case has yet to be heard, but UEFA has served notice that it has opened disciplinary proceedings “for the disruption of the competition anthem,” with a hearing scheduled for Nov. 19.At the root of these cases is UEFA’s definition of accepted behavior at games against what the clubs view as freedom of expression for their followers.“Enough is enough,” said Barcelona’s president, Josep Maria Bartomeu, on Sunday. “They have sanctioned Barça for allowing, or not impeding, a number of members from expressing their feelings in a peaceful manner with a symbol, the Catalan flag of independence, that does not promote violence, that is not banned in any place, and that represents legitimate feeling of identification for many Barcelona fans and Catalans.“These are the most basic rights of democracy, that of freedom of expression.”UEFA cites its regulations, which state “messages that are of a political, ideological, religious, offensive or provocative nature” are forbidden in the stadiums.In the Manchester City case, the fans last week raised their club scarves throughout the playing of the Champions League anthem, a tune based on Handel.The charge is that Manchester City fans showed disrespect to a piece of contrived UEFA pomp. The anthem is stirring, in the way that the Olympic hymn is stirring, and its performance is similar to how national anthems are played before numerous sporting events, including FIFA World Cup qualifiers, Rugby World Cup matches and baseball playoff games.Nationalism is to be observed if it is promoted by the governing bodies, but condemned if it is not recognized by the rules of FIFA or UEFA?UEFA is not alone in imposing penalties for what it sees as political incorrectness at games. FIFA — possibly not the best organization to sit in judgment of others — fined the Hong Kong Football Association after Hong Kong fans booed the Chinese national anthem during a World Cup qualifier against Qatar in September. The Chinese anthem is also that of Hong Kong, which returned to Chinese rule in 1997 but maintains its own legal and political system. Political tensions between Hong Kong and mainland China have been increasing in recent years. And we can only imagine what is in the pipeline when the World Cup is held in Russia in 2018 and then in Qatar in 2022, two countries that are not particularly well known for freedom of speech.All the polemics and the politics now embraced by the sport’s ruling bodies are cloaked in symbolism. Last month, Michel Platini, the UEFA president, took the moral high ground when he announced that his executive committee was launching a new UEFA Foundation for Children. “UEFA is fully committed to playing its part,” he said, “in ensuring that football is a force for social good.” On Sept. 17, he pledged €2 million as a UEFA donation toward “helping the living conditions of child migrants in Europe and beyond.”Absolutely fine. UEFA has the spare cash, the migrant situation has dominated the headlines out of Europe the last few months, and why shouldn’t a body as rich as UEFA show some charity? But it should be noted that just a little while after that announcement, Platini was suspended from all soccer-related activity for 90 days after news emerged he was paid $2 million by Sepp Blatter in 2011.UEFA, meanwhile, is at odds with Barcelona over its fans showing support for their region, and with Manchester City over supporters disrespecting its Champions League tune. Why are the fans behaving this way? One year ago, when City played CSKA Moscow in Russia, the game was to be played in an empty stadium, with no fans, to punish the Russian club for racist behavior by fans at previous games.The anthem echoed around a soulless Khimki Arena. But there were fans, more than 600 of them, rooting for Moscow. UEFA had punished the City fans, and allowed the Muscovites to mock their ban.Advertisement