By RYAN GOLDBERGOCT. 2, 2015
Frankie Dettori does not often find himself at a loss for words. But he did recently, when he recalled his Epsom Derby triumph in June aboard Golden Horn.“When I got to the furlong marker and I knew I was going to win, these enormous emotions . . .” he said, pausing before adding, “It’s very hard to explain.”That 236th running of the Derby at Epsom in England will long be remembered as Dettori’s. Before that, his most recent Derby mount had been in 2011, and in between his career had seemed headed off the rails. Dettori, a star jockey, had ended his 18-year association with the Godolphin Stable in the fall of 2012, and soon after, in France, he tested positive for cocaine.When he returned in 2013 after a six-month suspension, he was written off in some quarters. But, Dettori said, “To finish my career like that wasn’t my plan.”AdvertisementGolden Horn’s win was a declaration of Dettori’s return to the top. He punched the air as the colt, clear of the runner-up Jack Hobbs, stretched for the finish. Later, before a cheering crowd of 125,000, Dettori leapt off the horse in his trademark dismount.Advertisement“I’ve had a colorful life, and I’m not finished yet,” Dettori, 44, said after the race, before he and John Gosden, Golden Horn’s trainer, were greeted by Queen Elizabeth II. But Dettori was pressed for time: He was scheduled to ride at Lingfield Park Racecourse in Surrey that night. “I said, ‘Excuse me, ma’am, but I have to go to Lingfield,’ ” he recalled telling the queen.Three hours later, he won again, before a crowd of 7,644, — Lingfield’s largest since at least 1989 — aboard an odds-on maiden for the Al Shaqab Stable of Sheikh Joaan al-Thani.“It was on the way home anyway, so it wasn’t a big deal,” Dettori said of the back-to-back assignments.The tight schedule would seem to be more fitting for a 21-year-old trying to prove himself than for a 44-year-old who has won more than 200 Group 1 contests and practically every major race around the globe. But since his suspension ended in May 2013, he has at times seemed to be a man on a mission.On Sunday, the Italian-born Dettori returns to the scene of his failed drug test: the Longchamp racecourse in Paris, where he will ride Golden Horn in the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe. His task — to stop Trêve’s historic bid for three consecutive victories — is loaded with intrigue. Thani, who lifted Dettori from his malaise by hiring him as his stable rider in late 2013, owns Trêve.It was Dettori who was supposed to ride Trêve in the 2013 Arc. But Dettori broke his ankle only days before, and then watched the filly’s tour de force triumph in tears. Their reunion last year ended in bitterness: After two defeats, Trêve’s trainer, Criquette Head-Maarek, lobbied to have Dettori replaced by Thierry Jarnet, the filly’s previous rider.Trêve had been fighting foot and back problems, but she recovered and won a second Arc as Dettori watched from atop the also-ran Ruler of the World. It was a setback for Dettori, but not enough to derail his comeback.AdvertisementDettori is one of the few jockeys in the world who has reached celebrity status. In addition to his sporting exploits, he has appeared on the British reality TV show “Celebrity Big Brother” and the BBC quiz show “A Question of Sport.” He owns Frankie’s Sports Bar and Diner in London and has pitched Jockey yogurt and a line of frozen Italian food. Used to spending all that time in the public eye, he was impatient during his suspension.“My wife says I’ve got bipolar because sometimes I’m happy, sometimes I’m not, and I’ve got the concentration span of the flea,” he told The Guardian in May. “She’s got a point — I’m often up and down.”In a profession where an ambulance is always present at the workplace, nearly every jockey encounters tragedy at some point. Dettori is no exception, although in his case it was not on the track. In 2000, a small plane in which he was traveling crashed in England. The pilot died, but Dettori and the other passenger, Ray Cochrane, a jockey at the time and now Dettori’s agent, escaped with minor injuries. But Dettori has experienced few difficulties on the racecourse.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dettori grew up on farmland near Milan, the son of a jockey, Gianfranco Dettori, and a mother who rode horses in the circus. His riding ability and flair for the big stage came from them. At 14, he left school and his father sent him to England to train as an apprentice jockey. He turned professional at 16, but it was his time spent in the United States, Dettori said, that molded him into a true success.During four English winters, Dettori rode at Santa Anita Park, near Los Angeles. Mounts were hard to come by until his final spell, but he watched and learned from outstanding jockeys and trainers. In 1989, the jockey Angel Cordero told him to ride with his toes in the irons, not his feet, as was then the customary style in Europe. He learned to crouch low in the saddle, especially in the stretch, to minimize the drag.Back in Europe, his peers copied his unique style. In 1990 while still a teenager, Dettori won 100 races in one season. In both 1994 and 1995, he won more than 200 races.In 1994, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, the ruler of Dubai, signed Dettori for his Godolphin operation. On a single July afternoon in 1996, he won all seven races at Ascot. In 2000, the sheikh’s horse Dubai Millennium, with Dettori aboard, won the Dubai World Cup in record time.As fate would have it, although Dettori had long since parted with Godolphin, his old employer inadvertently opened the way for him to ride Golden Horn. In November 2014, Maktoum, after a poor season in England, settled on William Buick and James Doyle as his retained jockeys. Gosden often used both, so he turned to Dettori. (He had also regularly used Dettori before he had joined Godolphin.)AdvertisementDettori won with Golden Horn in April. But a month later, in the Group 2 Dante Stakes, he rode Jack Hobbs, another Gosden colt, while Buick was on Golden Horn, who won again. Dettori seemed set to ride Jack Hobbs in the Derby, until Godolphin bought a piece of Jack Hobbs. So Buick and Dettori traded horses.Winning the Derby was the best moment of his career, Dettori said, adding, “When you get older you understand the importance of a race like that.”He turns 45 in December, but he sounds as if he is closer to the start than the end of his celebrated career.“It’s been my life for 30 years, and I absolutely love it,” he said. “We are quite selfish as sportsmen because we get all this emotion and glory, and nobody can really understand that. My goal is to enjoy as much as I can for as long as I can.”A version of this special report appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Jockey Who Hit Bottom Rides Higher Than Ever .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.