AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 122, Bucks 97By Scott CacciolaMILWAUKEE — In the quiet moments before the Knicks’ season opener Wednesday night, the players attended to their business in the visitors’ locker room.Derrick Williams and Lance Thomas studied game film on a tablet. Kristaps Porzingis put on headphones and listened to a track by the hip-hop artist Andy Mineo. Sasha Vujacic read from a dog-eared copy of “Way of the Peaceful Warrior” by Dan Millman. And Carmelo Anthony lay flat on his back on a training table, receiving a massage.The locker room looked and sounded more like a yoga retreat, but once the Knicks vacated their private sanctuary to play the Milwaukee Bucks, everything changed.The Knicks, with their refurbished roster, did not bear even a remote resemblance to the ramshackle outfit that stunk up arenas throughout the N.B.A. last season. They defended, chased rebounds and raced end to end as they throttled the Bucks, 122-97, at the Bradley Center.“It was definitely a good start,” Coach Derek Fisher said.Fisher reiterated that these Knicks are not the same as the old Knicks — specifically, the Knicks that lost 65 games last season. He again cited the team’s improved chemistry and leadership, nebulous terms that mean little without results to back them up. But for one game, at least, the Knicks offered evidence.The Knicks were led by their reserves, who accounted for 73 of the team’s points. Derrick Williams, their most productive player in the preseason, came off the bench to score 24 and collect 7 rebounds, and Langston Galloway added 16 points. They helped mask a rough outing from Anthony, who had 11 points and shot 4 of 16 from the field.“We have a lot of guys that can play,” Williams said. “Our goal this year is to be the best second unit out there.”The lead swelled to 17 early in the third quarter when Vujacic swooped in for a steal and a fast-break layup. Jose Calderon quickly drilled a 3-pointer, and the lead was 20. When the Bucks mounted a small rally, cutting the lead to 16, Porzingis made a 3. He finished with 16 points and 5 rebounds in his N.B.A. debut.“I think anytime he’s on the floor, really good things can happen,” Fisher said. “His level of aggression is remarkable for a young guy his size. He doesn’t necessarily carry a lot of weight, but he’s not fearful to get in there and mix it up.”The Knicks took advantage of a depleted opponent. The Bucks were without Giannis Antetokounmpo, who served a one-game suspension stemming from last season’s playoffs; Jabari Parker, who continues to rehab from knee surgery; and O. J. Mayo, who was sidelined with an injury.Anthony struggled in his first regular-season game since February, when he had knee surgery and grappled with questions about his future. He acknowledged “not really knowing what was going to happen” after surgery, and his rehabilitation persisted for months, through last week. The experience, he said, was more terrifying for the team’s training staff.“There was a lot of pressure on them coming from the front office to get this right,” Anthony said. “So there were times when I had to tell them, ‘Hey, I’m going to be all right.’ ” Before facing the Bucks, Anthony said he knew he would need to guard against letting his emotions overwhelm him. He pledged to avoid trying to do too much.“I’ve been in a situation where you’re trying to come back and you want to try to prove things to yourself, to everybody,” he said. “But at this point, I feel like I don’t have anything to prove to anybody. I just want to come out and win the basketball game.”Neither Anthony nor the Knicks got off to a particularly strong start. The Bucks’ Greg Monroe (22 points, 14 rebounds) asserted himself early with a couple of putbacks as the Bucks ran out to an 11-4 lead. The Knicks relied on a diet of outside jumpers and were largely inaccurate, missing 10 of their first 12 shots.Fisher sought solutions from his bench, going 10 players deep before the game was nine minutes old. Led by Williams and Jerian Grant, the reserves played with energy and turned the early deficit into a 27-23 lead by the end of the first quarter.In the second quarter, Thomas — another reserve — threw in a low-percentage runner, drew a foul and made the free throw for an 11-point lead. The Knicks were rolling, even as Anthony continued to labor for open looks. He shot just 2 of 9 from the field in the first half, but his teammates compensated for his lack of production.Like Anthony, Fisher said, he tries not to dwell on the recent past.“Although we remember last season, it’s not going to cast a shadow over who we are,” Fisher said. “We’re going to stay positive and keep working hard. We’re going to get hit a couple times and have some down periods. But I think we have a different kind of group.”Advertisement