By ANDREW KEHOCT. 28, 2015
Optimism around the Nets has been hard to come by. The feeling appeared — unexpectedly and ever so briefly — in an energetic spurt in the second quarter of their season-opening game Wednesday against the Chicago Bulls, when they somehow trimmed a sizable deficit to 3 points.It popped up again with about four minutes to go in the fourth, when the Bulls’ lead shrank momentarily to 6 points. But again, as quickly as the feeling came, it was gone.Things may go this way this season for the Nets — grasping at wispy, ephemeral strands of positivity — as they go forth shrouded in low expectations. In an early display of mediocrity, they lost, 115-100, to the Bulls at Barclays Center.“It wasn’t pretty,” Coach Lionel Hollins said. “We showed some good things, but not enough consistency with those good things.”AdvertisementThere was a tangible buzz that emanated from the Nets three years ago after their move from New Jersey to Brooklyn. It spiked a year later when the team hired Jason Kidd as coach and acquired Paul Pierce and Kevin Garnett to make a trophy push. But any buzz has now quieted to a mumble.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prognosticators, for the most part, have not been kind to the team. Even in the unexceptional Eastern Conference, they are expected to struggle. And in the crowded sports landscape of New York, they have made a slow retreat to the background.Advertisement“I wouldn’t say we’re overlooked, but going into the season, I’d definitely say we’re like an underdog,” said Thaddeus Young (12 points), who signed a four-year, $50 million contract this summer. “A lot of people don’t really know what to expect out of us this year with some of the changes being made. We just have to go into the season with a chip on our shoulders.”That may not be enough to mask their shortcomings.Ribbons of smoke lingering from the pregame pyrotechnics muddled the air in the arena as the Nets stumbled to an 11-point deficit in the first quarter. Derrick Rose (15 points) clapped happily toward his teammates after a series of tough defensive stops at the start and chirped profane words of encouragement.The Nets clawed to 3 points down before halftime, temporarily stirring the sellout crowd. But the Bulls, who never trailed, started the second half on a 10-2 run and sauntered comfortably to the final buzzer.“I think the way we started off both halves, we didn’t give ourselves a lot of room for error,” center Brook Lopez said. “I didn’t play well in the pick-and-roll defensively, and I think they took advantage of that.”Not helping matters on Wednesday was that Jarrett Jack, who has succeeded Deron Williams as the team’s starting point guard, missed the game with a sore hamstring.So while the Nets showed some fight in the frontcourt, getting a game-high 26 points as well as 7 rebounds from Lopez, they were overmatched in the back by the swift, powerful Bulls guards.Advertisement“They’re a lot different,” point guard Shane Larkin said of the Bulls, who hired Fred Hoiberg to replace Tom Thibodeau as coach. “Last year they were slower paced. Now he’s getting them a lot more shots, a lot more pick-and-rolls, early random offense step-ups here and there.”Jimmy Butler finished with 24 points and 6 assists to lead the Bulls, who defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers on Tuesday night. The Bulls committed 20 turnovers, but they held the Nets to 41.9 percent shooting. The Nets missed all nine of their 3-point attempts.There were a few bright spots for the Nets. Rondae Hollis-Jefferson (8 points, 5 rebounds), a rookie forward drafted from Arizona, was an effervescent, disruptive presence on defense and got extended minutes from Hollins. Andrea Bargnani, a Knicks castoff, scored 17 points and grabbed 7 rebounds.But the Nets are merely at the foot of the treacherous mountain that is their early schedule. In their next 10 games, they will face, among other opponents, the San Antonio Spurs, the Memphis Grizzlies, the Atlanta Hawks (twice), the Houston Rockets and the Golden State Warriors.Any positive moments, then, are at risk of being washed away in the steady flow of dullness.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page F5 of the New York edition with the headline: High Points Prove Fleeting as Nets Begin With a Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.