
TV Sports By                     
 RICHARD SANDOMIR
 
OCT. 28, 2015
The Mets and Royals opened the World Series on Tuesday night the way Fox would like to script every Game 1: a 14-inning epic that should build the audience for subsequent games. As with any serial, whether Gene Autry’s westerns or the podcast “Serial,” people look forward to the next chapter if the first one engages them. Game 1 gave baseball a good name and raised hopes for the quality of the following ones.It had a star like the Mets’ Matt Harvey laboring beyond his famous innings limit. It had the rarity of Alcides Escobar’s inside-the-park home run that started Kansas City’s scoring in the first inning (and permitted us to reflect upon similar feats by Mule Haas and Patsy Dougherty). It had a game-tying, bottom-of-the-ninth home run by Alex Gordon and five extra innings that were simultaneously tense and interminable until the Royals won, 5-4. And, Fox’s power outage — brief, but maddening — gave the game another memorable element.In the end, an average of 14.9 million people were watching, the best audience for the first game of the World Series since 2010, but fewer than episodes this season of “NCIS,” “The Big Bang Theory,” “Empire,” “60 Minutes” and a bunch of N.F.L. games.There was a time — some of us were even alive for it — when multiples of Tuesday’s World Series audience watched the games. And it is a lovely coincidence that the two most-watched World Series games on record were played by recent ancestors of the Mets and the Royals.Advertisement■ Game 6, 1980: The Philadelphia Phillies won the series, 4-2, over the Royals before 54.9 million viewers watching on NBC. Sixty percent of the households in the United States watching TV at that time were tuned to Steve Carlton and Tug McGraw pitching the Phillies to a 4-1 win.Advertisement■ Game 7, 1986: An average of 52.1 million people watched the Mets beat the Boston Red Sox, 8-5, at Shea Stadium, against competition like “Monday Night Football” (the Giants beat the Redskins), “Newhart” and “Cagney & Lacey.”Those numbers do not happen anymore at the World Series, thanks largely to the availability of hundreds of TV channels, the Internet, gaming, scrapbooking and who knows what else. Still, the Series remains highly ranked among prime-time shows since ratings have skidded for years for all of them.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There is just so much more to do these days; how many people who might watch the Series are now tending their Facebook pages or streaming “The Walking Dead”? But carrying on, as if inoculated from the cultural and technological changes that have afflicted most television programming, is the N.F.L. After its conference championship games averaged 46.1 million viewers last season, the Super Bowl’s audience continued to climb to a gaudy 114.4 million.And those are not aberrations.An argument can be made that baseball, with its long season and heavy local broadcasting of games, is stronger regionally than nationally, diminishing the allure of any World Series in which your team is not involved. And the recent trend of putting nearly every league championship series game on cable, and not broadcast television, has probably facilitated the downward trend of World Series viewership.Over the past 11 years, only 10 World Series games have drawn more than 20 million viewers. Four came in the five-day stretch when the Red Sox swept the St. Louis Cardinals in 2004, the first World Series victory for Boston in 86 years. Games are likelier to bring in 14 million or 15 million viewers. In the 1990s, 32 games drew at least 20 million, and a dozen attracted at least 30 million.An analysis of World Series viewership patterns yields these thoughts:■ If a series reaches its full length, Game 7 is likely to produce a surge of viewers. In 2011, none of the first five games of the Texas-St. Louis series had been seen by more than 15.1 million people; the final two were witnessed by 21 million and 25.4 million, respectively. Madison Bumgarner’s pitching for the Giants last year, highlighted by his five-inning relief stint in Game 7, gave a series that might have been the least-watched on record an injection of 23.5 million viewers in the finale.Advertisement■ A big market like New York is desired by a network like Fox because it has so many people and a large built-in fan base for the Mets or Yankees. But it was better for the Yankees to play in a great series like the one in 2001 against Arizona soon after the 9/11 attacks (which 24.5 million watched) than the one in 2000 against the Mets (18.1 million) because it only tapped into the fan passion of one region. Six years since the Yankees’ last World Series appearance in 2009, it is worth watching to see if the Mets-Royals series can match the audience of 19.4 million that took in the Yankees’ six-game victory over the Phillies.■ A Midwest team like the Royals that attracted large audiences in the 1980s, before the explosion of entertainment options that have eroded traditional TV-watching, probably needs a big market opponent and a riveting series to avoid a modest audience like last year’s. San Francisco is the nation’s No. 6 market but New York is nearly three times as large.Central to viewership, large or small, is allowing people to see the games without interruption. Fox said it brought in two new generators in time for Game 2 on Wednesday night to replace the ones that malfunctioned Tuesday night and caused it to piggyback on the generators that MLB International uses to send out its world feed. An autopsy on the faulty generators has not found a reason for their failure.Email: sandor@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page F6 of the New York edition with the headline: Long-Lost Audiences Find Game 1 Drama .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »