AdvertisementSupported byBy Huw RichardsCARDIFF, Wales — Billy Vunipola’s role in England’s Rugby World Cup campaign is over, ended by a knee injury in last Sunday’s defeat by Wales. And the powerful No.8 forward had no idea how significant his best moment of the tournament was, the try he scored on the final play of the opening match against Fiji.Yet that score looms large as the World Cup’s “Pool of Death” moves toward a climax. It was England’s fourth try of the match and, even if Vunipola admitted to not knowing the tournament rule, won it a vital bonus point.All three of the pool’s leading contenders — England, Australia and Wales — have now played Fiji, a far from negligible fourth force. Each has won, none without some difficulty, but only England managed to add a bonus to the four points awarded for a win.It will be academic should England (1-1, 6 points) lose to Australia (2-0, 9 points) at its home stadium, Twickenham, on Saturday night. But should it win, as it has in three of its last four clashes with Australia at Twickenham, the bonus point Vunipola secured could help take the host into the tournament’s knockout phase.“They’ve got their backs to the wall and been criticized left, right and center. And sometimes that galvanizes a team,” said Wales Coach Warren Gatland of England after his own team’s 23-13 victory over Fiji Thursday night. “And they’ll also know that if they win, they could be through to the quarterfinals.” England’s final opponent is Uruguay (0-2), which has conceded 119 points in its matches against Wales and Australia.An Australian win would take Australia and Wales through to the quarter-finals before the two teams meet next weekend. “They could do us a big favor,” said Gatland, a New Zealander. “But it’s hard for a Kiwi to be cheering Aussies.”His players, who went to 3-0 (13 points) with a hard-fought victory over the Fijians (0-3) here will be watching from their homes in Wales before reassembling on Sunday morning to travel to London. “They need time with their families and for recuperation,” said Gatland.Wales’s problem is that it has a dreadful record against Australia, which has beaten it 10 times in a row, usually by narrow margins. That its 3-0 start still does not guarantee a quarterfinal berth shows, as Gatland said, how brutally tough the pool is.Wales’s strengths, and some of its weaknesses, were shown in the defeat of Fiji. Wales was playing only five days after the mentally and physically exhausting victory over England, yet was able to hold off a formidable Fijian challenge.“It was a really tough, physical encounter and they had to dig really deep,” said Gatland. Sam Warburton, the captain, said, “I was knackered in the first half, to be honest with you.”Wales has also suffered significant injuries and has had to replace five players since its original 31-man squad was announced. But its backups are delivering. Three men playing unexpected roles made significant contributions to the win over Fiji.The scrumhalf Gareth Davies, in only his seventh match for Wales, followed his match-winning try against England by being named man of the match against Fiji, scoring another try with a sharp quarterback-sneak-like move from close range.The third-choice fullback Matthew Morgan gained more yards running than anyone on the field, and must now be a serious candidate to start in the final pool match against Australia on Oct. 10.And flyhalf Dan Biggar, who has kicked penalty goals and conversions because the usual kicker, Leigh Halfpenny, is out of the tournament with an injury, landed all five kicks he attempted for a total of 13 points, to add to his eight out of eight against England.Looking ahead to the match against Australia, Wales again experienced serious problems with its scrums against Fiji. This is not usually an Australian strength, but the Wallabies’ performances in winning the Rugby Championship suggested improvement in that area.Fiji is out but can hold its head high after landing in the “Pool of Death,” when it might have been a serious contender in another pool, and being handed a schedule that saw it play three matches in 13 days, including two games in opponents’ home stadiums.But Coach John McKee refused to complain, saying, “That was the draw, and we knew what it was when we came here.”Fiji had brilliant displays by the athletic lock forward Leone Nakarawa and outside center Vereniki Goneva, who started and finished one of the best tries of the tournament with a brilliant counterattacking run followed by a slick combination with wing Timoci Nagusa.Both teams exorcised demons. Wales has ended a sequence of defeats to Pacific Island teams in Northern Hemisphere-hosted World Cups — it lost to Samoa in 1991 and 1999, then Fiji in 2007. Fiji, meanwhile, erased the memory of its 66-0 humiliation at the hands of Wales in 2011.Advertisement