By DAN BARRYOCT. 28, 2015
Edinson Volquez of the Kansas City Royals realized every pitcher’s boyhood dream on Tuesday night by starting the opening game of a World Series. In six grinding innings, he held the Mets to three runs, then left the game to receive backslaps, attaboys — and, apparently, the news that his father had died earlier in the day.At the request of his family, the Royals management and the Fox broadcasting network withheld the upsetting information until Volquez, 32, had thrown his last pitch of perhaps the biggest night of his 11-year major league career. He was then led by his wife and a Royals executive to a clubhouse office and told that his father, Daniel, 63, had died of a heart ailment hours earlier in the Dominican Republic.The ballplayer’s personal loss naturally injected a somber note to his team’s unpredictable and exciting 14-inning win. But the way in which its news was handled also highlighted the age-old awkwardness and discomfort that surround the notification of a death. After all, would you want to know if you were in Volquez’s position? And would you have told him if you were in his family’s position?There are grief counselors who specialize in helping people navigate the jagged shoals of the moment. There are protocols for professionals, whether they are grounded in the tense atmosphere of a hospital emergency room or in the otherworldly atmosphere of space. Down here or up there, it remains a vexing part of the human condition.Advertisement“I want to know everything, and I want to know as soon as possible,” said Daniel Tani, a former NASA astronaut who spent four months on the International Space Station in 2007 and 2008. “I think most astronauts say that.”AdvertisementDavid Kessler, the founder of grief.com and a co-author, with Elisabeth Kubler-Ross, of “On Grief and Grieving: Finding the Meaning of Grief Through the Five Stages of Loss,” said the challenge was in finding a meaningful narrative that justified the withholding of information and placed receipt of the information in an acceptable context.“That’s usually what our mind does: make meaning of it,” Mr. Kessler said. “In other words: ‘Dad would have wanted it that way. Dad would have thought it was the right thing to do. The last thing Dad would have wanted to do is hurt that moment or literally take me out of the game.’ ”In the case of the Volquez family, he added: “There’s an irony in that saying of when people are dying, they’re taken out of the game. And here’s someone who has a death and wasn’t taken out of the game because of it.”The Volquez matter is so delicate that accounts continue to conflict on what would seem an easily resolvable matter: exactly when the pitcher received the news. ESPN cited a family source in reporting that the pitcher learned of his father’s death while en route to Kauffman Stadium in Kansas City, Mo. But the Royals maintain that he did not know until after he had left the game.The Royals’ manager, Ned Yost, later told reporters that the team was suddenly presented with a sad situation.“You find out an hour before the game our starting pitcher’s father passed away,” he said. “It was hard. But then again, you just want to honor the family’s wishes. They requested, Don’t tell anyone and let him go out and pitch Game 1.”Asked whether he felt uncomfortable about the decision not to inform Volquez, the manager answered: “I didn’t feel bad. I love Eddy Volquez and if his family asked me to do something, I’m going to do it.”AdvertisementCompounding the unease was the odd dissemination of the sensitive information. Although the game’s national broadcaster, Fox Sports, had also agreed to suppress the information until after Volquez retired for the night, social media was already humming with news of the death. This meant that multitudes knew of the athlete’s loss before he did; they could, in fact, watch him on television with knowledge of the grief awaiting him.“You see Eddy out there competing his butt off, and you keep thinking, ‘Well, what’s coming next?’ ” Yost said afterward. “The news is coming next.”The challenge of whether to inform someone of a death usually centers on children. Is the child old enough to process the information? Should the child attend the funeral?“There is no one way to handle anything like this,” said Hal Lipton, a veteran social worker who specializes in grief management and crisis intervention. He recalled that when his grandmother died, he did not go to the funeral — and was glad of it.“I had a baseball game that day,” he said.But as the years passed, and as other loved ones died, he came to regret it. “You know,” said Mr. Lipton, who is 78, “I should have gone.”But the vexing question hardly centers only on children. Consider Broadway and its ethos of the show must go on.In 1996, the playwright Jonathan Larson, 35, died unexpectedly at his home, hours before his musical, “Rent,” was to begin previews at the New York Theater Workshop; that night’s show was canceled, and the company sang the score for the playwright’s family and friends.Perhaps the most memorable case, though, came in 1980, after the opening-night performance of “42nd Street” at the Winter Garden Theater. At the show, as the performers basked in enthusiastic applause, the producer David Merrick stepped onstage to announce news he had withheld from the cast: that the show’s director, Gower Champion, had died that day.AdvertisementSilence and sobs followed.The operatic also, at times, informs the opera. The dramatic soprano Deborah Voigt recalled that in 2003, days before she was to appear as Isolde in a high-profile new production of “Tristan und Isolde” at the Vienna State Opera — a singular honor for an American soprano — her family informed her that her stepsister Melinda had died.“It didn’t really hit me until I went to sing the ‘Liebestod,’ at the very end,” Voigt said, speaking of the climax of the opera, in which a transfigured Isolde sings rapturously of the dead Tristan and then dies herself. “She was very much on my mind, and that’s an emotional moment in that piece no matter what is happening in your life, but it certainly brought it to the forefront of my performance — thinking that she’s out there somewhere.”While the passage of a few days would have made it impossible for her family to keep the death from her, Ms. Voigt said that she would have preferred knowing in any case.“The loss of a loved one is something that is catastrophic to try to get through,” she said. “But I don’t really know if I would have wanted not to know.”She added: “I think I might feel somewhat resentful that they didn’t tell me.”Inon Barnatan, a concert pianist who is performing Mozart this week with the New York Philharmonic, agreed. He recalled playing in the final round of a televised piano competition in Switzerland — on Sept. 11, 2001.“The people that I was staying with decided not to tell me what had happened in New York,” Mr. Barnatan recalled, “and I heard about it basically 30 seconds before going on stage, from the person who was doing the makeup for the TV broadcast.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While emphasizing that this moment was quite different from learning of a death in the family, he said that he still struggled to process the information just minutes before sitting down to play Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 4.“It took me a little while to get away from the strangeness of the situation, and to concentrate,” he said. “But I do feel that in the second movement of that piece, which is such a tragic movement, it gave it a certain, at least for me, resonance.”AdvertisementMr. Barnatan said that in retrospect, he would have preferred to have known, because it would have given him the choice of whether to go on stage — and, if he did choose to go on, the option of channeling his pain into the music.“I would much rather be allowed to face it,” he said.Popular culture routinely addresses those awkward moments surrounding the notification of death. In a 2002 episode of the television comedy “Curb Your Enthusiasm,” Larry David doesn’t learn of his mother’s death until after her funeral because, he is told, she didn’t want to bother him. And in the recently released movie “The Martian,” the plot centers at one point on whether NASA officials will inform a space crew that the comrade it abandoned on Mars is alive, and not dead, as presumed.But real life — and death — seems always to trump fiction.In 2007, the astronaut Tani was 200 miles in space, aboard the International Space Station, talking by computer telephone to his wife. It was late in the evening, when things are normally quiet. Then came word over the spaceship’s intercom: Setting up a private link for Dan; stand by.He hung up with his wife, glad to know that she and their two young children were fine. But he also knew that whatever he was about to be told was, he said, “probably not good.”Twenty minutes later, Tani’s wife and some NASA officials were back on the communications system. His 90-year-old mother, Rose, had been killed in a car accident.Stephanie Schierholz, a NASA spokeswoman, said the protocol in such cases is for astronauts to express their preference before they leave for their protracted, distant assignments. “Each astronaut determines for him- or herself what they would want in certain circumstance,” she said. “What they would want to know and when they would want to know it.”And Tani had expressed his desire to be informed immediately. The call came at Christmastime, when work assignments are a bit slower up in space, and besides, he had just completed a spacewalk the day before.Tani had two more months in space, removed from friends and family, hovering above it all. But he still remembers that after ending that upsetting call from Earth, two crew members were there to hug him.Michael Cooper, Michael Paulson and David Waldstein contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page F1 of the New York edition with the headline: As Volquez Battled, Royals Faced Tough Situation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »