
On Pro Football By                     
 BILL PENNINGTON
 
OCT. 28, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The beginning of a weekday pro football practice is usually as eventful as watching any other cluster of laborers making a sleepy arrival at the same old workplace. But Wednesday morning at the Giants’ training complex, the players and the coaches took the field to see the face of a co-worker whose mysterious absence has cast a spectral cloud over the team since midsummer.The presence of defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul, in uniform and working out, shook the Giants out of their monotony. And most of them, like everyone else on the grounds, took a furtive — or obvious — glance at Pierre-Paul’s injured right hand, which was inside a custom-made white glove and missing the index finger and small portions of the thumb and middle finger.“You always try to peek but don’t want to say, ‘Show me,’ ” cornerback Prince Amukamara said. “I definitely tried to peek at it when I could. I’ve never seen anything like that.”Nearly four months after a still unexplained Fourth of July fireworks accident and after several weeks of keeping his increasingly exasperated employers in the dark about his injuries — infirmities that may ultimately cost him as much as $60 million — Pierre-Paul was lined up with the rest of his teammates, stretching and doing agility drills as if nothing out of the ordinary had ever happened.AdvertisementStill, an inquisitiveness was acknowledged. “I think the whole world had some type of curiosity waiting for this,” defensive tackle Cullen Jenkins said.AdvertisementAnd yet, Pierre-Paul rejoined the team without too much disorder or commotion.Pierre-Paul spent plenty of time conversing with teammates, although no players would say they had discussed the details of his accident. Nor did they ask to hear his reasons for keeping his distance from the team. Pierre-Paul did not address reporters, something the team said he would do at the end of his workweek.A contract impasse, which took a bizarre turn after his accident when Pierre-Paul rebuffed Giants medical personnel who showed up at his hospital, ended Tuesday night when the team and Pierre-Paul agreed to a reduced, one-year contract laden with performance incentives. The terms of the deal were not immediately known, but the total value was nowhere near the $14.8 million he could have signed for in the spring.Still, no resentment was expressed in the Giants’ locker room over Pierre-Paul’s actions, and there was no head shaking over his Fourth of July decision-making.For one, Pierre-Paul is well-liked, but, more important, talent is the currency of consequence on an N.F.L. roster. Even with Pierre-Paul missing one digit and pieces of two others, he is a two-time Pro Bowler who would be welcome on most any team, especially one like the 2015 Giants that ranks second-to-last in the league in sacks. And, finally, Pierre-Paul’s teammates, some of whom have made their own missteps, are a forgiving group.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the team’s first meeting Wednesday, Pierre-Paul was greeted with a standing ovation.“There’s been so much negative talk about this with people wanting to talk about the mistake he made,” defensive end Robert Ayers said. “We all make mistakes. He’s very humbled, hungry and motivated. I look at it as inspirational.”His teammates did notice changes from the Pierre-Paul they had known.“He seemed himself, just more focused this time,” said Amukamara. “He has been through a lot and has perspective. He’s on a mission.”Jenkins agreed.“He’s very serious — a lot more quiet,” Jenkins said.Pierre-Paul may be back in uniform, but many questions remain unanswered — chiefly, how much will he be able to contribute this season? Some kind of device encasing his right hand seems likely once he begins playing again.AdvertisementAfter warming up with the team, Pierre-Paul mostly did sprints on the sideline — and ran with the same fluid speed he always had. Under the direction of the athletic training staff, he also pushed a weighted sled. He did not scrimmage, and the Giants offered no projection of when he might be ready for a game except to say it would not be Sunday against the New Orleans Saints. Pierre-Paul’s weight, 268 pounds, was about what it had been in the past.“He’s healed significantly,” Coach Tom Coughlin said. “The doctors feel that he can play and perform with his hand as it presently is.”But that could nonetheless be in a manner distinctively different from that of the player who four years ago had 16 ½ sacks in one season.Coughlin said that anyone who had studied Pierre-Paul’s maneuvers as a pass rusher would see that “he’ll use that hand basically as he always has, not necessarily as a grabber, but as a club.”“We’re all rooting for him,” Coughlin said.Pierre-Paul’s teammates seemed to be adjusting to having their best defensive player back in the fold, even if it was under circumstances none of them had ever imagined.Jenkins was asked if Pierre-Paul was subjected to any marginal first-day hazing, such as having to carry other players’ helmets off the field — something rookies are occasionally required to do.“No, we didn’t,” Jenkins said laughing. “We’re still trying to get him back, get him back to his old self in the room.”A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page F6 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants See a Changed Pierre-Paul on His Return .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »