AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy Tim RohanWhen the Kansas City Royals’ Alex Gordon stood in the on-deck circle during the ninth inning of Game 1 of the World Series on Tuesday night, he noticed that Jeurys Familia, the Mets’ closer, had just thrown a quick pitch to Salvador Perez in an effort to catch him off guard and disrupt his timing.After Perez grounded out, Gordon stepped into the box, and Familia tried a similar quick pitch with him.But this time, Familia hung a split-finger fastball, and Gordon crushed it for a solo home run, tying the game and sending it to extra innings. The Royals prevailed, 5-4, in the 14th. Afterward, some questioned why Familia would resort to a quick pitch. His regular pitches had been so effective this season, so why use a gimmick?“He’s been really effective with it,” Manager Terry Collins said before Game 2 on Wednesday night. But Collins conceded that Familia had rushed in throwing the quick pitch to Gordon and had not stayed on top of it. As a result, the pitch stayed up, and Gordon took advantage.Collins’s admission could arouse more criticism of Familia’s use of the pitch. Why should a pitcher continue to do something that could backfire?But Collins said he was fine with Familia continuing to use the pitch when he saw fit. “I try not to say, ‘Don’t use that anymore,’ because it’s been an effective move for him,” Collins said. “We’ve got to realize when you do it, if you’re going to miss, you’ve got to miss in the dirt.”During the regular season, Hansel Robles, a Mets rookie reliever, used the quick pitch against Philadelphia, and Larry Bowa, a Phillies coach, seemed to take offense to it. Both teams left their benches, but no punches were thrown. PINE TAR CREATES BUZZ After Game 1 began in a light drizzle, a picture of Royals catcher Salvador Perez began circulating on social media, showing a dark clump of pine tar on one of his shin guards.Batters are permitted to use pine tar to get a better grip on their bats. Pitchers have used tar to better grip the ball and help their command, but the practice is complicated: It is illegal under major league rules, but it is often accepted among players because the substance is generally not being used to doctor the ball.In Tuesday night’s wet conditions, Perez apparently used pine tar for the more accepted purpose: to get a grip on the ball. The Mets shrugged it off.“Every catcher in baseball puts pine tar on his shin guard,” Collins said Wednesday. “It’s for them. It’s really hard to transfer that onto the ball to give the pitcher something to hold on to. Especially with as many times as they throw balls out.”Advertisement