AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenLONDON — Imagine if Bosnia’s national soccer team had not been able to take its wunderkind forward Edin Dzeko to the World Cup in Brazil last summer. Or if Ivory Coast had not been able to take stalwarts like Didier Drogba or Yaya Touré. Or if United States Coach Jurgen Klinsmann had not been allowed to put Tim Howard, perhaps the most famous American playing abroad, on his roster.In rugby, situations like these are a reality. While world championship tournaments are generally thought to be the pinnacles of their sports — the kinds of events that include all the top stars — the Rugby World Cup is different. Strange as it may seem, one of the more interesting aspects of the tournament, which began in England on Sept. 18 and will conclude on Oct. 31, is that some of the best players are not playing.The problem mostly affects the pre-eminent players from the so-called Tier 2 countries, where the domestic rugby leagues are of middling (or nonexistent) quality. When stars from countries like Samoa, Tonga or Uruguay go to Europe to play in the best leagues, the clubs there happily sign them to contracts that may imply — or overtly state — that they cannot also play for their national teams.What results from these contracts are announcements such as the one that Uruguay’s Rodrigo Capó Ortega made in June, not long after he helped his nation qualify for its first Rugby World Cup in 12 years. Citing “personal reasons,” Ortega — who was the first Uruguayan player to become a full-time professional overseas — suddenly retired from international play. He has recently been with his French club team, Castres, instead of with Uruguay’s national team, which has been thumped twice without him.“It’s a massive problem, and it’s largely being ignored,” said Dan Leo, a Samoan and a veteran player for the English club London Welsh. “The top nations are able to compensate the clubs for the release of their players, while the Tier 2 nations can’t pay the clubs, so they know there are players they can’t use. It’s mad. It just makes a farce of the Rugby World Cup in a lot of ways.”Leo, who announced his own international retirement in May, is one of the few players who have spoken publicly about the situation, although the issue of player release is “talked about all the time” among players, he said. Players are reluctant to acknowledge the specifics of their contracts because “it’s basically cutting off the hand that feeds you,” Leo said.The problem is not new, though. Elvis Seveali’i, a former Samoan wing, said he had missed two Rugby World Cups while playing for club teams in England. He described his contract negotiations with the clubs as brutally straightforward: He was offered one amount of money if he agreed to end his international career and another amount — about 30 percent less, he said — if he did not.Knowing the fragility of a player’s professional career (and the small window in which he could earn significant money for his family), he signed for the larger figure.“The next day in the newspaper, it said I had retired from international rugby,” Seveali’i said in a recent interview. “I was only 22 or 23 — who retires at 23 years old? I wasn’t retired.”He added: “You’re representing your last name, your family, your country, and the clubs are putting a price on that? It’s not right. It’s a pressure that any player shouldn’t have to deal with. Regardless of whether it’s the All Blacks or Japan or Papua New Guinea, the World Cup should have the best players. And in rugby, all of the best players aren’t there.”World Rugby, the sport’s global governing body, has a policy that is supposed to address these sorts of situations. The policy, known as Regulation 9, essentially says that any national team has the right to call in whatever players it wants for important matches.A spokesman for the organization said that the regulation “is a strong and robust set of rules designed to make sure all eligible players are available to play for their country during specific international windows” and added that “any alleged breaches of Regulation 9 are investigated thoroughly.” The spokesman also confirmed that World Rugby had received no allegations of breaches leading up to this World Cup.In practice, though, clubs are rarely penalized, players say, because club executives and coaches influence the players during negotiations and thus do not outright refuse to release them.And even if players are ultimately released for the World Cup, the lack of availability for the majority of other international competitions inhibits cohesiveness for a national team. For example, Mana Otai, the coach of Tonga’s national team, said in June that he was unable to take a few of his best players to the Pacific Nations Cup, an important warm-up tournament, because European clubs had persuaded the players not to take part.“There’s a lot of contractual issues with a lot of players who are not available, being pressured by their clubs not to be available for Tonga,” Otai said at the time. After the 2011 World Cup, Simon Mannix, who was then the coach of a club in France, told the English newspaper The Independent that his club had kept three Fijian players from joining their national team by paying them a bit extra. He said that “the club gave them a check to stay” in Paris.Rob Nichol, the leader of the global rugby players’ union, said that the problem centered on money and was most common for players from the Pacific islands. About 15 percent of professional players worldwide come from the islands, and all of them must play club rugby abroad because there is little opportunity in domestic leagues.“When they sign with clubs in England or France, the clubs might outwardly say, ‘Sure, we’ll release you,’ ” Nichol said. “But in practicality, a coach or someone is telling the player, ‘You can go, but if you go, when it comes to recontract you, we might not be interested.’ It’s a horrible thing. What are they supposed to say?”Nichol pointed out that the tiered structure of global rugby perpetuated the issue. The traditional rugby powers that make up Tier 1 (England, Australia, New Zealand, Scotland and others) receive a greater revenue payout from top competitions like the Rugby World Cup, which allows those federations to turn around and compensate club teams for releasing their best players.Tier 2 nations, on the other hand, receive a far smaller piece of the revenue and cannot pay the clubs of their players anything close to what the Tier 1 federations pay. In those instances, the clubs then have little reason to want to send an important asset off to play, and possibly get hurt, somewhere else. In the rare case that a player goes against the grain — Samoa’s Census Johnston, for instance, who plays for the French club Toulouse, initially said he would not play in the World Cup but then changed his mind — the reaction is generally one of surprise as opposed to encouragement.Nichol also noted that some top players from Tier 1 countries were not at the World Cup as a result of the selection policies that some rugby federations created for themselves. England and New Zealand have internal rules that largely prohibit players who do not play in their domestic leagues from being eligible for national team duty, creating several situations like the one involving England’s David Strettle. Initially pegged as a cog for England’s World Cup roster, Strettle signed a contract with a French club and, by doing so, acknowledged that his international career was over.Circumstances like that, and the plight of the Tier 2 stars, have combined to dilute the Rugby World Cup. And that, Nichol said, is a shame.“Rugby was amateur for years and years, and it was only in 1987 that people realized there could be money in this game, and only about 10 years later, that professionalism kicked in,” he said. “There’s no question it’s been a rapid rise, but this is one area where there’s clearly still a long way to go.”Advertisement