By TOM PEDULLAOCT. 28, 2015
LEXINGTON, Ky. —  For the first time in the 31-year history of the Breeders’ Cup, the event will be staged here, in the fertile region that prides itself on breeding and raising some of the world’s finest thoroughbreds.Keeneland will host 13 races totaling $26 million in purses. The two days of competition begin Friday and culminate on Saturday, when the Triple Crown champion American Pharoah participates in the $5 million Classic.“It’s a unique homecoming for horses born and raised here who have gone to various parts of the world to grow and compete for the right to come,” said Bill Thomason, president of Keeneland.The selection of Keeneland, which increased its capacity by 7,000 to 45,000 for the Breeders’ Cup through temporary seating, shows organizers are willing to use smaller tracks, at least occasionally, to get both a passionate crowd and an idyllic setting.Santa Anita Park in Arcadia, Calif., which hosted the event the last three years, will rejoin the rotation in 2016 for a record ninth time before another groundbreaking move to Del Mar Thoroughbred Club near San Diego. Del Mar, “where the turf meets the surf,” is similar to Keeneland in that it offers an intimate, picturesque setting and represents one of the few remaining hotbeds of interest in racing.AdvertisementVince Gabbert, vice president at Keeneland, said of the much-anticipated arrival of the Breeders’ Cup, “It will be the closest Lexington will ever come to hosting a Super Bowl.”AdvertisementThe event will have that feel given the participation of American Pharoah, the first Triple Crown champion in 37 years, in a talent-laden Classic. Beholder, seen as American Pharoah’s stiffest challenger, will try to become the second mare to win the Classic. Zenyatta in 2009 was the first.“The fact that we have people banging down the door to get tickets is not a bad thing,” said Craig Fravel, the Breeders’ Cup president since July 2011.Wagering online and at simulcast centers domestically and abroad could offset the smaller amount of money placed on races at smaller tracks. Fravel projected that Keeneland and the Red Mile, a nearby harness racing facility that will host a Breeders’ Cup Bash, would generate about $20 million in wagering handle. He hoped the off-track handle would be seven times that.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Keeneland is using temporary luxury chalets in an attempt to boost attendance and attract wealthy fans.“There has been a bit of a philosophical change,” Fravel added. “There used to be the feeling that we needed to be able to announce a crowd of 60,000 to 70,000 people at the track on Saturday. Now, we’re more tuned into the overall experience, to provide premium seats and premium activities.”Fans with less spending power and perhaps the desire for a less staid atmosphere will still have their place at Keeneland. They may flock to the Hill, the traditional setting for tailgating.If there was concern about holding a Breeders’ Cup at Keeneland for the first time, it involved last autumn’s move to a traditional dirt surface, away from the synthetic surface known as Polytrack that was used for the past eight years. Fravel and Thomason insisted that the switch had never been a prerequisite for a successful Cup bid.Advertisement“What we needed to know was what the conditions were going to be and that whatever track was in place, it had some time under it so they could be familiar with the maintenance of it, horses could be accustomed to it and gamblers would have perspective on how the track performed,” Fravel said.Polytrack met expectations as an extremely safe surface, but it often made handicapping more difficult when gamblers, typically accustomed to evaluating horses on dirt tracks, had to project how a starter might perform upon switching to a synthetic surface. Major players were often reluctant to make large wagers when that unknown existed.“I would say 90 percent of the handicappers are happy we are back to dirt,” said Jim Goodman, Keeneland’s director of mutuels and simulcasting. “It’s a much better surface to handicap.”Safety concerns arose when three horses sustained fatal injuries in the first week of a 17-day meet this autumn. After a review of the track and a sophisticated maintenance program that involves daily laser measurements of the cushion and moisture content, Thomason expressed confidence that an optimal surface could be provided.He is optimistic, too, that a region inextricably linked to thoroughbreds will not have to wait three decades for another Cup.“We think that after this Breeders’ Cup, their desire to return will be compelling,” Thomason said.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page F5 of the New York edition with the headline: As Breeders’ Cup Grows, It Welcomes Smaller Stage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.