AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherIt was a showdown between the once and future most valuable player.Stephen Curry won the prize last season. By consensus, Anthony Davis is the man expected someday to follow in his footsteps.Based on Tuesday night’s opener, the crown has not yet been passed.Curry showed no rust, pouring in 24 points in the first quarter, on his way to 40 points on the night. His Golden State Warriors cruised past Davis’s New Orleans Pelicans, 111-95, in Oakland, Calif.It was the 10th 40-point game of Curry’s career. It was also the most points by an M.V.P. in an opener since Kareem Abdul-Jabbar had 41 for Milwaukee in 1972, Stats reported.Curry did not let the pregame ceremony awarding the Warriors their championship rings distract him.“There’s so much hoopla before the game, and as soon as the ball drops, you’ve kind of got to take a couple of deep breaths, and just go out, be aggressive, have fun,” Curry told The Oakland Tribune.Davis’s first game of the season was one to forget: He was 4 for 20 for 18 points and had five turnovers. The .200 shooting percentage was his worst in a game in more than a year. The game score statistic, which accounts for everything a player does, rated it the eighth worst game of his career and second worst in which he played 30 minutes or more, according to Basketball-Reference. “We will put tonight behind us,” Davis told The Times Picayune. “We have 81 games left and one tomorrow.”The website FiveThirtyEight.com projects that the 22-year-old Davis will be the best player in basketball over the next six years, ahead of the 27-year-old Curry, James Harden, LeBron James and Russell Westbrook. “There’s never been a player quite like him,” the site said.But while Curry and the Warriors are once again title favorites, Davis’s Pelicans have a way to go. The team is improving, winning 27, 34 and 45 games in Davis’s three seasons. Historically, though, M.V.P.s come from the very best teams, often those with 60 wins or more.Davis’s supporting cast is not the 1960s Celtics, and the team’s second leading scorer last year, Tyreke Evans, is out six to eight weeks after knee surgery. Moreover, there is little margin for error in the tough Western Conference.Davis is unquestionably a great player, both offensively and defensively (he led the league last season in 2-point field goals and blocked shots). But until his team becomes a real contender or players like Curry and Harden start to slip, the Most Valuable Player Award seems out of reach.Advertisement