AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Emma StoneyWELLINGTON, New Zealand — After 28 years of the Rugby World Cup, two of the sport’s biggest powers, Australia and New Zealand, will finally face off in a final.The two Pacific nations have a rich history, playing each other since 1903. Both teams have won the World Cup twice — Australia in 1991 and 1999 and New Zealand in 1987 and 2011 — and have faced off in the semifinals three times, but never before have they met with the world championship on the line. Whoever wins at Twickenham Stadium on Saturday will win an unprecedented third title. And New Zealand is trying to be the first team to defend its crown successfully.Australia Coach Michael Cheika has been quick to claim underdog status, pointing out that New Zealand has won nine of the past 10 tests between the two teams. And New Zealand has held the Bledisloe Cup, an annual competition between the two, since 2003.But Cheika and the rest of the rugby world know that Australia has the ability to tip over New Zealand.The two took different routes to the final. Australia, which advanced out of the toughest group of the tournament, has been playing tough, must-win matches for five weeks that have left it battered and bruised. New Zealand’s toughest match in Pool C came against Argentina right at the start of the tournament before easier games against Namibia, Georgia and Tonga.Australia’s Wallabies have shown they can play free-flowing, ruthless rugby, as they did when they ripped England apart in their group game, but they have also shown they can win via their defense, too, as when they made 142 tackles against Argentina in the semifinals and held the South Americans without a try in a 29-15 victory.New Zealand did not show its full hand until its quarterfinal against France, when the All Blacks’ mixture of power, speed and precision obliterated the hapless French in a 62-13 win. That stunning performance was the type of rugby everyone has come to expect of the All Blacks.New Zealand then showed in its semifinal against South Africa that it has the composure to win close games as well.One notable moment in the semifinal was when flyhalf Dan Carter, playing in his 111th test, kicked a drop goal, only his second ever at a World Cup.It happened in the first five minutes of the second half when the All Blacks were trailing, 12-7, and were a man down because Jerome Kaino was in the sin bin. It was a crucial score and helped turn momentum New Zealand’s way.It also showed a clear shift in strategy for the New Zealanders, who for many years held a dismissive attitude toward the drop goal, believing it was better to try and win playing expansive rugby.That was never more evident than in 2007, when New Zealand failed to set up for a drop goal until it was ultimately too late and lost to France in the quarterfinals. Captain Richie McCaw admitted later that a drop goal was never part of the plan in 2007.But it has been part of the All Blacks’ planning for this World Cup, and expect it to be an option again if the final goes down to the wire. South Africa and England have both won World Cup finals with drop goals.“It’s something we work extremely hard on, setting up dropped goal plays. We have for months now,” Carter told New Zealand’s Fairfax Media. “It’s not really in the New Zealand psyche, and we haven’t had to use it because all our games up until now haven’t been as close as that one.”One area that will be crucial to the two evenly matched teams will be the breakdown. Each team will want to recycle the ball quickly to stretch defenses and bring into play scoring weapons like New Zealand’s Ma’a Nonu, Julian Savea and Nehe Milner-Skudder and Australia’s Adam Ashley-Cooper, Drew Mitchell, Matt Giteau and Israel Folau.The Australian loose forward trio of Michael Hooper, David Pocock and Scott Fardy has been outstanding. Pocock’s ability to win turnover possession at the ruck — or at the very least to slow down the opposition’s attack — has been superb, and he was sorely missed in the quarterfinal against Scotland when a calf injury ruled him out.But New Zealand’s loose forward trio of Richie McCaw, Jerome Kaino and Kieran Read is widely regarded as one of the best combinations in international rugby.It is more of a traditional lineup, with Kaino and Read the physical ball carriers and McCaw the master at the breakdown.Australia will also need to at least gain parity with New Zealand in the scrum. The Wallabies have improved greatly in that area but struggled against Argentina.The battle between the goal-kicking flyhalves Carter and Australia’s Bernard Foley is also worth watching. Carter — one of many veterans playing his final match for New Zealand — is playing as well as he ever has. He has rediscovered his running game, kicked well and shown the composure and wiliness garnered from more than 100 tests.Foley, 26, has plenty of tests ahead of him, but Saturday will be his biggest match yet. He has shown the temperament to handle big occasions, earning the nickname “Iceman” for his ability to convert match-winning penalties.But the bench could ultimately decide who wins, and New Zealand has the advantage when it comes to depth. There is probably no other team in the world that can call on substitutes with the experience of hooker Keven Mealamu, the power of props Ben Franks and Charlie Faumuina, the physicality and offloading skills of back Sonny Bill Williams and loose forward Victor Vito, the breakdown and defensive work of openside flanker Sam Cane and the attacking skills of scrumhalf Tawera Kerr-Barlow and utility back Beauden Barrett.Australia has game-changers like Kurtley Beale or possibly Quade Cooper, but they can just as easily cost their team a victory as win it. Back Matt Toomua provides good direct running and strong defense but does not have the “wow” factor of Williams. Scrumhalf Nick Phipps is not always composed under pressure, while the replacement forwards lack the impact that Vito or Cane can make.Advertisement