AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressThe Toronto Blue Jays clinched their first American League East title in 22 years with a 15-2 rout of the Baltimore Orioles in the first game of a doubleheader on Wednesday, capping their unstoppable two-month run.Marcus Stroman (4-0) allowed one run and five hits over eight innings in his fourth start since returning from left knee surgery. He struck out eight and walked two.Jose Bautista hit his 40th home run, Edwin Encarnacion delivered his 37th, and Justin Smoak also connected for Toronto. The Blue Jays were fourth in the A.L. East on the morning of July 29 with a 50-51 record, eight games behind the Yankees. But, including the 8-1 loss in the second leg of the doubleheader that was largely played by reserves, the Blue Jays won 42 of their next 57 games, helped by a slew of acquisitions around the trade deadline. CARDINALS TAKE CENTRAL Jason Heyward’s third-inning grand slam powered visiting St. Louis past Pittsburgh, 11-1, in the second game of a doubleheader, giving the team its third straight National League Central title and 11th since 1994. St. Louis assured itself of the best record in the majors despite losing several stars, including Adam Wainwright, Matt Holliday and Matt Adams, to injury for long stretches. Heyward’s shot off Bobby LaFromboise, who replaced an ineffective Charlie Morton (9-9), gave St. Louis an early six-run lead, which it held on to for its 100th win, the first time that plateau has been reached since the Phillies did it in 2011. In the opener, Francisco Cervelli hit his second career grand slam, Gerrit Cole (19-8) pitched seven solid innings, and Pittsburgh jumped on Michael Wacha (17-7) to win, 8-2. Neil Walker also homered for the Pirates, who inched closer to home-field advantage in next week’s wild-card game. Cole (19-8) allowed two runs and seven hits in what was likely his final regular-season start.CUBS 10, REDS 3 Austin Jackson drove in a career-high five runs and Jon Lester set a Chicago season record for strikeouts by a left-handed pitcher, leading the playoff-bound Cubs to a road win.The Cubs will play the Pirates in the N.L. wild-card game.TWINS AND INDIANS SPLIT Cody Anderson (7-3) pitched seven shutout innings and Jose Ramirez hit a three-run homer as Cleveland notched a 10-2 victory, splitting the doubleheader and keeping their slim hopes alive in the wild-card race. The Indians scored four runs in the second off Mike Pelfrey (6-11), who could not make it through the inning, and Francisco Lindor continued his case for rookie of the year with a two-run homer in the fourth. Minnesota won the first game, 7-1, behind six shutout innings from Kyle Gibson (11-11) and a three-run Torii Hunter double. With the split, the Twins were within one game of the Angels for the second wild-card spot, while Cleveland was five games behind Los Angeles and still faced potential elimination if the Astros were to top the Mariners in a late game.ATHLETICS 8, ANGELS 7 Stephen Vogt hit a tiebreaking, two-run single during Oakland’s four-run rally in the seventh, and it hung on to stop host Los Angeles’s seven-game winning streak. One day after the Angels completed a two-month chase by passing Houston for the second wild-card spot, they committed four errors and gave up seven unearned runs while dropping back into a tie with the Astros, who played at Seattle later.RANGERS 6, TIGERS 2 Adrian Beltre hit the first of three Texas home runs as the A.L. West-leading Rangers moved closer to a postseason berth with the home win. They open a four-game series at home Thursday against the Angels, who trail them by three games in the division. ROYALS 5, WHITE SOX 3 Eric Hosmer hit a go-ahead, two-run homer in the top of the 10th inning, and Kansas City won in Chicago to clinch home-field advantage in an A.L. division series.BRAVES 2, NATIONALS 0 The rookie Williams Perez threw six innings and Atlanta’s bullpen did the rest as the team shut out Washington.Jordan Zimmermann (13-10) took the road loss in what was likely his final appearance for the team that drafted him in 2007. Zimmermann, a free agent at the end of the season, gave up two runs and six hits in six innings in his career-high 33rd start.RAYS 6, MARLINS 4 Drew Smyly won his fifth straight decision, Grady Sizemore had a three-run double and host Tampa Bay beat Miami. Advertisement