By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 29, 2015
Even when they look sluggish, Tom Brady and the New England Patriots still dominate.Brady threw for 356 yards and four touchdowns — two to Julian Edelman in the fourth quarter — and the Patriots trounced the visiting Miami Dolphins, 36-7, on Thursday night to become the first of the N.F.L.’s five unbeaten teams to reach seven wins.Stephen Gostkowski broke Adam Vinatieri’s franchise record for consecutive field goals by connecting from 52 and 36 yards to run his streak to 26 in a row. Rob Gronkowski had 113 yards receiving and a touchdown, and Dion Lewis had 93 yards receiving and a score.The loss was the first for Miami (3-4) under the interim coach Dan Campbell. The Dolphins scored 82 points in wins over the lowly Titans and Texans in Campbell’s first two games after he replaced Joe Philbin. But they were overmatched against the Patriots, the defending Super Bowl champions.It could be an even bigger loss for the Dolphins because the four-time Pro Bowl defensive end Cameron Wake was carted off the field in the second half with an Achilles’ tendon injury.AdvertisementThe Patriots are 7-0 for the second time in franchise history and for the first time since going 16-0 in the regular season in 2007.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.COWBOYS’ RANDLE TAKES LEAVE Joseph Randle was the starting running back for Dallas until Darren McFadden had the team’s first 100-yard game of the season last weekend.AdvertisementNow the status of Randle, a third-year player, is in question as he takes time away from the team to deal with an unspecified personal issue while already being ruled out of Sunday’s game against Seattle with a back injury.Randle appeared at practice Wednesday before leaving, and he left after a brief appearance at the team’s complex Thursday morning.Coach Jason Garrett declined to discuss the specifics of Randle’s absence.“We have players who for different reasons, at different times, can’t be here, whether it’s a family issue, a personal issue of some kind,” Garrett said. “We address them, we solve them and then move on. We certainly try to support our players in every way we can.”MANGOLD PLANS TO PLAY Jets center Nick Mangold missed practice for the second straight day with a sore neck, but he still expects to play against Oakland on Sunday.“I feel like unless I’m laying there bleeding out, I’ll be able to play,” said Mangold, who was injured in a loss to the Patriots last weekend.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page F6 of the New York edition with the headline: Brady and Patriots Crush the Dolphins to Improve to 7-0 .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.