By SCOTT CACCIOLAOCT. 29, 2015
The introduction of the Knicks’ starting lineup Thursday night was preceded by a fancy laser show and very loud music. The crowd at Madison Square Garden screamed for Carmelo Anthony and Kristaps Porzingis. The Knicks were in first place. They were undefeated.The feeling was delightfully foreign. It did not last.In their home opener, the Knicks revealed that some bad habits — poor shooting, lackluster defense — are hard to break as they fell to the Atlanta Hawks, 112-101.“We saw the difference between the level where they are right now, and where we are right now,” Coach Derek Fisher said. “We’ll have to learn from it as we go forward.”The Knicks (1-1) were largely undone by their inability to defend along the 3-point line and at the rim. Early in the third quarter, Anthony lobbed a court-length pass to Robin Lopez — or at least Lopez was the intended target. The Hawks’ Al Horford intercepted the pass. The ball found its way to Kyle Korver, who hit a 3-pointer to put Atlanta up by 17. The Garden sounded like a bingo hall.AdvertisementAmid the quiet, the Hawks (1-1) eased past an opponent that had arrived back at the Garden flush with optimism. The Knicks were less than 24 hours removed from a season-opening victory over the Milwaukee Bucks. But the Hawks, who owned the best record in the Eastern Conference last season, offered a litmus test.Fisher continued to preach the twin concepts of patience and process.“Last night, everything was great and the sun was up,” he said, referring to the Knicks’ 25-point win over the Bucks. “And now, all of a sudden, there is no sun because we lost. That’s the mentality we have to get out of in this organization — everybody. We can’t go up and down with the sun and the moon. Being good takes time.”Anthony finished with a team-high 25 points, but shot just 10 of 27 from the field and missed all seven of his 3-point attempts. Lopez scored 18 points, and Porzingis added 10.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It has been two games,” said Jose Calderon, the team’s starting point guard. “Let’s not make a big deal about it. We have to get better for sure.”The Hawks, who shot 10 of 24 from 3-point range, were led by Jeff Teague, who collected 23 points and 8 assists. Atlanta scored 52 points in the key and led by as many as 22.AdvertisementBefore the game, Fisher said he had been trying to give his players digestible morsels. He said he wanted to “streamline things” so the players did not feel overloaded with information. The idea, Fisher said, was to “really give our guys a menu of things that they can focus on becoming good at for now.”He added, “And then, hopefully, as we grow and evolve over time, we can add layers and different options that require them to think a little bit more.”No new layers were evident against the Hawks. Anthony labored, extending a recent trend. Last week, in the team’s final exhibition of the preseason, he shot 4 of 18 against the Boston Celtics. On Wednesday, he faced consistent double teams from the Bucks and shot 4 of 16. Neither Anthony nor Fisher seemed concerned before Thursday’s game. Anthony had knee surgery in February.“We know he’s healthy,” Fisher said.Against the Hawks, Anthony deferred to teammates in the game’s early stages. All four starters not named Carmelo Anthony scored before he did. Finally, late in the first quarter, Anthony threw his body through a throng of defenders and converted a layup while drawing contact. He sank his free throw for an 18-17 lead.Porzingis, meanwhile, was blocked at the rim on the Knicks’ first possession. He missed his first three shots. But the crowd was charmed by his enthusiasm. When he hit the floor diving for a loose ball, he might as well have been hoisting a championship trophy. The Garden brimmed with hope, at least for a while.Defense was the larger issue against the Hawks, who shot 54.5 percent from the field in the first quarter as they ran out to a 30-20 lead.Fisher turned to his reserves at the start of the second quarter, and they delivered 11 straight points. The second unit was led once again by Derrick Williams, who ran the court in transition, capped a play with a dunk and generally treated the game like a jazz solo. Williams, who signed with the Knicks during the off-season, acknowledged his relative shortcomings.“I still don’t know all the plays,” he said this week. “People are still telling me, ‘Go here, go there.’ But I’m just playing off my instincts.”His instincts were good enough to help lift the Knicks to a lead, albeit a fleeting one. The Hawks soon regained their rhythm, particularly from long distance. Atlanta shot 8 of 13 from 3-point range en route to a 61-45 halftime lead. The Knicks were flat-footed on their defensive rotations, and it cost them.AdvertisementREBOUNDSTim Hardaway Jr., whom the Knicks traded in June for the draft rights to Jerian Grant, returned to the Garden as a member of the Hawks for the first time. “It never feels good to get traded,” Hardaway said before the game. “But you’re with a team, at the end of the day, that wants you. And it’s a blessing to be a part of that.” ... The Knicks were without Arron Afflalo (hamstring), Kevin Seraphin (knee) and Lou Amundson (back) for the second straight game.An earlier version of this article misstated the number of shots the Hawks took from 3-point range. It was 24, not 23. It also misstated the number of shots Kristaps Porzingis missed early in the game. It was his first three shots, not his first four. The article also misstated the number of three-point attempts made by Derrick Williams. He made none; it is not the case that he “buried a 3-pointer” as part of his performance off the bench.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page F7 of the New York edition with the headline: Knicks Return Home for a Dose of Reality.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.