AdvertisementSupported byBy Seth BerkmanWith his team leading the World Series by two games to none, Royals Manager Ned Yost looked relaxed Thursday afternoon during a session with members of the news media at Citi Field.Yost had his hair combed back in a style similar to that of the former N.B.A. coach Pat Riley, whose teams won five titles. Of the 18 questions Yost was asked, only one — about benching designated hitter Kendrys Morales — touched upon the strategic changes his team would have to make against the Mets as the series shifted to a National League ballpark. Instead, the questions ranged from Yordano Ventura’s postseason (Ventura will start Game 3 for the Royals) to the Gold Glove finalists announced Thursday (four Royals were named). An hour later, Mets Manager Terry Collins had to regularly reinforce the idea that his team had not lost its confidence after playing 23 innings of mostly futile baseball in Kansas City, leaving with no victories and tired bodies that did not get home and into bed until 5 a.m. Thursday.Preparing for Game 3 of the World Series at Citi Field on Friday night, the Royals brimmed with cool confidence, while the Mets looked to make adjustments against a team that stroked a number of timely hits against the Mets’ vaunted pitching staff.“I’m very, very impressed by it, how they do it and how they handle it,” Collins said. He added: “We’ve got to make better pitches. You can’t keep throwing the ball — there’s seven inches on each side of the plate, you’ve got to get it to the edges or they’re going to get good hits.”Noah Syndergaard, the Mets’ starter in Game 3, has devised a game plan based on how the Royals aggressively attacked Matt Harvey and Jacob deGrom, the Mets’ starters in the first two games.Syndergaard, a rookie who is 1-1 with a 2.77 E.R.A. this postseason, said he would continue to pitch to his strengths, whereas Harvey threw a lower percentage of fastballs than usual in Game 1. Syndergaard also hinted that he would not necessarily open the game with a first-pitch strike to Alcides Escobar, the leadoff hitter who surprised the Mets with an inside-the-park home run in the Royals’ first at-bat in Game 1.“I have a few tricks up my sleeve that I’ll be able to break out tomorrow night,” Syndergaard said.Shortly after Syndergaard’s news conference, he threw long tosses in right field before heading to the bullpen. The snapping of his high-velocity fastballs hitting the catcher’s mitt was the only ambient sound at Citi Field. Collins decided against holding a formal workout, citing his team’s need for rest and their familiarity with Citi Field, with the exception of two temporary commissioner’s boxes set up near the dugouts behind home plate.“To bring them out just so you guys can all go in and get a quote from them doesn’t make much sense to me,” Collins said. “So we’re going to give them a blow and get them ready for tomorrow.”The Royals, too, did not do much Thursday, but they did open their clubhouse for 30 minutes. They spoke with the assurance of players who have a two-game lead.“I think our team really matches up well in an N.L. game,” said first baseman Eric Hosmer, referring to the designated-hitter rules that are out of play for Games 3 through 5 (if Game 5 is needed).Although the Mets kept their operations close to the vest, making only Syndergaard and Michael Cuddyer available in addition to Collins, they tried to emphasize the longtime franchise slogan, “Ya Gotta Believe.” The 1986 Mets were one of the 11 teams that have overcome a 2-0 deficit in the Series.“There’s a lot of confidence in that clubhouse,” Collins said. “I talked to them when we got back off the field last night. It was a similar refrain from the night before. That is: We’re down, but we’re not out.”Advertisement