AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanKANSAS CITY, Mo. — As Tori Murphy took a seat in the family section of Kauffman Stadium for Game 2 of the World Series on Wednesday, she pulled up a photo on her cellphone that her mother had sent her. There was her 19-month-old son, Noah, surrounded by a group of children admiring his bright shoes.The day before, back in New York, Noah’s grandmother had taken him to his favorite neighborhood park, not far from the family’s Upper East Side apartment. A group of children there thought they recognized him — those shoes helped — and asked his grandmother, “Is Daniel Murphy his father?”The answer was yes. Daniel Murphy had become so well known for his heroics during the Mets’ October run, and had done enough interviews during Champagne celebrations while cradling Noah, that Murphy had, in turn, made the boy somewhat easy to spot, too.“It kind of freaked me out,” Tori Murphy said. “I’m not going to lie.”This is the sort of thing that happens after your husband hits seven home runs in the first two rounds of the playoffs, one shy of the record for a single postseason, and leads the Mets to their first pennant in 15 years. Murphy also hit a home run in six consecutive playoff games, a feat never before accomplished, and did it off some of the best pitchers in baseball.Tori Murphy, of course, does not view her husband the way excited fans do. She is overjoyed by his startling success, but weighed against that are other priorities, like raising Noah and preparing for their second child, a girl, due in December.Playoffs or not, Noah still races into his parents’ bedroom to wake up his father to play with him. Tori still needs help with errands and chores. Murphy still changes diapers if Noah wakes up in the night. In recent weeks, as the Mets kept winning and Murphy kept rounding the bases, he and Tori never really had the time to celebrate. A nice dinner? Forget it.“Seamless is the best thing in the world,” Tori said, referring to the food delivery service. They like to order fried rice, sesame chicken and sushi from Tao.When Game 2 began, with Noah still with his grandmother in New York, Tori, who agreed to let a reporter watch the game with her, stood nervously when her husband came to bat. She swayed back and forth on her feet, her hands shoved into her pockets. When the at-bat was over, she would sit down and immediately check her phone for an update on her son.Because she is pregnant, Tori cannot stand for too long. She has attended most of the postseason games, which have included stays in Los Angeles and Chicago, but has not lasted through all of them. When she stands up, she also feels the urge to use the bathroom. During the five-hour, 14-inning Game 1, she said she visited the restroom at least 10 times.After that game, Murphy was wired, wide awake, but Tori felt exhausted. She ordered him room service — chicken fingers and cheesecake — and went to bed.The wives and girlfriends of Mets players have a group text chat they use to share a running commentary during games. They use the bomb emoji to describe home runs. “Or the muscle,” Tori Murphy said, raising her right arm and flexing.But over the past few weeks, when she would jump up to celebrate each time her husband hit another homer, she had to sit down to catch her breath. If her due date were earlier than December, she said, she might have thought twice about even being at the ballpark.Throughout Game 2, when the action slowed or stopped, conversation with Tori would drift toward her son — how he’s dressing as his father for Halloween, how he smeared mud on his father’s face during one postseason celebration. Her husband, she noted, hates getting dirty.During the fifth inning of the game, when the Royals scored four runs to take a commanding lead, third baseman Mike Moustakas capped the rally by driving a run-scoring single by a diving Murphy at second base. Tori silently crossed her arms, frowning, taking in the celebrating Royals fans around her.Then she checked her phone, almost impulsively, for any updates on Noah.In August, Tori thought she might be going into early labor. She had been sitting on the floor, reading to Noah, when she stood up and felt a shooting pain down her back. Her body froze in the shape of a question mark. Noah started crying. She didn’t know what was wrong, and her husband was at Citi Field, preparing for a day game.Tori asked Maegan Parnell, Bobby Parnell’s wife, to come over to help. Her fears that she was going into labor soon subsided, but her back did not get much better. She texted her husband: Get home as soon as the game is over. Which he did. “Time to be a father,” Murphy said he said to himself as he drove home as quickly as he could.In recent years, Daniel Murphy has become increasingly religious, to the point that many fans are now aware of how much that factors into his life. During team chapel sessions, he asks his teammates to pray that he be a better husband and father. He prays during games as a way to calm himself. Aside from maybe Kevin Long, the Mets’ first-year hitting coach, who adjusted his mechanics, Murphy credits his faith as the most important factor in his postseason performance.But Murphy was not as religious when Tori met him. He was a handsome, confident baseball player at Jacksonville University. She was a softball player at the University of North Florida. One day, she asked a friend to help move a couch, and Murphy came along to help.“Offered him 20 bucks,” she said. “Gentleman wouldn’t take it.”They dated for a few years, but they broke up in the fall of 2011. Murphy has described his behavior at the time as “selfish.” It was around then that he embraced Christianity, and not long afterward he and Tori got back together. Next came marriage and parenthood, an ever-deepening faith for both of them and what Tori refers to as “this crazy time.”“Crazy” may be putting it mildly. Entering the postseason, Murphy had never hit more than 14 home runs in a season. He had made one All-Star team. Some fans criticized him for his deficiencies on defense and questionable decisions on the basepaths. In any case, the Murphys could take their son to the park without being treated as front-page celebrities.That has now changed, at least in New York. During an off day after the Mets swept the Chicago Cubs in the National League Championship Series, the Murphys took Noah outside to play baseball and go down a playground slide.A few children came over, then a few more. A nearby school was out on recess, and soon a mob of children surrounded Daniel Murphy, asking for autographs. They asked him to sign lunchboxes. They asked him to sign leaves, whatever they could get their hands on. A few days after that, Noah was being treated as a big deal in his own right.All of this, of course, can subside as easily as it arises.For the Murphys, for the Mets, and for an army of disappointed fans, the first two games of the Series have been nothing like the two rounds of the N.L. playoffs. The Mets have lost twice, and Murphy has not come close to hitting another homer.In Game 2, the Royals’ pitcher, Johnny Cueto, seemed to treat Murphy carefully, walking him twice (and also striking him out twice). Of the 22 pitches Murphy saw in the 7-1 loss, he later estimated that three of them had been worth trying to hit. In the end, he went hitless for the first time this postseason.When the final out came, Murphy walked off the field jawing at an umpire over the strike zone, and Tori Murphy commiserated with another woman in the family section. Back home, Noah was fast asleep.Advertisement