
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 29, 2015
Sometime late on the season’s final Sunday, while traveling secretaries bustled and fans checked their fantasy scores and vendors hawked the last of their inventory, it happened again. For the 10th season in a row, major league hitters set a record for strikeouts: 37,446 in all.One of these days, Geico will notice and sell insurance with the catchphrase: If you’re a major league hitter, you strike out — it’s what you do. As hard as modern pitchers throw, with such late movement and command of the strike zone, hitters (a loose term, really) increasingly accept the whiff as part of the game.And then there are the Kansas City Royals.“Personally, for me, I hate striking out,” said left fielder Alex Gordon, who has been there the longest. “So if I get to two strikes, I’m going to battle as much as I can. Even if I hit a weak ground ball, I feel like that’s a lot better than striking out. This is a crazy game. As long as you put it in play, something good might happen.”Gordon — a preposterously dangerous No. 8 hitter for the first two games of this World Series — drew a walk to lead off the fifth inning Wednesday in Game 2. He let his teammates unleash the crazy on the Mets’ Jacob deGrom.AdvertisementTrying to hold a 1-0 lead, deGrom allowed two singles to tie the score. After a groundout and a flyout, three more singles followed before David Wright fielded a hard smash to end the inning. The Royals scored four runs, knocked another hard-throwing ace from the game, and cruised behind Johnny Cueto to a 7-1 victory and a two-games-to-none lead.AdvertisementIn 11 innings over two games, deGrom and Matt Harvey have managed only four strikeouts. DeGrom, who thrived in the National League playoffs with 27 strikeouts in 20 innings, did not generate a single swing and miss with his celebrated fastball in Game 2.This is what we expected from the Royals, whose hitters have finished with the fewest strikeouts in the majors in each of the last four seasons. Kansas City’s Dave Eiland — the only major league pitching coach who does not have to devise a game plan for handling these pests — can appreciate the Mets’ pain.“Even me — the mediocre pitcher that I was, at best — I would much rather face a power-hitting bat than a contact hitter,” Eiland said. “Those guys were pains in the butts. They just keep coming. They put balls in play, they fight off good pitches. Usually with power guys — not all of them, but for the most part — there’s holes and you’ve got to go through them. Now, if you miss, they’re going to hurt you. But the thing with this team, if we get down a couple runs, there’s absolutely no panic at all. We can reel off four, five, six hits in a row.”Perhaps Harvey and deGrom, both far past their previous career-high workloads — like the Game 3 starter, Noah Syndergaard — have finally grown tired, which tends to reveal itself in a loss of command. A top pitcher who hits his spots is tough for every lineup to handle.
                This season, the Mets had four of the top 20 pitchers who threw the most pitches over 95 m.p.h.            But that is just the physical part. The Royals wear on pitchers mentally, too.“You appreciate the grind that it is for the opposing pitcher,” said Royals starter Jeremy Guthrie, a 12-year veteran. “You look at it and think, I would never be completely comfortable facing this team. The fact that they can start a rally and the fact that they can grind out an at-bat are worrisome for a pitcher who has to get through the lineup two, three times.”The Royals swung and missed just three times against deGrom — though the Mets, to be fair, swung and missed just three times against Cueto, too. The difference was that Cueto, an erratic pitcher but one who led his league in innings pitched last season, stayed strong and did not make mistakes.“We swung at six pitches out of the zone, which isn’t many,” the Mets’ hitting coach, Kevin Long, said. “There was some quality to a lot of those at-bats. Cueto made some good pitches. He probably threw five pitches in the middle of the plate — really, not that many. As I looked through the at-bats, there wasn’t a whole lot of pitches in the middle.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Mets, clearly, need Syndergaard to approximate that kind of precision to win Game 3 and sustain a realistic hope of a championship. Anything less, and the Royals are likely to smack balls all around Flushing, exploit the Mets’ weaker fielders and use their speed to full advantage.AdvertisementThe Royals’ lineup is more dangerous than the one that lost in seven games to the San Francisco Giants last fall, with Ben Zobrist, Alex Rios and Kendrys Morales in place of Omar Infante, Nori Aoki and Billy Butler. (Morales, as the designated hitter, will be on the bench at Citi Field.)But Zobrist, a midseason trade acquisition, is the only Royal who ranked among the top 40 major leaguers in pitches per plate appearance this season. The Royals, with a spacious home ballpark and a midlevel payroll, were built this way deliberately, emphasizing speed and contact in their farm system and pouncing on reasonably priced free agents (Morales, Rios) and short-term rentals (Zobrist).Yet despite their success, the Royals’ style of hitting has shown few signs of spreading to other teams. The reason may be simple.“It’s really hard to do,” said Michael Cuddyer, the veteran Mets outfielder. “When you get down in the count, the tendency is to chase quality pitches. And when we’ve made quality pitches the last two days, they haven’t chased very many of them. That’s not easy to do — not at all. Trust me, if it was easy, the whole league would do it.”The Royals do it better than anyone, and it has helped bring them halfway to a championship.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page F1 of the New York edition with the headline: Heat Resistant.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »