By TYLER KEPNEROCT. 29, 2015
Thursday’s day off from the World Series gave several teams a chance to announce hirings and firings, and other moves were made but not announced as teams began to formalize their off-season planning.The Toronto Blue Jays said that their general manager, Alex Anthopoulos, was leaving the organization. His departure coincides with the arrival of Mark Shapiro, formerly of the Cleveland Indians, whose hiring as the Blue Jays’ president and chief executive was announced in late August and who is set to take control Monday.Anthopoulos’s trades for Josh Donaldson, David Price and Troy Tulowitzki helped produce Toronto’s first division title in 22 years, and on Thursday, the same day his departure was announced, The Sporting News said he had won its award for executive of the year in a vote by his peers.“Alex has done an unbelievable job and positioned us well for the future,” Paul Beeston, the Blue Jays’ retiring president and C.E.O., said in a statement.AdvertisementThe most intriguing dugout hire is no surprise, and not yet official: Don Mattingly will be the next manager of the Miami Marlins. Mattingly, who led the Los Angeles Dodgers to the National League West title in each of the last three seasons, left the team last week in what was called a mutual decision. His agreement with the Marlins was confirmed by a person with knowledge of the deal who requested anonymity.AdvertisementThe Marlins, meanwhile, fired General Manager Dan Jennings, who had spent most of the season as manager in an unusual switch that did not change the team’s fortunes.Michael Hill, who had been Miami’s president of baseball operations, will assume the general manager duties for an organization in a consistent state of upheaval. Mattingly will be the team’s 10th manager of more than one game (including two stints for Jack McKeon) since Jeffrey Loria bought the Marlins in 2002.The San Diego Padres also have a new manager: Andy Green, 38, a former infielder for the Arizona Diamondbacks and the Mets who had managed in the Diamondbacks’ farm system and was most recently their third-base coach.The Padres started last season with Bud Black as their manager, but Black now appears headed to the Washington Nationals, according to a Washington Post report. The Nationals, who fired Matt Williams after a disappointing season, had narrowed their manager search to Black and Dusty Baker.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Texas Rangers announced that they would not bring back Mike Maddux as their pitching coach. He had held the role for the last seven seasons, helping the Rangers reach the postseason four times.Maddux had been among six coaches invited to return and was previously offered a new contract that he had not signed, The Associated Press reported, but General Manager Jon Daniels said he and Manager Jeff Banister had met with Maddux “to inform him we had decided to go in another direction.”The Detroit Tigers filled their pitching-coach vacancy with Rich Dubee, the Philadelphia Phillies’ pitching coach when they won the World Series in 2008.TIGER HAS GROWTH REMOVED The Detroit Tigers left-hander Daniel Norris wrote on Instagram that he had had surgery on the cancerous growth on his thyroid and was “cancer free.” He had announced last week that he was having the growth removed.AdvertisementNorris was the most highly regarded prospect in the deal that sent David Price to the Blue Jays. The Tigers said they knew about his condition when they acquired him. (AP)MORNEAU’S OPTION DECLINED The Rockies declined a $9 million mutual option on first baseman Justin Morneau and bought him out for $750,000. Morneau, 34, was limited to 49 games this year because of injuries. (AP)SCULLY EAGER TO RETURN In his first public comments since having an unspecified medical procedure, Vin Scully told SportsNet LA that he was “chafing at the bit” to return to the Dodgers’ booth next year, which would be his 67th season and is expected to be his last. Scully, who turns 88 on Nov. 29, missed calling the team’s playoff appearance against the Mets. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page F2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Torrent of Changes in Dugouts and Offices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.