
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
OCT. 29, 2015
MILWAUKEE — Kyle O’Quinn grew up in Queens, presumably too late to fully appreciate what the 1990s were all about for the Knicks at Madison Square Garden.He was born in 1990, which means he was just developing a sense of professional basketball after the hard-hat Knicks of that decade had hit their prime.Charles Oakley — the name mean anything to you?It turns out O’Quinn, the Knicks’ new power forward, is an astute historian, but not in the most predictable way. Of Oakley, the sturdy enforcer who typically had Patrick Ewing’s back, he said: “He went to a historically black college — you know what I’m saying?”O’Quinn, who is 6 feet 10 inches, 250 pounds and played a little football in high school, attended the historically black Norfolk State. As a senior he led his team, a No. 15 seed, to an upset of Missouri in the N.C.A.A. tournament. He wound up a second-round draft pick of the Orlando Magic in 2012, which means he understands formidable odds, if not fairy tales.AdvertisementHe went on to say that with players like Oakley and Ben Wallace, both products of Virginia Union, “You always look to guys like them and how they stayed in the league — if they could do it, I can do it. You never played at a black college, so you don’t know. It’s a little rougher than you think. Those guys paved the way with the style they brought their team. ”By now, long-suffering Knicks fans know where this is going. O’Quinn, 25, may soon have a warm place in their hearts.“I got six fouls — I mean, I probably won’t play long enough to use them,” O’Quinn said after grabbing 11 rebounds in 23-plus minutes as the Knicks manhandled the Milwaukee Bucks, 122-97, in their season opener Wednesday night. “But somebody got to go out there and sacrifice their body. Melo can’t go out there hacking nobody. We need him out there on the floor.”Shots aren’t going to fall every night for Carmelo Anthony’s supporting cast the way they did Wednesday, when Anthony (11 points) was outscored by Derrick Williams (24), Kristaps Porzingis (16), Langston Galloway (16) and Lance Thomas (13). The Knicks made 45 percent of their attempts, including 9 3-pointers, but that wasn’t the takeaway point.This was: the Knicks were the rougher, tougher team, the one with the more competitive and conspicuous core, albeit on a night the Bucks were missing three important players.AdvertisementThe Knicks’ home opener on Thursday night produced a far different result, a 112-101 defeat to the Atlanta Hawks — who, let’s remember, won 60 games and reached the Eastern Conference finals last season with an unremarkable cast that was widely appreciated for being greater than the sum of its parts.Given his ongoing roster remake, Phil Jackson could have worse role models. In trying to live down the humiliation of a 17-victory first full season as the Knicks’ president, he often spoke of plans to acquire players to fit a blueprint. He wasn’t necessarily referring to his beloved triangle offense, but to a collection of individuals who could provide elements that are not as noticeable in the flow of a fast-moving game, or in the box score.Center Robin Lopez happens to fit that foundational approach, even if his presence with the Knicks is owed more to loser’s luck than to Jackson’s architectural genius.By most accounts, Greg Monroe was higher on Jackson’s free-agent list than Lopez, and it was easy to see why on Wednesday night, when Monroe flashed his considerable southpaw low post moves, scoring 22 points to go along with 14 rebounds and several slick passes.Before his Bucks debut, Monroe explained that he chose Milwaukee over New York because of the young talent Coach Jason Kidd had assembled in steering the long-lowly Bucks to the playoffs in his first year on the job.“I haven’t been on any commercials to this point, honestly,” Monroe said facetiously. “Don’t know if that will ever change.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He will be fine in sleepier Milwaukee, and the Bucks figure to be much better with Giannis Antetokounmpo, Jabari Parker and O. J. Mayo back in the lineup. But Monroe is no rim protector. Lopez blocked two Bucks shots and challenged many more.For all the talk of how the N.B.A. is now and forever a small-man’s league, a long-distance shooter’s paradise, it remains advisable to invest in establishing a no-trespassing zone in the paint on defense.Advertisement“That’s something we want to do from the beginning, have a lot of our energy originate from the defensive end,” Lopez said. “That’s something that grows organically and naturally. It’s contagious and, you know, we all want to help this kid out a little bit.”He meant Porzingis, who, at 7-3, has many intriguing qualities, not the least of which is his staunch refusal to back down. Suffice it to say that Porzingis of Latvia has made an early believer of O’Quinn of Queens.“He’s skinny, but I’ve worked out with him over the summer, and the boy has heart,” O’Quinn said with Porzingis within listening distance. “He’s not just a skilled European guy, 7-3, just willing to get pushed around.”Porzingis, 20, is bound to wear down over a grueling season, but Lopez and O’Quinn would appear to form a solid protective firewall for him and the others Jackson has assembled in trying to build that core, at least for now, around Anthony, who struggled for the second straight night, this time against the quick Atlanta rotations in a reality-check game.“Phil’s not a magician, not Harry Potter with a stick, coming in and changing everything,” said Sasha Vujacic, the Knicks guard who was also with Jackson in Los Angeles. “But when you are guided by someone like Phil, you just have to trust in the journey.”To that end, O’Quinn cited summer workouts at the team’s training base and in Puerto Rico, an Anthony orchestration of leadership where players bonded over dinners and softball.“We’re not the best softball players,” O’Quinn admitted.Not the best N.B.A. players, either. But based on very early returns, probably no longer among the absolute worst.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page F7 of the New York edition with the headline: Rougher, Tougher Knicks Are Trying On Hard Hats.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »