AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe N.B.A. season is only two nights old, and drawing ironclad conclusions from what has been seen so far would be foolhardy. Still, even with the tiny sample size, there are trends that seem to be coming into view.With the risk of looking stupid at the end of the season (or even in a week) here are some early-season truisms:The Thunder are back (and LaMarcus Aldridge may not be a panacea for the Spurs).Thunder 112, Spurs 106After three trips to the conference finals or better in four years, the Thunder crashed to earth last season, missing the playoffs entirely in the tough Western Conference. The main reason was the loss of Kevin Durant for most of the season with various foot, ankle and toe problems.In the 27 games he did play last season, Durant averaged 25 points, and while his 6-for-19 shooting Wednesday night was not great, he did have 22 points and 6 rebounds, and the Thunder pulled away from a good Spurs team late.The preseason buzz on San Antonio was that landing the choice free agent Aldridge was a coup that would keep the greatness going for another year. But Aldridge did not look like a savior Wednesday, shooting 4 for 12. The road to another elite season for the Spurs may be a bit bumpier than expected.The Knicks are not terrible.Knicks 122, Bucks 97After winning 17 games last year — fewer than Philadelphia! — the Knicks almost have to improve. An easy win on the road against a .500 team is not the stuff of championships, but it is a big step up. The towering rookie Kristaps Porzingis had 16 points and 5 rebounds in his N.B.A. debut, Derrick Williams had 24 off the bench, and there is hope in New York again.The Lakers are in for another long year (and the Wolves will be better).Timberwolves 112, Lakers 111Even after two playoff-less seasons, it still feels funny to see a Kobe Bryant-led Lakers team at the bottom of the standings. Last season, the team was 21-61, but surely with talented youngsters like Julius Randle and D’Angelo Russell the atrociousness cannot continue.The schedulemakers were more than kind, giving Los Angeles an opener at home against the worst team in the league last season. The Lakers managed to lose anyway, hurt notably by a 9-for-35 effort from 3-point range (Bryant was 3 for 13).There will not be a victory parade, or playoffs in Minnesota this season, but Karl-Anthony Towns and Andrew Wiggins offer hope, and Ricky Rubio, only 25, looked outstanding with 28 points and 14 assists Wednesday night. The team almost has to improve on its 16-win season. Hey, it’s 1/17th of the way there already.The Pelicans aren’t ready to join the elite (and the Blazers may not have collapsed).Warriors 111, Pelicans 95Blazers 112, Pelicans 94Anthony Davis is superb, but his Pelicans, 45-37 last year, are not necessarily going to scare the Warriors out West this season.The loss to Golden State was more than forgivable, but the Pelicans will not be happy about following it with a loss to a Portland team that everyone had pegged as a disaster after the loss of Aldridge and Wesley Matthews.The Blazers are 1-0 and maybe will not be an embarrassment after all. On the other hand, C.J. McCollum isn’t going to score 37 points every night. Is he?The Nets are lost.Bulls 115, Nets 100“I wouldn’t say we’re overlooked, but going into the season, I’d definitely say we’re like an underdog,” Thaddeus Young said of the Nets. That’s an understatement, as the consensus is that Brooklyn will struggle to match the 38 wins and playoff berth of last season.The Nets were never in their home opener against the Bulls and shot very poorly. The early schedule looks daunting, and the team is light on draft picks in the seasons ahead. Hope is in short supply on Atlantic Avenue.The Hawks won’t replicate last season’s magic.Pistons 106, Hawks 94Atlanta somehow jumped up from years of mere competence to a 60-win, conference final season. Reversion to the mean was always a likelihood, but a dispiriting home loss to the Pistons? The Hawks will be looking for better at Madison Square Garden on Thursday night.The Sixers are awful, again.Celtics 112, 76ers 95What more can you say about a team that continues to “stockpile assets” as part of a “process” for the future while steadfastly avoiding opportunities to improve itself now? Twin towers Jahlil Okafor (offensively) and Nerlens Noel (defensively) have promise, but the surrounding cast is almost D-League quality. After seasons of 19 and 18 wins, another long year is in the cards.Don’t draw conclusions after one game.Bulls 97, Cavs 95Cavs 106, Grizzlies 76After one game, the narrative was that the Cavaliers’ reign was threatened and that the Bulls were real contenders, or even favorites in the East. Kyrie Irving’s hurt! Kevin Love and J.R. Smith aren’t shooting well!After Wednesday night’s 30-point pasting of a good Grizzlies team on the road, the sky is no longer falling in Cleveland.A reminder that one game is sometimes just one game.Advertisement