AdvertisementSupported byBy Kelley McMillanBoston — As the 2016 World Cup season begins, Marcel Hirscher of Austria is looking to win a record fifth consecutive World Cup overall title, and he took his first step toward it with a third-place finish last Sunday at the opening race in Sölden, Austria.Over the past four seasons, Hirscher, 26, has dominated ski racing’s technical events — slalom and giant slalom — and has amassed 28 wins, five trophies in the individual disciplines and the four overall titles. On the men’s side, only Marc Girardelli, an Austrian who raced for Luxembourg, has won five overall World Cup titles, which he collected over a nine-year span. Hirscher says he is not chasing the record but would welcome it. “If it happens, great; if it doesn’t, it’s no big deal,” Hirscher said in a telephone interview from Schnalstal, Italy. “With four overall World Cups, I’ve reached a point where, if there are no more victories coming, then it’s already a very successful career.”Two formidable rivals stand in Hirscher’s way: Aksel Lund Svindal and Kjetil Jansrud of Norway. Both men specialize in the speed disciplines, downhill and super-G. A two-time overall champion, Svindal, who has won the downhill and super-G trophies a combined seven times, returns to competition after missing last season with an Achilles’ tendon injury.In Svindal’s absence, his teammate and friend Jansrud emerged as the most dominant speed skier on the World Cup circuit and finished second to Hirscher in the 2015 overall standings. But the ability of both Jansrud and Svindal to win the speed events may dilute each of their chances for the overall title, which Hirscher believes might make the road to his fifth overall title easier. “For sure in the speed disciplines, there are more favorites for victory, so hopefully they are going to take points from each other,” Hirscher said of his rivals.Aside from Svindal and Jansrud, Hirscher faces another obstacle: himself. He admits that he has found it challenging at times to continue summoning the motivation to train and ski at such a high level year after year.“If you have a dream and you have already reached it, it’s not so easy to find motivation for it. My biggest dream was to be once the overall World Cup champion. I reached it,” he said. “What is more motivating: To reach your biggest goal or that you have already reached it?”Negotiating the physical and emotional demands of his success has been one of Hirscher’s biggest challenges over the past four years. “For a long, long time, ski racing was everything, but now there are more things in life that are important, more important than ski racing,” he said.This new, more balanced approach is reflected in how Hirscher spent his summer. He kayaked in whitewater, rode dirt bikes and earned a license to drive race cars. He took more time off from skiing and didn’t do any super-G or downhill training. Instead of traveling to South America to train on snow, as he has in years past, he stayed in Europe. “Going to South America costs me a lot of mental and physical strength, and it wasn’t worth it this year,” Hirscher said. “That’s why I didn’t go.”In Sunday’s season-opening race, a giant slalom, he finished 0.17 seconds behind Ted Ligety of the United States, who earned a record fourth win in Sölden. “I’m super happy because I had a weird prep period, and to be on the podium is a sign of excellence,” Hirscher said after the race.Hirscher’s rivals have no doubts that he’ll be a front-runner for the overall title this season. “Hirscher was unbeatable in slalom last year. In G.S., he was faster than Ted Ligety, who is the best G.S. skier in the world,” said Alexander Khoroshilov, a Russian skier who placed third in the 2015 World Cup slalom standings. “It will be hard for anyone to beat him this year for the overall.”And while Hirscher’s approach to ski racing may have changed, his desire to win has not wavered.“I still want to be the best, and this is always the same.”Advertisement