AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartOn Nov. 15, 2014, Georgia running back Todd Gurley tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee in a game against Auburn. That turned out to be the last game of his impressive collegiate career. A junior, he declared for the N.F.L. draft one month later. The St. Louis Rams, undeterred by Gurley’s injury, selected him with the 10th overall pick, the highest draft selection used on any running back in three years.It has not taken Gurley long to make the Rams look smart. He has been dominant in his last three games, rushing 68 times for 433 yards and two touchdowns. That translates to a spectacular 6.37-yards-per-carry average, and he also caught six passes for 50 yards over that stretch.Gurley turned 21 in August. He is now the youngest player to rush for 125 or more yards in three consecutive games since at least 1960. Despite not getting his first N.F.L. start until Week 4, Gurley is already making history. He is the first rookie in the N.F.L. since Eric Dickerson, in 1983, to rush for 125 yards and average at least 5 yards per carry three times in his team’s first eight games. Dickerson, a Hall of Famer, was also a Ram.The Rams have had one of the league’s most underwhelming offenses for years. St. Louis had seven different players lead the team in receiving yards over the last seven seasons, and the team has not had a player gain 800 receiving yards since Torry Holt in 2007. This season, the Rams’ leading receiver is Kenny Britt, who has 224 yards; the other 31 N.F.L. teams each have at least one player with 290 receiving yards.As a result, the success of the offense over the final two months of the year will rest on the shoulders and legs of Gurley. Eleven months ago, it would have been hard to imagine that any N.F.L. team would be relying so heavily on Gurley so soon, but he has proved to be the exception to more rules than one.When Coach Jeff Fisher arrived in St. Louis in 2012, he was expected to bring his brand of power football to the Midwest. But until Gurley, no Rams player had rushed 100 yards in three straight games in Fisher’s tenure. With one of the league’s most talented defenses and a star running back, Fisher may finally be capable of duplicating the success he achieved with the Titans.A.F.C. South Is Still BleakFrom 2010 to 2014, the A.F.C. South was the worst division in football. The Houston Texans, the Indianapolis Colts, the Jacksonville Jaguars and the Tennessee Titans won just 38 percent of all interdivision games in that five-year period, the worst rate among the league’s eight divisions. The next-worst division by this method was the N.F.C. East, but teams in that division still won 46.5 percent of all games against the rest of the league. During this period, a league-high six teams in the A.F.C. South finished a season with four or fewer wins.But this year, the division may reach a new low. Through seven weeks, the four teams in the A.F.C. South have won just four of 19 games outside the division. That puts the division 11 games below .500 in interdivision games. That is the second-worst performance in the last 30 years and the worst by any division through seven weeks since the N.F.C. East began the season 4-17 in 1998.The Jaguars are responsible for two of those four wins, with victories over the Dolphins in Week 2 and the Bills in London on Sunday. The other two wins came against Tampa Bay, by Tennessee in Week 1 and by Houston in Week 3.Since 1970, the worst record by the teams in any division in nondivision games is 10-30, set by the 2008 N.F.C. West. Given the way the A.F.C. South teams are trending, that record for futility is in jeopardy.The Titans won by 28 points in Week 1 against Tampa Bay, but Tennessee has been outscored by 48 points and gone 0-5 since. The Texans trailed, 41-0 and 42-0, before finally scoring in their last two games against nondivision opponents. The Jaguars, while making strides on offense, have allowed 120 points in the team’s last three nondivision games. And the Colts? While Indianapolis sits atop the division with a 3-4 record, the Colts are 0-4 in interdivision play.The only hope for the division would be for its young quarterbacks to improve. The A.F.C. South and the N.F.C. South are the only divisions with three starting quarterbacks who were top-three N.F.L. draft picks, but Andrew Luck, Marcus Mariota and Blake Bortles have all been inconsistent this year. Luck has played at a Pro Bowl level before, while Mariota and Bortles have shown flashes of greatness. In the long term, the future may be bright for these teams, but in the short term, this is going to remain the worst division in football.Advertisement