AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken Belson and Joe DrapeLONDON — The N.F.L. has long opposed sports betting and has more recently declined to invest in, or officially embrace, the daily fantasy sports websites that have caught on with fans in the United States and blanketed game broadcasts with advertising.But in Britain, where sports betting is legal, and which is now host to three N.F.L. regular-season games a season, the line is, well, blurry.The N.F.L. signed a three-year deal that allows one of the major daily fantasy sports companies, DraftKings, which has been deemed a gambling outfit here, to post advertisements at Wembley Stadium, where the games are played, but with a caveat. It can post its logo with each replay shown in the second quarter on the big screens at Wembley, but not on signboards near the field, so television viewers in the United States cannot see them.Likewise, the N.F.L. required that the sports betting machines at Wembley be turned off during games, but fans here Sunday happily placed bets from their seats on mobile phones or at a betting parlor near the grounds.DraftKings, which made the marketing push ahead of its plans to open for business in Britain in the near future, did win out on something more innocuous: It got a choice spot to hand out foam fingers with its logo to some of the 80,000-plus fans who made their way into the stadium.The N.F.L., whose players and games form the backbone of the sites’ virtual contests, has long walked a delicate line, at once trying to tap fantasy fans’ rabid appetite for football while trying to keep an arm’s length between itself and this unregulated industry, which is increasingly under scrutiny.Daily fantasy sports games are not considered gambling in the United States because of an exemption to a federal law. The exemption was pushed for by the N.F.L., which opposes gambling out of the fear that it could compromise real games.So the league is left with a seemingly contradictory posture that becomes particularly glaring as it tries to expand beyond the United States, into places like Britain, where sports betting is permitted.Daily fantasy’s popularity has flourished as millions of people flock to sites in which users pay an entrance fee, draw up their own “roster” of players for virtual contests, and win cash based on the actual performances of athletes on the field.In the United States, federal and state agencies have begun inquiries into the practices of daily fantasy websites, which are valued at more than $2 billion. The agencies want to know if players have been duped by aggressive solicitation or the use of insider information by employees of the sites. At the same time, lawmakers and some states see a resemblance to Internet gambling and are pushing to prohibit the games or regulate them.The question of whether daily fantasy sports is gambling is settled in Britain: DraftKings had to get a gaming license to operate, a regulatory necessity that critics of the industry have seized upon.“By maintaining a gambling license in the U.K., DraftKings is directly admitting the obvious: Daily fantasy sports is gambling,” said Representative Frank Pallone Jr., Democrat of New Jersey, who has asked Congress to explore the relationship between fantasy sports and gambling. “The N.F.L.’s acceptance of sports betting — as long as it isn’t in the U.S. — is yet another example of the league engaging blatant hypocrisy by supporting and investing in fantasy sports betting while opposing sports betting at casinos and the tracks.”Mr. Pallone and Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, intend to ask the Federal Trade Commission to investigate not only the practices of daily fantasy companies, but also any ties between the industry and professional sports leagues, players and employees of the leagues.“If employees of fantasy sports games should not be allowed to play the games due to the potential use of insider information, then certainly neither should those who actually run, catch, throw or kick the ball,” Mr. Menendez said.The N.F.L. allows its players to participate in fantasy contests as long as the stakes do not exceed $250. Brian McCarthy, a league spokesman, said it required all N.F.L. employees — players, coaches and team and league staff — to certify each year that they have received and read league policies and understand them.“It is every employee’s responsibility to comply with N.F.L. policies and to report to the N.F.L. any known or suspected violations,” Mr. McCarthy said. “If there is reason to believe any employee has violated any league policy, we would look into the matter.”The N.F.L., which on Sunday will play its third and final London game of the season, tiptoed around questions about its complicated relationship with DraftKings in Britain. An N.F.L. spokesman in New York would say only that the marketing deal was struck by the league’s representatives in Britain, where conditions are different. A spokesman for the N.F.L. in London declined to discuss the link.Football fans here are befuddled by the American restrictions on sports betting and the controversy daily fantasy sites have caused.“I don’t understand it, given everything else you can get your hands on,” said Joe Cunningham, a 26-year-old Packers fan from Leeds.He put a 10-pound ($15-$16) bet on the Jaguars to win before Sunday’s game. Though he plays the less contentious season-long fantasy games, which do not yield the rapid, high-dollar payouts in dispute in the United States, he said daily fantasy did not appeal to him.DraftKings is hoping to milk the sports-crazed market here, but its potential fan base requires an education on how football teams are composed. The “drafting” of players and even the name of the company can be confusing.“Draft here means beer or conscription,” said Jeffrey Haas, who is spearheading DraftKings’ expansion in Britain, adding that the word “draft” would be changed to “selection process.”He said that in the long term he hoped to persuade about 10 percent of the 8.5 million British N.F.L. fans who play season-long fantasy football to try the daily fantasy version.“Consumers have a lot more choice here than they do in the U.S. and it’s going to be a challenge for us to resonate with sports bettors,” he said. “We need to go through an education process because our category does not exist in any substantial way in the U.K. yet.”The N.F.L.’s ambiguous relationship with daily fantasy goes back to the websites’ origins.In the United States, a 2006 federal law aimed at eliminating online gambling exempted fantasy sports after lobbying from the N.F.L. and other sports leagues convinced legislators that the games did not constitute gambling, but required skill and were vital to driving up interest in their games.In fact, a previous N.F.L. commissioner, Paul Tagliabue, and the current one, Roger Goodell, lobbied lawmakers for the exemption.“When Tagliabue came in, it was to encourage and thank,” said a Capitol Hill staff member who worked at the center of the drafting of the legislation and who requested anonymity because he is still working on related issues. “Goodell came in when the regulations were being implemented.”Mr. Goodell joined ESPN’s “Mike and Mike” show Tuesday and reiterated the N.F.L.’s strong stance against legalized sports gambling. The professional leagues, along with the N.C.A.A., have opposed New Jersey’s effort to offer legalized sports betting at its casinos and racetracks.“We’re not in favor of legalizing sports gambling,” Mr. Goodell said. “We think that’s a mistake for sports. The integrity of the game is the most important thing. We want to make sure that our game is above any kind of influence. We do not want to participate in that. That’s something we’ve had a longstanding position — we continue to have that.”Mr. Goodell was more muted on the N.F.L.’s position on daily fantasy sports, but he seemed to join Robert Manfred, the commissioner of Major League Baseball, and Adam Silver, the commissioner of the N.B.A., in welcoming regulation of the industry.While nearly every N.F.L. team has a sponsorship deal with DraftKings or FanDuel and two powerful N.F.L. owners — Jerry Jones of the Dallas Cowboys and Robert K. Kraft of the New England Patriots — have equity stakes in the companies, the league has kept a distance from daily fantasy football operators in America even as Major League Baseball and other leagues have invested in them.“Whether it’s gambling or not, it’s a decision made by state authorities, attorneys general — they’ve made that determination,” Mr. Goodell said. “We do understand our fans are interested in playing daily fantasy. We just want to protect our fans and make sure there’s proper consumer protection in there for them, and we’ve encouraged that and we think it’s important that our fans have that protection.”In Britain, fans take such protections for granted because sports betting is heavily regulated. In their minds, daily fantasy football is gambling and therefore no problem at all.“We already have sports betting, so we’re pretty much used to it,” said Liam Teague, a Saints fan from Brighton who attended an N.F.L. fan fest in London and is part of a season-long fantasy football league.Daily fantasy is “the new thing,” he said. “It’s a matter of time that we turn to this.”Ken Belson reported from London, and Joe Drape from New York.Advertisement