AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinThe angry shouts and threats coming from the visitors’ dugout after the first pitch of Game 3 of the World Series were the initial reactions from the Kansas City Royals.After a 9-3 loss, the Royals expressed their outrage at Noah Syndergaard, whose initial offering sizzled past the head of Alcides Escobar at 97 miles per hour, sending Escobar to the dirt.As Escobar sat in the batter’s box, legs apart, trying to regain his composure, several players on the Royals’ bench shouted at Syndergaard, among them third baseman Mike Moustakas, whose agitated, expletive-laden spew was caught on television.“I think the whole team was pretty upset,” Moustakas said. “The first pitch of the game goes whizzing by the leadoff man’s head. Whatever it was, that’s what happened. I don’t think I was the only one upset in the dugout. All 25 guys in the dugout were pretty fired up.”The Royals were convinced that Syndergaard had thrown the perilous pitch on purpose — he did not deny it — and their evidence was that he had telegraphed his intentions the day before when he said he had “a few tricks” up his sleeve.“He threw at his head,” Royals first baseman Eric Hosmer said. “He said he came up with a master plan; he had a way to figure out the aggression. Throwing at a guy’s head, that’s not the way to go about it.”When asked how the Royals should respond, Hosmer answered in a way that could be seen as a threat of retaliation.“The game will find a way to make that go away,” he said, “and find a way to maybe think of our own master plan. Who knows?”Escobar had one hit in Game 1, a first-pitch, inside-the-park home run, and two in Game 2. He set a Royals record with 21 postseason hits, including a hit in Game 3. He has also been swinging at first-pitch fastballs, including six of them in his 10 at-bats in the first two games.Syndergaard said his intention had not been to hit Escobar but to throw inside and discourage him and, by extension, the rest of the Royals from being aggressive at the plate. Escobar called the pitch stupid, and Syndergaard replied that if the Royals felt the urge, they were invited to come fight him.“If they have a problem with me throwing inside, they can meet me at 60 feet 6 inches away,” Syndergaard said, referring to the distance between home plate and the pitcher’s rubber. “I’ve got no problem with that.”The Royals also expressed their displeasure with Syndergaard by refusing to credit him with a well-pitched game. He allowed three runs and seven hits while striking out six in six innings.Moustakas said Syndergaard had simply been “O.K.,” before adding that the rookie right-hander was “pretty good.”Hosmer added that if Syndergaard had not had the benefit of an offensive outburst by the Mets, he most likely would have taken a loss.“We did a good job of getting to him, but his offense did a good job of bailing him out,” Hosmer said. “They found some momentum to pick him up there in the late innings.”Advertisement