AdvertisementSupported byMets 9, Royals 320 PhotosView Slide Show ›Richard Perry/The New York TimesBy Tim RohanThe first pitch came out of Noah Syndergaard’s right hand at 97 miles per hour and zipped past the head of Alcides Escobar, the Royals’ leadoff hitter, who had tormented the Mets in the World Series. Escobar dived out of the way, fell to the ground and sat in the batter’s box for several moments, trying to gather himself while toying with his bat.Mike Moustakas, the Royals’ third baseman, shouted expletives toward Syndergaard from the dugout.This was a premeditated attempt to make a statement. Syndergaard knew that Escobar had a knack for crushing first-pitch fastballs this postseason, including one for an inside-the-park home run in Game 1. Before the game, Syndergaard told catcher Travis d’Arnaud that he wanted to go high and tight with the first pitch.“I didn’t think he’d want to swing at that one,” Syndergaard said.Syndergaard wanted to attack the Royals, make them feel uncomfortable — a feat that Matt Harvey and Jacob deGrom had failed to accomplish in Games 1 and 2, as the Mets lost the first two games of the series in Kansas City.After a few shaky innings, Syndergaard bullied the Royals, and Curtis Granderson and David Wright each belted a two-run homer as the Mets throttled Kansas City, 9-3, on Friday at Citi Field to take Game 3.Steven Matz will try to even the series in Game 4 on Saturday, with the Mets trailing, two games to one.As the night started, the Mets held out hope, because Syndergaard was pitching. Fans flooded the park dressed as Thor, wielding hammers in honor of Syndergaard’s nickname. This was the Mets’ first World Series game at home in 15 years. Billy Joel sang the national anthem. Mike Piazza threw out the first pitch. Then Syndergaard brushed back Escobar.This moment had seemingly been brewing over the first two games. The Royals had routinely pitched Daniel Murphy, who had hit seven home runs in the postseason, inside to disrupt his rhythm. On Thursday, Syndergaard said that he had “a few tricks up my sleeve” for pitching to Escobar.“He said yesterday he had a plan for Escobar,” Escobar said after the game. “That’s not a good plan. If you want to throw me inside, throw me down. Don’t throw to my head.”The Royals did not seem fazed. They scored three runs in the first two innings: one on a passed ball by Travis d’Arnaud, another on a botched double-play attempt that ended with Syndergaard and Lucas Duda colliding as they both tried to cover first base.After Escobar singled for the Royals’ fourth hit of the second inning, Syndergaard angrily slapped his glove against his hip. After that, Syndergaard retired the next 12 Royals in order, getting ahead in the count using his breaking ball and then firing his electric fastball.“I don’t think they could just sit on one pitch in the third inning on,” Manager Terry Collins said.It helped that the Mets’ offense gave Syndergaard a lead and he could continue to attack the Royals. In his first World Series at-bat in New York, Wright slugged a two-run homer. Granderson clubbed another two-run blast in the third. Syndergaard had singled ahead of Granderson and looked relieved and ecstatic celebrating at home plate.After Game 2 in Kansas City, a group of reporters approached Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach, when he left the clubhouse. Harvey, deGrom and Syndergaard had never pitched this much in their professional lives. Warthen was asked whether they had hit a wall.“No, no,” he said, firmly. “I still think we’re going to win this thing.”Part of his confidence came from the fact that Syndergaard was starting Game 3. Warthen and Syndergaard had worked extensively late in the season on his delivery, on his grip, so that he would trust his off-speed pitches. In four playoff appearances, Syndergaard has struck out 24 batters in 18 innings and has looked as if he has had more stamina than deGrom or Harvey.Even in the sixth, when Syndergaard walked two consecutive batters to load the bases and give the Royals hope, he responded by throwing a biting slider that Alex Rios dribbled to short for the last out. Syndergaard walked off the mound with his fist clenched. He left with a 5-3 lead after striking out six batters.Once the Mets gained the lead, and Syndergaard started establishing himself, the Royals made a few mental mistakes. In the fourth, with no outs and two runners on, Michael Conforto hit a chopper between first base and second. Eric Hosmer, the first baseman, ranged over for the ball and turned to see no one covering first base. Panic spread over his face. Hosmer sprinted and dived for the bag, but Conforto beat him there, and another run scored.Then, in the bottom of the sixth, with two runners on and one out, the Royals suffered one last indignity. Franklin Morales fielded a chopper from Granderson and looked utterly confused about what to do. He looked home and then to third, and then spun and made a wild throw to second base. All runners were safe.“Franklin said he heard Salvy say, ‘Home,’ ” Royals Manager Ned Yost said, referring to catcher Salvador Perez. “So he stopped and turned, and it was a mess from that point.”It looked like the type of blunder the Mets, not the Royals, had been making in tense situations like these. The Royals conferred on the mound, trying to regroup. But Wright punched a single into center field, scoring two more runs to put the game out of reach.Starting with that first pitch of the night, when the Mets proved to be the aggressors, the Royals stuttered in response.Advertisement