By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 30, 2015
Washington Redskins wide receiver Pierre Garcon filed a class-action lawsuit against the popular daily fantasy sports website FanDuel on Friday, accusing it of profiting off his name and likeness without permission.The lawsuit filed in federal court in Maryland, where the Redskins play their home games, is the latest legal challenge to the lucrative daily fantasy industry, which has attracted scrutiny since a multimillion-dollar advertising blitz at the start of the N.F.L. season.Garcon’s suit said FanDuel has repeatedly used his name and likeness in its television ads and on its website without his consent. Garcon said that he and other players should be compensated by FanDuel for the use of their names, which he says has driven up revenue for the company.Garcon said in a statement that he was bringing the lawsuit “on behalf of myself as well as any other players who are being treated unjustly.”AdvertisementThe lawsuit said that Garcon’s name appeared frequently in FanDuel commercials, including a 28-minute infomercial in which his name is seen 53 times.Advertisement“We believe this suit is without merit,” FanDuel said in a statement. “There is established law that fantasy operators may use player names and statistics for fantasy contests.”Members of Congress have called for hearings into the daily fantasy sports industry, and FanDuel and its chief rival, DraftKings, have attracted the attention of regulators in several states. Revelations that employees of the two companies often played on competing sites have raised questions about possible insider information being used to win.FanDuel has a marketing partnership with the Redskins, who have a “FanDuel lounge” at their home stadium, FedEx Field in Landover, Md. DraftKings has a partnership with the N.F.L. players’ union that allows it to use player names and likenesses.LINEMAN SAID TO MAKE THREATS The former Chicago Bears defensive lineman Jeremiah Ratliff threatened team employees and said he “felt like killing everybody in the building” the day before he was cut, according to a police report released Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The police in Lake Forest, Ill., said in the report, which was dated Oct. 21, that Ratliff also said “I am the devil” and that he wished staff members’ children would die. It said an officer responded to Halas Hall, the Bears’ headquarters, because of a report that Ratliff was “very angry and irrational.” He was seen that day having an animated discussion with General Manager Ryan Pace in the parking lot outside Halas Hall.The Bears cut Ratliff on Oct. 22, the day after the episode. Coach John Fox was asked Friday how much of a threat he felt. “As I commented early in the week, we were concerned for the building, and that’s why the police were called,” Fox said.Fox said that there had been no previous incidents with Ratliff and that he did not know why Ratliff was so upset.The person who called the police said that there was “concern for the safety of staff on the property” and that it was believed Ratliff “owns multiple firearms.”AdvertisementMARIOTA TO MISS TEXANS GAME Quarterback Marcus Mariota will miss a second straight game Sunday because of a knee injury, the Tennessee Titans said. Zach Mettenberger will start at Houston. Mariota, who sprained the medial collateral ligament in his left knee Oct. 17 against the Miami Dolphins, may return to action on Nov. 8 when the Titans play at New Orleans.49ERS’ HYDE SIDELINED San Francisco 49ers running back Carlos Hyde has been ruled out of Sunday’s game at the St. Louis Rams because of an injured left foot. Hyde is the ninth-leading rusher in the N.F.L. with 470 yards on 115 carries. He also has three touchdowns.DOLPHINS LOSE WAKE Miami Dolphins defensive end Cameron Wake has a torn left Achilles’ tendon that will end his season. Wake was hurt in Thursday’s loss at New England, and it is possible that Wake, a four-time Pro Bowl end, has played his final game for Miami. Wake has a cap number of $9.8 million in 2016, and Miami could save $8.4 million in cap space by cutting him.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: In Suit, Garcon Says FanDuel Is Using His Name Without Permission.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.