By TIM ROHANOCT. 30, 2015
Facing a two-games-to-none deficit in the World Series, Manager Terry Collins met with his coaching staff Friday to discuss the Mets’ lineup for Game 3. Their offense had managed only two hits in Game 2 and was in desperate need of a lift. Most important, they had to decide which of their outfielders would start against Yordano Ventura, the Royals’ right-handed starter.According to Collins, they unanimously decided to stick with their usual lineup against right-handers, which meant that Michael Conforto, the struggling rookie, would start in perhaps the most important game of the season.“If you show panic now, it could spread in the clubhouse,” Collins said, “and I’m not going to do that. I like our lineup. I like what they’ve done all year long.”When the lineup flashed on the video board during batting practice, the average next to Conforto’s name looked like a misprint: .050. He had tallied one hit in 20 playoff at-bats, albeit a home run off Zack Greinke in the division series.AdvertisementIn recent days, Collins has defended Conforto, saying that the Mets’ advanced statistics showed that he was making hard contact but was just experiencing a bit of bad luck. “This guy has had very, very good at-bats and has nothing to show for it,” Collins insisted.Like the Mets’ acquisitions at the trade deadline, Conforto’s arrival in July provided the Mets a real lift. In 56 games during the regular season, he batted .270 and compiled 23 extra-base hits and 26 R.B.I., which was particularly impressive considering he had been playing college baseball the year before.AdvertisementConforto was not the only young Met who appeared to be growing fatigued in this series. Matt Harvey and Jacob deGrom had so-so starts and, entering Game 3, Conforto, Travis d’Arnaud and Wilmer Flores had combined to bat 1 for 21 and strike out three times. Conforto also made a defensive gaffe in Game 1 that led to Alcides Escobar’s inside-the-park home run.“We certainly can’t put what we’re doing offensively on the shoulders of Michael Conforto,” Collins said. “He goes up there and every time he gets in the batter’s box, you think he’s going to hit one in the seats.”VOLQUEZ EXPECTED TO RETURN Edinson Volquez, the Royals pitcher who traveled to the Dominican Republic on Wednesday for his father’s funeral, was expected to rejoin the team Saturday and pitch in Game 5 on Sunday, if necessary.Ned Yost, the Royals’ manager, said Volquez had texted the pitching coach Dave Eiland to tell him that he would arrive on Saturday.“We should see Eddie tomorrow,” Yost said before Game 3. “He’ll be ready to go.”Volquez pitched Game 1 on Tuesday just hours after his father, Daniel Volquez, died. But the Royals said they did not tell him, at his family’s request, before the game. Volquez was given the news shortly after he came off the mound after the sixth inning and returned to the clubhouse.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Volquez gave up three runs and six hits but did not figure in the decision as the Royals won in 14 innings. He went 13-9 this season with a 3.55 E.R.A. He is 2-5 in his career against the Mets in the regular season with a 5.70 E.R.A. In four starts at Citi Field, he is 0-3 with a 5.66 E.R.A. DAVID WALDSTEINAdvertisementFIRST PITCH FROM PIAZZA Mike Piazza threw out the ceremonial first pitch — a bit outside — before Game 3 and said he was energized by the atmosphere in the stadium.“It was great to hear the fans and see their faces, and the energy was really, really amazing,” he said. “Hopefully it will get us going, get us some runs.”Piazza played in the Mets’ last World Series, a five-game loss to the Yankees in 2000, and made the final out on a fly ball to center fielder Bernie Williams. Piazza said this Mets team had more going for it than his team.“I think they are a really talented bunch, and they played so well down the stretch and into the postseason,” Piazza said. “It’s a challenge where they are right now, but if anyone can do it, they can. They are really talented.”Speaking just moments after tossing the first pitch, Piazza stressed that the Mets still had a chance, before rushing up to a suite to watch the game.“You have to win one before you win two,” he said. “Tonight’s a really big ballgame. I’m excited. I need a drink.”  DAVID WALDSTEINA version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets’ Coaches Favor Consistency, Keeping Conforto in the Lineup.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »