AdvertisementSupported byBy Melissa HoppertLEXINGTON, Ky. — On Wednesday afternoon, after steady rain had pelted the Keeneland racecourse for several days, the trainer Bob Baffert and his team left Barn 62, where the Triple Crown winner American Pharoah was under the careful watch of the National Guard, to see what condition the racetrack was in.They hopped fences and climbed hills, determined to get a feel for what their champion colt was up against during morning training. As they walked, they made small talk — about Baffert’s flat tire earlier in the morning, about what they might find when they reached the top.There was no acknowledgment of the moment hanging over them like a dark cloud: After American Pharoah races in the Breeders’ Cup Classic on Saturday, he will leave their barn forever for a lucrative career in the breeding shed.Yet there was no getting around this fact. Coolmore’s Ashford Stud, for which American Pharoah will stand, made certain of that by putting up a billboard on a road leading to Keeneland that declares its new prized stallion the Eighth Wonder of the World.But first, American Pharoah has a race to run. In the $5 million Classic, he will face older horses for the first time and will try to punctuate a remarkable career in which he won eight of 10 races and captured the first Triple Crown in 37 years.This race means even more to his connections because of what transpired in his last start, in the Travers Stakes on Aug. 29, when he was caught by Keen Ice in the deep stretch.As American Phraroah’s popularity grew, his followers began tracking his flights, referring to the planes as Air Horse One.“He was in trouble early; I could tell that,” Baffert said in recalling the Travers. “He didn’t have his energy. At the top of the stretch, I thought he was just going to run fourth or fifth. But that showed how gutsy he is. He just has so much will. He didn’t want to lose.”But he did lose. At the time, with the defeat hanging over them like a funeral pall, the heart that American Pharoah displayed was of little consolation.“When he got beat, it was just crushing,” Baffert said, adding that it had been especially hard for his wife, Jill, and his son Bode. “It’s like watching your kid get beat.”After the race, American Pharoah’s heartbroken owner, Ahmed Zayat, said his gut feeling was to retire him. But after a consultation with Baffert and his team, they decided to follow through with the original plan: American Pharoah would wrap up his racing career in the Breeders’ Cup Classic.It is perhaps fitting that American Pharoah’s final race will come in the heart of the Bluegrass State at bucolic Keeneland, which is hosting its first world championships despite being in the epicenter of the horse racing industry. With Keeneland’s lush green hills providing a magnificent backdrop, organizers of the Breeders’ Cup have rolled out the purple carpet for the horse who has given the sport the shot in the arm it so sorely needed.American Pharoah has also enriched the lives of his team. Zayat has benefited from big purses and multiple sponsorships; Baffert has become a bona fide celebrity outside the racing circuit; and the jockey Victor Espinoza was on “Dancing With the Stars.”“I didn’t even know I could move my hips that well — that was about the only thing I could do,” said a laughing Espinoza, who was eliminated after his second performance. “It’s a lot easier to ride horses, because that’s my job. It was basically like learning how to walk, and that’s not easy.”Espinoza realizes he would not have been on the show if not for American Pharoah.“It’s an amazing feeling that I’m the one who won the Triple Crown after 37 years,” Espinoza said. “For me, it’s an honor to say that I was the jockey who rode American Pharoah.”Even the lesser-known people who have played important roles in the colt’s success, like the assistant trainer Jimmy Barnes, the exercise rider Jorge Alvarez and the groom Eduardo Luna, have become recognizable and sought-after figures.For Alvarez, the Belmont Stakes was the highlight of his run with American Pharoah, who won the final leg of the Triple Crown by five and a half lengths.“We all knew he was training really well, but you just don’t know,” said Alvarez, who was a jockey in Tijuana, Mexico, before coming to the United States and becoming an exercise rider. “Then the way he did it. I looked back, and I saw everybody screaming and crying.”Baffert’s home base at Santa Anita Park in Arcadia, Calif., has been a bundle of energy since American Pharoah won the Crown. Every day brings more visitors who want to catch a glimpse of the champion colt. Lurkers have become so commonplace that when American Pharoah lost in the Travers and the number of visitors slowed to a trickle, Baffert wondered what was going on.“After he got beat, everything sort of got quiet,” he said. “If he would have won, it still would have been crazy.”Now, there is an empty stall where American Pharoah used to reside at Santa Anita. Baffert, who has a live video feed of the stall on his phone, said he was dreading returning home and seeing it empty.Barnes said: “When I come to the barn, he’s right near my office. He’s one of the first horses I check every morning for the last year and a half. The hardest thing is going to be deciding who to put in his stall. Because you don’t want to put just a horse in there; you want to put a good one.”Although American Pharoah will stay in Kentucky, he might not head straight to Ashford as was initially reported. He could remain under Baffert’s care through November, and the team wants to throw him a proper going-away party. It may be held at Churchill Downs in Louisville, but details are being worked out.Still, that is good news for the team members, who get more time to say goodbye.“I think it’s going to be hard on everybody that works for me,” Baffert said. “He’s been such a pleasure to have around. He’s like a pet; he’s just that sweet. He’s pretty spoiled, too.”Alvarez added: “It will be very different when he’s gone. It will be a little difficult for all of us. He’s my motivation when I get up every morning.”For now, those who know American Pharoah best want to think only about putting him in a position to win his final race. But if he does not win on Saturday, that is O.K., too.“I don’t feel that kind of racing pressure,” Baffert said. “I had a lot of pressure for the Derby; felt a lot for the Haskell. It was very important that he didn’t lose his next race after the Belmont, because that would have just taken the air out of it.”It was an uphill climb to get to this point, but the team members have savored every second of it. It will hard to say goodbye, but, he said, they can always visit.“I think it will be sad and hard, but in a way, I think it’s the best thing for him,” Espinoza said. “The last thing I would want is for him to get hurt on the track, because that would be my nightmare. Hopefully everything goes well in the Breeders’ Cup, and he comes out safe — that’s the most important thing. He deserves to be retired and have a great life on the farm. After such a long campaign — and he changed a lot of people’s lives, including mine — I think it’s time.”Advertisement