By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 30, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  Alternately smiling and somber, Giants defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul said Friday that he felt lucky to be alive after a Fourth of July fireworks accident caused the amputation of his right index finger and severely damaged his right thumb and middle finger.“I’m just very fortunate that I’m alive,” Pierre-Paul said in his first comments to the news media since the accident. “I’m just fortunate to have a hand.”During the hospitalization for his injuries, he said, he was near others with Fourth of July-related wounds.“I saw a kid die at the age of 12 years old,” Pierre-Paul said. “One they had to cut off his whole finger.”AdvertisementHe added that “there were probably 12 people in that hospital” with similar injuries and that his hand was “the best one.”AdvertisementPierre-Paul declined to be specific about his accident, although he said he had set off fireworks on the holiday for the past six or seven years for children around his South Florida neighborhood.“Things happen, mistakes happen, incidents happen,” he said.Asked for his initial reaction when the fireworks injured his hand, he replied: “I wasn’t worried at all. I wasn’t in shock or nothing. I looked at my hand and my fiancée was going crazy, but I kept calm through the whole situation.”Pierre-Paul indicated there was more to the story, which he said he planned to tell at a later date. He said Friday was not the right time to be more revealing because he wanted to focus on helping the Giants win games.Asked if he was suggesting that the accident was not his fault, Pierre-Paul replied: “No, I’m not saying that. By me buying the fireworks, it was my fault.”He was aware that he had been harshly criticized and mocked nationwide for actions and decisions that have so far cost him millions in salary. But he did not agree with those sentiments.“I wasn’t embarrassed by nothing,” he said. “People are going to have their own opinions. But I didn’t care about none of that because I knew one way or another, I was going to return back to football. Just coming back to the Giants, I’ve already won.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pierre-Paul, who rubbed his left hand across his surgically reconstructed right hand repeatedly as he spoke for 12 minutes with reporters at his locker, was making no predictions about how effective he would be as a football player. But he defiantly announced that he felt no different from before. He is expected to play next month.“I am the Jason Pierre-Paul I was last year,” he said. “The skill set is the same. It’s not going to be a major adjustment. As far as like my hand goes, I’ll get used to it.”AdvertisementThe Giants rank second to last in the N.F.L. in quarterback sacks this season.“Just looking at the games, you can tell they needed a pass rusher,” said Pierre-Paul, who will wear a special glove while playing.Laughing, he said: “Of course, it’s a special glove. I’m missing an index finger.”Pierre-Paul denied rebuffing Giants medical personnel who arrived at his hospital shortly after his accident.“You can’t do nothing when you’re on anesthesia, waking up, going in and out” of consciousness, he said. “I had no reason not to let them in. I just didn’t know.“I don’t know who was making my decisions. It could’ve been the doctors.”When pressed on why he stayed out of touch with the Giants for months after the accident, Pierre-Paul responded, “Next question.”Later, he credited the Giants for being “a very caring organization.”“They did a great job handling it,” he said. “I thank them for giving me a second chance.”Not surprisingly, Pierre-Paul added that his days exploding fireworks on the Fourth of July were over.“As far as fireworks, they’re very dangerous,” he said. “You shouldn’t play with them. Because it had been seven years I did it and it just went off.“You live and learn. People make mistakes. We’re all human. We’re all people.”A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘I’ll Get Used to It,’ Pierre-Paul Says of His Injured Hand.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.