By DAN BARRYOCT. 30, 2015
You might have missed this — and who could blame you if you had? — but Representatives Grace Meng of New York and Lynn Jenkins of Kansas have a bet riding on the World Series. So look out, constituents: Things can get crazy when elected officials try to act all humanlike.Meng, from Queens, is backing the Mets, of course, and Jenkins is for the Kansas City Royals. The particulars of their bet call for the losing lawmaker to don the winning team’s jersey and be photographed in said jersey while congratulating the winner of the bet — thus ensuring preservation of another politician’s awkward smile for posterity.According to a joint news release, Jenkins “laughed”: “The Mets have some decent pitching, but as Rex Hudler” — a television commentator for the Royals and a former baseball player — “always says, you can’t sneak a piece of cheese by a hungry rat.”To which Meng “quipped”: “There are some things we can agree on in Congress, but that does not include the World Series.”AdvertisementHer gibe, though, raises a question: What are these things on which the dysfunctional Congress supposedly agrees?AdvertisementTheir wager is just one of several that have been made between various elected officials from the two regions, in keeping with a familiar World Series tradition as cheesy as whatever is failing to be sneaked past hungry vermin.For example, Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York and Gov. Jay Nixon of Missouri have also agreed to wear the winning team’s jersey for a full day if their team loses. Presumably this allows for other articles of clothing to be worn as well.But the gubernatorial wager includes additional terms:If the Mets win, Nixon promises to send his New York counterpart various Missouri items of immeasurable worth: a commemorative jersey from the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, a bag of “20th anniversary platinum edition blend coffee” from the Roasterie coffee shop, a Ford F-150 baseball cap and, of course, some Kansas City ribs.If the Royals win, Cuomo will part with the following Empire State treasures: a cap from the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, some bagels from Jrs Bagel factory in Queens, Gianelli’s hot Italian sausage from Central New York and various “craft” beverages.In the news release announcing the bet, both governors spoke in a syntax uncommon to everyday discourse — a kind of release-speak that tracks more like the language of proclamation.“The Mets’ strength, skill and leadership sets them apart from every other team, and their fans are truly without equal,” Cuomo is said to have said. “From my hometown of Queens to stadiums across the country, this team has proved that they have what it takes to clinch the World Series, and I’m confident that is exactly what they will do.”Nixon proved just as release-speak articulate: “The Royals have earned their second consecutive berth in the Fall Classic through strong pitching, discipline at the plate, spectacular defense, and a dedicated fan base at the K” — Kauffman Stadium — “that is second to none. Good as the Metropolitans have been in the postseason, I don’t see them overcoming this playoff-seasoned team.”AdvertisementSenators Chuck Schumer of New York and Claire McCaskill of Missouri are putting their money where their hearts are: a C-note. That’s right, pal: $100.If the Royals win, Schumer promises to tweet a photo of himself wearing a Royals T-shirt while simultaneously riding a bicycle through New York City (impressive only if his biking jaunt includes all five boroughs). If the Mets win, McCaskill pledges to tweet a photo of a Mets flag flying outside her home.In addition, each has pledged a $100 donation — in Schumer’s case, to the MLB Urban Youth Academy in Kansas City, and in McCaskill’s case, to Our Lady of Sorrows Church in Corona, Queens, which is being rebuilt after a devastating fire. Perhaps the senators might consider making these donations no matter who wins.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Given the delight that politicians apparently derive from humiliating others — see Republican Party presidential debates — these wagers are relatively mild. But consider the one agreed upon between the mayors of the two cities, Sly James of Kansas City, Mo., and Bill de Blasio, longtime Boston Red Sox fan, of New York.If the Mets win, James will send the requisite shipment of Kansas City-style barbecued ribs. If the Royals win, de Blasio will send some Junior’s Cheesecake.But wait. There’s more. The Kansas City mayor insisted on upping the ante — as a way to promote the arts of his city — and the New York mayor agreed.If the Royals win, de Blasio will go to a New York ballet school and sing the classic rhythm-and-blues song “Kansas City.” And if the Mets win, James will go to the Kansas City Ballet School and sing “New York, New York” — a song that perhaps you’ve heard before.All these potential moments of humiliation, all these side dishes of crow to be eaten with ribs or cheesecake — it almost makes one wish that both teams could win. Almost.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Strange Bet Fellows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »