AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenIn a city that thrives on big sports moments, Friday’s World Series game between the Mets and the Kansas City Royals at Citi Field was monumental.Game 3 marked the first time in 15 years the Mets had hosted a World Series game. They had made just one playoff appearance in that time until this fall, a lost decade and a half for a franchise known more for its faith-testing lows than the occasional high. For all of the talk about Kansas City being hungry for a title, there is no hungrier, more frustrated fan base than the one backing the Mets.With their team trailing two games to none, the Mets’ faithful, predictably jittery and anxious, came out in force Friday. Some feared the worst, but most cheered their heads off and gave in to the infectious optimism of a historic night.“I understand the frustration,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said Thursday when asked why he took the Mets’ managing job, and what he thought about the challenges inherent in it. “I see it every day. I see it on the streets every day. It’s competitive. It’s dog eat dog. It’s win, not lose.”Friday was a big, big win. More significant in many ways than the Mets’ last World Series appearance, in the 2000 Subway Series against the Yankees. The 2000 Series is a milestone, but the reality is that it also is an unhappy reminder of the futility that no Mets fan celebrates. The Mets dropped that Series four games to one, and they and their fans had to endure watching the Yankees celebrating their championship near the Shea Stadium mound.No, the last truly joyful World Series moment for the Mets was in 1986, when they rallied to win Games 6 and 7 against Boston to claim their last championship.That was joy. It was also nearly 30 years ago. In between there has not been a lot to cheer until this season, when a Mets team led by three young hard-throwing pitchers roared into the postseason.A World Series victory — a feat that seemed unlikely a couple of days ago — can help wash away the bitter taste of seasons past.There was a first-place finish in 2006, and a trip to the National League Championship Series against the Cardinals. But even that happy season brings a grimace to the face of any Mets fan. It ended in the seventh game, at home — when Carlos Beltran looked at a called third strike.A season later the Mets blew a seven-game lead in September and wound up disastrously missing out on the postseason. A year later, they did it again.But there was more than disappointment on the field during this period of mostly darkness. In 2008, the arrest of Bernard L. Madoff, the architect of a far-reaching and devastating Ponzi scheme, pulled the Mets into an off-field scandal. In 2011, the owner Fred Wilpon’s relationship with Madoff came under scrutiny when Wilpon’s company was sued by the trustee for those who had invested with Madoff.Wilpon said he never knew what Madoff was up to; Madoff, from prison, said as much. But the veneer of the benevolent but absent-minded baseball owner gave way to a far less flattering image of a billionaire with ties to one of the shrewdest swindlers in American history. And fans feared the worst, that the scandal would bring down the team.Yet for all of those highs and lows, here the Mets are, a game from pulling even in a Series some of the faithful may have thought was slipping away. After losses in the first two games, agonizing Mets fans wondered what had happened to their unbeatable pitching, overlooking the fact that the Royals had merely held serve. Beginning with Friday’s game, the Mets would have three chances to take a 3-2 lead back to Kansas City. It does not take much to send a fan base that has grown accustomed to losing into dark corners of doubt and second-guessing. This campaign has broken a dismal cycle.At the end of the regular season, as the Mets pulled away from Washington, attention focused on the Mets’ young starting pitchers. Reputations grew, and by the end of a four-game sweep of the Chicago Cubs in the N.L.C.S., the three best young pitchers — Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom and Noah Syndergaard — were declared unhittable.Humility built up over 15 years gave way to confidence and, perhaps, to overconfidence. In two humbling starts in Kansas City, the Mets learned that any pitcher can be hit, just as last fall, against the Giants, the Royals learned that any batter can be silenced.But Kelly Johnson, the veteran Mets infielder, said that the upside of what some might call youthful overconfidence was the ability to forget yesterday and focus on today.“Now guys are so much better mentally,” he said. “If they strike out or have a bad at-bat or a bad game, it’s over with, they’re done. They’re very confident. They come to play, they show up the next day, they wipe the slate clean and they do their work.”For Syndergaard, who won Game 3 on Friday night, the losses in Kansas City were ancient history.Asked before Friday’s game if he would continue the Mets’ tradition of throwing first-pitch strikes to Kansas City’s Alcides Escobar, who famously swings at every first pitch, Syndergaard smiled and said, “I’ve got a few tricks up my sleeve I’ll be able to break out.”He intentionally fired the game’s first pitch over a ducking Escobar’s head. That sent a playful but pointed message to Escobar and the disciplined hitters of the Royals that the Mets intended to seize control of the Series in New York as the Royals had done in Kansas City.“My intent on that pitch was to make them uncomfortable, and I feel like I did just that,” Syndergaard said. He had watched Escobar swing at first-pitch fastballs throughout the postseason. “I didn’t think he wanted to swing at that one.”A number of Royals players let it be known they were not amused by Syndergaard’s first pitch. “I certainly wasn’t trying to hit the guy,” Syndergaard said, referring to Escobar. “I just didn’t want him getting too comfortable. If they have a problem with me throwing inside, then they can meet me 60 feet, 6 inches away. I got no problem with that.”So yes, there is a tradition of frustration for the Mets, but there also is a tradition of digging out. With their three young pitchers and a stable of other contributors, the Mets appear to have dug themselves out of a hole that was 15 years in the making.All things considered, for this team of emerging young stars, seizing control of the Series is not a mission impossible.Advertisement