AdvertisementSupported byBy Rebecca R. RuizA second-division soccer team in North Carolina has cut its ties to the global FIFA scandal. The team, the Carolina RailHawks of the North American Soccer League, announced Friday that it was under new ownership.The RailHawks had been owned by Traffic Sports USA, a Miami-based marketing firm that pleaded guilty in May to wire-fraud conspiracy in United States District Court in connection with the scandal in world soccer. The same month, the United States announced similar criminal charges against Traffic’s owner, José Hawilla, and its president, Aaron Davidson.Both men were accused of paying bribes to global soccer officials to secure lucrative marketing rights to soccer tournaments. Mr. Hawilla pleaded guilty along with Traffic, while Mr. Davidson pleaded not guilty and is out on bail and under house arrest in Miami.On Friday, Curt Johnson, president of the RailHawks, announced that Stephen N. Malik, a local businessman, had bought the team from Traffic. Mr. Malik founded a health care technology company, Medfusion, in 2000; in 2010, he sold it for $91 million.“Steve is exactly who we have been searching for,” Mr. Johnson said. “On Day 1, Steve made it clear that the resources will be there to elevate the organization on and off the field.”In the five seasons that Traffic owned the RailHawks, Mr. Davidson was an active force behind the team, and he had a large role in creating and leading the league in which the team played, serving as chairman of its board of governors until he was indicted in May.RailHawks fans soon learned about the team’s ties to corruption and protested Traffic’s ownership at home games during the summer, waving banners with activist messages, language from the federal indictment and a picture of Mr. Davidson himself.Fans objected to Traffic’s ownership not just out of concern for the team’s public image but also out of concern for its finances. Questions were raised about the team’s future and its ability to re-sign players and honor existing contracts. In August, months after Traffic’s guilty plea, Mr. Johnson said the firm had continued to fulfill its obligations, abiding by an established budget, though he indicated that the RailHawks were seeking a new owner.On Friday, the team got what it had been seeking: a new owner who suggested that he was prepared to put significant resources into in the team. “Our goal is to take the RailHawks to the highest level through additional investment in marketing, players and staffing,” Mr. Malik said.In a statement, Bill Peterson, commissioner of the North American Soccer League, praised Mr. Malik’s purchase of the RailHawks, with no mention of the previous owner.Traffic’s ties to the league, however, may be more enduring. The North American Soccer League has two classes of ownership, according to court records and league employees, and as of August, Traffic was the majority Class B stakeholder, marking it as a significant early investor that still collected dividend payments and had a say on some decisions by the league.Asked on Friday whether Traffic still had a majority Class B interest, the North American Soccer League declined to comment.Advertisement