AdvertisementSupported byBy Huw RichardsLONDON — Rugby union’s World Cup final is always a great occasion, but it has yet to produce a great match. The tournament stages its eighth final at Twickenham Saturday, and it is still waiting for a climax memorable for the quality of the rugby.Like all previous finalists, Australia and New Zealand are focused on winning. The winner will become the first to lift three World Cups, while New Zealand aims to be the first to retain the trophy. Looking good is secondary.In the past, most finalists have played timid, risk-averse rugby, evidently more fearful of losing than hopeful of winning. Rugby’s complexity means one team with that mind-set can spoil a match, and in the seven previous finals, only 11 tries have been scored.The best contests involve two teams prepared to display their skills and take calculated risks, trying to make things happen on the attack rather than waiting for mistakes by the opposition. Saturday might just have that.Each finalist has produced memorable attacking displays — New Zealand in demolishing France 62-13 in the quarterfinals, the Australians when they eliminated the host country England at Twickenham, its national stadium, in the pool stages. Playing conditions should be good, while Nigel Owens — the Welsh referee — has a well-deserved reputation for encouraging open, free-flowing games.“Nigel is clearly the best referee in the world — he’s demonstrated that,” New Zealand selector and 1987 World Cup winner Grant Fox told the Newstalk ZB radio station in the past week. “One of the key things he does, apart from communicating incredibly well with the players, is that he lets the breakdown breathe, and that is really important.”“If we do our best we’ll give ourselves an opportunity,” New Zealand’s captain, Richie McCaw, told journalists Thursday. “If we get that performance right, that will be something that would be pretty nice to do.”Getting things right against Australia is McCaw’s speciality. Nothing in a career of exceptional achievement — he has played and won more international matches than any other player — is more remarkable than the 11 tries he has scored against Australia.That is the all-time record, in matches between rugby’s established nations, for tries against a single opponent. McCaw has played 36 times against Australia, but is a flanker, so scoring is well down his list of duties. It is as if a blocking fullback were to lead the N.F.L. in touchdowns.At the top of his list Saturday will be countering Australia at the breakdown. For several years the loose forwards McCaw, Jerome Kaino and Kieran Read have mastered every opponent. But Australia offers a novel formation, combining the herculean work rate of Scott Fardy with the double turnover threat of David Pocock and Michael Hooper.Australia has beaten New Zealand only once in their last 12 meetings, but that was in August when it fielded that lineup for the first time, and stole the Southern Hemisphere’s Rugby Championship from the All Blacks.“We realize we need to be on the job and limit their influence as much as possible and hopefully our back row can impose themselves,” said McCaw. “There’s no doubt if you give the Wallabies quick ball, front-foot ball and a loose forward trio with those two, it can make your day a pretty tough one.”The breakdown is not the only fascinating matchup. New Zealand’s veteran hooker Keven Mealamu has warned against concentrating too much on the threat of Pocock. “We understand he’s a good player, but there are so many parts of the game that if we concentrate on one we’ll end up not doing anything else,” he said.Australia’s vastly improved scrum will believe it can match the All Blacks, while New Zealand’s veteran center pairing of Conrad Smith and Ma’a Nonu faces up to the play making expertise of the versatile veteran Matt Giteau and the power of Tevita Kuridrani.Australia’s multisports star, Israel Folau, will start at fullback but has yet to make a real impact, while New Zealand’s multisports star, Sonny Bill Williams, starts on the bench but comes off it to change midfield patterns and break defensive lines.Each team is calm in adversity. New Zealand withstood periods when it trailed on the scoreboard and was a man short on the field against both Argentina and South Africa and won each match, with its stifling of South Africa in the semifinal a model of how to close out a tight contest. And against Wales, Australia was down to 13 men for seven minutes but held the Welsh scoreless with a heroic defensive stand.New Zealand usually wins when it plays anywhere near its potential, while Australia coach Michael Cheika says his team still has “plenty of room for improvement” and hopes to make the country proud of it.Too close to call? That’s a tempting prediction, but if a choice must be made, New Zealand looks the likelier winner, in a close contest.Advertisement