AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Mexican Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonSergio Pérez of the Force India team probably knows better than most Formula One drivers how aptly the catchphrase “two steps forward, one step back” can apply to a career in elite racing.Pérez, the first Mexican driver to race in the series since Héctor Rebaque in 1981 and only the sixth ever, had started in the series in 2011, at the Sauber team. He was only 21 and quickly showed great potential, nearly winning a race in his second season, at the Malaysian Grand Prix of 2012. He twice finished second that season and also had a third-place finish, results that were extraordinary for a small-budget team like Sauber.As a result, in 2013 he was signed up to race at McLaren Mercedes, one of the most successful teams in Formula One history. It looked like the chance of a lifetime, a move that would launch a solid career and give Pérez a shot not only at race victories, but, eventually, a world drivers’ championship.But 2013 turned out to be the worst year in decades for McLaren Mercedes. The team achieved no victories or podium finishes. Pérez’s teammate was Jenson Button, the 2009 world champion, and not even he could make the car perform better.McLaren dropped Pérez late in the season. He was only 23 and it looked like his once-promising Formula One career might even be finished. But he signed a lucrative deal with the Force India team for the 2014 season, joining the highly rated German driver Nico Hülkenberg. Since then, both this year and last year, it is not Hülkenberg who has been visiting the podium for the team, but Pérez. (In addition to the Formula One season, the German driver this year raced in the Le Mans 24 Hours endurance race and won it.)Pérez raced to a brilliant third place at the Russian Grand Prix on Oct. 10 and finished fifth at the United States Grand Prix last Sunday in Texas. These results in consecutive races have set the stage for high expectations at his home race in Mexico City this weekend.“Things change so quickly in this sport from weekend to weekend,” Pérez said at the U.S. race in Austin last weekend. “Now this is in the past and we have to think forward for what is coming up. Up to now it has been a tremendous season, but we have to keep the momentum up for the last races of the year.”When a driver who has not yet proved himself joins a top team, as he did at McLaren, and the team then fails to live up to its historic expectations, the young driver will end up looking bad even if the fault lies not with him but with the team and the car. He will look even worse if the team then lets him go, as McLaren did Pérez.“That damaged my reputation quite a bit,” Pérez said, “but in the end, people in Formula One, they see your results and they see it’s worth it giving you a chance.”“You lose a lot of confidence and motivation,” he added, referring to the difficult year at McLaren. “I thought I am not willing to stay in just any team just in order to stay here in Formula One. There are a lot of other attractive series around and if I am not going to be in a position ever to fight for podiums or for wins in my whole career, there is no point to stay around.”At Force India, he has found a team that may not be one of the richest but is powered by the excellent Mercedes engine. His accomplishments with the team have reversed what looked to be a career slide, particularly as he has been performing better than Hülkenberg, 28. Force India also seems to be a better place for Pérez, who is still only 25, to develop his skills as a Formula One driver.“Luckily, Force India gave me the opportunity,” he said. “And there is plenty to come in the future, I believe, and I keep developing as a driver and keep getting better and better. So hopefully the chance of getting to the top one day will come.”Born in Guadalajara in 1990, Pérez grew up racing go-karts in Mexico, starting at the age of 6. He considered a career in professional soccer but then opted for racing, as did his older brother, Antonio, who now races in the Mexican Nascar stock car series.After excellent go-karting results throughout his childhood, he graduated to car racing in 2004. He took part in the Skip Barber series in the United States, before moving to Europe in 2005 to join the Formula BMW program. He finished 14th in his first year and sixth in his second.He moved to England in 2007 to race in the British Formula 3 series, where he won the National Series, which used an older chassis than the main series. He graduated to the main series the following year, and finished fourth after leading much of the season.In 2009, Pérez raced in the GP2 series, which is the highest level of open wheel racing below Formula One. In the Asian GP2 that year, he won five races and finished second over all.In 2010 he joined the Ferrari Formula One team’s driver development program and was thus viewed as a future driver for the Italian team. There had been speculation that he might join Ferrari as a driver in his second year in the series, but things change quickly in Formula One, and that move never happened.Pérez’s career has been backed by extensive support from the Mexican telecom company Telmex, and his rise has now coincided with the return of the series to Mexico for the first time in more than two decades.“Obviously it will be very intense and very loaded in terms of media and sponsors, and I think every day I am having some dinner, visiting someone,” he said, looking ahead to his Grand Prix weekend in Mexico City. “But we all know the main objective is to do well on Sunday, and whatever happens that’s what matters.”If his results continue to improve, Pérez said his next objective would be to try to get a drive at a top team, hoping to succeed where he did not with McLaren. Although Ferrari is greatly improving this season, at the moment there seems to be only one team capable of winning championships: Mercedes.“Getting into a team that will give me the chance to fight for world championships and for victories, that will be my main target,” Pérez said. “I’m in a great team, but still it is a midfield team trying to move to the top, and I’m sure that next year we can do a very big step with this team. Hopefully in the near future a big opportunity can come for me.”Advertisement