AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesKEENAN REYNOLDS The Navy senior quarterback scored twice in the fourth quarter to tie the collegiate mark for career rushing touchdowns, and the Midshipmen set a team record with three 100-yard rushers in a 29-17 home victory over South Florida.The Midshipmen did not lead until Reynolds bulled in from the 1 to make it 22-17 with 6 minutes 58 seconds left. After South Florida fumbled on the ensuing kickoff, Reynolds clinched the win with another 1-yard touchdown run with 1:49 remaining.Reynolds scored his 77th career rushing touchdown, tying the former Wisconsin running back Montee Ball (2009-12) for the most in N.C.A.A. history.“It’s just a number,” Reynolds said of his touchdown total. “At the end of the day, it was just about getting ahead and putting the game out of reach. We were able to execute that play. It’s a big deal, obviously. I am very blessed and fortunate. But I always deflect the attention to my teammates because it’s 11 guys out there working.”Reynolds finished with 117 rushing yards, Dishan Romine had 115, and Chris Swain added 131 for Navy.ANTHONY BROWN The Purdue senior cornerback intercepted three passes, helping the Boilermakers top visiting Nebraska, 55-45.The victory ended Purdue’s nine-game Big Ten Conference losing streak and gave its third-year coach, Darrell Hazell, his first conference win at Ross-Ade Stadium; his first nine league home games had been losses.Brown became the first Boilermaker to intercept three passes in a game since linebacker Mike Rose did it in 1997 against Northwestern.ALEX COLLINS The Arkansas junior ran for a career-high five touchdowns, tying for the second-highest single-game total in Razorbacks history, in a 63-28 home win over Tennessee-Martin. Collins finished with 173 yards on 16 carries.BRETT RYPIEN The Boise State freshman completed 35 of 52 passes for a career-high 469 yards to lead the visiting Broncos to a 55-27 win over Nevada-Las Vegas. Rypien threw for two touchdowns and caught a pass for another score.GUNNER KIEL The Cincinnati junior completed all 15 of his passes, for 319 yards and five touchdowns, as the host Bearcats spoiled the debut of Danny Barrett, a former Cincinnati star, as the head coach at Central Florida in a 52-7 rout.News and NotesHAPPY HALLOWEEN Southern Mississippi played in all-black uniforms while visiting Texas-El Paso received permission from Conference USA to wear all orange for their Halloween game, and the weather turned scary with a lightning storm that caused the stadium to be cleared at the start of the fourth quarter.Golden Eagles quarterback Nick Mullens found D. J. Thompson on two second-half touchdown passes and finished 23 of 33 passing for 277 yards in Southern Mississippi’s 34-13 victory.TROJANS KEEP UP MOMENTUM Adoree Jackson returned an interception 46 yards for a touchdown, and Ronald Jones ran for 80 yards and a score to lead Southern California to its 12th straight win against California, a 27-21 road victory.Tre Madden also had a touchdown run, and Cody Kessler threw for 186 yards to lead the Trojans, who won for the second straight week under their interim coach, Clay Helton.Jared Goff threw the interception that put the Golden Bears in a 17-point hole in the third quarter and sent Cal to a third straight loss after a promising start to the season. Goff threw for 272 yards and two touchdowns, but he was intercepted twice.Information from The Associated PressAdvertisement