AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanGreen Bay Packers (6-0) at Denver Broncos (6-0)8:30 p.m. Line: Packers by 3The only quarterback who seems to give the Broncos’ championship-caliber defense consistent trouble is Peyton Manning. He may wear the same color jersey as Von Miller, Brandon Marshall and the rest of the Denver defenders, but Manning has been their worst enemy, with three interceptions returned for touchdowns accounting for 20 of the 102 points allowed by Denver this season. The team’s turnovers have led to 34 points over all, according to SportingCharts.com.The interesting thing about Denver is that if its quarterback was not named Manning, fans would very likely be lining up to praise the team instead of expecting the bottom to drop out.Take away expectations associated with a version of Manning that no longer exists and Denver is a team that has allowed an N.F.L.-low 281.3 yards a game and is second in the league in points allowed, with an average of 17. The Broncos’ rushing game has been almost nonexistent, so they have had to rely on an aerial attack that has produced a lot of yards but also a lot of turnovers, with a net result being a respectable 23.2 points a game. Focus on their defense, rather than their quarterback, and they have the makings of a poor man’s version of the 2002 Tampa Bay Buccaneers or the 2000 Baltimore Ravens, teams that went on to win Super Bowls.November should reveal whether the Denver defense has what it takes to carry the team or if it has been benefiting from subpar competition. The Broncos start the month playing Green Bay and end it playing New England.The Packers are the team the Broncos envisioned themselves being when the season started. No one is questioning Green Bay’s perfect record. Aaron Rodgers has continued to produce despite numerous injuries to his wide receivers and running backs. Its defense is allowing just 16.8 points a game, trailing only Denver’s.There are some cracks in Green Bay’s veneer, with Rodgers having come back to earth a tad since his incredible Week 3 performance against Kansas City, Eddie Lacy continuing to nurse a sore ankle and a defense that, while excellent, is probably playing over its head. Still, Green Bay has an advantage even on the road.PICK: PACKERSAdvertisement