
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
NOV. 1, 2015
History is often told in thumbnails. Bill Buckner. Mitch Williams. Steve Bartman. Grady Little. They are goats of October, never mind the context or the more complicated stories that contributed to their infamy.The Mets still have time to win this World Series and redeem Daniel Murphy for his crushing error in the eighth inning of Game 4 against the Kansas City Royals on Saturday night. But the 5-3 loss pushed the Mets into a three-games-to-one hole, and if they survive Game 5 on Sunday, they must then win twice at Kauffman Stadium.“This is not Daniel Murphy’s fault,” said David Wright, the Mets’ captain. “This is the New York Mets’ fault. We lost this game.”With 110 other World Series to cite, there are almost always hopeful examples for a desperate team. The 1979 Pittsburgh Pirates trailed the Baltimore Orioles by three games to one, took Game 5 at home and then won the last two on the road. But there has not been a World Series comeback in that precise fashion since then.AdvertisementBarring a seventh-game party for the Mets — and it is hard to imagine the Royals losing home Game 7s in back-to-back years — the Murphy play will live in Mets infamy.AdvertisementIt came with one out and the Mets leading, 3-2, with runners at first and second. Jeurys Familia had entered the game to face Eric Hosmer after Tyler Clippard had issued consecutive walks. Hosmer rolled a slow grounder, Murphy charged, and the ball skipped under his glove.“I tried to one-hand it,” Murphy said. “That probably deserved to be two-handed. I tried to come through on it. I probably had more time than that. I just misplayed it. Went right under my glove.”Ben Zobrist raced in with the tying run. A ground-ball single by Mike Moustakas — far to the left of Murphy — then gave the Royals the lead. A line-drive single to right-center by Salvador Perez made it 5-3.“Murphy, he’s one of the best players we have here,” said Familia, who was officially charged with his second blown save of the World Series. “He’s one of the reasons we’re still here. It happens.”When the Royals took the lead, Manager Ned Yost immediately called for closer Wade Davis to get a six-out save. Davis, who had not pitched since Game 1 on Tuesday, delivered.Terry Collins, the Mets’ manager, had shown such urgency in the decisive game of the team’s division series, bypassing Clippard and using a rested Familia for two innings to eliminate the Los Angeles Dodgers.This time, he waited too long. Collins had used Familia in the ninth on Friday to protect a six-run lead, partly at Familia’s suggestion. Familia’s inning on Friday, Collins acknowledged, affected his usage plan “a little bit” for Saturday.Advertisement“We said before the inning, if the go-ahead run gets on, we’re going to go to Familia,” Collins said. “But I didn’t want to have to burn Jeurys tonight for two innings if I could help it. So it didn’t work.”If burning Familia with a two-inning save had helped the Mets win Game 4 — and ensured that the World Series would return to Missouri — they could have lived without him for Game 5. As it stands, they must win on Sunday to save their season.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We beat the Cubs four in a row when they were playing excellent baseball,” Wright said, referring to the National League Championship Series. “It can be done. It’s not an ideal position, but we dug this hole for ourselves, and now we’ve got to dig our way out of it.”This was not a potential elimination game, as Game 6 of the 1986 World Series was for the Mets against Boston. That night, of course, they scored the winning run on Buckner’s error after tying the score on Bob Stanley’s wild pitch. Other late implosions came at precisely the same moment the Mets unraveled on Saturday.Five outs. That is what the Philadelphia Phillies needed when they called for Williams to protect a 14-10 lead in Game 4 of the 1993 World Series. The Phillies were playing at home, trying to tie the series. They fell that night, 15-14, and lost the World Series in six.Five outs. That is what the Cubs needed to win the pennant in Game 6 of the 2003 league championship series when Bartman, a fan down the left-field line, deflected a foul ball from Moises Alou’s reach. By the end of the inning, with help from an error by Alex Gonzalez, the Marlins had scored eight runs. They went on to win the World Series.Five outs. That is what the Red Sox needed to win Game 7 of the 2003 American League Championship Series at Yankee Stadium when Little, the Boston manager, stayed with a tiring Pedro Martinez. He waited until the lead was gone to use his bullpen, and Aaron Boone’s homer sent the Yankees to the World Series.Murphy’s blunder stands in startling contrast to his overwhelming run of success through the N.L. playoffs. Murphy carried the Mets to the World Series with his record home run streak — six games in a row, through the end of the N.L.C.S., for which he was named the most valuable player of the series.AdvertisementHis earlier defensive misplay — a shaky feed on a double play that spun around Ruben Tejada at Dodger Stadium in the Mets’ division series — was lost in the bedlam over the reckless takeout slide by Chase Utley that followed. In any case, the Mets could live with Murphy’s uneven defense if he continued to smash home runs.The five-day layoff between the N.L.C.S. and the World Series brought Murphy back to reality. The Royals, of course, put the ball in play more often than any other team. That means more potential to exploit the Mets’ weak defense up the middle — a potential that turned to reality at the worst possible moment, when Murphy botched Hosmer’s grounder.“Obviously, the country knows how huge he’s been for us in the postseason,” Mets outfielder Michael Cuddyer said of Murphy. “If you have a selective memory on Daniel Murphy, shame on you.”This loss, as Wright asserted, was indeed a collective effort. The Mets got two solo homers from Michael Conforto but just one other run. And while Steve Matz looked sharp for four innings, Collins curiously let him to bat for himself in the fifth after he had allowed a run and stranded two in the top of the inning.Matz had not gone past five innings in this postseason, and the sixth started badly — a double by Zobrist and a run-scoring single by Lorenzo Cain. Then Collins called for Jon Niese. He said that if Conforto had not homered to give the Mets a 3-1 cushion, he would have hit for Matz in the fifth.“After the home run, I thought I’d let him hit,” Collins said. “I thought he was still throwing the ball O.K. Let him start, and see if he can get us through the sixth inning so we can save the pen.”Niese, Bartolo Colon and Addison Reed brought the game to the eighth with the Mets holding a 3-2 lead. Clippard has been unsteady this postseason, but he had walked only one of the 27 batters he had faced before walking Zobrist and Cain with one out. Cain battled him for eight pitches.“I tried to get a ground ball on 2-2 with a slider, and I didn’t execute,” Clippard said. “Same thing on 3-2 with a changeup. He did a good job laying off those pitches, but at the same time, they weren’t where I wanted them.”So Clippard departed. Familia entered. So much could go wrong at that point against a team that thrives on putting the ball in play. So much did.AdvertisementMurphy will long be hailed for his performance in the N.L. playoffs. But unless the Mets win this World Series, he will also be remembered for his error. The failures around him should not be forgotten, either.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Crushing Error, and Now a Daunting Hole.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »