AdvertisementSupported byRoyals 5, Mets 317 PhotosView Slide Show ›Doug Mills/The New York TimesBy Tim RohanThe Mets were five outs from winning a pivotal Game 4 of the World Series on Saturday night when they called on their closer, Jeurys Familia, to protect a 3-2 lead.With two Royals already on base, Familia threw his signature sinker and got what he wanted, a slow chopper toward second base from Eric Hosmer. Mets second baseman Daniel Murphy charged it with his glove out.The Mets had made the World Series in large part because of Murphy’s heroics in the two previous rounds of the postseason. He had hit seven home runs and had become the first player to homer in six consecutive games, all while several of his teammates slumped. He had gone from a veteran role player to an overnight celebrity.As Murphy reached for the ball, it dipped around his glove for an error. He stood there, stunned, as the ball trickled into the outfield and then turned and watched Ben Zobrist score the tying run.Murphy applied lip balm, took a deep breath and retook his position. But Mike Moustakas bounced the next pitch into Murphy’s vicinity, too. Murphy dived but could not reach the ball, and Lorenzo Cain came in to score.The Royals tacked on one more run in the inning, capping a scintillating comeback that gave them a 5-3 victory, a commanding three-games-to-one lead in the Series and a chance to clinch their first title since 1985 on Sunday night at Citi Field.The result also gives the Mets only a day to collect themselves after another devastating loss.From the recesses of Citi Field, the Mets owner Fred Wilpon silently left with his hand on his wife’s shoulder. Chris Christie, New Jersey’s governor and a presidential candidate, followed in the procession behind the Wilpons, his hands shoved into his pockets.In the clubhouse, Murphy was the first player at his locker, taking questions from a throng of reporters. He calmly explained that he had rushed himself and tried to field the ball with one hand instead of two, a mistake that seemed elementary.“I misplayed it,” Murphy said. “There’s no excuse for it.”Until that inning, the Mets controlled the game, thanks to two rookies: Steven Matz, who turned in a solid start, and Michael Conforto, who made history by hitting two solo home runs.For Matz, this was a childhood dream come true. He grew up on Long Island as a Mets fan and remembers watching the Mets in the 2000 World Series. On Saturday, after commuting to the game from his parents’ house, he held the Royals to two runs in five innings. And to be fair, one of those runs was aided by a defensive mishap: Mets center fielder Yoenis Cespedes kicked away a loose ball, giving Salvador Perez a double, and Perez scored when Alex Gordon followed with a single.When the Royals started the sixth with two hits off Matz, scoring their second run, the Mets called on their veterans Jon Niese and Bartolo Colon, who combined to retire the next three batters. Colon ended a 10-pitch at-bat by striking out Perez with a runner on third.This season, the Mets had four of the top 20 pitchers who threw the most pitches over 95 m.p.h.“This team just keeps coming,” the Mets’ David Wright said of the Royals. “Seemed like every inning, or every other inning, they put runners in scoring position and put us with our backs against the wall.”Other than Conforto’s home runs, the Mets could not produce much offense. They scored only one other run, when it appeared Alex Rios forgot how many outs there were. With one out and a runner on third, Rios caught a fly ball from Curtis Granderson, took a nonchalant step toward the dugout and finally made a late throw home after coming to.Conforto had at least given the Mets a lead to work with.Chris Young, the Royals’ starter and the former Met, left one lazy fastball over the plate in the third inning, and Conforto ripped it for a 395-foot solo home run several rows into the second deck in right field. After Danny Duffy replaced Young in the fifth inning, Conforto slugged another solo home run, becoming the first rookie to homer twice in a World Series game since Andruw Jones in 1996.Before this game, Conforto had been batting .090 in the playoffs. He had also made a defensive blunder that led to an inside-the-park home run in Game 1, and the Mets had had to defend playing him. On Saturday, as Conforto watched the ball clear the wall, he pumped his fist and yelled, “Let’s go!”The Mets had seemed to be gaining confidence since Noah Syndergaard had begun Game 3 by firing his first pitch, an upper-90s fastball, near the head of Alcides Escobar. Syndergaard said he had thrown the pitch to disrupt the Royals’ confidence. He had hinted as much the day before, when he said he had “a few tricks” up his sleeve for Escobar.The Royals took exception, to both the pitch and Syndergaard’s candor. They hinted that the Mets might receive some sort of retribution in Game 4.“We’ve got a few tricks up our sleeves, too,” Royals Manager Ned Yost said Saturday afternoon.The Royals did not retaliate. They responded by playing their same relentlessly aggressive style of play.The eighth-inning rally started when Zobrist and Cain each worked walks off Tyler Clippard, the Mets’ setup man, who has appeared fatigued lately. That forced the Mets to turn to Familia to get a five-out save.This was Familia’s first appearance in a save situation since he allowed a solo home run by Gordon in Game 1. After that, Manager Terry Collins had said he hoped to get Familia back in a game quickly, for the sake of his confidence now and later in his career.Familia was able to induce a weak chopper from Hosmer, but the play left the crowd groaning.In the clubhouse, the Mets rallied around Murphy, the way they had rallied around Familia after Game 1. But their voices sounded softer this time, more defeated.Their next loss, their next critical mistake, would end their season.“It’s a tough play,” Wright said. “It’s a tough play anytime you’re coming in like that, having to worry about the lip of the grass, the dirt. It’s one of those kind of do-or-die plays. You want to try to get an out there, obviously, so you want to be aggressive and try to come field that ball.“That’s not the reason we lost this game. That’s definitely not the reason.”Advertisement