By DAVID WALDSTEINOCT. 31, 2015
The intrigue surrounding Noah Syndergaard’s high first offering in Game 3 did not fade before Game 4 on Saturday, although it did not affect the way Game 4 was played, either, with the Kansas City Royals winning, 5-3, and moving one step from a championship.Still, before Game 4 began, there was a lot more talk about what had happened on the first pitch of Game 3.First, the Royals disputed the claim from Syndergaard, a Mets starter, that he threw the pitch on purpose, and then they made veiled threats of their own.When Syndergaard came to bat in the third inning, he told Royals catcher Salvador Perez that the pitch had been an accident, Royals Manager Ned Yost said.Advertisement“He just said that he wasn’t trying to throw it up and under his chin, that he didn’t mean to do it,” Yost said.AdvertisementThat was not the answer Syndergaard gave after the game, which the Mets won, 9-3. He said he intentionally threw the pitch high and inside to keep Alcides Escobar from feeling comfortable at the plate. If the Royals did not like it, Syndergaard implied, they could charge the mound.But Syndergaard’s reason for telling Perez that the pitch was an accident might simply have been self-preservation: It is not wise to tell a catcher that you intentionally threw at one of his teammates just as you are striding to the plate.Regardless, the pitch forced Escobar to hit the ground. He struck out in the at-bat.When the Royals heard about Syndergaard’s comments, they became even more enraged, particularly Escobar, who was angry that Syndergaard basically challenged the Royals to either shut up about the matter or fight.Escobar, speaking on the field before Game 4, said that fighting in baseball was practically useless because when the benches emptied, the main combatants rarely got close to one another. Instead, there tends to be a lot of pushing, shoving and shouting.More important, in the World Series, a key player could be ejected from a crucial game.“That was a stupid comment right there,” Escobar said, adding: “It’s a World Series game, and nobody’s going to fight here. Everybody is going to come in and play hard; that’s it.”Escobar continued his denunciation of Syndergaard.“He thinks he’s Superman,” Escobar said. “If he wants problems, we’ll give him problems. That’s not a way to take a player out of the game, to throw 100 miles an hour at his head.”The Royals were particularly irked by Syndergaard’s statement the day before the game that he had a trick up his sleeve. Syndergaard mentioned that Escobar had been particularly aggressive on first-pitch fastballs. Then, the next day, he unleashed the high pitch.Advertisement“I didn’t expect him to throw a strike,” Yost said Saturday. “But I didn’t expect him to throw it under his chin, either. But we’ve got a few tricks up our sleeves, too. Let’s go with that.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yost would not elaborate about what he meant. Asked if the Royals would throw at or near one of the Mets’ batters, he said, “No.” And as Game 4 proceeded, they did not.Terry Collins, the Mets’ manager, indicated that Syndergaard should never have admitted that he threw the pitch intentionally to intimidate Escobar and the Royals’ hitters. Traditionally, even when pitchers try to push batters off the plate with an inside pitch, they claim the ball slipped out of their hand.“The one thing that you try to make sure you don’t do is give them a reason to stomp on your neck, you know?” Collins said.Matt Harvey, scheduled to be the Mets’ starter in Game 5 on Sunday, said that Syndergaard’s comments after Game 3 could be attributed to the adrenaline of the moment.“I think everybody kind of saw a different side of him,” Harvey said. “Usually, he’s a little bit more reserved and calm.”Harvey is set to face Edinson Volquez in a rematch of Game 1. Volquez left the team after that game and went to the Dominican Republic to attend his father’s funeral.His plane was due to land in New York just before the start of Game 4.Yost said he did not know if Volquez had been able to throw or play catch in the Dominican Republic to keep his arm loose, but he said that was not a concern.“It’s not a bad thing this time of year,” Yost said. “Eddie has logged over 200 innings in the regular season, and it’s not going to affect him a bit.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Syndergaard’s Knockdown Pitch Lingers Until Game 4 Begins .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.