By MELISSA HOPPERTOCT. 31, 2015
LEXINGTON, Ky. —  The defeat in the Travers Stakes in August sucked the air out of the air-conditioned V.I.P. room at Saratoga Race Course. Television cameras recorded every emotion, from shock to horror to devastation, after the Triple Crown champion American Pharoah had lost his first race in more than a year.American Pharoah’s connections then made their way to the interview tent behind the jockeys’ room, a short walk made long by the sadness of the occasion, which had all the makings of a funeral procession.Ahmed Zayat, American Pharoah’s owner, battled back tears. Bob Baffert, the loquacious trainer, struggled to find words. His wife, Jill, sobbed, and his son Bode hung his head in silence.Excuses abounded: The colt was tired from flying nearly 21,000 miles during his 3-year-old season; he ran too fast during training the day before the race, egged on by the estimated 15,000 fans who packed the historic grandstand.Advertisement“One thing that I really like about him — which sometimes gets me in trouble — is he is the sweetest horse, but as soon as he gets to the track, he’s all business,” his exercise rider, Jorge Alvarez, said Wednesday. “Sometimes he can be very aggressive. And sometimes I have to be sure not to let him do too much and do what I was told to do.”AdvertisementOn Saturday, after American Pharoah romped to a six-and-a-half-length victory in the Breeders’ Cup Classic at venerable Keeneland Racecourse to cap his spectacular career, those moments were still fresh but were soon forgotten.“I am so proud of the horse, but I feel a sense of relief,” Baffert told the assembled crowd of news media and admiring horsemen, which included the Hall of Fame trainer D. Wayne Lukas.Baffert continued, “I just wanted to make sure this horse ran well, not only for him, but for all the fans of racing.”The first words that Zayat could muster were: “What can I say? What a horse.”He added: “He is once-in-a-lifetime. This race was only about American Pharoah. We wanted him to go out a winner.”That American Pharoah was in the Classic at all was a remarkable feat. To the chagrin of fans, it has become commonplace to retire stars of big races at the height of their success, the lure of lucrative breeding deals and the threat of injury before the chance to cash in too much to resist.While Zayat sold American Pharoah’s breeding rights for an undisclosed amount to Ashford Stud, the United States branch of Ireland’s Coolmore Stud, well before the colt won the Kentucky Derby, he retained ownership and decision-making through 2015.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, with American Pharoah expected to command well over $100,000 per live foal that stands and nurses, Coolmore most likely would have preferred to get the first Triple Crown winner in 37 years off the racetrack and into the breeding shed as soon as possible.But Zayat refused to waver after the Belmont Stakes, saying that as long as American Pharoah stayed healthy, he owed it to the struggling sport and its devoted fan base to keep the superstar in training.AdvertisementThen came the defeat in the Travers, in which Keen Ice, who finished fourth in the Classic on Saturday, ran past a struggling American Pharoah in the deep stretch, stunning not only the colt’s connections but the sold-out crowd that had lined up before dawn to catch a glimpse of greatness.“He was just not the same today — not strong like I’m used to,” the jockey Victor Espinoza said afterward.Zayat then said his gut was telling him that that was it for American Pharoah.“If the horse showed me he’s not the Pharoah I know, then I have no problem retiring him,” he said at the time. “I’m disappointed, I’m heartbroken.”The team slept on it. By morning, there appeared to be a lightening of moods, with Baffert hinting that the Breeders’ Cup Classic was still on the table. On Sept. 3, Zayat made it official: American Pharoah would race one final time.American Pharoah is expected to remain under Baffert’s care until the team can throw him a proper going-away party, which may be held at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky., but the details were still being worked out.For now, the team is relishing one final victory that would not have come without Zayat’s commitment to keeping his superstar on the racetrack.“I’m very happy for the sport, for enjoying a horse like American Pharoah and going off on a high note,” he said. “I wish I could have kept him another year to race — that would have been the icing on the cake.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Final Victory Wipes Away Effects of a Startling Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.