AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerDickie Noles was watching the third game of the World Series on television Friday night when he saw a fastball sail up and in to a Kansas City Royals hitter. Like that, Noles had company among pitchers who had done this, to great effect, on baseball’s brightest stage.“By the fifth inning,” Noles said, “I had about 20 phone calls and texts.”The Mets’ Noah Syndergaard is 23 years old, the same age Noles was in 1980 when he knocked down George Brett in a World Series game for the Philadelphia Phillies. The pitch has long been celebrated in Philadelphia as a turning point in that series. As the Mets prepared for Game 4 on Saturday, they hoped for the same.“Certainly I think it set a tone that ‘Hey, look, we’re in this World Series, too,’ ” Manager Terry Collins said, “and we’re going to get after it.”The Mets went on to a 9-3 victory on Friday, their first in the Series after two losses in Kansas City. The Royals were greatly aggrieved that Syndergaard had thrown his first pitch to the backstop against Alcides Escobar, a notorious first-pitch swinger.This was not surprising from the Royals, a close team that largely grew up together and has a well-earned reputation for feistiness. Ned Yost, their manager, was not asked about the pitch on Friday; his players had not yet complained about it. On Saturday, Yost cryptically vowed revenge.“I didn’t expect him to throw a strike, but I didn’t expect him to throw it under his chin, either,” Yost said. “But we’ve got a few tricks up our sleeves, too.”This season, the Mets had four of the top 20 pitchers who threw the most pitches over 95 m.p.h.Syndergaard was not headhunting. He was pitching. He intended to pitch Escobar exactly as he did: fastball to the backstop, curveball, curveball, 99-mile-per-hour strike three. Yost said that during Game 3, Syndergaard had told Royals catcher Sal Perez that the pitch simply got away.Frank Viola, the Mets’ Class AAA pitching coach and a mentor to Syndergaard, had an explanation.“It wasn’t even near the head,” Viola said on the field before Game 4. “It was a purpose pitch that made the point it needed to make: ‘Hey, I’m not afraid to throw the fastball. I don’t have to throw the first-pitch fastball here, I’m going to throw it here.’ He was not comfortable the rest of that at-bat. Yeah, he got a bloop base hit the next time up, but at least it set the tone to say, ‘Hey, that’s my plate.’ “I’m telling you, the worst feeling in the world is for a hitter to feel uncomfortable at the plate. That’s all he made Escobar do that first time up. Are you going to upset people? So what? That’s part of the game.”In 1980, the Royals were on their way to a lopsided win in Game 4, which would have tied the Series. Noles had allowed a home run to Willie Mays Aikens in the second inning and had admonished Aikens for admiring his blast. He said he wanted to knock down Aikens the next time he faced him.Aikens was on deck in the fourth inning when Brett dawdled getting back into the box after a foul ball. That irritated Noles, who looked for a sign from Bob Boone and decided not to wait.“It goes through your mind real quickly,” he said. “When Boone called for a fastball, I thought, ‘This is the guy now.’ ” The pitch upended Brett, who saved his jaw by diving back and to the dirt. The Royals howled, but Noles kept pitching. The Phillies won the next two games to take the title.A difference between Noles’s pitch and Syndergaard’s was premeditation. Noles made a snap decision to target Brett. Syndergaard made a plan with his catcher, Travis d’Arnaud, to counter Escobar’s aggressiveness.“My first words I said to Travis when we walked in the clubhouse today is, ‘How do you feel about high and tight for the first pitch and then a curveball for the second one?’ ” Syndergaard said after Game 3. “So I feel like it really made a statement to start the game off, that you guys can’t dig in and get too aggressive because I’ll come in there.”A literal statement generated at least as much attention. After hearing that the Royals were upset, Syndergaard essentially said: Bring it.“If they have a problem with me throwing inside, then they can meet me 60 feet 6 inches away,” he said. “I’ve got no problem with that.”Viola — a World Series most valuable player for Minnesota in 1987, at age 27 — said Syndergaard’s bravado was a sign of maturity.“He’s growing up,” Viola said. “I don’t know if I would have been able to do that back in my time, honestly. That’s a self-confident kid who understands who he is and what he needs to do. It wasn’t like he was threatening or anything. It was just a statement: ‘Hey, if you have a problem, talk to me.’ That’s it.”The Royals vowed to get back at the Mets with action — perhaps as benign as “swinging the bats and playing good defense,” as Yost said, but maybe in another way. Noles recognizes a compelling story line when he sees one.“Watching the game, I thought: ‘You know what? There’s a message,’ ” Noles said. “If you’re going to dig in and swing the bat, I’m going to let you know I’m coming in.”He added: “I love to watch the Mets’ pitchers pitch, and I love to watch the Royals play, too. They’re very exciting teams, the best two teams, which is what you want to see in the World Series. Might as well have a little edge to it.”Advertisement