AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Jay SchreiberThis past week ended up a pretty bumpy victory lap for the Mets. It was capped by the disconcerting sight of the Washington Nationals, of all people, jumping up and down at Citi Field on Saturday night after Max Scherzer barely allowed a Mets batter to make contact, let alone get a base hit.But if you are a Mets fan with a long memory, you may recall a precedent for Scherzer’s no-hitter, which might also be a pretty good omen.On Sept. 20, 1969, the Mets were closing in on their first division title — and wrapping up their first winning season — when Pittsburgh’s Bob Moose threw a no-hitter at Shea Stadium in Game 152.Moose walked three and struck out six in the 4-0 victory, so his performance was nowhere near as dominant as Scherzer’s. And Moose’s no-hitter did little to throw the Mets off stride. They were still four games ahead of the Chicago Cubs, and they proceeded to win nine of their last 10 games on their way to a 100-victory season and a World Series championship.Actually, Moose’s no-hitter was one of a number of unusual moments for the Mets that September. On Sept. 9, as the Mets were playing the Cubs at Shea Stadium, a black cat ran in front of the Chicago dugout. The Mets, let it be noted, won.On Sept. 12, the Mets won each game of a doubleheader in Pittsburgh by 1-0. Each run was driven in by the starting pitcher — Jerry Koosman in Game 1 and Don Cardwell in Game 2.Three days later, the Mets beat the Cardinals, 4-3, in St. Louis despite striking out 19 times against Steve Carlton, which set a record for a nine-inning game.So how did the Mets ever score four runs that night? On two two-run homers by Ron Swoboda, the second coming in the eighth inning with the Mets trailing, 3-2.In his other two at-bats, Swoboda, of course, struck out.The past month has not been as nutty for the Mets, but Scherzer’s no-hitter holds potential. Yes, the Mets have now lost five in a row, and there are some injury issues, but maybe things are looking up. Advertisement