By RICHARD GOLDSTEINOCT. 31, 2015
Mel Daniels, the Hall of Fame center who led the Indiana Pacers to three American Basketball Association championships and became the leading rebounder in the league’s history, died Friday in Sheridan, Ind. He was 71.His death, which was announced by the Pacers, came the day after he attended their season’s home opener. The cause was not given, but he had heart problems and had been hospitalized in October.At 6 feet 9 inches and 220 pounds, Daniels was an intimidating presence on defense, a fierce rebounder, and loath to pass up a fight, though he had a sensitive side, having written thousands of unpublished poems. He possessed a nearly unstoppable fadeaway jump shot.Daniels was the A.B.A.’s rookie of the year in 1967-68 with the Minnesota Muskies, having signed with the fledgling league despite being selected by the Cincinnati Royals in the first round of the N.B.A. draft.AdvertisementHe spent the next six seasons with the Pacers, taking them to A.B.A. championships in 1970, 1972 and 1973 under Coach Bob Leonard. He was named the league’s most valuable player in 1969 and 1971 and was a seven-time All-Star.He was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame at Springfield, Mass., in 2012.Daniels was right at home in the rough-and-tumble league with the red, white and blue basketball.“I loved to knock guys down,” he told Terry Pluto in his A.B.A. oral history, “Loose Balls” (1990). “When you went to the boards, you did it with your elbows out. If there was a fight, it wasn’t just one-on-one, it was 12-on-12. The fine for fighting was $25. That wasn’t going to stop any fights.”As his teammate Billy Keller put it: “He scared people out of driving the lane. If he went for a ball and ended up with someone’s head in his hands, he was just as likely to put a headlock on the guy as let him go.”Daniels was the A.B.A.’s career leader in rebounds, with 9,494, and he averaged 18.7 points a game in his eight seasons in the league.AdvertisementAfter playing for the Memphis Sounds in his final A.B.A. season, he played in Italy for one season, then closed out his career in the N.B.A., playing briefly for the Nets in 1976-77, the first season of the A.B.A.-N.B.A. merger.He was an assistant coach at Indiana State in the late 1970s when the future Boston Celtics Hall of Fame player and Pacers coach Larry Bird played there and later became an assistant coach and director of player personnel for the Pacers.Melvin Joe Daniels was born on July 20, 1944, and grew up in Detroit, his family having moved there from North Carolina when he was a child. His father, Maceo, worked for an auto parts manufacturer.After playing at Pershing High School in Detroit, he became an all-American center at the University of New Mexico, averaging 20 points a game.He averaged 19.4 points and 16 rebounds a game with the Pacers, who retired his No. 34 jersey in 1985. It hangs at the team’s Bankers Life Fieldhouse along with those of his Pacers teammates George McInnis and Roger Brown and the latter-day Pacer Reggie Miller.Daniels, who lived on a ranch in Sheridan, north of Indianapolis, is survived by his wife, CeCe; a son, Melvin Jr.; his sisters Vivian and Wanda; and two granddaughters, The Associated Press reported.Daniels’s mother, Bernice, read poetry to him when he was a youngster, and he was writing poems by age 8 or so. He continued to write them through his playing days and thereafter, focusing on athletes’ lives but also on the world beyond sports. He preferred not to share them with his teammates, presumably to avoid being ribbed.“This is the side I’ve kept quiet,” he once said.An obituary on Sunday about Mel Daniels, a Hall of Fame center for the Indiana Pacers, referred incorrectly to Larry Bird, also a member of the Hall of Fame. While Bird coached the Pacers for three years and is currently the team’s president of basketball operations, he played his entire career for the Boston Celtics; he did not play for the Pacers.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page A28 of the New York edition with the headline: Mel Daniels Is Dead at 71; Prolific Rebounder Paced Pacers of the ’70s A.B.A. .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.