By BILL PENNINGTONOCT. 31, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — As a crowd of reporters surrounded the rising Giants star Odell Beckham Jr. at his locker last week, quarterback Eli Manning walked by and shouted from the back of the scrum in an odd, contrived voice, “Odell, how excited are you to go back to New Orleans?”If Manning was playfully mocking members of the news media, he was also signaling to one of the team’s pivotal players that Sunday’s game comes with a particularly unusual and arduous set of circumstances.Beckham, like Manning, was raised in New Orleans, with each attending Isidore Newman School. They return to play the New Orleans Saints, with the Giants underdogs to the surging Saints. Two other Giants, wide receiver Rueben Randle and safety Landon Collins, are also from the New Orleans area. It will be the first trip back to New Orleans as N.F.L. players for Beckham, Randle and Collins.But it is Manning, more than anyone, who knows what the homecoming will be like. It will be thunderously loud inside the Superdome and far from welcoming. Manning has played there twice and endured humiliating losses, with the Saints outscoring the Giants, 97-51. The Giants have not won in New Orleans since Manning was 12 years old, in 1993, a span of four games that have often ended as lopsided Giants losses.AdvertisementSome of the worst games the Giants have played this century have occurred in a city nicknamed Big Easy, which is surely not how the Giants view the place. With Sunday’s game coming one day after Halloween, the Giants would be forgiven if they approached the Superdome as their own house of horrors.Advertisement“The fans are good fans and take great pride in being loud and trying to cause difficulty for the offense to communicate,” Manning said. “I know what it’s like, and we’ve got to make some plays — move the ball and keep them under control.”Manning was once one of those noisy fans. His father, Archie, was the Saints’ quarterback, and though Eli was born one year before Archie’s last year as a Saint, he still attended countless games when his father retired to become a broadcaster for the team. Asked last week if he remembered the last Giants victory in New Orleans, Manning unconvincingly answered: “I guess I was there.”His memory is much better when it comes to his most recent visits to his hometown as an opponent, when the Giants lost by 49-24 in 2011 and by 48-27 in 2009. Manning nodded his head as if conceding that he had seen the worst of it, with the Saints up by two or three touchdowns and the noise inside the Superdome ear-piercing. That is when, he said, “the crowd really gets on a roll.”Manning has also lived through the distractions of going home to New Orleans as a rival player, something Beckham, Randle and Collins have yet to experience as professionals. Manning is trying to inculcate them in on-the-road protocols that a visiting corporation might call “best practices.”Manning, for example, said he was not seeing his family before the game, even though the Giants expect to arrive in New Orleans on Saturday afternoon.“I’m not doing anything — just going to play a game,” he said. “It’s the next game, going to New Orleans and trying to get a win.”Had he given the same advice to his teammates with New Orleans roots?Manning assiduously deflects any kind of public acknowledgment that he is a team leader, guru or locker room adviser — even though he surely is after two Super Bowl Most Valuable Player Awards — so he did not answer the question directly. But in a reading through of the lines, his response said otherwise.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m sure there will be lots of friends and family there for certain guys and you’ve to tune it all out,” Manning said. “You’ve got to keep the focus on the game, your job and on your assignments. Don’t get overexcited. Just play your game and don’t try to do more than you have to.”AdvertisementBeckham, who did not so much as smile at the thought of returning home, has gotten the message. Only once did he seem animated.“To go back where you grew up, I mean, my house is only 15 minutes from the stadium,” Beckham said. “That is definitely exciting.”But Beckham, now in his second season in the N.F.L., has been studying and analyzing what makes the Saints historically difficult to defeat at home.“They’re a chaotic team; they play very much like their home atmosphere,” he said. “They do a great job at creating chaos and making you make mistakes.”Randle and Collins, lesser stars in a Giants universe controlled by veterans like Manning and the charismatic Beckham, were also low-key in discussing their return to New Orleans.“I think we’re going to have to try to make some big plays offensively to take some air out of their building,” said Randle, now in his fourth year with the Giants. “Because you know they’re going to be rowdy in there. And the Saints are coming off two straight wins.”Collins, a rookie, was trying to stay unnoticed.“I’ve got enough on my plate,” said Collins, who despite his inexperience was the only Giants defender to never come off the field in the team’s last game.There will be a plethora of other New Orleans-Giants connections all over the field Sunday. The Saints’ coach, Sean Payton, was the Giants’ offensive coordinator from 1999 to 2002. The Giants’ defensive coordinator, Steve Spagnuolo, held the same position for the Saints in 2012. New Orleans running back Mark Ingram, the son of the former Giants wide receiver Mark Ingram Sr., was born in Hackensack, N.J., about seven miles from the Giants’ headquarters. Giants linebacker Devon Kennard’s father, Derek, played for the Saints in the 1990s.But for the Giants, the focus will be on their ignominious 22-year losing streak in New Orleans.On Friday, Giants Coach Tom Coughlin was asked why the Giants have had such dismal recent results in New Orleans. He could only surmise it was the home-crowd noise. To try to prepare, the Giants have had artificial crowd noise blasted through immense speakers as they worked out inside the indoor practice facility at their training complex.Advertisement“I think you could hear the noise from three miles away,” Coughlin said, laughing. “So we’ve done what we can. It’s probably been louder at practice than in the Superdome.”An article on Nov. 1 about the Giants’ connections to New Orleans misstated the name of the school that quarterback Eli Manning and receiver Odell Beckham Jr. attended there. It is Isidore Newman School, not Isidore Newman High School.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants Try to Stay Focused as a Noisy Superdome Awaits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.