By DAVE CALDWELLOCT. 31, 2015
Rangers forward Mats Zuccarello has returned to the ice six months after a frightening head injury with no apparent after-effects, and fans eager to shell out $330 for a Zuccarello sweater also happen to be showing up again at the sporting goods store next to Madison Square Garden.Nick Slade, a buyer for Gerry Cosby & Company, said Friday that demand for Zuccarello sweaters “is right back up from where it was before he was hurt.”Indeed, the No. 36 Zuccarello sweaters are almost as popular as No. 30 Henrik Lundqvist sweaters and No. 27 Ryan McDonagh sweaters, Slade said. Men, women and children love Zuccarello, the energetic right wing from Norway who still draws chants of “Zuuuuuke” when he handles the puck.After the game Friday night, in which he managed the first hat trick of his N.H.L. career, Zuccarello has scored seven goals through the Rangers’ first 11 games, a much faster start than he had in either of Alain Vigneault’s first two seasons as coach. Zuccarello had two goals after 11 games last season and one goal after 11 games in 2013-14. The Rangers, not coincidentally, have also started faster.AdvertisementWhen asked after practice on Thursday if he felt any consequences from the injury that ended his season five games into the Stanley Cup playoffs, Zuccarello, 28, smiled and said, “Not that I notice.”AdvertisementReferring to the injury, Zuccarello said: “I stopped thinking about that. It’s forgotten right now. I try to look forward.”Zuccarello was hit in the back of the head by a slap shot by a teammate, defenseman McDonagh, late in the first period of a 2-1 overtime victory at the Garden in the fifth and final game of a first-round series against the Pittsburgh Penguins.On June 1, three days after the Tampa Bay Lightning had eliminated the Rangers from the playoffs, four games to three, in the Eastern Conference finals, Zuccarello revealed publicly that he had sustained a brain contusion and a hairline fracture of the skull. He said he had been unable to speak for three or four days after the injury.Zuccarello resumed skating during the series against the Lightning, but Vigneault said it was unlikely that he would have returned if the Rangers had reached the Cup finals. The Rangers were clearly hampered by his loss.“He was a vital piece to how our offense goes,” McDonagh said Thursday. “You could see his playmaking ability, his finishing ability. As the playoffs go, chances become less and less, so you’ve got to capitalize on them. He’s a guy who’s very high percentage on connecting the dots and finishing the plays. That’s something we dearly missed, for sure.”Though Zuccarello attended the games he missed — often drawing huge cheers from Garden fans when he was shown, wearing a suit and sitting in a suite, on the large screens — his presence, both happy-go-lucky and workmanlike, was missed off the ice.“He brings a lot of energy, especially practices,” Rangers center Derick Brassard said. “He’s a key player. When you’re trying to win a Cup, and you’re that close, and you’re missing one of your top guys, it’s going to hurt you as a team.Advertisement“We still managed to go all the way to Game 7, but it would have been nice to have him on board, obviously. We’re just happy to have him healthy, and he’s back where he was.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Zuccarello said in June that doctors told him he would be fine this season, but he needed most of the summer to recover. He picked up a specially reinforced helmet.“Even though he got cleared medically with that type of injury, you never know how long it’s going to take,” Vigneault said.In evaluating Zuccarello’s play, Vigneault said last week: “I would say, since he’s been with me, that this has been his best start. If you remember the last two years, both years he had a difficult time finding his game.”Vigneault, however, then made it clear that Zuccarello was not playing perfectly. With the exceptions of Lundqvist, the backup goaltender Antti Raanta and perhaps center Derek Stepan and defenseman Kevin Klein, Vigneault thinks his team can improve. Zuccarello acknowledged that his play had been “up and down.”“My expectations of him offensively and defensively are higher than what I’ve been seeing so far,” Vigneault said of Zuccarello. “I expect more from him at both ends of the rink. He’s a good player. He’s a competitive player. He’s a highly skilled player. Because of his injury, he wasn’t able to have a full summer of training. Now he’s getting his legs and getting his rhythm.”After 11 games, the Rangers are 7-2-2. They were 5-4-2 through 11 games last year, and 4-7-0 through their first 11 games under Vigneault two years ago (when they were hampered by having to play their first nine games on the road).Zuccarello, a Mets World Series cap pulled low over his shaggy black hair, said last week that he can be the same caliber of player he was before the injury.“You’re probably not going to get 90 points out of me, but I work hard and try to make my teammates better,” he said.AdvertisementBrassard said: “With the injury he had, you think he might be scared of getting hit, but he doesn’t show anything like that. He has a big heart. He plays with that every night.”But Zuccarello brings so much more. He is in only his third full N.H.L. season and is signed through the 2018-19 season at $4.5 million per year. He has become an integral part of the team’s core. His teammates notice, too, that the Garden buzzes with the “Zuuuuuke” chant.“He’s been here a handful of years now,” McDonagh, the team captain, said. “He’s become more vocal in the room. He’s been a good voice for the forwards. He prepares very well. He works hard in practice. He’s fine-tuning his skills, so when it comes game time, he doesn’t really look nervous. And he’s still very calm, funny, joking around, keeps the room loose, so guys are able to go into a game feeling good.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: After Injury, No. 36 Bounces Back (Like Sales of His Sweater).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.