AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe waters have parted.It’s only Week 8 of the N.F.L. schedule, and already some teams have separated themselves from the pack, both in the leaders and among the bottom feeders.Barring a wave of injuries, fans in New England, Wisconsin, Colorado, Cincinnati and Charlotte, N.C., can begin budgeting for playoff tickets. And barring a total turnaround in performance, fans in Tennessee, Houston, Detroit and Baltimore can start thinking about the No. 1 overall draft selection.It is difficult, even before the halfway point of the season, to project any outsiders forcing their way past the Patriots or the Bengals in the A.F.C., or the Packers in the N.F.C.Yes, the Seahawks could find that magic formula again, as they did in 2014 after a 3-3 start, and the Panthers have shown the resilience and strong coaching required of a contender. Arizona and Atlanta can be scary opponents, and somebody has to win the N.F.C. East.But the road to the N.F.C. title as the temperatures plummet and snow starts to fall will appropriately run through Green Bay.The Packers are getting healthy coming off their bye week as they head to Denver to play the Broncos for a rare matchup of 6-0 teams, just the fourth time it has happened in the N.F.L.They have found ways to somewhat replace the star receiver Jordy Nelson, and Aaron Rodgers’s rapport with some of his younger receivers will only grow through November and December. The running game is formidable, with Eddie Lacy and James Starks operating behind an improving line.And the defense has more than held its own, which might be all the Packers need.“You definitely have to be very optimistic, knowing that we feel we haven’t played up to our full potential as a team yet, but we’re sitting here at 6-0,” guard T. J. Lang said. “Obviously, a lot of momentum on our side, a lot of confidence, and getting a couple key guys back for us this week is going to be huge.”The gap between the Packers and the rest of the N.F.C. might not appear huge in the standings, with Carolina at 6-0, Atlanta 6-1 and Arizona 5-2. The next two weeks might show it is, should the Packers get through the Broncos and the Panthers on the road before a four-game stretch within the division.The A.F.C. is even more clear-cut, even with three undefeated teams. As the Jets displayed last Sunday, just one mistake — Brandon Marshall’s drop in the end zone that would have given the Jets an 8-point lead in the final quarter — is all the Patriots need. It was the first time the Patriots truly were tested — they did not play particularly well, and they still won.While this is not a Patriots team reminiscent of the 2007 version that went 18-0 before falling in the Super Bowl, it resembles last season’s champions well enough to be considered a strong favorite over the Bengals and the Broncos. Particularly if New England gets A.F.C. home-field advantage.Denver, with a terrific defense that has bailed out a struggling Peyton Manning and the offense, has become too one-dimensional. But there are expectations that the 39-year-old Manning will return to form one more time, and the Broncos have a relative walk-through in the A.F.C. West.Cincinnati has matched its best start, but it might not have things so easy in the A.F.C. North now that Ben Roethlisberger is returning to the Steelers. Of course, a victory against Pittsburgh on Sunday would mean a three-and-a-half-game lead in the division, and the Bengals have already established solid credentials in all areas. Enough so — particularly if Andy Dalton is truly is the quarterback he is at the moment, not the postseason flop of the past four years — to book their place in the playoffs.The playoffs are beyond reach for more teams than usual before the calendar turns to November. Most shocking is how Baltimore and Detroit have separated themselves — in the wrong direction.John Harbaugh’s Ravens have been known for their ability in the clutch, their versatility and resourcefulness. They certainly have been resourceful this season in finding ways to lose, and the season-ending injury to their pass rusher Terrell Suggs has taken down the entire defense.Detroit is such a mess that it is firing coordinators and assistant coaches a week before its bye. There is nothing but negative karma around the Lions.The Ravens probably are not lost enough to wind up at the top of the draft, which would be a new spot for them. The Lions, the Titans, the 49ers and the Texans have been very persuasive in their presentations for worst team in the N.F.L.Among those clubs, only Tennessee had a losing record last season.Talk about separation in the wrong direction.Advertisement