By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 31, 2015
NASHVILLE —  Before Challenger, a bald eagle, soars around the stadium for his stirring portion of the pregame routine, he takes the same trip upstairs as many fans heading to the upper deck.He rides the elevator.Challenger’s trick is swooping from his perch high above the field and circling over the fans on his way down to the waiting left arm of one of his handlers, with the occasional extra loop around the field.“He recognizes people are clapping, applauding, taking pictures,” said Al Louis Cecere, founder and president of the nonprofit American Eagle Foundation, who is also a handler. “Who knows? We can’t totally get into Challenger’s mind, but I think he kind of enjoys it.”Challenger has become a regular during national anthems since the Tennessee Titans moved into their current stadium in 1999, but this eagle has flown at N.F.L. stadiums in Green Bay, Buffalo, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Minnesota and Detroit, with Houston on tap later this year. Philadelphia is also a frequent stop for Challenger, with the Eagles bringing the bald eagle to several games this season.AdvertisementHe is considered the first bald eagle trained to fly freely at sports stadiums, with his résumé featuring three Pro Bowls, five World Series, a handful of Fiesta Bowls, five Bowl Championship Series games, the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball Final Four and a variety of major league baseball and college football games. Challenger has also flown for five American presidents.AdvertisementWhile Challenger’s flights add an emotional punch to an anthem, this eagle’s mission is education and bringing attention to the foundation, which is based at Dollywood in Pigeon Forge, Tenn.“Other people here, it might be entertainment, it might be patriotic, but it’s educational for the foundation,” said Cecere, the foundation’s founder and president.Challenger was a few weeks old when blown from his Louisiana nest by a storm, then cared for by people who found him. Once released, he kept going to people for food, but that was too dangerous as he grew to two feet tall with a six-foot wingspan. So the eagle was taken to the foundation, where handlers started by taking Challenger on educational visits.Exercising the eagle involves daily flights that started with short hops and extended to trips lasting up to 50 seconds. So Challenger’s public appearances grew from elementary schools and veterans’ homes.“He was physically perfect, but he had the mental handicap thinking he was a person, having been raised by people in Louisiana,” Cecere said. “I don’t know, I just thought it’d be a great idea for the American people to see the national bird up close in a stadium during the national anthem.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Challenger’s first flight came at a Bassmaster Classic in 1995 in North Carolina. His big stage was the 1996 Olympics, where Challenger flew into the stadium from the parking lot, embellishing his finish by circling the flagpole a few times.“It was like a perfect introduction to Challenger at sporting events,” Cecere said.Challenger, now 26 years old, has an entourage, along with his own carrier featuring a perch, a window and lots of ventilation. Cecere is one of five trained staff members with Challenger for outdoor events.Once they arrive in a city, the first stop is a store to pick up fresh salmon and bottled water for Challenger.AdvertisementEven though Challenger has made approximately 370 event and television appearances, the eagle still makes three practice flights, usually on the day before at each stop. Rain forced Challenger to rehearse last Sunday only a couple of hours before the Titans kicked off against Atlanta, with the last flight coming while the Falcons also warmed up on the field.Two handlers take Challenger to his release point high in the stadium, with one keeping curious fans at a safe distance while the other releases the eagle. Cecere usually catches Challenger, while another person swings the lure that calls the eagle down. Then the eagle gets to wait in his own locker room before his big appearance. He makes a few stops in luxury suites for photos as part of the educational message, with a big meal Challenger’s reward before the next stop.Challenger gets a vacation. He takes off June, July and August, when his feathers molt. He gets fed as much as he wants.When Challenger performs, he may take an extra swoop or two before landing.“What he’s trying to do is slow down where he can make an approach, a slower approach and land on the glove,” Cecere said. “But there have been a couple times over the years when he first started doing it that I wondered for a second what was going to happen, and a couple times where he came in so fast he actually touched my glove with his feet and kept going. After so many events, I learned he was going to make an extra turn and come in for a landing.”Ever the showman.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Star of 5 World Series, a Final Four, 3 Pro Bowls and an Olympics? One Bald Eagle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.