By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 31, 2015
LONDON —  New Zealand became the first team to retain the Rugby World Cup when it held off a second-half comeback by Australia on Saturday to win the final, 34-17, capping an era of rare dominance for a country.In probably the last international match of his record-breaking career, fly-half Dan Carter steered the All Blacks to a record third global title — and the first outside New Zealand, at Twickenham Stadium.Carter kicked a momentum-turning dropped goal from 40 meters. Then he booted a penalty before delivering the knockout blow, a right-footed conversion in front of the posts.In a 10-minute span, Carter made up for years of personal hurt on the sport’s highest stage, and cemented his place among rugby’s greats.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Carter kicked 19 points and was the All Blacks’ calming influence in their win. Throw in the man-of-the-match award, and it wasn’t a bad way to bow out if, as expected, this was his last game.AdvertisementA target of roughhouse tactics by the Wallabies in the first half, Carter — his right knee wrapped in tape — kicked three penalties and a conversion to help the All Blacks to a 21-3 lead, and he was still there when they needed him most.AdvertisementThe Wallabies closed to 21-17 when their momentum was halted in the 70th minute by Carter, who took a pass from scrumhalf Aaron Smith, stepped back onto his left and kicked a dropped goal.“I was yelling at the ball to go over and it did,” Carter said. “It gave us breathing space.”When Australia collapsed a scrum just inside its own half two minutes later, Carter chose to go for a goal. He hit it sweetly, and the game was over for Australia.His last-minute conversion may have been his last touch of the ball in test rugby.“When we needed him to step up and make some decisions and go out on a bit of a limb and have a crack at a dropped kick, he delivered,” said Ian Foster, the All Blacks’ assistant coach. “He should be really satisfied with what he’s done. He’s left this team in a really good space.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP12 of the New York edition with the headline: New Zealand Tops Australia in Cup Final.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.