AdvertisementSupported byEssay14 PhotosView Slide Show ›Talya Minsberg/The New York TimesBy Talya MinsbergTraining for a marathon involves a lot of maps. A six-mile route is fairly easy to create in your neighborhood, in local parks or on a trail. A 22-mile route? That’s a different story.As I trained for the New York City Marathon, I became somewhat of an amateur cartographer. I consulted GoogleMaps and MapMyRun, looked at old-fashioned trail maps and followed arrows painted on rocks, jumped on prerouted runs with groups, and still managed to get lost.I plotted long routes through a sandstorm in Israel and a rainstorm in New York City, through the heat of Southern California and the fog of Northern California, and around bike paths and lakes in Minnesota and Wisconsin.Perhaps the most interesting map to draw? A 13-mile run in Jerusalem. I was wise enough to refrain from looking at an elevation map, as you always seem to be running uphill in Jerusalem. I planned to get moving early Saturday morning, before the blazing summer sun was beating at my back.I lived in Jerusalem years ago, so I knew the neighborhoods to avoid, those where my running shorts and a T-shirt would be inappropriate. But I had never created a 13-mile route traversing the rolling hills of the city while carefully skirting religious Jewish and Muslim neighborhoods.It was perhaps one of the hardest and most rewarding runs of my training. I had almost the entire city to myself around 6 a.m. when I hit the streets. In Jerusalem, public transportation is shut down for the Jewish Sabbath and most shops are closed. There are few cars, and at that time of the morning, most of the city was still sound asleep.So, with a few other runners I encountered along the way, I ran down the center of streets, through the empty souk, around a usually bustling park and past rows of fancy shops outside the Old City.When I stopped at a drinking fountain, a policeman looked at me quizzically and asked how long I was running. When I replied 21 kilometers, his eyes bugged out and he proudly said, “Once I ran 5K!” and wished me luck.Finishing the 13-mile run in Jerusalem, and every long run after that, was an exercise in endurance, logistics and solitude.But the beauty in running is found in its simplicity. No matter what construction or obstruction you find along the way, you just have to figure out how to keep moving.In Los Angeles, I mapped a particularly beautiful route that hugged the Pacific for 19 miles. I did not anticipate the construction that would take me on a detour, and I did not consider just how few drinking fountains I’d encounter along the way. But when you are lost and alone on a detour 13 miles into a 19-mile run, all you have to do, and all you can do, is continue to run.The solitude of marathon training will give way to the controlled chaos of race day in New York. A wave of 50,000 runners race through the streets of New York City thanks to the support of 10,000 volunteers and over a million spectators.I have no more maps to make. Just one to study. Advertisement