AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunThe golden era for Ivy League football, at least in terms of producing quarterbacks, was probably the early 1980s. Five quarterbacks found their way into the N.F.L. A few of them even stuck.There was Jeff Kemp, who emerged from Dartmouth to lead the Los Angeles Rams into the 1984 playoffs. There was Princeton’s Bob Holly, a dashing backup to Joe Theismann in Super Bowl XVII. There was Jim Crocicchia, who got a call from the Giants after graduating from Penn in 1987. The players were on strike; the Giants needed a quarterback. He made his debut on “Monday Night Football,” completed six passes for 89 yards, and never played in the N.F.L. again.So it seems to go for quarterbacks from the Ivy League, which was established in 1954. Universities in the league have produced 14 of the 44 presidents (and some decent tight ends and safeties, too). But only 25 quarterbacks have appeared in N.F.L. games, and eight played before the end of World War II. The most venerated of any of them, Sid Luckman, retired in 1950. Yet Luckman’s total of 137 passing touchdowns still stands as the highest for any Ivy League alumnus. And now, after 65 years, it is in peril.“I knew I was getting closer,” Jets quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick said last week. It is, he acknowledged, an obscure and trivial statistic. But the fact that he enters Sunday’s game against Oakland only three touchdowns behind Luckman is testament to Fitzpatrick’s longevity at a position that has not been kind to his Ivy League brethren. Brian Dowling was a Yale legend in the late 1960s, but he never got an N.F.L. start in five seasons. Neither did Archie Roberts, who set 14 Ivy League records as a quarterback for Columbia. His pro career registers only one game: mop-up duty for Miami in a 41-0 loss in 1967. He soon retired — thankfully, because he became one of the most renowned heart surgeons in the country.John Witkowski, another Columbia alumnus, actually did earn a start in his career, which involved three games in 1984 and two in 1988. It came in the Detroit Lions’ season finale against the Chicago Bears, a year before the Bears won the Super Bowl. He got hammered, completing only three throws. The Bears finished with 12 sacks. But Witkowski earned a moment to savor.“It’s something that not many can say they’ve done,” Witkowski said from his home in Orchard Park, N.Y.Witkowski was lucky, after all. Others did not have much of a chance in the pros. One of Brown’s early quarterback prospects, Jimmy Jemail, must have thought he had a good situation in 1921, as the starter for a new metropolitan franchise, the New York Brickley Giants. But after the team lost its first two games, 55-0 and 17-0, the owner, Billy Gibson, suddenly disbanded it, and Jemail’s career went with it. A few years later, Gibson suggested to a young bookmaker, Tim Mara, that he revive the franchise. Mara trimmed the name and founded the New York Giants in 1925. That franchise has welcomed Ivy League quarterbacks. Bill Hutchinson played his one season there in 1942 (no touchdowns, two interceptions), and Gary Wood wore blue for five years in the 1960s (nine total starts). Even Jason Garrett played two games for the Giants in 2000, at the end of an eight-year career out of Princeton. His name should be familiar to Giants’ fans: He now coaches the Dallas Cowboys. The Ivy League has played in the lower tier of Division I football (now the Football Bowl Subdivision) since 1982, so comparing it with the Pac-12 is silly. But Kemp, whose N.F.L. career lasted 11 seasons, said that being one of the few guys from an entire conference could feel isolating.“My wife would watch me after the games, and she’d chuckle because I’d be wandering around looking lost,” Kemp said. “I couldn’t find anyone from the Ivy League. Everyone would be saying hi to all their friends, and I’d be looking around saying, gosh, I don’t know any of these guys.”Kemp had an advantage: He was the son of Jack Kemp, a former All-Star quarterback in the A.F.L. But another Dartmouth alumnus, Jay Fiedler, had a tougher time getting noticed after his college career ended in 1994. He went undrafted, latched on as a third-stringer in Philadelphia, spent two years out of football and even coached at Hofstra before finally breaking through in Miami in 2000. (The last of Fiedler’s 69 touchdown passes was thrown in his stint with the Jets in 2005.)“Just getting that opportunity was the toughest challenge for me,” Fiedler said. “I don’t know if they didn’t think I could or what. It’s just not too many people knew about me.”Similarly, Fitzpatrick was overlooked coming out of high school in Gilbert, Ariz. — enough so that Harvard Coach Tim Murphy worried that other teams were not recruiting him for a reason. “I just figured they knew something we didn’t know,” Murphy said. “Fortunately, we were right and they were wrong.”Murphy, who has coached at Harvard for 22 years, offered his best explanation for why players like Fitzpatrick have not come around more often.“I think it’s pretty simple,” Murphy said. “Those guys who end up being some of the best college prospects in the country as quarterbacks are so highly recruited.” Fitzpatrick, whose 11 touchdowns and 61.4 completion percentage have helped the Jets to a 4-2 start, considered Luckman’s record a “cool distinction.” “It’s not like when I started my career, I was saying, all right, that’s the number right there,” Fitzpatrick said. “But I think it’s one of those things that, if it happens, it will be cool.”And a small fraternity of former players will be watching.“I think it’s great that Fitz is doing what he’s doing,” Witkowski said. “Even though he’s from Harvard.”Advertisement