AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeré LongmanMeb Keflezighi arrived for his 10th New York City Marathon in the usual fashion, flying on a redeye from San Diego, taking the same room at a Midtown hotel.“Meb’s the only one who asks for the redeye,” David Monti, who helps recruit elite athletes for the race, said, laughing. “He’s a guy that thrives on structure and detail.”Attention to routine has built a glorious running career over 26.2 miles for Keflezighi, the only person who has won the New York City Marathon (2009), the Boston Marathon (2014) and an Olympic marathon medal (silver, 2004 Athens Games).At 40, he enters Sunday’s race among a half-dozen favorites and is expected to qualify for the 2016 Rio Olympics by finishing among the top three at the United States Olympic marathon trials on Feb. 13 in Los Angeles.Frank Shorter is widely considered the greatest male American marathoner, having won gold at the 1972 Munich Olympics, taken silver at the 1976 Montreal Games and finished first for four consecutive years at Japan’s Fukuoka Marathon, a de facto world championship in the 1970s.Yet given the persistence of Keflezighi’s career in an event where the top runners often flare as brightly and briefly as shooting stars, said Amby Burfoot, winner of the 1968 Boston Marathon, “Meb’s longevity on top is without equal, I think.”A thread that stitches Keflezighi’s triumphs is his success not in time-trial races on flat courses like Berlin but on challenging courses without pacesetters in New York and Boston, and in championship races like the Olympics, where strategy and tactics are as important as sheer speed.In 2014, Keflezighi made an early break and became the first American man to win Boston since 1983, running a personal best 2 hours 8 minutes 37 seconds at age 38. At the 2012 London Olympics, he reeled in a dozen runners in the final half of the marathon on a brutally humid day, came from nowhere and finished fourth, one spot off the medal podium.On Sunday, Keflezighi will not possess the same pure speed as Wilson Kipsang of Kenya, a former world-record holder (2:03:23) and the reigning New York champion and Olympic bronze medalist. Nor will Keflezighi match the fastest time of Lelisa Desisa of Ethiopia (2:04:45), a two-time Boston champion.A stern challenge is also expected from Geoffrey Kamworor of Kenya, the 2014 world half-marathon champion and 2015 world cross-country champion, whose blistering speed on the track brought him a silver medal at 10,000 meters in August at the world championships in Beijing.But if Keflezighi can parry these confrontations, if he correctly decides which surges to ignore and which to counter, if he makes a deft move of his own, if he remains among the leaders as the marathon reaches its final, undulating miles in Central Park, history suggests that anything is possible.“He absolutely rises to the challenge when he’s in a position where he can challenge for a win,” said Burfoot, a longtime editor at Runner’s World magazine. “If he’s close, he will be a factor and possibly a winner. He’s got a wealth of experience, he’s learned more about his body and he has come to know expressly his limits — and lack of limits.”No man has won New York in his 40s. (Miki Gorman of the United States, twice, and Priscilla Welch of Britain have as women’s champions.) Even if Keflezighi does not finish among the top runners on Sunday, a consolation prize seems within reach: the American masters record of 2:13:52, set in 2006 by Mbarak Hussein.“I’m here to compete,” Keflezighi said. “Goal No. 1 is to try to win” or get a high placement. Barring that, his finishing time could be a kind of golden parachute, allowing a gentle, somewhat satisfactory landing. Seven of his nine marathons in New York have finished under the current masters record.What is his secret to staying competitive for so long? There are many theories. Keflezighi has kept the same coach, Bob Larsen, since his college days at U.C.L.A. He remains committed to the mundane routines of stretching and strength work. Training for so many years at altitude in Mammoth Lakes, Calif., much of it on soft surfaces, has perhaps prolonged Keflezighi’s career, Larsen said, forcing him to restrict the intensity of his training while still providing him the cardiovascular benefits.Also, Larsen noted, Keflezighi has seldom run more than 100 or 110 miles per week (though he did reach 130 miles and a long run of 27 miles in training for Sunday’s race and bridging his preparation for the 2016 Olympic trials). And there have been inevitable concessions to age for a man who figures he has logged about 100,000 career miles — four times the circumference of the earth.He no longer feels compelled to run mile repeats in 4:17 to 4:20. On easy days, he once ran each mile at a pace of 6 to 6:15. Now he starts at 7:15, or even 8, and warms up to 6:10.Instead of a second run daily, Keflezighi often trains on an ElliptiGO machine, a combination of an elliptical trainer and bicycle. And Keflezighi said he had cut his daily calorie intake from about 5,000 calories a day as a young runner to 2,500 to 3,000 to maintain a weight of 122 to 123 pounds.“I’m so efficient,” Keflezighi said. “I’ve been running over 25 years. When I’m doing 6:30 miles, I’m not burning anything. I’m burning half a banana.”Perhaps no one should be surprised at the perseverance of Keflezighi, given his family’s history of dogged resolve. In a story well known in running circles, Russom Keflezighi, Meb’s father, walked 150 miles across Eritrea in East Africa, fearing for his safety in the country’s war to gain independence from Ethiopia, making his way to Italy and then to the United States.Of the 11 children in the family, Meb said, nine have earned college degrees. And one has become a champion marathon runner, even if first impressions were unnerving. At his first New York City Marathon, in 2002, he finished ninth in 2:12:35 and grew so chilled that his father tried to massage warmth back into his legs and his mother told him, “No more marathons for you.”He remembers telling himself and others, “I don’t want to ever do that again.”Now he is back in New York for a 10th marathon. And after a break of four days or so, Keflezighi will begin his recovery and buildup toward the Olympic trials in February. He did this successfully before the 2012 London Olympics on an even shorter turnaround.Presumably, his attention to detail will avoid a repeat of what happened during the 2011 New York City Marathon, when Keflezighi forgot to put a breathing strip on his nose, leaving it in his running shoe as he finished sixth. An irritation developed and his foot became infected, costing him three weeks of training. Still, Keflezighi rebounded to win the Olympic trials.“He was a little embarrassed,” said Larsen, Keflezighi’s coach. “He’s very alert and precise at what he does. That was very unusual for him.”Advertisement