AdvertisementSupported byCampus CornerBy Jill Painter LopezPASADENA, Calif. — Before Robert Thomas walked to midfield for the coin toss for U.C.L.A.’s game against California at the Rose Bowl on Oct. 22, he paused to reflect and became emotional. He gave himself a hug.The last time Thomas walked out on the field as a captain was in 2001 as an all-American linebacker for the Bruins. This time, he made the walk as an honorary captain.U.C.L.A. began selecting honorary captains in 2003. Troy Aikman, Randy Cross and J. J. Stokes have received the honor, as have less-famous counterparts. In 2012, the former offensive lineman Nick Ekbatani was selected for being an inspiration after his left leg was amputated following a motorcycle accident.“It makes former players still feel appreciated, wanted, valued and understanding their accomplishments and achievements and what they’ve given is appreciated and never forgotten,” said Rip Scherer, an associate athletic director for football at U.C.L.A. “It also links our present players with the past. It’s meaningful for our players to understand that once you’re a Bruin, you’re always a Bruin.”Thomas, 35, was an easy choice to become an honorary captain for U.C.L.A., which defeated visiting Colorado, 35-31, on Saturday. A first-round draft pick in 2002, he played in the N.F.L. through 2008, with the St. Louis Rams, the Green Bay Packers and the Oakland Raiders. He finished his career with 304 tackles.After he retired, he spent several years playing golf, snowboarding, surfing and traveling abroad“There’s only so much golf and travel you can do,” Thomas said. “I started coaching football. I wanted to give back to society.”Thomas became an assistant coach at Oceanside High in San Diego County, and he met U.C.L.A. Coach Jim Mora during an unscheduled visit. Thomas returned to the university this year to earn his degree and began wearing blue and gold again on the sideline as a student coaching assistant working with linebackers. He is scheduled to graduate in June.Thomas’s mother, Elizabeth, was instrumental in getting him to return to school. He was only 18 credits shy of his degree and is taking advantage of an N.F.L. assistance program that helps retired players finish their degrees. “It was like the movie ‘Back to School’ with Rodney Dangerfield,” said Thomas, who is from El Centro, Calif. “I’m that old guy. That was weird at first. It’s not weird anymore. It’s more interesting when I’m sitting in class, listening to the history professor talk. Listening and grasping it. I’m older and wiser. When I was a kid, I had so much on my mind.”For the game against Cal, about 15 friends and family members looked on as Thomas walked hand in hand with U.C.L.A. linebacker Cameron Judge and defensive back Taylor Legace.“That kind of gave me chills,” Thomas said. “I felt like I was back in the game, and all those feelings from back in the day. Being a Bruin was special. In the moment, I felt like I was going to strap it on. It was definitely a blessing. As I walked out there, I was thinking I did some great things to be the honorary captain. I’m proud of what I accomplished.”When Thomas completed his duties as honorary captain, he sprinted off the field and through the Rose Bowl tunnel to race his way up to the press box, where he coached from the booth for the first time in his football career.The honorary captain often stays at the team hotel the night before a game and talks to the team. On game day, the captain connects with former officials, donors and teammates.Thomas did not participate in any of these activities because of his coaching duties with U.C.L.A. But he talks to the linebacking corps every day.“A lot of kids gravitate toward me,” Thomas said. “What I tell them is: ‘You’re not just representing the name Bruins. We’re family. You represent the name on the back of your jersey. Thomas is who I am.’ ”He added: “Playing football has given me opportunities to set my life up forever. I took that approach.”Advertisement