
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
OCT. 30, 2015
When the sports agent Andrey Baranov sent an email in the spring to New York Road Runners, asking the group to accept five of his female Eastern European runners into the professional field of this year’s New York City Marathon, he was confident that at least one of them would receive an invitation.At minimum, Tatyana Petrova Arkhipova of Russia would make the cut, Baranov thought. She was, after all, the bronze medalist in the marathon at the 2012 London Olympics. One of the best marathoners in the world.The response from New York, Baranov recalled on Thursday, stunned him: Sorry, not interested. Good luck with other races.“I can get runners into London, Boston, Tokyo, but New York always gives me problems, and it’s confusing for me,” Baranov said. “Can you imagine if the U.S. Open had no Russians playing tennis? If there would be no Maria Sharapova there? Now what kind of scandal would that be? But in the marathon, there’s nothing. No scandal, nothing. I don’t understand it.”AdvertisementBaranov is right about the field’s lack of Russian runners, a demographic that used to have a strong presence among the top competitors in the event. Lyudmila Petrova won the women’s race in 2000. In 2001, four Russian women finished in the top 10. In 2005, five Russians placed in the top 13.In recent years, though, the number of Russians and Eastern Europeans more generally has dwindled. And now, for the second year in a row, the pro field that will line up on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge will have no Russians. In fact, the only Eastern European runner among the elites this year is Jelena Prokopcuka, a two-time winner. She’s from Latvia.Advertisement“I have a feeling why,” Baranov said of the exclusion of his clients. “It’s because of the doping problem in Russia. I know there’s a doping problem there. But just because there’s one bad apple doesn’t mean in Russia there are all bad apples. And in other Eastern European countries, the apples are even from completely different trees!”New York City Marathon officials aren’t saying that Russians are missing from their elite field because other Russians have doped. They’re using more nuance than that because their process of choosing athletes is complex.Peter Ciaccia, the marathon’s race director and the Road Runners president for events, told me Friday that elite Russian marathoners just weren’t as good as they used to be. That’s partly why they are disappearing from New York and other major marathons, like those in Chicago and Berlin, he said.When I asked if Russians and other Eastern Europeans were being excluded because of recent doping revelations in that part of the world — the International Association of Athletics Federations is embroiled in a scandal involving Russia right now — Ciaccia didn’t say yes or no.He just said Road Runners had a team of two people who “have their ears to the ground” — who know which athletes work with which coaches, trainers and agents and are aware of any whispers regarding their integrity. The scouts vet each runner before bringing any name back to Road Runners so a final group of athletes can be invited.“It’s a privilege to run New York, and that’s the way we look at it,” Ciaccia said. “So we have to make judgment calls on who makes it and who doesn’t.”AdvertisementIt’s not as if the marathon, run by a private company, has to take each country’s top runners. Just like a co-op board in New York, the race officials can be much more selective and make decisions according to their own whims and preferences. And like a co-op board, they have no obligation to explain their thought process, either.I can tell you this: The judgment calls made when choosing the elite fields have certainly been affected by the current doping scandal in Russia, which involves claims of systemic doping and of bribes paid to cover up positive tests. And the decisions have certainly been affected by positive doping tests involving Russian athletes. Right now, an independent investigation launched by the World Anti-Doping Agency is looking into the possibility that doping and corruption involving drug use have been rampant in Russian track and field.If that doesn’t repel race organizers from inviting Russian athletes, who knows what else would?It would be foolish for the marathon’s organizers to ignore those red flags. Nor would it be wise, since they are custodians of their race and their precious brand.Already, the major marathons conduct their own drug testing because they know testing isn’t uniform — and can’t be trusted — worldwide. They also have an unwritten rule to dissuade athletes from doping in their races: One positive test, and you’re out, forever, no matter your excuse.So the Russians and their agents can blame their compatriots if they want. And the Russian sports machine, if they want: Since Russia failed to weed out its dopers on a national level, those athletes have gone on to shine on the international stage before testing positive on a grand scale.Clean Russians have good reason to be upset about being excluded from big races, or blackballed, if you can call it that, because of what others from their country have done.Liliya Shobukhova, who was the second-fastest female marathoner in history, was handed a suspension in 2014 after her biological passport — a record of blood values kept by antidoping authorities — showed evidence of doping. She has since cooperated with antidoping officials and was reinstated for competition this summer, six months before her ban was to end.Another top Russian, Lyubov Denisova, tested positive for an elevated testosterone-to-epitestosterone level in 2007. For years, she had been a staple in the front group of the New York City Marathon. Denisova and Shobukhova both used Baranov as an agent.AdvertisementIn 2008, seven female Russian track and field athletes, five of them bound for the Olympics, received sanctions for tainting their doping samples.That’s not a brilliant legacy for the Russians currently trying to make a living in the sport.“You can’t paint a broad brush to a whole country based on one or two positives, but you can be really careful, though,” said Mary Wittenberg, a former New York City Marathon race director. “In New York, we were always careful with agents. If an athlete of an agent was caught, we wouldn’t be looking to work as much with that agent.”She added: “The majors have been burned because that’s a lot of money and prestige at stake, and everybody feels burned when somebody cheats. We have to trust our professionals running up front.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Russians aren’t the only ones who have had doping problems, though. The Kenyans recently have had their own drug issues — and a lot of them, too.More than two dozen of them have tested positive in the last few years, including Rita Jeptoo, a three-time winner of the Boston Marathon and a two-time winner in Chicago. She failed a test for the blood booster erythropoietin, or EPO, just before the New York City Marathon last year — just before she was to pick up a $500,000 World Marathon Majors prize based on her performances over a two-year cycle.Now that half-million prize is given to the winner in annual installments of $100,000 as extra incentive for the athlete to stay clean over time.So what, then, does Baranov tell his athletes, their sponsors and the friends he has calling him from the Russian consulate who are asking him why New York will have no top Russians on Sunday?“We are at the mercy of the race organizers,” he said. “If they say my runners are not interesting, they are not interesting; what can you do? You just swallow and go to the next race.”Still, Baranov said he hoped for a little bit of payback. If one of his runners wins a gold medal in the marathon at the 2016 Rio Olympics, he will have some leverage.Advertisement“Then New York will call because they will want the athlete and they will want the publicity, and I will say no,” he said, with a laugh. “You didn’t want us, now we don’t want you.”Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: History of Doping Leaves Organizers Wary of Russian Runners .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »