By LEANDER SCHAERLAECKENSOCT. 30, 2015
Luis Robles was just going to hang around for a couple of months. Stay in shape, cash his paychecks, wait for a team to claim him. In all likelihood, nobody would. And that was O.K. His wife would have the baby — covered by Major League Soccer’s health insurance — and that would be it. Robles would walk away from soccer for good. He was fine with that. Even had a job lined up.Instead, on Sunday, Robles will start in goal for the Red Bulls when they open the M.L.S. playoffs against D.C. United. This is what he does, what Robles has done 106 times in a row now — six games shy of Kevin Hartman’s league record of starting and finishing 112 straight regular-season games. Midfielder Chris Klein once started 118 in a row — the overall league record for consecutive games — although, unlike Robles and Hartman, he did not complete them all. But that record is now within view for Robles, too.If it is strange for Robles, 31, to be nearing either milestone, it is because the odds of his becoming the league’s ironman were prohibitively long. He was a marginal and undersize prospect coming out of the University of Portland, drafted 50th over all by D.C. United in 2007. When M.L.S. offered him an $11,700 developmental contract, he declined and decided to try his luck in Germany instead.His agent put him up in the barn of an old country house, where Robles took up residence in the spartan washroom. In fits of boredom, he would walk the sheep on the property, luring them around the grounds with Cheerios. But while he worked as an amateur shepherd, he also was becoming a professional goalkeeper.AdvertisementAlmost two years after he dropped his bags in the barn, Robles won the starting job with the senior team at F.C. Kaiserslautern, in Germany’s second professional tier. When his manager threatened to fine him 10,000 euros for not speaking German, Robles began hanging out with his aging, chain-smoking landlady, who actually spoke the Pfaelzisch dialect. That was how the Arizona-raised son of a South Korean mother and a Puerto Rican father, who speaks neither Korean nor Spanish, came to be fluent in German.AdvertisementIt was his play that got him noticed. Robles briefly earned a spot on the United States national team in 2009, spending the summer with the team at the Concacaf Gold Cup. That call-up, his last one to date, forced him to miss Kaiserslautern’s preseason, however, and upon his return he found that the team’s new manager had given his starting job to someone else.After a season on the bench, Robles moved on to Karlsruher, which also played in Germany’s second division. But the club had seven managers in his two seasons there, and Robles soon found himself ostracized from the club and — as a 6-foot-1 shot-stopper in a country that preferred giants in goal — criticized in the news media, which accused him of being a locker-room cancer.“When you’re a foreign goalkeeper and maybe not a stereotypical build and then you have a tremendous amount of turnover, it doesn’t make for a good situation,” said the former goalkeeper Kasey Keller, a veteran of German soccer and, as a former Portland all-American, something of a mentor to Robles. “You can become a victim of circumstance.”Exasperated, Robles and his wife, Cara, who was pregnant, decided in early 2012 that they wanted to go home.“We decided we were going to come back and take a chance and see if Major League Soccer worked out,” Robles said. “And if not, I’d go do something else with my life.”But the league’s dense tangle of rules and regulations on player acquisitions kept tripping up the teams that wanted to sign Robles. Because he had played for the United States, even if it was only one game, he was categorized as a returning national team player. That meant any team that selected him would go to the back of the line when the next one became available, a steep price to pay for a presumed backup goalkeeper.While he waited, Robles fielded offers from Norway, Sweden and Azerbaijan, but none of them made sense. So in the absence of any kind of signal from M.L.S., Robles took a job with a real estate business back home in Arizona; with a baby on the way, he needed the security of the health insurance the job offered, and the brokerage promised him a new career.Advertisement“We were in a situation where I thought if soccer is done, it’s O.K.,” Robles said. “I wasn’t bitter. I wasn’t resentful. It was a hard way for it to end. But maybe, at the end of the day, that was my career and I was O.K. with it. It seemed like a natural transition, an opportunity to move on.”But Robles’s wife insisted he contact M.L.S. one last time. “She says, ‘Why don’t you just Google ‘Major League Soccer’ and call them?’ ” Robles said. “I’m like: ‘You’re crazy. It doesn’t work this way.’ She told me how it works wasn’t working either.”So Robles called the league. And someone picked up.Robles negotiated a cut-rate deal for $44,000, making sure to ask if it came with health insurance. Assured that it did, he signed the contract and waited for a team to claim him. His plan was to hang around in soccer limbo long enough for the baby to arrive and then quit for good.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I figured if I can get through this and not pay 25 grand for a pregnancy, that in and of itself is worth it,” Robles said. In August 2012, the Red Bulls unexpectedly picked him up.He had not practiced in months but made a strong impression, surprising both himself and his new team. On Sept. 29, 2012, he started his first game. He has not missed a minute of playing time since — a run of more than 10,000 consecutive minutes, if playoffs are included.“Having that experience, he tried to learn from it — why he was presented with those challenges and how to grow,” Red Bulls Coach Jesse Marsch said. “It’s empowered him to appreciate what he’s going through now and helped get him there as well.”Teammates contend that the genial and cerebral Robles is still not fully appreciated. The Red Bulls allowed the fewest goals in the Eastern Conference this season, a big reason they posted the league’s best record and earned a bye in the first round of the playoffs. Yet only recently has Robles been considered a serious contender to win the league’s goalkeeper of the year award.“I don’t think he gets the credit that he deserves,” said the Red Bulls’ captain, Dax McCarty. “I think the past three years, he should have been in the conversation for goalkeeper of the year every season, but for whatever reason, he hasn’t been. He’s kind of flown under the radar.”AdvertisementRobles still wears No. 31, the one he was given when he arrived. “That was the number they gave me,” he said when asked why he had never sought a lower number. “No one ever asked me.”Other things have changed. Robles and his wife now have two children, ages 3 and 1. Both pregnancies were covered by the health insurance that came with his professional resurrection. But Robles knows that his business is fickle, that a new manager could end his career a second time.Robles chuckles at the thought. “I could,” he said, “go back to real estate.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP14 of the New York edition with the headline: A Mainstay in Goal Who Never Imagined It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.