

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
OCT. 30, 2015
On Wednesday morning, the bickering tribes of college football came together to wish Jerry Kill well. Kill, Minnesota’s fifth-year coach, has epilepsy and recently had seizures, so during the week he announced his immediate resignation because of concerns about his health.But if Kill’s departure seemed cut and dried, seven other head-coaching changes in the Football Bowl Subdivision this season did not.Seven midseason vacancies — including Kill’s, and not including that of Illinois’s Tim Beckman, who was dismissed one week before the season opener — is the same number as the previous three seasons combined, according to Stats L.L.C. It is not uncommon for there to be no coaching changes atop the more than 120 F.B.S. teams until after the regular season is complete.Three coaches — Dan McCarney, from North Texas of Conference USA; Randy Edsall, from Maryland; and Al Golden, from Miami — were fired simply for not winning enough. Beckman and Southern California’s Steve Sarkisian faced questions about their personal conduct. Central Florida’s George O’Leary, after an 0-8 start, resigned from the program he was integral in building. And Steve Spurrier walked away from South Carolina after beginning 2-3.AdvertisementThe trend is seen as yet another sign that little anymore distinguishes college from professional football — and, as such signs do, prompted soul-searching about the sport’s trajectory.“It’s more evidence of the monetization of college athletics,” said Bill Carr, a former athletic director at Florida who consults on coaching hires. Firing coaches is not cheap — Edsall’s contract, for instance, could net him a $3.1 million buyout — and doing it before the end of the season frequently makes it even more expensive.AdvertisementRichard Southall, a professor of sport management at South Carolina, added, “It’s another indication that college athletics has adopted the same institutional logic — the same way of doing business — as professional football and professional basketball because the fans view it the same way fundamentally: They want the results now.”Beckman and Sarkisian were nominally dismissed because of questions about their conduct. A report found that Beckman had inappropriately influenced medical decisions and encouraged injured players to compete; Sarkisian’s reported behavior suggested that he was struggling with substance abuse.But even in those cases, there was evidence that on-field performance played some role. Allegations against Beckman, whose record at Illinois was 12-25, first surfaced several months earlier. Sarkisian acknowledged mixing alcohol and pills after giving a blustery, profane speech at a booster event in August — before the Trojans, ranked No. 8 in the preseason, shuffled to a 3-2 start.“We’ve never seen this much midseason changing,” said Robert Boland, a sports business and law professor at Ohio University who has also consulted on coaching searches.Miami fired Golden after a 58-0 loss to No. 3 Clemson despite having a winning record (4-3). “I don’t think we’ve ever seen a precedent like Golden, where the guy can still go to a pretty good bowl game,” Boland said. “He just got blown out by a better team.”As money and national attention have flooded into college football, universities have long since departed from a model in which their coaches’ tenures were little less secure than their professors’, and moved toward turnover rates comparable to those of professional leagues.AdvertisementWhen Bo Pelini was fired as Nebraska’s coach despite winning at least nine games in each of his seven seasons, no one batted an eye, since the move came shortly after the regular-season finale in 2014. Pelini was among a half-dozen F.B.S. coaches, including those at other high-profile programs like Michigan and Florida, who were fired or pressured to resign after the regular season.If anything, turnover is expected to be fiercer later this year. In the Power 5 conferences, Edsall and Golden were seen as occupying hot seats along with coaches like Kyle Flood of Rutgers, Mike London of Virginia, Darrell Hazell of Purdue and Paul Rhoads of Iowa State. As the season has progressed, there have been whispers surrounding Indiana’s Kevin Wilson, West Virginia’s Dana Holgersen and even Frank Beamer, the 29-year coach of Virginia Tech. But few, if any, were expected to be gone before the regular season was complete.Many criticized the midseason departures as disrespectful to players, who — as many of the same presidents and athletic directors who preside over and execute the dismissals insist — are primarily students.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think programs that get hysterical and start making moves in the middle of the season denigrate the quality of the student-athlete experience,” West Virginia’s president, E. Gordon Gee, told a West Virginia newspaper Tuesday.Boland added: “This strips away any remaining illusion that there is some higher educational purpose in collegiate sports.”Many officials pointed particularly to the effect that midseason changes can have on players, who are often recruited by the very men who suddenly are gone. When a coach departs, a member of the coaching staff is typically appointed interim coach — perhaps getting a leg up on the permanent position — but that does not guarantee continuity.“The direction and vision of the team usually comes from the main guy, so when he leaves, it’s a whole new system, vision, even ethos,” said Myron Rolle, a former Florida State player who now sits on the Knight Commission on Intercollegiate Athletics. It is a particularly challenging adjustment, Rolle added, for “guys who haven’t played much yet or who are role players looking to break through.”From a more hardheaded business perspective, the midseason changes shift leverage from the colleges to coaches and their agents, and also empower boosters, Boland argued. He also noted that unlike the N.F.L., the N.C.A.A. did not bar teams from contacting other teams’ head coaches, further minimizing the advantage an early vacancy might buy.However, Carr said, teams could gain a head start. “It does give you a chance to begin your search process,” he said. “Some would say there’s no benefit, and I would disagree.”AdvertisementPerhaps the most eloquent defense of the midseason departure was mounted two weeks ago by Spurrier. Pleading, essentially, to being over the hill at age 70, he abruptly resigned at South Carolina and indicated that he was retiring (he allowed that he might find himself coaching high school, but also signed with a broadcast agent).Asked why he did not instead finish out the season and then resign, Spurrier said, “I find that doesn’t work a lot, because if the players know you’re not going to be their coach after such and such a time, you just don’t have the accountability.”He added, “When something is inevitable, I believe you do it right then.”Southall, whose areas of expertise include ethics in sports, found a sense of irony in the situation.“I’m fine with the coach leaving midyear,” he said. “Whatever the two parties can agree to. Most often you have counsel involved and everybody says, ‘O.K., this is what we’re going to do that’s mutually agreeable.’“But that’s totally thrown out the window when it comes to anything to do with the athlete.”Southall offered a hypothetical that few in college football or the pros would accept.“If everything is negotiable and this is a business environment, then fine,” he said. “Tell a player he can decide to quit midyear so he can go to an N.F.L. camp early.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page SP11 of the New York edition with the headline: Midyear Vacancies Reflect a Professional Mentality.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »