Reported by THE NEW YORK TIMESNOV. 1, 2015
Even with linebacker Jadeveon Clowney sidelined — he injured his back in the first quarter and left for good in the second — the Texans turned in a dominating defensive performance, forcing three Titans turnovers and tying a franchise record with seven sacks to rebound from a 44-26 loss to the Dolphins last week. Whitney Mercilus accounted for three and a half of those sacks, a career high, and J. J. Watt had two and a half, forcing a fumble on one early in the fourth quarter. Watt, who tied a career high with nine quarterback hits, said, “That’s the type of defense we expect to be.”The Rams’ Todd Gurley ran for 133 yards on 20 carries, becoming the first rookie to open his career with four straight 100-yard games, according to Stats L.L.C., with data available since 1991. Gurley, who had a 71-yard scoring run in the win over the 49ers, has 566 rushing yards, the most in a player’s first four starts in the Super Bowl era, according to the N.F.L.The Browns’ Josh McCown, playing with a sore right shoulder and ribs, threw three touchdown passes in the first half. But he had to play much of the second half in even more pain after taking a shot to the ribs. (At one point, he waved off Cleveland’s coaches and his backup Johnny Manziel, who finally came in with 2 minutes 16 seconds left.) That helped provide an opening for the Cardinals and Carson Palmer, who threw three of his four touchdown passes in the second half in helping Arizona score 27 straight points for the victory. Palmer finished with 374 passing yards.Drew Brees: seven touchdowns and 511 passing yards in a Saints victory. What more needs to be said?Injury ReportRavens receiver Steve Smith Sr. tore his Achilles’ tendon and will miss the rest of the season. ... Lions receiver Calvin Johnson injured his ankle. ... Steelers running back Le’Veon Bell hurt his knee. ... Reggie Bush, a 49ers running back starting for Carlos Hyde, hurt his knee when he slipped on concrete at the end of a punt return. ... Bears running back Matt Forte injured his knee. ... Browns defensive backs Joe Haden and Donte Whitner sustained concussions.Information from The Associated PressA version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Day’s Best.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.