AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerIt is all over for the Mets, this season of triumph, this World Series of torture. The Kansas City Royals won the title at Citi Field in Game 5 on Sunday, earning it with a relentless brand of joyous teamwork. Baseball like it oughta be, as the Mets once said of themselves.“I remember as an area scout, one of the first things I was told: Pick players just like you’re in gym class,” said Dayton Moore, the Royals’ general manager, who patiently built a throwback champion. “We picked players that we liked watching play.”Only the most ardent Mets fans, feeling the thud of a fresh gut punch, might disagree. In the age of the strikeout, it is heartening to know that a team can still win with guile and gumption and extraordinary skill at the most basic of baseball tasks: putting the ball in play.The cold accounting for the Mets is that they lost three of these games after leading in the eighth or ninth inning. Jeurys Familia blew three saves, but the last two felt more like team breakdowns. That included the finale, when the Royals ran the Mets right into winter.The lasting image of the night will be Eric Hosmer, in a blizzard of dirt, erasing the Mets’ final lead of their best season in 15 years. Soon enough, the Mets descended into caricature. The Royals erupted for five runs in a sloppy Mets 12th inning to take the championship with a 7-2 victory.“We never quit,” said Royals catcher Salvador Perez, the winner of the Series Most Valuable Player Award, who hit .364. “We never put our heads down. We never think about, ‘O.K., the game is over.’ We always compete to the last out.”The Mets and their fans will dream in serial nightmares this winter. There was Alex Gordon’s game-tying homer in the ninth inning of Game 1. There was Daniel Murphy’s game-tying error in Game 4. And, on Sunday, there was Hosmer’s game-tying dash in the ninth.It came on a one-out grounder by Perez to the Mets’ captain, David Wright, at third base. Wright looked at Hosmer before throwing to first, but it was an empty gesture. He was not about to give Perez first base, and Hosmer held his ground.“That was kind of a weird play to begin with,” Wright said. “It was a jam shot that kind of hit and took a funny hop. You try to check him back as much as you can, but nobody can get over there to cover third for there to be any kind of real fake, to get him to freeze or go back.”It was classic Royals baseball. Put the bat on the ball, even against an elite closer, and something good can happen. The odds increase when the base runner forces the issue. Players talk about the importance of slowing the game down, keeping a calm heartbeat when everything seems scrambled. But the Royals scramble the mind and break the heart.As soon as Wright threw to first baseman Lucas Duda, Hosmer streaked for the plate. Rusty Kuntz, the Royals’ first base coach, said he had never seen Hosmer run so fast.“I had to do a double-take,” Kuntz said. “I thought, ‘Oh my God, did we pinch-run there, or what?’ It’s just an instinctual play. I’m sure when he was in Little League, he probably pulled that off — not in the World Series.”Duda said it had taken guts — actually, he named a different body part — for Hosmer to bolt when he did.“The game’s on the line,” Duda said, “and he went for it.”Duda said he did not know if he could have thrown out Hosmer, but it really did not matter. He should have made a better throw, he said, and offered no excuses. Kuntz knew it would have been close.“Some of the guys were saying, ‘Well, if he throws it right on the bag, he’s out,’ ” Kuntz said. “We’ll take that chance. This is the World Series. We don’t say, ‘Well, what if?’ We just go.”In the instant before Duda made his throw, was there really any doubt what would happen? The Mets had looked shaky in the field all series — remember Wright’s error, which put the winning run on base in the 14th inning of Game 1? — and this was another example. Even Duda had to glumly concede the difference.“The Royals played extremely clean, aggressive baseball,” Duda said, and it could not have been a surprise. But a scouting report and the real thing are very different. The Royals hit only one ball over the fence in five games. Yet danger lurked everywhere in their lineup.They stole bases in their game-tying and go-ahead rallies. They also bashed a double over the left fielder’s head — by Hosmer in the ninth, to drive in the first run — on the last pitch of Matt Harvey’s season.Manager Terry Collins and the pitching coach Dan Warthen let Harvey start the ninth inning, and they were right to listen to their ace. Through eight innings, Harvey had a four-hit shutout with nine strikeouts and 102 pitches.There was every reason to believe that Harvey and his rebuilt elbow, the source of so much intrigue this season, could survive the ninth. This was a brash star refusing to let a rival celebrate on his turf. It was the stuff of Jack Morris or Bob Gibson, demanding to finish what they had started. It just did not work.“I made my clear point that I wanted to go back out,” Harvey said. “One pitch here, or a fly ball, we’re out of that situation and the game’s different. I told both him and Dan that I wanted the ball. Unfortunately I just couldn’t get it done.”As it turned out, Familia faced six batters on Sunday and retired them all, despite losing the lead on Perez’s grounder. Yet the way Harvey was pitching, he was the Mets’ best hope to get the final three outs.Yet he walked Lorenzo Cain on seven pitches, the second night in a row that Cain had drawn a critical walk in a game-tying rally. Cain stole second and then scored when Hosmer stroked his double over Michael Conforto.Hosmer had spoken at length before Game 5 about the Royals’ motivation, about the way they used their Game 7 loss to the San Francisco Giants last fall as fuel for their encore.“We think about it quite often,” Hosmer said. “I’ve said before, and I’ll say it again: I think that’s kind of something that we all turn to mentally, to kind of — when there’s points in time during the season where your team is not going too well.”After all those seasons in the wilderness — no playoff appearances between 1986 and 2013 — these Royals have now matched their ancestors for autumn glory. The Royals of George Brett and Frank White also reached two World Series and won the second.“We still feel like we’re still in the heart of this whole thing,” Hosmer said. “We have a lot of guys that came up in the same years, and we still have a lot of years left with the team.”Maybe, but maybe not. Johnny Cueto and Ben Zobrist seem likely to leave as free agents, and possibly Gordon, too. These chances are precious. Ask the Mets of the 1980s how many rings they expected to win. The final tally: one, in 1986.It remains the last title for the franchise. The Mets’ young core should give them more chances to contend. But this chance is finished — emphatically, somehow, in a series that should have been closer.“They outplayed us,” Wright said. “As much as that hurts, as much as it stings, we can hold our heads high and take pride in what we were able to accomplish this year. We fell just short.”Advertisement