AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Michael PowellSo a glorious run of a Mets season, a trip deeper into the terra incognita of the postseason than anyone had reason to expect in midsummer, ended in an improbable string of sorrows.It was as if the Kansas City Royals made a margin call on the joy and luck the Mets experienced this autumn, and not just in that endless and deadening 12th-inning denouement.The second baseman who stroked home run after home run in October could not pick up a grounder on a critical play; the fearless young closer who had given up not a run all postseason surrendered a crushing homer; the Mets’ alpha dog of a staff ace pitched an artful, dominating final start, only to see one of his fastballs reach the left-field wall in what was to be his triumphant final inning.Manager Terry Collins, who was on a golden postseason roll, went with sentiment and let Harvey pitch the ninth inning. “He said, ‘I want this game in the worst way,’ ” Collins said. “So obviously I let my heart get in the way of my gut. I love my players.”“It was,” he added, “my fault.”So a night that seemed to offer a stay of execution instead became a delayed execution.For the Mets, to reach the World Series was a joy. And there was no shame to be found in losing to a superb Kansas City Royals team. The Royals played each game with their chins out, daring the Mets to stop them from taking an extra base, to keep them from fouling off pitches, to try to hit yet another of their deadly relief pitchers.Sabermetricians say there’s no such animal as a clutch hitter. In that case, you hope they slept with eyes shut tight through the Royals’ at-bats. By the third game, with the game on the line, you could more or less type out the phrase “the Royals got the leadoff hitter on base” with no fear of having to press the delete key.Royals first baseman Eric Hosmer was as sloppy with his glove as the Mets’ infielders were, but with Matt Harvey looking to complete a season saver of a win Sunday, Hosmer swung tight and hard and stroked a crusher of a double to left.The greater frustration for the Mets was how often their own miscues and failures laid them low. For long innings, the Mets’ hitters snoozed, and not only against the band of hard-tossing brothers in the bullpen. With two strikes, the Royals shortened their swings and put their bats on fastball after fastball, waiting for a pitch to rap hard.“Kansas City, they all buy into what their approach is,” Collins said on the afternoon of this fateful final game. “The deeper you get into the count, the more you cut your swings back.”The Mets’ hitters, by contrast, swing for the fences and rarely cut down on their swings. (Curtis Granderson offered a series-long exception to that rule, as did Daniel Murphy.) When their rhythm and timing are sweet, Lucas Duda, Michael Conforto and Yoenis Cespedes can offer a wonderful sound and light show, sending baseballs arcing off into the night in the direction of the Willets Point garages.In this series, however, those hitters offered only a disjointed explosion here or there. And that meant long soporific stretches in which few Mets reached base.“The Royals crowd the bases with runners, and that puts on nonstop pressure,” David Wright said the night before.On Sunday, with the season on the line, the Mets scratched out four hits.The Mets’ defensive fundamentals bordered on the unsightly this series. Murphy, who carried the Mets through the first two playoff rounds, hitting home runs off the National League’s finest arms, stood exposed in the field. He made a crucial, sad error on Saturday, and another unsightly one in the inning of the Mets’ unraveling on Sunday.And Duda, the first baseman, made an errant knuckleball of a throw to the plate, allowing the Royals to tie the score in the ninth inning of a game that the Mets had to win.Like anything rare, Mets double plays were cause for celebrations. And Mets pitchers and their promising catcher, Travis d’Arnaud, were profligate in giving up stolen bases, as if runners were an old-fashioned, 1980s annoyance.None of this is to erase a terrific season from memory. Collins and his coaches coaxed and challenged the team’s quartet of young starting arms, and spelled them when they were tired. All of these pitchers throw at least 95 miles per hour, and their command of curves and sliders and changeups speaks to good tutors and to preternatural pitching maturity.By the end, which is to say this series, the starters looked ragged, which Collins acknowledged Sunday. “I had a pretty good pitching coach tell me the other day on the phone, he said, ‘After I saw them pitch in Chicago, they’re out of gas,’ ” Collins said.He shrugged and said, “Maybe that’s a fact.”Harvey, though, pitched on Sunday like the alpha dog he yearns to be. If he fell an inning short, that owed as much to Collins’s making the sentimental decision to heed his headstrong pitcher. “He’d been beaten down, and I just trusted him,” Collins said of his decision to let Harvey try to finish the game. “It’s my fault. It’s not his.”Points of encouragement will be easy enough to find in coming weeks. Shortstop Wilmer Flores’s bat fell silent in the postseason, but his fielding improved, and his arm was strong. Granderson resurrected his hitting career this season, and Wright came back from a near-season-long spinal injury, although the precise shape of his future and how often he can play is uncertain.Wright, who played every inning of the postseason, had taken to making soft, boleo-style throws to first base. After the last game, the Royals’ third-base coach said that this fact had not escaped their notice.Taken together with their knowledge of Duda’s uncertain throwing at first base, the Royals took a calculated dice roll, and in that ninth inning, a not particularly speedy Royal darted from third to home plate with the tying run while Wright threw to first base.“They played better than us,” Wright said. “They definitely put their foot to the gas on the basepaths.”The second-to-last batter in this sad extra-inning battering was Conforto, a rookie who is a powerfully built hitter. He has escape-velocity power and grand potential. If you’re sifting the ashes for promising signs, take a look at his last at-bat, in which he eschewed trying to pull the ball and shortened his swing and lined a single to left field. It was good hitting; like the starting pitchers and closer Jeurys Familia, Conforto is young and carries the gleam of great promise.Away from the multicar pileup that were the final innings of this final game, the Mets can justifiably talk of next year as far more than just a loser’s cliché. They won a pennant. Wright, 32, his midsection wrapped as usual in bandages and ice, stood by his locker Sunday night and paused to talk of the unexpected gift of his first World Series.“It turned the worst year for me individually because of the injury into the best time I’ve ever had on the baseball field,” he said.Collins, his eyes red, his voice hollowed out, was more somber. “We’re real disappointed,” Collins said. “I won’t be sleeping much the next couple of days; I’ll tell you that.”The final loss was deadening, perhaps embarrassing. It can crush, or it can be a goad. That’s the question for next season, which, by the way, begins in less than four months.Email: powellm@nytimes.com Advertisement