AdvertisementSupported byRoyals 7, Mets 2 (12 innings)21 PhotosView Slide Show ›Doug Mills/The New York TimesBy Billy WitzAt the end of each baseball season, Ned Yost goes home to his 700-acre spread in Georgia, where he can close the gate behind him, settle into his blind and hunt. It is his sanctuary, a place where he is at peace, jettisoning the scrutiny and sleepless nights that accompany him during the season.Yost expected it to be the same last winter, after the team he manages, the Kansas City Royals, came agonizingly close to winning the World Series, the seventh game ending when catcher Salvador Perez fouled out with the tying run at third base.One day turned into one week, then one month, but the sting did not abate.When Yost returned to Arizona for spring training, the disappointment still felt like a kick in the gut. For his players, it served as a spur.“We think about it quite often,” Royals first baseman Eric Hosmer said. “I’ve said before, and I’ll say it again: I think that’s kind of something that we all turn to mentally, to kind of — when there’s points in time during the season where your team is not going too well. You look in September there, and we started to slide a little bit. But I just think everyone kind of relates back to that and relates to how much that hurt.”The Royals knew the only way to salve their regret was to win the World Series, and Sunday night at Citi Field, they accomplished that in a very Royal-like manner, with a come-from-behind 7-2 victory in 12 innings over the Mets. The victory, their fourth in five games, gave them their first championship since 1985.The Royals survived a superb performance by the Mets’ Matt Harvey, scoring twice in the ninth inning to tie the score at 2-2 and breaking through to score five times in the 12th against relievers Addison Reed and Bartolo Colon.For a team that has been defined by its derring-do on the basepaths, it was fitting that the game turned on the bold base running of Hosmer, who dashed home with the tying run in the ninth on an infield groundout when Mets first baseman Lucas Duda’s throw home went wide of the mark.The winning rally also had innocuous roots: a bloop single by Perez, a stolen base by pinch-runner Jarrod Dyson, a productive groundout by Alex Gordon that moved Dyson to third and a line single to left by pinch-hitter Christian Colon, who was making his first appearance in the postseason.Then the floodgates opened. Doubles by Alcides Escobar and Lorenzo Cain brought home four runs, sending fans toward the exits and leaving the Royals to await the coronation. That came when Wade Davis struck out Wilmer Flores for the final out, sending the Royals storming out of the dugout.“It’s unbelievable,” said Perez, the winner of the Series Most Valuable Player Award, who was one of four homegrown starters on Sunday night. “We’ve got almost the same group when I played my first year in 2007 in Arizona, the Rookie League. It’s amazing to now win a World Series and see the same guys with you.”It was the Royals’ eighth come-from-behind win in the playoffs, including all four in this series, which began with Gordon’s ninth-inning, game-tying home run off Mets closer Jeurys Familia that led to a 14-inning victory in Game 1.On Sunday, the Royals were held scoreless against Harvey until the ninth. But after Cain walked to begin the inning and stole second base, Hosmer doubled into the left-field corner to cut the Mets’ lead to 2-1, and Familia, the closer, relieved Harvey.Mike Moustakas moved Hosmer to third with a groundout, and Perez grounded to third baseman David Wright to begin the critical sequence.Wright, who ranged to his left to snag the ball, froze Hosmer by looking back, and then threw to Duda at first base. As he did, Hosmer broke for the plate, but Duda’s throw — which would have been in time to get the final out — sailed wide of catcher Travis d’Arnaud.“I just kept shuffling along with David,” Hosmer said. “As soon as his head turned to go to first base, it’s an opportunity for us to maybe steal a run.”The decision was not a rash one. In their scouting reports, the Royals identified Wright and Duda as suspect fielders. “Watching Wright throw, he doesn’t have a cannon. Plus Duda over there, he’s got to catch the ball and still make a perfect throw to home, which he didn’t do,” the third-base coach Mike Jirschele said. “We talk about that.”It was the type of aggressive base running that has put the Royals’ opponents on their heels all through the playoffs. Hosmer’s hustle forced Daniel Murphy’s crushing error in Game 4; Cain scored the pennant-winning run against the Toronto Blue Jays by racing home from first base on a single; and the Royals stayed alive in their division series against Houston when Astros shortstop Carlos Correa hastily misplayed a potential double-play grounder.Until Hosmer’s dash, Harvey had owned the night from the moment he stepped to the mound and struck out Escobar, the Royals’ pesky leadoff hitter.The capacity crowd rose to its feet frequently, waving orange towels and letting chants of “Har-vey, Har-vey” echo throughout the stadium.Harvey carried the crowd’s energy and rode it like a wave through the middle innings.When he struck out the heart of the Royals’ order — Cain, Hosmer and Moustakas — in the fourth, the last pitch a 98-mile-an-hour fastball, he shook his fist and let out a scream.He struck out three more in the fifth, though he did allow a walk.Harvey masterfully used all four of his pitches — fastball, curveball, slider and changeup — keeping the ready-to-hit Royals off balance and out of sorts.Most important, he did so efficiently, keeping his pitch count manageable enough so that he could forcefully plead with Manager Terry Collins, who was criticized for his use of the bullpen in Saturday night’s loss, to finish on Sunday.In case Collins needed any additional prodding, fans who watched the conversation take place took up Harvey’s case by chanting his name. When he hopped up the dugout steps and sprinted to the mound to begin the ninth, the stadium roared once again.It was a decision Collins came to regret.“I let my heart get in the way of my gut,” Collins said. “I love my players and I trust them. And so I said, ‘Go get ’em.’ And he went out, and the leadoff walk started it off.”He added: “It didn’t work. It was my fault.”For the last two months, Harvey has brought to the mound something beside his gifted right arm and his comic-book nickname. He carried with him an anvil-like question, one that cuts to the heart of any competitor — especially one whose persona, the Dark Knight, has been crafted around relishing the biggest stage.Was he all in?When his agent, Scott Boras, raised concerns in early September that the Mets were compromising Harvey’s long-term prospects, it put Harvey — who missed last season after elbow surgery — in the uncomfortable public position of having to weigh in on two agendas that did not necessarily dovetail: his long-term future and the Mets’ current prospects.Then, early in the playoffs, Harvey was late for a workout, arriving bleary-eyed and saying he had overslept.When he left on Sunday, to a standing ovation after 111 pitches, there was little questioning that Harvey had given his best — and his all.If Harvey’s performance was redemptive, Royals starting pitcher Edinson Volquez’s was inspirational.Volquez, who started the Series opener, learned after he left that game on Tuesday that his father, Daniel, had died earlier in the day from heart failure. Volquez returned to the Dominican Republic for his father’s funeral, then rejoined his teammates in New York just before the start of Game 4.Volquez was nearly Harvey’s equal, allowing only Curtis Granderson’s leadoff home run in the first inning and then limited the Mets to one run when they loaded the bases with none out in the sixth. The Mets not only lost an opportunity to broaden their cushion, they also lost center fielder Yoenis Cespedes, who fouled a ball off his knee and left after popping out.On their path to the World Series, the Mets could do no wrong, it seemed.But here it was the Royals, who pestered the Mets’ pitchers by making contact, flustered their fielders with their aggression and shackled their hitters at the plate. They also had a manager who pushed all the right buttons.As Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson walked past his team’s clubhouse, holding his dog on a leash, he noted that only one team could win. Not far away, his manager was feeling the disappointment of it all — coming so far and coming up short.“I won’t be sleeping much the next couple of days,” Collins said. “I’ll tell you that.”Somewhere on the other side of the field, soaked in Champagne and celebrating, there was a manager — and many Royals players — who know just what he means.Advertisement