By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 1, 2015
The Denver Broncos found some offense to go with their dominant defense, powering their way past the visiting Green Bay Packers, 29-10, on Sunday night.In only the fourth meeting of N.F.L. teams with records of 6-0 or better, Peyton Manning tied Brett Favre’s record with his 186th regular-season win, and Denver’s defense rattled Aaron Rodgers into one of the worst games of his career.The Broncos piled it on in the fourth quarter, when DeMarcus Ware sacked Rodgers and the ball went into the end zone for a safety.The Broncos improved to 7-0 for the first time since the 1998 season, when they won the Super Bowl after finishing 14-2.AdvertisementAlthough neither quarterback threw for a touchdown, Manning threw for 340 yards and completed 21 of 29 passes. Rodgers was of 14 of 22 for just 77 yards — the fewest of his career for a game in which he was not knocked out by injury.AdvertisementRodgers was sacked three times, and the Packers had just 140 yards of total offense to Denver’s 500.BENGALS 16, STEELERS 10 Andy Dalton passed for Cincinnati’s only touchdown with 2 minutes 57 seconds to play, and the Bengals intercepted Ben Roethlisberger twice in the fourth quarter in rallying for a victory in Pittsburgh.At 7-0, the Bengals are off to their best start in franchise history and are in command of the A.F.C. North.Roethlisberger, who was making his return after missing four games with a sprained knee, completed four of five passes during an opening 80-yard touchdown drive. But he and the Steelers faded late.Roethlisberger’s final interception, caught by Reggie Nelson, set up a Bengals field goal with 1:47 to go, which meant that Pittsburgh would need a touchdown. The Steelers drove to the Cincinnati 16 with four seconds left, but a Roethlisberger pass went out of the end zone to end the game.RAVENS 29, CHARGERS 26 Justin Tucker kicked a 39-yard field goal on the game’s final play to help host Baltimore end a three-game skid and hand San Diego its fourth straight loss.The Ravens went ahead, 26-23, with 4:34 to play as Joe Flacco scored on a quarterback sneak. But the Chargers pulled even on a 49-yard field goal from Josh Lambo with 2:07 remaining.AdvertisementTucker’s winning kick, his fifth field goal of the game, came three plays after a third-down pass interference call against Chargers cornerback Steve Williams moved the ball 21 yards to the San Diego 22.TEXANS 20, TITANS 6 A 21-yard touchdown reception by DeAndre Hopkins put host Houston on top in the second quarter, and the Texans did not trail after that. They will be tied for the A.F.C. South lead, at 3-5, if the Indianapolis Colts lose to the Carolina Panthers on Monday night.Tennessee’s Zach Mettenberger threw for 171 yards with an interception in his second straight start in place of the injured Marcus Mariota. Houston’s Alfred Blue, starting in place of Arian Foster, had 40 yards rushing and 33 receiving.CHIEFS 45, LIONS 10 Quarterback Alex Smith gained 78 yards on five carries, including a career-high 49-yard scramble in the second quarter that set up his 12-yard touchdown run, as Kansas City routed Detroit in the last of this season’s three regular-season games in London.With a comfortable lead in hand, the Chiefs did not need more big plays from Smith, who threw for 145 yards and two touchdowns.For the first time since 1960, the Chiefs had four players run for a score in the same game: De’Anthony Thomas, Smith, Charcandrick West and Spencer Ware.CARDINALS 34, BROWNS 20 Michael Floyd had a 60-yard touchdown catch, and tight end Troy Niklas had two short scoring receptions to help the Cardinals overcome four turnovers and win at Cleveland for the first time since 1985 (before they had moved to Arizona).SEAHAWKS 13, COWBOYS 12 Seattle’s Russell Wilson had a scoring pass for the game’s only touchdown and directed a drive for a decisive field goal with 1:06 remaining.AdvertisementThe visiting Seahawks, the defending N.F.C. champions, moved to 4-4, improving to .500 after an 0-2 start. Dallas got back Dez Bryant after he missed five games with a broken right foot — he finished with two catches for 12 yards — but the Cowboys still lost their fifth straight with Tony Romo sidelined.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Seattle receiver Ricardo Lockette sustained a concussion in scary fashion, running into a vicious block on a punt return. He appeared to be unconscious and was carted off the field after a lengthy delay. Lockette could be seen talking while moving both hands.BUCCANEERS 23, FALCONS 20 Tampa Bay blew a 17-point lead but bounced back, beating host Atlanta with a 31-yard field goal from Connor Barth in overtime.Having benefited from a questionable decision by Buccaneers Coach Lovie Smith to go for it on a fourth-and-1 at the Tampa Bay 40 with two minutes to go, the Falcons tied the score with 17 seconds left in regulation as Matt Ryan hit Julio Jones for an 8-yard touchdown.The Buccaneers, who had squandered a 24-point lead the previous week at Washington, looked to be in trouble again.Instead, Jameis Winston led an impressive drive on the first possession of overtime, with Tampa Bay converting three third downs. After Winston short-hopped a pass in the end zone, Barth came on to make his third field goal.Atlanta, which had rallied from a 20-3 deficit despite four turnovers, got the ball again but did not even make it to midfield. On a fourth down, Ryan was heavily pressured, forcing a desperation pass that was not close to anyone.VIKINGS 23, BEARS 20 Adrian Peterson ran for 103 yards, and Blair Walsh kicked a 36-yard field goal as time expired to lift Minnesota to a win at Chicago.AdvertisementThe Vikings had dropped seven straight at Soldier Field, and it looked as if the streak would reach eight when Bears quarterback Jay Cutler plowed over Minnesota’s Harrison Smith for a 4-yard score with just under five minutes left.But two late scores lifted the Vikings to their third straight win. Stefon Diggs turned a short pass into a 40-yard touchdown when he spun around Sherrick McManis and went up the left side, tying the score with 1:49 left. After Chicago punted, Teddy Bridgewater completed a 35-yard pass, and two plays later, Walsh booted the winner.RAMS 27, 49ERS 6 St. Louis’s defense did not allow a touchdown for a second straight game, racking up three sacks and a safety in a home victory over San Francisco.Tavon Austin outran the 49ers to the pylon for a 2-yard score, and he later had a 66-yard touchdown reception, compensating for an early lost fumble. At 4-3, the Rams are above .500 this late in a season for the first time since 2006.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Broncos Outclass the Packers in a Battle of 6-0 Teams .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.