
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
NOV. 1, 2015
A popular talking point before this postseason was guessing which pitcher would be the next Madison Bumgarner. The answer, of course, was nobody — his dominance last fall, in toppling the Kansas City Royals, was nearly unparalleled in the annals of autumn.The Royals have channeled their disappointment from the last World Series into beating the Mets in this one. Without Bumgarner and the San Francisco Giants in their way, they have charged toward a title with their familiar and enchanting formula of a relentless offense and a punishing bullpen.“A big benefit for us is knowing that if we’re late in the game, or even if we tie the game, we still have an advantage because of how good our bullpen is,” first baseman Eric Hosmer said on Sunday, before Game 5 at Citi Field. “That’s one thing, mentally, that we all use.”The anchor of the Royals’ bullpen, in his own way, has been the closest parallel to Bumgarner this fall. Closer Wade Davis has been the immovable force of this postseason. After his two-inning save to stifle the Mets in Game 4, Davis had fired nine and two-thirds scoreless innings this postseason, allowing five singles and three walks, with 15 strikeouts.AdvertisementIn 21 career postseason relief appearances — after starting and winning his playoff debut in 2010 — Davis had a 0.34 earned run average with a .156 opponents’ average. In Mariano Rivera’s first 21 postseason relief appearances, he had a 0.56 E.R.A. and a .147 opponents’ average.AdvertisementThe 2015 Mets probably felt the same dread as their 2000 ancestors, who succumbed to a six-out save by Rivera at Shea Stadium in Game 4 of that World Series. When Davis took the mound on Saturday — after the Mets had decided not to bring in their closer, Jeurys Familia, for a six-out save — the game was effectively over.“Wade never, ever gets worked up,” said Ned Yost, the Royals’ manager. “James Shields said his nickname in Tampa was ‘the silent assassin,’ and you can see that in him. When the situation gets tougher, he gets tougher. He takes his game to another level. He doesn’t shy from it.”Davis came to the Royals with Shields in a December 2012 trade that signaled the end of the franchise’s long reconstruction. The Royals had staggered through nine consecutive losing seasons before General Manager Dayton Moore dipped into his deep prospect pool, trading outfielder Wil Myers and two promising pitchers to the Tampa Bay Rays for Shields and Davis.Shields was the headliner, a veteran stabilizer for the top of the rotation who was destined to leave as a free agent after two seasons. (He now pitches for San Diego.) Davis, who was signed through 2015 with two more club options, was a longer-term investment.Davis had made 64 starts for the Rays, going 25-22 with a 4.22 earned run average, before thriving as a setup man in 2012. Even so, Moore wanted him to start.“We needed starting pitching, and he had the arsenal to be successful with it,” Moore said. “We felt that he could do it, and I still think that he could do it. He made some good, quality starts for us, but he wasn’t as consistent.”Shifted to the bullpen in late 2013, Davis was a revelation. All of his pitches — fastball, cutter, curveball — were harder, and he embraced the mentality of late-inning relief. He is the only pitcher in major league history with consecutive seasons of a 1.00 E.R.A. or lower, minimum 65 innings.Advertisement“He just simplified everything,” said the Royals’ pitching coach, Dave Eiland. “First of all, he’s out of the stretch only. But some guys, just mentally, are like: ‘I’m out here to get three outs and my day’s over.’ Well, this time of year, maybe it’s six outs. But it’s: ‘Let’s go, and then I’m done.’ ”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Starters typically land in the bullpen because they cannot command enough pitches to survive more than once through a lineup. Davis took all of his weapons to his new role as a setup man for Greg Holland, whose elbow injury made Davis the closer late this season.“That’s what makes him elite,” said Eiland, a former Yankees pitching coach. “Mariano threw one pitch, but he threw it all over the place, so it was actually more than one pitch — here, there, front door, back door. Well, Wade can do that with three different pitches.”It is nice to have choices. When Davis finished Game 4, with two runners on, by getting Lucas Duda to line into a double play when Yoenis Cespedes strayed too far off first base, he knew which pitch to deploy.“I think at that point, I hadn’t thrown a whole lot of cutters, so I kind of stored that in the back, in case I got in that situation,” Davis said. “Fortunately I had a lefty up, where the cutter works a little bit better, and got a little jam line drive, and got lucky on that.”He added: “I don’t think you get too excited in that situation. You really just try to settle down and stay calm.”Davis has done that all postseason, and after Game 4 he got his next assignment, the ultimate for a pitcher.“In this setting, the playoffs and World Series, there are no restrictions,” Eiland said. “He was in there last night after the game, getting treatment like he normally does, and I said, ‘You’ve only got to pitch one more time, buddy.’ ”One more time for a championship.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: When Royals’ Closer Comes In, The Game Is as Good as Over.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »