By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 1, 2015
Sam Reinhart broke a tie with 6 minutes 16 seconds remaining to help the Buffalo Sabres complete a comeback in a 2-1 win over the Islanders on Sunday night.Matt Moulson also scored in the third period. The Sabres have won two in a row and three out of five.Linus Ullmark made 29 saves for Buffalo.The Islanders have lost three straight. Defenseman Calvin de Haan scored his first goal of the season.The loss was the Islanders’ second at Barclays Center in regulation. Thomas Greiss made 20 saves.This meeting between Buffalo and the Islanders, their first of the season, was a defensive affair.AdvertisementNeither team scored until past the midpoint of the second period. Both the Sabres and the Islanders clogged the middle of the ice, limiting offensive chances mostly to low-percentage shots from the perimeter.CANADIENS 5, JETS 1 Tomas Fleischmann had two goals and an assist to lead Montreal to a home win over Winnipeg.Paul Byron, David Desharnais and Lars Eller also scored for the Canadiens, who have a league-best 22 points and remained perfect at home (5-0-0). Mike Condon stopped 18 shots to improve to 4-0.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chris Thorburn scored for Winnipeg, spoiling Condon’s shutout bid with 6:03 remaining.SHARKS 4, AVALANCHE 3 Brent Burns broke a tie with 1:39 left to help San Jose beat Colorado in Denver.Burns made the score 3-2 when he came down the right boards and sent a snap shot through traffic and past goaltender Semyon Varlamov. The goal was upheld under review.AdvertisementBurns also had a short-handed goal in the second period, Joe Pavelski and Joel Ward added goals, and Martin Jones stopped 23 shots. Coming off a 5-3 loss in Dallas on Saturday, the Sharks won for only the second time in seven games.Pavelski scored an empty-net goal 19 seconds after Burns’s second goal, and Colorado made it a one-goal game on a shot by Dennis Everberg with 1:05 left.LIGHTNING 4, HURRICANES 3 Ryan Callahan and Steven Stamkos scored in the second period to give Tampa Bay the lead, and the Lightning won at Carolina.J. T. Brown and Tyler Johnson scored in the third to help Tampa Bay end a four-game losing streak. Andrei Vasilevsky finished with 31 saves in his first appearance of the season.Eric Staal, Kris Versteeg and Jordan Staal scored for the Hurricanes, who broke a three-game winning streak. Cam Ward stopped 27 shots and Victor Rask had three assists.DUCKS 4, PREDATORS 2 Chris Stewart had a goal and two assists, Frederick Andersen stopped 40 shots, and Anaheim beat visiting Nashville.Rickard Rakell, Sami Vatanen and Andrew Cogliano also scored to help the Ducks break a five-game skid (0-4-1) and get their second win in 11 games.Shea Weber and Calle Jarnkrok scored Nashville’s goals.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Third-Period Goals Lift Sabres to Win Over Islanders .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.