AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Benjamin HoffmanIt should have been a matchup of N.F.C. heavyweights. The Seattle Seahawks, two-time defending conference champions, traveled to Dallas to face the Cowboys, who entered this season as a playoff favorite.Instead, a disappointing Seahawks team shuffled through an unimpressive 13-12 victory over the injury-riddled Cowboys, and both teams have fallen to the middle of the pack.The nature of the N.F.L. in recent years has led to a great deal of parity, with turnover at the top nearly inevitable, and the early-season collapse of Seattle and Dallas has made way for a new crop of contenders to join Green Bay and Arizona atop the heap in the N.F.C. With the season at or near its midpoint for teams, the Atlanta Falcons and the Minnesota Vikings have each improved dramatically, ostensibly taking the place of the Seahawks and the Cowboys in the wild-card playoff race behind the division-leading teams in Atlanta, Carolina, Green Bay and New York.For the Seahawks, the season got off to a terrible start, due in large part to a two-game holdout by Kam Chancellor, one of the key players in the team’s Legion of Boom secondary. His return has helped, as the team is 4-2 with him in the lineup, but the swagger of the last few seasons is still missing in action.A team that seemed immune to distraction found itself working through numerous controversies, both real and contrived, this off-season. Their goal was to avenge a Super Bowl loss that ended with a Russell Wilson interception instead of a Marshawn Lynch touchdown.Suddenly Chancellor was trying to renegotiate his contract and Wilson was making headlines for his huge new contract, his relationship with a pop star and his claim that the water he endorses can help prevent concussions. Even the tight-lipped Lynch was not immune to the trappings of increased exposure, recording some amusing commercials along with various late-night television appearances.Whether any of those things have actually contributed to the slow start is known only by players in the locker room, but the difference in the team from year to year is stark.Last season, the Seahawks had an above-average offense to go with its star-studded defense, but Russell Wilson has not been efficient enough to justify the new contract. He completed 19 of 30 passes for 210 yards and a touchdown against Dallas, but nearly cost his team the game when Greg Hardy intercepted him in the fourth quarter, leading to the Cowboys taking the lead on a field goal. Wilson had just seven interceptions last season, but is now on pace for 12.The Seahawks have run the ball fairly well with Marshawn Lynch and Thomas Rawls, but the team’s biggest problem has been an inability to finish off drives, scoring touchdowns on only 33 percent of red zone attempts coming into the game, which was the worst mark in the N.F.L. They failed to score on two red-zone attempts against Dallas.While the Seahawks’ defense gives the team reason to remain optimistic, the same is not necessarily true for Dallas. The Cowboys have been given every opportunity to stay in the N.F.C. East race, with the Giants, the Redskins and the Eagles all struggling, but the team’s offense has been completely inept since losing Tony Romo to a broken clavicle in Week 1.After Brandon Weeden proved incapable of running the offense, he lost his job to Matt Cassel who has been just as bad. After a three-interception performance last week against the Giants, Cassel completed 13 of 25 passes for only 97 yards against the Seahawks despite the return of Dez Bryant, who had missed five games with a foot injury. Bryant, the All-Pro wide receiver, did not get his first reception until midway through the third quarter and he finished his first game back with only two catches for 12 yards.Seattle is .500 and has plenty of winnable games left on the schedule, as well as two games against the N.F.C. West-leading Cardinals that could tip the balance of the division. It would seem they just need some sort of wake-up call if they are going to reassert themselves as a top team. Beating Dallas did not hurt, but it was not very convincing.For Dallas the outlook is far more grim. No wake-up call appears to be on the horizon.Advertisement