AdvertisementSupported byRaiders 34, Jets 20By Ben ShpigelOAKLAND, Calif. — Ryan Fitzpatrick stood at his locker, a cellphone cradled against his ear, his back to the room, his damaged left thumb wrapped. Beside him sat Geno Smith, who had returned minutes earlier from a visit to the X-ray room at O.co Coliseum. Late Sunday afternoon, the two Jets quarterbacks were as battered as their team, whose 34-20 loss to the Oakland Raiders shoved a promising season toward a pivot point. No longer are the Jets the bunch they thought they were, buoyed by the steady Fitzpatrick at quarterback and the turnover-forcing defense with a rapacious appetite for destruction. After tearing ligaments in the thumb on his nonthrowing hand on the opening series, Fitzpatrick is facing an absence of uncertain length. After failing to cause a turnover for the second consecutive week in a game that also exposed their deficiencies in pass coverage, the Jets are facing their first real turbulence. Before hosting Jacksonville next week, they must try to repair a defense that has allowed 64 points and 688 passing yards during the past two games while they also cope with the potential loss of their starting quarterback.“It’s a body blow,” receiver Jeremy Kerley said. The Jets’ most immediate concern is the status of Fitzpatrick, who spent most of the final 56 minutes on the sideline. As he is wont to do, Fitzpatrick dived headfirst instead of sliding on a 12-yard scramble, leaving himself vulnerable to a hit from Charles Woodson, who appeared to grab Fitzpatrick’s thumb as he tried to wrest away the football. When Fitzpatrick tried to grip the football, he could not.“I knew something wasn’t right,” Fitzpatrick said.He added, “I couldn’t really do anything with pressure and keep it in the right place.” How much time Fitzpatrick will miss — Coach Todd Bowles declined to speculate — will be determined by a magnetic resonance imaging test on Monday, and Fitzpatrick betrayed no sense of his standing other than despair. It is a difficult way to cede the starting job — “a fluke thing,” he called it — but so is absorbing a jaw-breaking punch from a teammate, as Smith did.Replacing Fitzpatrick on Sunday, Smith transported the Jets back three months, before the blow on Aug. 11 that changed the trajectory of his career and their season. The presumptive starter, Smith was replaced by Fitzpatrick, whose mastery of the offense and general reliability endeared him to teammates and helped propel the Jets to four victories in their first five games. Smith had not played since Week 17 last year, or taken first-team snaps since the second week of August. But he revealed decent command of the offense (completing 27 of 42 passes for 265 yards, with two touchdowns and an interception) if not the situation (absorbing at the end of a 29-yard run in the fourth quarter a crushing hit by David Amerson that he could have avoided by running out of bounds).As it was, when Ray-Ray Armstrong zipped past D’Brickashaw Ferguson to level Smith with about a minute left in the game, Fitzpatrick had to come in and relieve him for two plays.Smith said he would prepare to start next week, and if the Jets learn that Fitzpatrick will be out for a while, Bowles acknowledged the possibility of adding another quarterback. “Every chance I get to step onto the field is a way for me to prove my worth,” said Smith, whose X-rays on his shoulder — from the Amerson hit — came back negative. “I just want to go out there and win the game.”In another week, Smith’s performance, and the 20 points the Jets scored under his guidance, could have restored competitiveness to a game that lacked any after the first quarter. The Raiders led by 21-3 late in the first half, then by 28-6 early in the second, before Smith tossed two late touchdown passes. Oakland built that lead by amassing 232 yards on its first three drives, all of which ended with touchdown passes from Derek Carr, and the Raiders did not punt until midway through the fourth quarter.The halftime entertainment on Sunday featured two people zorbing — an activity, for the unfamiliar, that required them to run the length of the football field in a giant inflatable sphere. Inside the transparent orb, they wobbled and they staggered and they tripped — yet they still demonstrated a greater sense of coordination than the Jets’ defense, which covered the Raiders’ receivers poorly, took bad angles and missed more tackles than Darrelle Revis could count. “We had issues with everything,” Bowles said. “We didn’t do anything well.” Their troubles started on the Raiders’ first drive, when they committed two penalties, gave up a 26-yard run and were beaten on a 5-yard score by Andre Holmes, and continued early in the third quarter, when Taiwan Jones juked and sidestepped four defenders en route to a 59-yard touchdown that put Oakland ahead, 28-6. The loss dropped the Jets three games behind unbeaten New England in the A.F.C. East, and the surging Raiders dislodged the Jets from the top wild-card spot and now own the head-to-head tiebreaker. “There’s no reason you can’t think of yourself as a playoff team,” Woodson said.The paradigm in Oakland has shifted, with dynamic young talent like the rookie receiver Amari Cooper and the second-year quarterback Carr, who tormented the Jets for 333 yards and four touchdowns, positioning the Raiders for success. The Jets’ revival, after a 4-12 debacle in 2014, has come no less suddenly. It has come after they unearthed a competent starting quarterback and upgraded an already stout defense. Now, after the most deflating day of their season, the Jets must see if they will have both components next week, and beyond. EXTRA POINTSReceiver Brandon Marshall sustained toe and ankle injuries that he said he hoped would not jeopardize his availability for next week’s game against the Jaguars. ...The neck injury that Nick Mangold sustained late last week against New England forced him to miss only the fourth game of his career. Advertisement