AdvertisementSupported byBy Lindsay CrouseA half an hour or so after Stanley Biwott of Kenya won the New York City Marathon, he was followed by a grinning man nearly old enough to be his grandfather: David Walters, the first sexagenarian to cross the finish line Sunday.Finishing in 2 hours 47 minutes 27 seconds — ahead of all but about 200 of more than 50,000 runners — the 60-year-old Walters shuffled straight back to his hotel in Times Square, grabbed a protein shake and hopped on a flight home to Chicago. It was his second age-group victory in a marathon in three weeks.Walters is a masters runner, one of a group of highly competitive veteran runners over age 40 who still manage to beat most runners under age 40 and yet who know their best times are often behind them. (Walters qualified for the 1988 Olympic marathon trials at age 33 in 2:19:56.) He has been racing at a national level for nearly five decades.“As you get older, if you decide you want to continue to run and to compete, you have to narrow your focus and decide what’s important,” he said.Sustained competition, couched in a steady stream of 60-to-85-mile weeks, has yielded benefits for Walters beyond age-group titles. His 5-foot-6 frame still carries the same weight as it did when Walters was in high school — 126 pounds on race day. As a captain for United Airlines for the past 28 years, he flies around the world for two six-day periods a month, cramming his suitcase with a foam roller and therapy bands. He has developed a monthly schedule that has him rising at 2 a.m. for tea before launching into a 12-mile run through the empty streets of Hong Kong.“At this stage, when you’re working your way backward in time, you have to find new motivation,” he said. “You know next year you probably won’t be as fast, but you still find the joy of pushing yourself to the limit.”17 PhotosView Slide Show ›Benjamin Norman for The New York TimesNew York was his 25th marathon over all, and his second since he turned 60 in August; he also won the 60-to-64 age group on Oct. 11 at the Chicago Marathon by 20 minutes. (This is his fourth Chicago-New York double; three years ago, Hurricane Sandy sabotaged a planned double.)The night after Chicago this year, he captained a plane bound for Brussels and discovered that the marathon’s winner, Dickson Chumba, was aboard, on his way back to Kenya.Walters found Chumba and greeted him in Swahili, drawing upon the language he picked up as a child in Tanzania, where he lived from fifth grade to eighth grade. Attending boarding school near the Serengeti plain, he began running three miles a day with students of his parents, who were teachers with a Lutheran mission.He gave Chumba a tour of the cockpit and upgraded him to first class.Walters’s runs in Tanzania quickly translated to success in high school in Illinois, where he felt empowered by running when he was a victim of boarding-school pecking orders.“When you’re the smallest kid, it’s like ‘Lord of the Flies’ — you get pounded,” he said. “And angry.”Walters ran his first marathon as a high school sophomore on a family trip to Toronto, when his father saw a sign for a marathon in two days and suggested he try it. Walters went out with the leaders, struggled and wound up just under three hours.He finished high school with two Illinois state titles and earned a scholarship to the University of Illinois, where he studied aviation and Swahili. He became an all-American.Walters’s race times improved until age 37, after which he began running with younger people to stay on pace. He ran the New York marathon with two men half his age. One of them, Adam Callans, 31, had already run the marathons in Berlin and Chicago in the past five weeks before starting the race with Walters, whom he trains with in Chicago.“We go into races aiming for the same pace, but Dave is generally more successful at it than I am,” Callans said, adding, “He’s only a little younger than my dad, but he feels like a friend.”Callans ran with Walters for Miles 9 through 19, before finishing behind him in 2:54:02.Decades of experience have taught Walters to run conservatively for the first 18 miles of a marathon. He has become adept at achieving “negative splits,” completing the second half of the race faster than the first.“In my younger years, I was able to push it over the red line and hang on,” he said. “I would rather die than slow down.”But a hospital visit at age 48, after he collapsed at a finish line, taught him to value pacing and hydration.His wife, Janet, maintains that her husband’s commitment to racing has edified their marriage — especially now that he is able to sustain conversation in the days before races, something he could not seem to pull off back in his all-American days.“Dave brings a tremendously high level of dedication to everything he does,” she said. “This is our normal.”They have been married for 36 years, and have two sons.They agree that he will most likely race as long as he can walk, summoning his drive to transcend any age-group designation.“I’m not talented; I’m a middle-of-the-road guy, with middle speed,” Walters said. “But I’ve learned that if you spend enough time investing in what you care about, you’ve got a running start.”Advertisement