By BILL PENNINGTONNOV. 1, 2015
NEW ORLEANS —  After 101 points, after a punter’s illicit tackle and after a kicker’s textbook field goal had somehow decided a flabbergasting duel between two brilliant quarterbacks, some things still did not add up.“How many touchdowns did Drew and I throw — 13 or 14?” Giants quarterback Eli Manning asked in the wake of Sunday’s game between the Giants and the New Orleans Saints. “I couldn’t keep up.”Drew Brees, Manning’s counterpart with the Saints, seemed almost as thunderstruck.“Things about this game were mind-boggling,” Brees said. “It was punch to punch. You didn’t even keep track of the exact score because you knew you’d just have to go back out and score again anyway.”A record-setting showdown inside the Superdome concluded on the final play, a 50-yard field goal by New Orleans kicker Kai Forbath, which gave the Saints a 52-49 victory.AdvertisementBut in a fitting twist to a high-octane game, Forbath’s kick was the only field goal in a contest that featured six touchdown passes by Manning and seven by Brees, a combined total that broke a 46-year-old N.F.L. record for touchdown passes by two quarterbacks in one game. Brees’s seven touchdowns tied a league record, and the 101 points were the third-highest total in N.F.L. history.AdvertisementIn the end, though, it was, like many athletic contests, a game evaluated from distinctly different perspectives by the losers and the winners. To New Orleans (4-4), it was a third consecutive victory, a rally led by Brees that has resurrected the Saints’ season.As Giants linebacker Jonathan Castillas said of Brees, “When he plays like that at home, he’s almost unstoppable.”Brees threw for 511 yards and completed 40 of 50 passes with one interception. From the first quarter to the third quarter, Brees completed 18 successive passes.And yet, his team trailed late in the final quarter, and Brees had to revive the Saints yet again, which he did, tying the score, 49-49, on a 9-yard touchdown pass with 41 seconds remaining.But a relentlessly entertaining and unpredictable game could not quietly fade to overtime. Instead, the final seconds were cloaked in controversy when a pivotal penalty was called against the Giants (4-4), then nullified and finally enforced after all, setting up the winning field goal.The decisive sequence came with 20 seconds remaining when the Giants were forced to punt after a final possession. Giants punter Brad Wing’s kick was returned 24 yards by the Saints’ Marcus Murphy. At the Giants’ 47-yard line, Giants safety Craig Dahl jumped Murphy from behind and stripped the football from Murphy’s grasp. The fumble bounced to the Saints’ Willie Snead, who grabbed it but lost his balance and was immediately tackled by Wing.But Wing also grabbed Snead’s face mask, and a face-mask penalty was called with five seconds left. After a brief deliberation, the officials announced to a displeased Superdome crowd that there was no foul. Shortly thereafter, the officials — perhaps after consulting with league officials in New York via wireless communication devices — reversed their position and enforced the penalty, moving the football to the Giants’ 32-yard line.AdvertisementThat left Forbath a long, but manageable, field-goal attempt.Even 30 minutes later, the Giants were still confused about the penalty.With 20 seconds remaining in the game, Giants punter Brad Wing’s kick was returned 24 yards by the Saints’ Marcus Murphy, who fumbled forward as he was tackled at the Giants’ 47-yard line. The fumble went to his teammate Willie Snead, who was quickly tackled by Wing. Wing grasped at Snead’s face mask as the players collided. With five seconds left, Wing was whistled for a penalty. But after a brief deliberation, the officials announced that there was no foul on the play. Several minutes passed, when the officials might have been communicating with league officials in New York. Although Snead could not advance a forward fumble and was in a sense already down, a personal foul could still be assessed. The officials never explained their reasoning, but they did reverse themselves to enforce the face-mask penalty, moving the football to the Giants’ 32. That allowed Saints kicker Kai Forbath to attempt a long, but manageable, field goal, and the 50-yarder won the game.


		That was the Saints’ total offensive yards, the third most in team history.The Giants travel to Tampa Bay to play the Buccaneers, who defeated the Falcons in overtime Sunday in Atlanta.“They had their backs to me, and they were huddled,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said of the officials. “I never could get a word out of them the whole game. I don’t know what that was about.”Focusing on the final five seconds after each team’s defense had so many opportunities to take control with even one defensive stand, let alone two, seems illogical or misplaced at best.As Giants defensive tackle Marcus Kuhn said, the whole thing was like a college game. “Both sides are just trying to outscore each other until the clock runs out,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Throughout this season, the Giants have had one of the worst pass defenses in the N.F.L. For a majority of games, it had been a liability the Giants got away with because most of their early-season opponents started backup quarterbacks, or lightly regarded ones.But on Sunday, they were facing Brees, a skilled, cunning and meticulous quarterback, the N.F.L. equivalent of a marksman, who if given time and an open field of sight will aim and not miss his target. When Brees dropped back from center, he had a bevy of open targets.But in the modern, pass-happy N.F.L., there is often another craftsman slinging the football with precision and fearlessness. Manning, who completed 30 of 41 passes for 350 yards without an interception, did not back down from Brees’s assault.Although Brees threw for a stunning 300 yards in the first half with four touchdowns, Manning threw three touchdown passes and almost matched him on the scoreboard.The Giants tied the game, at 28-28, just after halftime. The touchdown was the result of the athleticism of two New Orleans-bred Giants playing to their strengths. Manning scrambled and improvised, motioning for wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. to keep running toward the end zone. Manning then heaved the ball more than half the length of the field, arching it just over two defenders and into the arms of Beckham for a 50-yard touchdown pass at 13 minutes 8 seconds of the third quarter. It was Beckham’s third touchdown catch of the game.AdvertisementLess than three minutes later, the Saints regained the lead, 35-28, on another deft, precise touchdown pass by Brees. When New Orleans extended its lead to 14 points with 33 seconds left in the third, it appeared the stubborn Giants had finally been vanquished.But the real back-and-forth was just beginning.The Giants answered with a lengthy drive, one kept alive by Saints penalties. Manning scrambled and threw back across his body for a 9-yard touchdown to Dwayne Harris. A few minutes later, a 20-yard scoring pass from Manning to Harris tied the score at 42-42 with 9:37 remaining.The Giants then took their first lead since the first quarter when cornerback Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie’s stiff shoulder tackle on Snead caused a fumble that the Giants’ Trumaine McBride snatched out of the air and returned 63 yards for a touchdown.To be trailing seemed nothing more than another challenge to Brees. “I always believed the game would go down to the wire,” Brees said.Leaving the Superdome late Sunday afternoon, Manning was glumly shaking his head but smiling a bit at the same time. He offered a final assessment.“I don’t know,” he said, “if I’ve ever played in a game quite like that one.”A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Battle of Quarterbacks Is Decided by a Kick .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.