AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Juliet MacurThe trash talking began days before Sunday’s New York City Marathon. Not among the elite runners, though, at least for this story.Among runners in their 60s.David Laurance, a 63-year-old podiatrist from Manhattan, had heard last week from a fellow marathoner that another runner thought Laurance had not run fast enough in recent New York marathons. Basically called him a wimp.“I was told that this one particular person thought I was babying myself too much and that I needed to go harder,” said Laurance, who said he didn’t know the smack-talker’s name but had a feeling it was someone in his age group. “That particular person said I wasn’t pushing like I used to, and that didn’t make him happy, because to him it wasn’t fair.”Why unfair? Because both men have run more than 30 consecutive New York City Marathons — and both were near the top of the list of runners who had extended streaks.According to unofficial statistics kept by New York Road Runners, which organizes the race, Laurance was tied for second on the list of most consecutive New York City Marathons. Going into Sunday, he had run 37 straight.Road Runners calls those who have completed at least 15 consecutive New York marathons streakers. All run clothed.“Some people are extremely covetous of their streaks and are jealous of me; I know it,” Laurance said. “But for the most part, the streakers are a pretty friendly group. When we get together every year, it’s like a group of Marines seeing each other after a long time.”17 PhotosView Slide Show ›Benjamin Norman for The New York TimesBut there’s a reason Marines are Marines. And it’s not because they like being defeated. They pride themselves on accomplishing goals with drive and intensity.There are about 1,000 people who have run the New York City Marathon again and again and again. And among the roughly 50,000 who crossed the finish line on Sunday, these streakers take marathons to another level.Because they just can’t stop running the New York City Marathon.In the late 1990s, Connie Lyke Brown fell near Mile 2 of the 26.2-mile race, smacking the pavement after doing what she called “a Pete Rose dive” and bloodying her knees and hands. Brown, who will turn 72 this week and is the top female streaker, with 37 in a row, wanted to stop running but simply couldn’t.“I’ve done so many now, I just can’t quit,” she said.Richard Shaver, who is tied for second on the men’s list, with 38 straight finishes after Sunday’s, had had knee surgery since last year’s marathon but didn’t consider skipping this one, even though he hadn’t trained as much as he had planned. He is achingly close to the top of the streakers’ leaderboard, you know.“Am I the one with the longest streak?” Shaver, 63, said. “Frankly I don’t know. But I’m going to be the last one standing.”He then took a shot at a 72-year-old runner named Dave Obelkevich, the current No. 1 streaker, who finished his 39th straight New York City Marathon on Sunday. “I’m sorry; he’s a retired music teacher, a grandfather,” Shaver said. “I’m working every day, and I fit my running in.”Shaver, a lighting specialist, laughed as he spoke because Obelkevich seems invincible, having finished 104 marathons and 185 ultramarathons. But I got the feeling Shaver wasn’t kidding. This is a tough guy we’re talking about, one who passed out from heat exhaustion a half-mile from the finish in 1979 and then said to medical workers, “Give me back my shoes!” so he could finish.(For the record, Shaver finished Sunday’s race in 4 hours 56 minutes 35 seconds. Obelkevich finished in 4:57:01.)A streaker is now even running the Road Runners organization.Michael Capiraso became the president and chief executive of Road Runners in the spring and even then didn’t pull his entry in Sunday’s marathon, which was to be his 24th in a row.After all, there was a guy named Mark Myers who lived two buildings away from him and who started running the race in 1991, just as Capiraso did. Each year, the two of them competed to see which one ran faster.“Let’s just call it a friendly competition,” Capiraso said.So even though Capiraso is one of the people in charge of the whole marathon, he still ran on Sunday. Afterward, he told me it was worth the trouble of squeezing the epic run into a more-than-full workday.On the Queensboro Bridge, about 15 miles in, he saw Myers in the distance and caught up with him. They ran side by side for the next four or five miles, joking, “You can go first; I don’t want to hold you back.” Then, “No, you go first.”Capiraso eventually pulled ahead, to finish in 3:54:05, nine minutes faster than Myers.The Queensboro Bridge, however, only brings up painful memories for Laurance.“These days, when I’m running on that bridge, I have to strike it from my mind that I used to be finished by now,” he told me on the eve of Sunday’s race.He tries to put things in perspective. He is still healthy. Still has his streak going. All of that, even though he finished in the dark, in 6:45:06.For him, what counted most was that he just kept going.“My father used to tell me about my eating habits, ‘Even a machine stops sometimes, David,’ ” he said. “But I always proved him wrong.”Email: juliet@nytimes.comAdvertisement