AdvertisementSupported byBy Melissa HoppertLEXINGTON, Ky. — A perky American Pharoah greeted visitors at Barn 62 on Sunday morning, a day after he won the Breeders’ Cup Classic to punctuate a competitive career in which he won nine of 11 races and captured the first Triple Crown in 37 years. His trainer, Bob Baffert, led him out of the barn at around 10 as his jubilant owner, Ahmed Zayat, stood guard.“What a glorious morning,” Baffert said to about 200 people, many of whom were wearing American Pharoah apparel. The crowd then swarmed the colt, with some getting close enough that they were able to pet him. As on the racetrack, American Pharoah displayed incredible poise. He did not try to bite or kick.The scene in the heart of the Bluegrass was a fitting send-off for a superstar colt who captured the attention of casual racing fans and gave a flagging sport a shot in the arm.Even the most hardened horsemen were smitten. The Hall of Fame trainer D. Wayne Lukas attended the postrace news conference Saturday and asked for the microphone.“On behalf of every one of us that gets up in the morning and tries to make a living, thank you,” he told Baffert.The 12th Triple Crown champion, American Pharoah will be escorted by Baffert to Coolmore’s Ashford Stud on Monday, where he will cool down and await a going-away party that is being planned by his team. The celebration could be held at Churchill Downs in Louisville, but the details are still being worked out.Afterward, he will return to Ashford in Versailles, Ky., where he is expected to stand for well over $100,000 per live foal that stands and nurses.Baffert, 62, acknowledged that he has been emotional every day since the Travers Stakes on Aug. 29, when American Pharoah was upset by Keen Ice. Soon, Baffert will have to say goodbye to the horse he calls a “gift from God.”“This horse came along at a time when the experience really helped,” Baffert said. “I just went with my gut. I knew he was a great horse and I could rely on him.”Advertisement