AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichEvery week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A. Oklahoma City at Houston, Monday, 8 p.m. Eastern, NBA TVThe Houston Rockets, who before the season appeared to be one of a handful of Western Conference contenders, lost by 20 points in each of their first two games. James Harden, the runner-up for the Most Valuable Player Award last season, was shooting only 25.6 percent from the field and was 3 for 22 from the 3-point line entering Sunday’s game against the Miami Heat.Now, a team that has not lost its opening three games since 2010 must prove its shaky start was a fluke. Dwight Howard, who missed the team’s season opener against the Nuggets, will have to shake off back troubles and look a little more alert than he did when the Warriors’ Harrison Barnes dunked over him in Friday’s game.Kevin McHale’s Rockets have been criticized for a lack of energy in the past, and a slow start, even this early in the season, can make it difficult to catch up to the rest of the top tier. Last season, the Rockets managed to seize the Southwest Division and the second seed in the Western Conference, by the narrowest of margins.But there are major upsides for Houston this season. Patrick Beverley, the team’s hard-nosed point guard, has recovered from the wrist injury that sidelined him during the 2015 playoffs. Beverley and his backcourt mate, Ty Lawson, have the potential to make for a fearsome pairing. When on the court together last week against the Nuggets (Lawson’s former team), their play was one of the few impressive parts of Houston’s game.Houston also has a promising prospect in the young center Clint Capela. In his second season in the N.B.A., the 6-foot-10 Capela is poised to make a major leap. In last season’s playoff series against the Warriors, he showed an impressive ability to defend more experienced players and to score with power. The former Rockets star Hakeem Olajuwon has praised the center, saying he shows “great potential.” He may be a reliable asset for the Rockets in the months ahead, particularly if Howard continues to struggle with his back.Houston played the Oklahoma City Thunder three times in the 2014-15 regular season and won every game. But Russell Westbrook missed one of those matchups, and Kevin Durant missed two. Now that the Thunder are back to full strength, it does not seem likely that they will be swept again, or miss the postseason for a second consecutive year, at least not if their first two games were any indication.Everything that has gone wrong for Houston has gone right for Oklahoma City. Durant, has made a complete return to form after his injury, unlike Howard. Westbrook, an M.V.P. candidate, has looked better than ever, unlike his counterpart Harden. And the Thunder won their first two games, including a tough victory over the Spurs in their season opener.Durant’s return may distract from the most promising newcomer in Oklahoma City, Coach Billy Donovan. His predecessor, Scott Brooks, was much loved by his players but was often criticized for an offensive system that favored slowdown isolation ball over the more fluid tactics that have gained prominence in San Antonio and Golden State. Even Brooks’s vaunted defense failed his team near the end of last season.Donovan may well provide a sturdier system on both sides of the ball. Thunder players, including Westbrook, have commented on the surplus of space in Donovan’s offense. That said, the Thunder have relied heavily on their stars’ firepower through the first two games of the season, particularly in a 139-136 double-overtime win at Orlando on Friday.Questions linger about the Thunder’s role players. Enes Kanter, the big man often blamed for Oklahoma City’s defensive lapses last season, can be a talented offensive player but is prone to absent-mindedness. There are some worries that his presence in the middle will make it easier for opponents’ offenses to score inside. But Kanter has looked solid through the first two games of the season, coming off the bench and scoring and rebounding well. The inconsistent Dion Waiters, who sometimes seems to think of himself as a star on a par with Durant and Westbrook, is another concern.But over all, the Thunder should be thrilled to have their core of Durant, Westbrook and Serge Ibaka back in top form. According to the analyst Zach Lowe, the Thunder have not lost a playoff series when those three are healthy since Harden left for Houston. After seeing their former teammates’ success last year, the rejuvenated teammates should be geared up to face him Monday. And Thunder fans, trying their best to ignore the specter of Durant’s coming free agency, should find some comfort in their team’s early victories.Advertisement