
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 3, 2015
It is no stretch to suggest that Max Scherzer might have turned in the greatest nine-inning pitching performance in major league history on Saturday night at Citi Field. It was unquestionably unique: the first no-hitter to feature no walks and at least 17 strikeouts.The circumstances, of course, could not match Don Larsen’s perfect game in the 1956 World Series. Scherzer’s team, the Washington Nationals, was out of the playoff race, and the Mets, although playing for home-field advantage in the first round, had already clinched a spot.But the heights of dominance that Scherzer reached can hardly be overstated. Until Saturday, the record for strikeouts in a no-hit, no-walk game was 15, by Clayton Kershaw of the Los Angeles Dodgers on June 18, 2014. That game, like Scherzer’s, was marred only by an error.Scherzer had 15 strikeouts through eight innings Saturday and fanned two more before a pop-up ended the game, a 2-0 Nationals win. Using his full array of overpowering pitches — high fastballs, curveballs, sliders and changeups — he humbled some of the Mets who will face Kershaw in the division series next week.AdvertisementKershaw’s no-hitter registered a Game Score of 102, based on a metric devised by Bill James and cataloged at Baseball-Reference.com. The only better nine-inning Game Score was a 105, for Kerry Wood’s 20-strikeout one-hitter for the Chicago Cubs on May 6, 1998.AdvertisementWood hit a batter that day, and the Game Score formula, somewhat oddly, does not penalize a pitcher for hit batsmen. If it did, and Wood had one point deducted from his game, he would have registered a 104 — the precise figure Scherzer achieved Saturday.Scherzer did not face the Mets’ best lineup; David Wright and Travis d’Arnaud did not play, and Daniel Murphy, Lucas Duda and Yoenis Cespedes took one at-bat apiece as pinch-hitters. And Scherzer’s gem underscored the disappointment of the Nationals’ year: They have so much individual talent, yet their season ends Sunday.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But enough of all that. This is a pitcher who has improved since his Cy Young Award season with Detroit in 2013, when he still had never pitched a complete game. He has four this season, including a one-hitter at Milwaukee on June 14 and a no-hitter against Pittsburgh six days later. He missed a perfect game that day by one pitch, hitting a batter with two outs and two strikes in the ninth.Scherzer struggled at times this season, enduring a stretch of nine starts from late July to early September in which he went 1-3 with a 5.54 E.R.A. He finished the season 14-12 (the loss total is a career high) but with a 2.79 E.R.A. It is a shame we cannot see more of him this year, but he delivered on a vow he made this spring.“You either get better or you get worse,” he said then. “So for me, I’m focused on, in every way, to get better.”At the baseball writers’ dinner in New York in 2014, Scherzer sat on the dais next to Sandy Koufax, quizzing him about his curveball and taking notes on his iPhone as Koufax talked. Now, in one season, he is halfway to Koufax’s career total of no-hitters.There have been seven no-hitters in the majors this season, tying a record from 1990, 1991 and 2012. The others were by San Francisco’s Chris Heston (also at Citi Field against the Mets), Philadelphia’s Cole Hamels (just before his trade to Texas), Seattle’s Hisashi Iwakuma, Houston’s Mike Fiers and the Chicago Cubs’ Jake Arrieta.AdvertisementMany of the greats, though, never threw a no-hitter, including Steve Carlton, Roger Clemens, Tom Glavine and John Smoltz. Neither did the pitcher who inspired Scherzer to wear No. 31.“In Detroit, they gave me 37,” Scherzer explained this spring. “I liked the number, but in college I was 31 — I really liked that number, and Greg Maddux was 31. I always looked up to him when I was a kid. It worked for me in college, and I’ve had it a couple of other times. So when I had a chance to pick a number, I wanted to be 31.”Maddux won four Cy Young Awards and 355 games, the most of any living pitcher. But he never had a night like Scherzer’s in Flushing on Saturday. Perhaps no pitcher ever has.A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: In Terms of One Outing, at Least, Washington’s Ace Has Few Peers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »