By DAVID WALDSTEINNOV. 1, 2015
As Edinson Volquez went from pitch to pitch, with the game on the line for every one of them, it was impossible to tell what was churning in his mind and his heart.Volquez was making his first start since his father, Daniel Volquez, died on Tuesday, and from the outside, it appeared as if it were just a normal game for him. Volquez said the day before that he wanted to make his family, including his father, proud.He did that, even if he could not get a victory.His only big mistake came against the first batter of the game, when Curtis Granderson hit a home run, but after that, he fought and competed right along with Matt Harvey, the Mets’ ace.The Mets scratched out another run in the sixth inning after a walk to Granderson on a close full-count pitch, a ground-ball single by David Wright, an error by first baseman Eric Hosmer and a sacrifice fly by Lucas Duda.AdvertisementVolquez went six innings and gave up two runs and two hits, walked five (one intentionally) and struck out five. Facing a bases-loaded situation in the sixth with no outs, he allowed only the run on Duda’s sacrifice fly. It was an important moment that kept the game close and allowed the Royals to come back to defeat the Mets, 7-2, in 12 innings to win their first World Series title in 30 years.Volquez pitched Game 1 on Tuesday without knowing of his father’s death. On Wednesday, he flew to the Dominican Republic for a sad three-day trip that included his father’s funeral.When he arrived in New York on Saturday evening, he battled pregame traffic but made it to Citi Field shortly before the first pitch. He greeted his Royals teammates, told Manager Ned Yost that he was ready to pitch Game 5 on Sunday, put on his uniform and went to the dugout, where he chatted with Johnny Cueto — a teammate, a fellow Dominican pitcher and a friend. Cueto asked Volquez if he was going to pitch in Game 5, as scheduled.Volquez responded by playfully asking Cueto if he wanted to pitch instead.“No, that’s your game, now,” Volquez said, relaying Cueto’s encouraging words. “Make your dad proud.”Daniel Volquez, a 63-year-old who had been battling heart problems, died hours before his son’s start in Game 1, which was his first appearance in the World Series. Edinson said his wife, Roandy, decided it was best not to tell her husband because she knew the family would want him to pitch, that his father would have wanted it, too. She did not tell him until he left the game, he said, after he had pitched the first six innings in the Royals’ 14-inning victory.Advertisement“I think it was the right choice,” he said, “because I don’t think I am going to be able to pitch that day if I find out before the game.”Daniel Volquez, a mechanic, was a hero to his son. He provided everything Edinson needed in terms of health, education and guidance, plus the baseball equipment, encouragement and support to carry him to his chosen profession as a major leaguer.“He was everything for me,” Volquez said. “He was one of the greatest men. I remember he bought me my first glove and my first spikes, brought me to the field. He knew that’s what I wanted to be. I want to be a baseball player. And he gave me a lot of support, and he bought everything for me. He put me in the right way.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Volquez said he appreciated all the support he had received from his teammates, and he also thanked reporters at a news conference on Saturday for their concern and expressions of support.“It was definitely nice to see him back in the clubhouse with his smile,” Alex Gordon, the Royals’ left fielder, said Saturday. “It’s contagious. And giving high-fives. He’s such a great guy. We feel bad for him, but we’re glad to have him back.”The Royals are learning to deal with this kind of sadness. It was the third time since August that a player’s parent had died. Mike Moustakas, the third baseman, lost his mother, and Chris Young pitched shortly after his father died in September.Volquez said that to prepare for Sunday’s game, he played catch in the Dominican Republic on Friday to keep his arm loose. When he arrived at Citi Field on Saturday, he played catch again in the batting cage before the game.He said he planned to honor his father Sunday, perhaps by inscribing something inspirational on the inside of his hat or his glove, taking Daniel’s memory to the mound. But he said he believed his father would be watching him.“I’m pretty sure my dad is going to be proud of me when I pitch tomorrow on the mound,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: On a Poignant Night, a Proud Performance by Volquez.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »