

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
NOV. 1, 2015
Saturday would have seemed like a good day for a cocktail party if you were a college football fan, and not just because it included the actual World’s Largest Outdoor Cocktail Party, the annual Florida-Georgia game, which the No. 11 Gators (7-1, 5-1 Southeastern Conference) dominated, 27-3.Five of the top seven teams in the Associated Press poll entering the weekend were off. No. 5 Texas Christian played on Thursday, handily holding off visiting West Virginia, 40-10. ESPN’s “College GameDay” broadcast was from Philadelphia, which was last known as a college football town during the George Munger era at Penn.But if you slept on the sport, you missed remarkable endgame excitement. And you missed results that, although not directly involving most of the top teams, could nonetheless carry major consequences for the composition of the College Football Playoff rankings, whose first iteration will be released Tuesday night.Discussion of endgame excitement starts, now and for all time, with the Miami-Duke game. Trailing by 27-24 and receiving a kickoff with six seconds left, Miami managed a miraculous return that involved 50 seconds, eight laterals and a game-winning touchdown. It also involved what the Atlantic Coast Conference confirmed on Sunday were an illegal block in the back by a Miami player and a knee down by a Miami ball carrier. However, for now, the Hurricanes’ win stands.No. 16 Michigan (6-2, 3-1 Big Ten) stuffed Minnesota’s quarterback sneak on the game’s final play to seal a 29-26 victory. Notre Dame quarterback DeShone Kizer hit receiver Will Fuller late in the game to go up on Temple, and a subsequent interception permitted the Irish (7-1) to stay up, 24-20, moving Notre Dame from No. 9 to No. 8 and the Owls from No. 21 to No. 23. Through the rain in Pullman, Wash., Stanford required a missed 43-yard field-goal attempt as time expired to stave off Washington State, 30-28, and improve to 7-1, but the Cardinal dropped to No. 9 from No. 8.Advertisement“It took being fortunate,” Stanford Coach David Shaw acknowledged.The Hall of Fame pitcher Lefty Gomez repeatedly said, “I’d rather be lucky than good.” In the four-team playoff era, which demands near-perfection through a 12- or 13-game gantlet, teams must be both. And not just in the games they play.AdvertisementTake No. 3 Clemson (8-0, 5-0 Atlantic Coast Conference), which dispatched North Carolina State (5-3, 1-3) on the road, 56-41, on Saturday. Its best win this season came last month over Notre Dame. That meant that an Irish loss to Temple would have weakened the Tigers in the playoff selection committee’s eyes; now, Notre Dame’s win, on the road against a top-25 team, will most likely grant the Irish a top-10 seed — and, therefore, Clemson a top-10 win.As Jeff Long, Arkansas’s athletic director and the selection committee’s chairman, explained each week’s rankings last year, he constantly referred to such factors. He explained one set of rankings by saying, “The committee placed significant value on Oregon’s quality of wins against three top-25 teams” (times have changed for the 5-3 Ducks). At one point last year, he justified putting T.C.U. above Baylor because the former had twice the number of top-25 wins as the latter — never mind that the latter had beaten the former.So while contenders like Florida, Notre Dame and Stanford did well for themselves Saturday, they also did well for others, chiefly Clemson and Louisiana State. Here is a prediction: Although they are ranked behind No. 1 Ohio State and No. 2 Baylor in the A.P. poll, Clemson and No. 4 L.S.U., those Tigers burning bright, will rank ahead in the committee’s numbers, because they have wins over likely top-11 teams (Notre Dame and Florida, respectively), while the Buckeyes and the Bears do not.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Similarly, expect No. 13 Utah (7-1, 4-1 Pacific-12) to outrank No. 12 Oklahoma State and No. 10 Iowa in the committee’s eyes. The latter teams have no losses, but also no top-25 wins; Utah beat Michigan in the season opener, and its sole loss came on the road to Southern California (5-3, 3-2), which could find itself with a top-25 designation (it was effectively 27th in A.P. polling).But these advantages will most likely prove fleeting in the weeks leading up to the final rankings on Dec. 6 as all teams get opportunities to prove themselves.Ohio State still has Michigan and No. 6 Michigan State. Baylor has No. 14 Oklahoma, Oklahoma State and T.C.U. in successive weeks this month. Oklahoma State hosts T.C.U. next Saturday and Baylor two weeks later. Iowa will see good competition in the Big Ten championship game.That is to say nothing of the already epic Notre Dame-Stanford game on Nov. 28 and Florida’s likely chance to prove itself in the SEC championship game, which could involve a rematch with L.S.U. That is, if L.S.U. can beat No. 7 Alabama (you knew we would get to the Tide) this Saturday in Tuscaloosa.There is plenty of time left for teams to be fortunate.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: A Wave of Thrillers With a Ripple Effect on the Rankings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »