AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanThe Pittsburgh Steelers barely got a chance to welcome Ben Roethlisberger back from a knee injury before Le’Veon Bell went down with what appeared to be a major injury to his right knee in a game against the Cincinnati Bengals. Bell was taken to the locker room on the back of a cart, and he did not return.Without their star running back, the Pittsburgh offense was not quite as dynamic, and Roethlisberger threw a crippling interception late in the fourth quarter that cost the team a chance at a coming back in a 16-10 loss to the still-undefeated Cincinnati Bengals.The injury came after Bell caught a short pass from Roethlisberger in the second quarter. Brought down at the sideline by Cincinnati’s Vontaze Burfict and Reggie Nelson, Bell’s right knee extended violently to the outside and twisted under him. He was initially taken to a trainer’s table, but at half-time he left the stadium entirely for further testing. The team had not made any further updates when the game ended.The loss marred the much-anticipated return of Roethlisberger from a knee injury he sustained in Week 2. The two-time Super Bowl winner seemed limited in his movements while wearing a knee brace for the first time. He completed 28 of 45 passes for 262 yards, 1 touchdown and 3 interceptions.But much of the focus for the team after the loss will be how seriously Bell’s knee is injured.Perhaps no team in the N.F.L. is as aware of the need for depth at key positions than Pittsburgh after the team’s offense struggled to do anything in Roethlisberger’s four-game absence. Michael Vick and Landry Jones made the formidable Pittsburgh offense look pedestrian, with the second- and third-stringers combining for a 2-2 record.The Steelers should be in decent shape thanks to the presence of veteran backup DeAngelo Williams.A ten-year veteran, Williams got two starts earlier this season while Bell was suspended for a violation of the league’s substance abuse policy, and did well, rushing 41 times for 204 yards, tying the franchise record for rushing touchdowns in a game when he scored 3 against San Francisco in Week 2.With Pittsburgh going into halftime with a lead, Tomlin seemed confident in his backup.“We played the first two weeks without him, and DeAngelo did a good job,” Tomlin said at half-time. “We were rolling and I expect that to continue.”He did a decent job of holding down the fort after Bell’s injury, rushing 9 times for 71 yards, including a 55-yard run in the third quarter.But it was not enough as Andy Dalton led a fourth-quarter comeback that culminated in a 9-yard touchdown pass to A.J. Green with 2:57 remaining. On the subsequent drive, Roethlisberger’s third interception of the day gave Cincinnati the ball back with a lead and less than three minutes remaining.The game may be yet another controversial chapter in the intense division rivalry between Pittsburgh and Cincinnati. Bell’s injury immediately recalled the hit by Nelson in Week 17 of last season that hyperextended Bell’s knee, forcing him to miss Pittsburgh’s wild-card playoff game against Baltimore, which the team lost, 30-17.Bell addressed Nelson’s hit in the leadup to today’s game, saying he harbored no ill will toward the Cincinnati safety.“I don’t think he intended to hurt me,” Bell told reporters. “He chose to go low. The way my body was positioned, it was an ugly hit. But it wasn’t as bad as it looked.”The come-from-behind win on the road was a big change for Dalton, who came into the game with a 2-6 career record against the Steelers. He had won just once in four previous trips to Heinz Field.But this season has been a different story. He came into the game with 14 touchdown passes and just two interceptions in his team’s flawless start. He was not quite as sharp today, but finished with 23 completions on 38 passes for 231 yards and one touchdown, helping offset his two interceptions.Cincinnati will try to remain undefeated on short rest when they take on Cleveland this coming Thursday, while the Steelers will prepare for a home game against Oakland unsure of what they can expect from Bell.Advertisement