AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherIt was one of the wildest finishes you will ever see. Using lateral after lateral, Miami managed a 97-yard kickoff return as time expired to beat Duke.But a cloud has fallen over the amazing victory, after the Atlantic Coast Conference on Sunday suspended the entire officiating crew for two games for numerous errors on the final play.Miami trailed No. 22 Duke, 27-24, on Saturday with six seconds left and was receiving a kickoff. Things looked grim. ESPN reported that the Hurricanes’ chance to win the game was less that 1 percent.Miami retrieved the squibbed kickoff, and its players immediately began lateraling the ball, looking for openings to run and passing the ball off when the openings were not there.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.The play developed more like something out of the Rugby World Cup than a college football game and was reminiscent of the Cal-Stanford game in 1982. Finally, after eight laterals, Corn Elder found an opening and rambled nearly the length of the field for the touchdown and the miracle win.A flag was on the field, apparently for an illegal block. But after a review delay that lasted close to 10 minutes, the referees picked up the flag and allowed the touchdown to stand.Duke had several complaints. At one point in the sequence, Miami’s Mark Walton was close to being tackled, but managed to get the ball away … or did he? Pictures seemed to show his knee was down. The illegal block that suddenly wasn’t also annoyed Duke fans. And some complained that Miami players had run on the field in celebration before the game was over.It was tough to argue that the conclusion was part of a referee conspiracy against Duke: The officials called 28 penalties in the game, and 23 of them were against Miami.In the aftermath of the game, the A.C.C. acknowledged that mistakes were made. The result will stand, but the officiating crew and two replay officials are suspended for two games.The conference cited four errors.■ Walton should have been ruled down before he released his lateral.■ The officials missed an illegal block by Miami at the 16-yard line early in the sequence.■ While the officials were within their rights to pick up the flag on the illegal block further downfield, the referee’s communication on why the flag was picked up was poor.■ A penalty should have been called on Miami for players leaving the bench area before the end of the play.But all this does little for Duke, which has now lost for the first time in conference play and may have missed its chance for a title.Miami, which was playing its first game after the firing of Coach Al Golden, has a play for their all-time highlight reel. And they won’t be likely to put an asterisk on it.Shortly after the decision was announced, Miami’s Twitter feed summed it up:Advertisement