AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeré LongmanThe New York City Marathon had not been forgiving for Stanley Biwott of Kenya. He was among the favorites in 2012, but the race was canceled in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy. In 2013, Biwott hung near the front for about 23 of 26.2 miles, then faded to fifth place.On Sunday, though, Biwott, 29, proved without match in speed, strength and endurance as a cautious race accelerated into a blistering finish, winning his first major marathon, in 2 hours 10 minutes 34 seconds. A conservative pace hastened toward a decisive conclusion with three hammering miles of 4:24 for Mile 21, 4:30 for Mile 22 and 4:33 for Mile 23.Finishing 14 seconds behind Biwott was his countryman Geoffrey Kamworor, the world cross-country champion, who took second in 2:10:48. Lelisa Desisa of Ethiopia, the 2013 and 2015 winner of the Boston Marathon and the second-place finisher last year in New York, finished third in 2:12:10. This was Desisa’s fourth marathon of the year, and he could not summon a sufficient response in his legs on Sunday.Wilson Kipsang of Kenya, the 2014 New York champion, the 2012 Olympic bronze medalist and a former world-record holder, also could not sustain the race’s late surge. He took fourth in 2:12:45. He has won eight of his 13 marathons, but this is an unforgiving sport, and even a runner as great as Kipsang has to at some point confront unavoidable decline.Meb Keflezighi, 40, of the United States, the 2009 New York champion and the 2004 Olympic silver medalist, finished seventh, another runner unable to keep churning his legs fast enough in the final blazing miles. Still, Keflezighi set an American masters record by 20 seconds, finishing in 2:13.32.Biwott worked on a dairy farm in Kenya until he started training as a professional runner in 2006. He is self-coached but apparently not lacking in strategic mastery. His training partner, Dickson Chumba, also of Kenya, won the Chicago Marathon last month.17 PhotosView Slide Show ›Benjamin Norman for The New York TimesBiwott’s former coach, Claudio Berardelli of Italy, was fired last month by a high-profile Italian athlete management group; three of Berardelli’s Kenyan runners had tested positive for banned substances since 2012. They include Rita Jeptoo, a three-time winner of the Boston Marathon.More than 30 Kenyan runners have been penalized for using prohibited substances in recent years, but neither of Sunday’s champions in New York — Biwott or Mary Keitany — has been implicated in doping. Keitany has campaigned for stronger antidoping measures.Biwott attributed his victory to longer miles in training to enhance his endurance. For the first time, he said, his long runs extended to 40 kilometers (24.8 miles). And he was fresh, unlike some of the other top contenders, who had participated in the world track and field championships in Beijing in August.Biwott won the Paris Marathon in 2012 and has a personal best of 2:04:55, but he had sometimes faltered near the end of races. Not on Sunday, when he forcefully handled an exhausting three-mile surge after the race had crept along at a casual pace for 20 miles.Recently, Biwott had finished second in the Great North Run, a half-marathon, to Mo Farah of Britain, the Olympic and world track champion at 5,000 and 10,000 meters. Before Sunday’s marathon, Biwott felt assured. “I hope to have good speed at the finish,” he said. “That gives me confidence that I’m going to win.”He was right.Conditions at the start were far more favorable than they were last year, when a whipping headwind buffeted the runners. Even with a slight tailwind and temperatures in the mid-50s on a cloudy morning, though, the race became tactical from the beginning.New York has no pacesetters to kick-start the race. The Kenyans and the Ethiopians worked together in teams, Keflezighi said, apparently concerned about the humidity and rising temperatures and sometimes swirling wind. A large pack of runners went through the midway point in a pedestrian 1:06:49.“No one wanted to take the lead,” Keflezighi said.In Mile 17, along First Avenue, 16 runners hung in the lead pack, stretched across the road like a marching band. Craig Leon, an American who would finish eighth in 2:15:16, turned to Keflezighi and said, “This is a lot of fun.”There were no rabbits, just racing. It felt like a cross-country competition to Leon. But the real race was about to begin. Kipsang fueled a 4:40 surge in Mile 18. Then came the scorching 4:24 mile in Mile 21. Contenders were shed like discarded layers of clothing.Kamworor failed to grab his water bottle at 21.7 miles. Still, he hung on. But Keflezighi fell away. So did Kipsang. The lead pack winnowed to three: Biwott, Kamworor and Desisa.The leaders kept their intense pace, running 4:30 for Mile 22 and 4:33 for Mile 23. Biwott made a move on an uphill stretch around Mile 24.“I know the course,” he said. “I was able to push and maintain a high speed.” He was testing his body, he said, adding, “The pace was too slow.”At one point, Biwott drifted slightly across the road and looked back, apparently to gauge his rivals. Then he surged again. Desisa dropped back. Now the race would be decided between Biwott and Kamworor. Biwott held a three-second lead after 24 miles and seemed relaxed, his arms loosely swinging, his legs steady with a slightly knock-kneed style.Kamworor made up a second on the gap, but he could not hold the pace in the hills of Central Park. Victory for Biwott became inevitable, and he crossed the line jubilantly.For three months, Biwott said, he had changed his training, adding more miles and longer runs so that he could complete a marathon “without getting exhausted.” “Today,” he said, “it helped me a lot.”Advertisement