AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Michael PowellWhen the helium begins to leak from the balloon and the descent turns pell-mell, the earth can soar up to greet you with startling speed.So it is for Daniel Murphy. For three weeks, this baseball scrapper soared through the playoffs, a blur of diving stops, mad baseline dashes and one improbable home run after another. A pesky and obsessive hitter had transformed himself into an Irish-American Bambino, and otherwise rational fans began to hypothesize that this 30-year-old second baseman suddenly might enjoy season after season of 25 to 30 home runs, a feat stretching to the limits of the horizon.Which brings us to the eighth inning of Game 4 of the World Series on Saturday night. Mets closer Jeurys Familia threw a pretty pitch, and Kansas City first baseman Eric Hosmer was fooled and drove the ball into the infield grass. It took a big bounce, a smaller one and a smaller one still. Murphy, running in, reached down with his glove to scoop it up.He missed.The tying run came around to score. As it is an iron law of playoff thermodynamics that mistakes end up cubed, two singles followed, and the Mets trailed the Royals by a 5-3 score that never changed.The postseason offers a mind twist of a mood machine. So Murphy — Mighty Murphy — ended up standing, looking pale in front of his locker late Saturday and dealing with a fielding mistake that, if followed by another loss, would push the Mets down the World Series exit chute.“I misplayed it,” he said softly. “I wish I would have caught it.”A reporter offered that Murphy would make that play nine out of 10 times. Murphy shook his head, refusing to sidestep the 18-wheeler of his undoing.“I didn’t make it the only time that counts,” he replied. “It was very, very costly.”When the postseason opera turns dark, there are so many tales of heroic failure. Familia, the Mets’ hulking and boyish relief pitcher, has embraced the role of closer with an obvious joy. Less than two weeks ago, in Chicago, smiling broadly, he crawled atop the dugout to embrace Mets fans. He then gave up a crusher of a home run in the first game of the World Series and ended up being nibbled to death Saturday night.Tyler Clippard, the setup relief pitcher with the nerd-hipster glasses who paces about with a leonine energy, had given the Mets a couple of good relief innings this series. Not Saturday night. He gave up two bases on balls. With this Royals team, that’s like baiting the hook of your own destruction.“It’s frustrating, and very disappointing,” he said of his performance. “It was my runners I left out there. It’s a helpless feeling.”He gave a half-dozen iterations of this sad story, and reporters and camera crews wandered away. Then Clippard turned and faced his locker, and sighed and pushed his hands back through his hair.Manager Terry Collins has had a marvelous run of decision-making for the Mets this October, a “Honey, I never knew Vegas could be this easy” run. He would stay with a pitcher, and the kid would pitch out of trouble. He would send up a long-injured pinch-hitter, and the guy would hit a bullet.Collins has warned that no manager keeps flipping up aces. “You make the best educated guess you can make,” he said a couple of weeks back. “As I’ve said many times, my wife on the way home tells me it was a dumb move.”On Saturday night, Collins proved prescient about his luck. He stayed with his starter an inning too long. And, arguably, he should have brought in Familia to close out the last two innings rather than first trying Clippard.There is, too, the simple fact that the Kansas City Royals are a very good baseball team. The Mets go up by a run, and here come the Royals, like hounds on the scent of a weakened deer. The cumulative impact is wearying. We New Yorkers pride ourselves on our lunacies; the Citi Field crowd can hoot, holler and work itself into a reasonable frenzy. But by the middle innings Saturday night, our bravado yielded to something more strangled. The eighth inning was a Zoloft experience.David Wright, the Mets’ third baseman, spoke of this afterward.“It just seemed every inning they were coming at us, stealing bases, scratching,” he said. “They put a lot of pressure on your defense, and it’s constant. It’s not all about our mistakes; they are an excellent team.”A reporter asked Wright about Murphy and that error. At age 32, afflicted with a perpetually sore back and yet still playing every inning this postseason, Wright has embraced his role as captain. Play hard, and he will protect your back. He knows that whatever the damage from Murphy’s fielding fumbles and mindless walkabouts on the bases, his longtime teammate never fails to bust a gut.Wright’s answer did not feel practiced. Three games ago, he noted, he was guilty of his own error at third base that helped pry open the doors of defeat. Then, on Friday night, he hit a vast bomb into the left-field stands and followed it with a key hit, and all of it led the Mets to their first victory of the Series.Baseball, he said, can be beautiful and ugly, and “within about five minutes of each other.”“Look at the 100 home runs Murph’s hit in the last few weeks — we would not be here without him,” he said. “This is not Daniel Murphy’s fault; this is the New York Mets’ fault.”On Sunday evening, the Mets trotted out onto the field once more, this time in hope of sending the Series back to Kansas City. They hoped that Michael Conforto, their young power hitter, who dredged his bat through the lower reaches of the strike zone and hit two towering home runs Saturday night, might stay hot.They hoped that Yoenis Cespedes, the outfielder known as la Potencia — the Power — would find the elixir that allowed him to do a Willie Mays imitation in the late-summer pennant race. And they no doubt hoped he would avoid his recent penchant for kicking a missed baseball around center field as if it were a soccer ball.The postseason is a transient season. Nothing is a given.Two weeks ago, when his home runs ruled the playoff evenings, Murphy was asked how he managed not to be overwhelmed. He is a father and a husband and speaks of his imperfections. His was a rueful wisdom.“Really, try to enjoy the moment,” he said. “Tomorrow has enough worry for itself.”Email: powellm@nytimes.comAdvertisement