AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — A huge banner in Chelsea’s stadium spelled out a fan’s message to the owner: “The Only Way is Jose” it read.What it did not say — could not say — was where that way is leading. José Mourinho has managed more Chelsea victories than anyone. But his team is capsizing. Saturday’s 3-1 home defeat against Liverpool was the team’s third loss in a week, and the ninth loss in 17 games since this season started.Chelsea’s defense has become hesitant and flimsy. The defense of its English Premier League title appears already over. And the only person who is backing the manager, the club owner Roman Abramovich, is silent.Abramovich, the Russian owner of Chelsea FC, was nowhere to be seen in the stadium. In the summer, he gave Mourinho a four-year contract extension, but the only way accepted at Abramovich’s Chelsea has to be a winning way, or else the manager goes. In the 12 years since the oligarch purchased the West London club, he has hired 10 different managers, three of them on an interim basis. All, including Mourinho once before, have been dismissed when results have disappointed.In that sense, the cloth banner had the wrong message: The Only Way is Roman’s Way. “I have nothing to say,” Mourinho said as he stonewalled his way through postgame television and newspaper interviews after Saturday’s loss. “I cannot speak because I am punished if I speak.”The manager who once called himself “A Special One” then held a crisis meeting with five of his assistants out on the stadium field before leaving, he said, to watch the Rugby World Cup final.He said he would be back to lead a training session on Sunday, and that he would still be in charge of the team for Wednesday’s Champions League game against Dynamo Kiev.Mourinho’s sullenness contrasted with, and in part took the shine off, Jürgen Klopp’s ebullience. Saturday brought the German’s first significant win as manager of Liverpool, and first victory in Premier League soccer since he replaced Brendan Rodgers last month.“We have to turn doubters into believers” was the way Klopp succinctly summed up the task of turning around a failing team. On Saturday, trying not to glow in Mourinho’s presence, the new Liverpool manager described the victory.“An important, deserved, good and intensive game. They made their early goal, we kept cool and played football.” And won.By that point, the cloth carrying the message for Mourinho had gone with the wind.The sympathizers for an embattled manager are likely to be fewer in this case because of Mourinho’s constant and caustic public disparaging of rivals. If he looks at the Premier League standings, he will see that Manchester City and Arsenal are 14 points above his team. Even Leicester City, a club not remotely comparable to Chelsea in wealth or expectation, lies third, 11 points ahead of Chelsea.Mourinho has called Arsenal’s manager, Arsène Wenger, “a serial loser” and dismissed ManCity’s manager, Manuel Pellegrini, as a second-rater. And Mourinho sneered at Claudio Ranieri, the man whose team he originally inherited when he first signed with Chelsea in 2004.If ever the phrase “Be kind to them on the way up, you might meet them on your way down” seemed appropriate, now is the time.Mourinho, however, seems trapped by his own rhetoric. He has built a career on his undoubted ability to make players play, and win, to his own pattern. What he has lacked in entertainment, he has made up for with victories, trophies, and up to now, a win-to- loss ratio that almost cows opponents before a ball is kicked.Somewhere this season, that aura has blown away.Even before the Premier League began, Chelsea’s preseason was strange because Mourinho took his team to play exhibition games soon after winning the championship, and then gave the players a belated vacation.That seemed to reverse the customary pattern of relaxing tired players after a gruelling 10-month season before gradually building them up again for the new campaign. The manager’s own behavior was erratic, and publicly so after he ranted on the sideline at the team doctor Eva Carneiro when she ran onto the field to treat a fallen player, Eden Hazard.Dr. Carneiro was never allowed near the team again and is pursuing legal action against the club.Hazard has not looked the same player since, certainly not the outstanding midfielder he was throughout last season. And if his diminished performance was indicative of something wrong at the core of Chelsea’s harmony, the jittery defense of the entire backline has looked incapable of comparison with the unit that bullied and blunted opponents in the past.John Terry, the tired, aging, captain, may have come to the end of a long and hitherto glorified decade. Chelsea tried, and failed to buy Everton’s young central defender, John Stones, to replace him, and Mourinho tried dropping his captain, before reinstating him.The indecisiveness of the coach, dropping big-name players from each area of his lineup, reflects inner turmoil. Mourinho also appears to have lost his touch with the media.His voice, so loquacious and sometimes downright manipulative, has rattled experienced opponents, and his shifting of blame onto referees has became a self-defeating mantra. If, as Mourinho again implied Saturday, his players have become afraid to express themselves, then who is undermining them?Liverpool was the latest opponent to capitalize. A goal down inside four minutes, Liverpool slowly gathered momentum. Philippe Coutinho, the Brazilian whose confidence had seemed lost, shone with two immaculate goals, each with a matador’s sweep inside Terry and Gary Cahill before, with his left, then his right foot, Coutinho struck. Christian Benteke then finished off Chelsea. If Mourinho did indeed watch the rugby final, he might, if it is not too late, have learned two things: The humbleness of New Zealand in triumph, and the magnanimity of Australians in defeat were lessons in how to conduct sport.Advertisement