By HUW RICHARDSOCT. 31, 2015
TWICKENHAM, England — At workplaces around the world Monday, New Zealanders will arrive with an extra spring in their step and an assertive gleam in their eyes. And nowhere will this be more so than in the many places where they work alongside Australians.That New Zealand’s All Blacks became the first team to win consecutive Rugby World Cups and the first three-time champion is satisfying enough, but that the 34-17 victory at Twickenham on Saturday was achieved against its larger neighbor and archrival Australia adds an extra dimension.And, as the chants of “four more years” heard from the Twickenham stands indicate, New Zealand’s win created a feeling of satisfaction that will last until the next World Cup is played in Japan in 2019.That World Cup will take place in an atmosphere very different from recent ones. Before 2011 the rugby world asked, after several near misses, if New Zealand would ever again win the trophy. Before this year’s tournament the question was whether it could win away from its own soil.AdvertisementLeading up to 2019, the rugby world will be asking how long it will be before anybody but New Zealand wins the World Cup.AdvertisementSaturday’s victory is the high point for an extraordinary All Blacks generation — above all the captain, Richie McCaw, and the midfield playmaker, Daniel Carter. McCaw’s 148 matches and Carter’s 1,598 points are all-time records for international rugby.“Richie is probably the greatest All Black ever and Dan a close second,” said Steve Hansen, the New Zealand head coach.“Why would you ever want to give this up?” McCaw asked immediately after Saturday’s victory, casting doubt on assumptions about his likely retirement. But Carter, along with the veteran center pairing of Conrad Smith and Ma’a Nonu and hooker Keven Mealamu — second only to McCaw, with 132 appearances — is certainly quitting the international game.That’s a huge loss in leadership and experience. But a fresh generation is ready and able to step up. The wings Julian Savea and Nehe Milner-Skudder, the versatile midfield playmaker Beauden Barrett, the lock Brodie Retallick and the scrumhalf Aaron Smith are all in their mid-20s, and all are already world class.“We’ve got lots of people with 20 to 40 caps who are in great shape to carry this team forward,” Hansen said.The All Blacks coach ducked the question of whether his team might be considered the best ever, saying, “That’s for other people to say.” But a 49-3 record with two draws since 2012, culminating in a second consecutive victory at the World Cup, gives this team a large voice in that conversation.Its victory Saturday was worthy of that record, the final score reflecting its superiority over an Australian team that played with courage and intelligence. “Tonight we just weren’t good enough,” acknowledged Australia’s captain, Stephen Moore.AdvertisementNew Zealand did wobble in the second half, when fullback Ben Smith was suspended for 10 minutes for a dangerous tackle. It is usually at its best when handicapped this way, but during Smith’s absence its 21-3 lead was reduced to 21-17 by well-worked tries from the Australian No. 8 David Pocock and center Tevita Kuridrani.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For a few minutes it seemed as if the force might be with the Wallabies. But a superb 45-yard drop goal from the flyhalf Carter shifted momentum with 10 minutes to go, and he added a penalty to extend New Zealand’s lead to 10 points. Barrett’s last-minute try, converted by Carter, was cruel to the valiant Wallabies, but reflected New Zealand’s overall dominance.Carter, who missed the 2011 final with an injury, was named man of the match for kicking 19 points and controlling the match tactically. His three penalties and a 9-3 lead had seemed a poor return on New Zealand’s control of possession and position as the match approached halftime, but tries either side of the break gave the team a decisive edge.Immediately before halftime, dazzlingly quick passing between Conrad and Aaron Smith and McCaw made space and time for Milner-Skudder to cross the try line on the right. Doubtless relieved when Conrad Smith, whose ability to find space in crowded midfields has been a rugby marvel, went off at halftime, the Wallabies were immediately afflicted by his successor, Sonny Bill Williams.Williams twice offloaded dextrously, the second time sending Nonu on a slashing, angled 50-yard run to the line for his 11th try against Australia, matching McCaw’s all-time record of tries against another top-tier opponent.Against most teams, a 21-3 All Blacks lead after 42 minutes would have led to a massacre, but Australia did not quit.“Heart and courage have been built into this team and will last and take it forward,” said Australia’s coach, Michael Cheika. “They wanted to stay in the battle until the end, and they did.”Australia, too, will lose great servants. The veteran midfield playmaker Matt Giteau deserved much better than to be forced off injured after 26 minutes, then become the first man to play on two losing World Cup final teams. (He had appeared briefly in Australia’s 20-17 loss to England in 2003.) But the core of its team, and in particular its brilliant back-row forwards, Pocock and Michael Hooper, is young enough to figure again in 2019.“They’re not just outstanding players, but outstanding people,” Cheika said.It will take all those qualities, and perhaps more, for the rest of the rugby world to thwart New Zealand’s bid for a hat trick in Japan in 2019.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.