By RAY GLIEROCT. 3, 2015
ATHENS, Ga. —  Alabama’s football team assumed the personality of its stern head coach, doing away with the pregame prancing and skipping on Saturday to show off their passion. The Crimson Tide made themselves as businesslike as Coach Nick Saban, and once the game started, Alabama hit Georgia with running play after running play — just the kind of rock ’em, sock ’em football that Saban likes.In rain that was as dispiriting for the fans at Sanford Stadium as the 13th-ranked Crimson Tide (4-1, 1-1) were for Georgia, Alabama reasserted itself in the Southeastern Conference with a 38-10 thumping of the eighth-ranked Bulldogs (4-1, 2-1).Two weeks after the Crimson Tide lost to Mississippi in a mistake-filled game that had many questioning whether they could compete for a national championship, Alabama’s brand of complementary football — offense, defense, special teams — was too much for Georgia.“A lot of mental toughness, a lot of physical toughness,” Saban said of his team’s performance.AdvertisementThe loss to Mississippi cast so much doubt on Alabama, the Crimson Tide were underdogs for the first time since the 2009 SEC championship game, against Florida. There were turnovers galore against Mississippi, but more worrisome was the disjointed offense. Jake Coker, a 6-foot-4 senior quarterback, is viewed as a pocket passer, but he was trying to run a West Coast offense of horizontal passes and timing routes under the coordinator Lane Kiffin.Coker, who had completed just 55 percent of his passes with four interceptions in four games, seemed settled in with a play-action plan against Georgia. He completed 7 of 8 passes for 158 yards in the first half while Alabama took a 24-3 lead.AdvertisementA picture-perfect deep ball from Coker to wide receiver Calvin Ridley, after a faked handoff, gave the Crimson Tide a three-touchdown lead with 3 minutes 48 seconds left in the second quarter.“I had a little drought on deep balls lately, so that was pretty nice,” said Coker, who ended up completing 11 of 16 passes for 190 yards.Alabama running back Derrick Henry gained just 24 yards with his first eight carries, but Saban’s orders were to keep pounding. Henry finished with 148 yards on 26 carries with a touchdown.“We were going to play the game close to the vest and throw play-action passes because we did not want to get behind in the game,” Saban said. “We were going to stick with it; we were not going to abort what our plan was coming in here on a day like today.”Alabama’s running game finally clicked in the second quarter. The game was tied, 3-3, when Henry took a second-down handoff at the Georgia 30-yard line, stepped right and burst untouched to the end zone. The extra-point kick made it 10-3.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Georgia, which punted seven times in the first half, let the game get away with a special-teams blunder as the Bulldogs’ Collin Barber had his punt blocked inside the 5-yard line by the Alabama freshman Minkah Fitzpatrick, who came off the left side untouched. Fitzpatrick grabbed the ball on the bounce at the 1 and scored.AdvertisementCoker’s touchdown pass to Ridley then made it 24-3.It was one of the most eagerly awaited games in recent years for Georgia, but the Alabama defensive line, led by ends Jarran Reed and A’Shawn Robinson, could not be blocked. They hemmed in running back Nick Chubb, a Heisman Trophy contender, and harassed quarterback Greyson Lambert until he was replaced late in the second quarter.“We’re physical, and we pride ourselves on being physical and dominating the line of scrimmage,” Reed said. “It was going out there and dominating.”Lambert, who captured an N.C.A.A. record by completing 24 of 25 passes against South Carolina, was just 7 of 17 before being benched. It did not help that Georgia could not run the football effectively on first or second down and that Lambert was put in third-and-long situations over and over. The Bulldogs finished 3 for 17 on third-down conversions.Chubb had 63 yards on 18 carries before he broke off an 83-yard touchdown run with five seconds left in the third quarter, by which time the game was out of reach. The campus bridge behind the scoreboard was already filling up with drenched Georgia fans eager to get out of the storm and away from the wrath of the Tide. Chubb finished with 146 yards.“We got whipped,” Georgia Coach Mark Richt said. “We all know it, and we have to do something about it.”Saban kept his composure after the game, and so did his team.“I think it’s one game,” Saban said. “I think we have to show we can play with consistency.”A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: Alabama Wipes Out Doubts and a Rival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.