AdvertisementSupported byRoyals 5, Twins 1By Pat BorziMINNEAPOLIS — The jaunty beat of Van Morrison’s “Bright Side of the Road,” heard across Target Field moments after Kansas City’s 5-1 victory Saturday eliminated the Minnesota Twins from the wild-card race, sent fans home with a bounce in their step.It was something the game failed to provide.The race came down to the regular season’s penultimate day, with three teams chasing one American League berth — the Houston Astros, the Los Angeles Angels and the Twins. Minnesota entered Saturday two games behind the Astros and one behind the Angels with two to play, an achievement for a team coming off four straight 90-loss seasons and a managerial change. But to make the postseason, the Twins needed to win and get some help. Instead, a wrenching loss, peppered with three errors and 16 strikeouts from the Twins, eliminated Minnesota from contention and the possibility of a wild-card date with the Yankees, who crushed the Twins four times in division series from 2003 to 2010. The result prompted a 20-minute postgame clubhouse meeting that the first-year manager Paul Molitor described as emotional.“A lot of guys are taking this a little bit personal, in a good way,” a grim Molitor said. “I feel bad for them. There’s a lot of rawness out there.”In the end, the Twins (83-78) had no one to blame but themselves. While the Astros lost five straight games in mid-September, with the Texas Rangers sweeping four in Arlington to grab the A.L. West lead, the Twins lost five straight at home. Before that, the Twins had one of the A.L.’s best home records. From Sept. 17 on, the Twins lost two games in which they led by 5-0 and 4-0. The three-time All-Star closer Glen Perkins, shifted to a setup role because of back trouble, entered a tie game Friday night against the Royals and gave up two run-scoring hits, the difference in a 3-1 loss.“We didn’t get it done on our behalf, regardless of what went on around us,” Twins General Manager Terry Ryan said before Saturday’s game. “Consequently, we’re really in trouble now.”The pregame mood had been surprisingly upbeat, with Eddie Rosario, Kennys Vargas and Miguel Sano taking turns tooling through the clubhouse on a mini-Segway and Brian Dozier cranking the 1987 country hit “Fishin’ in the Dark” from his iPod. But the game quickly turned. Kansas City took a 1-0 lead in the first. In the second, Twins starter Tommy Milone and catcher Kurt Suzuki collided on a Salvador Perez pop-up between the mound and the plate. The ball ticked off Milone’s glove, but Suzuki drew the error for jostling him. Kansas City’s Yordano Ventura kept the Twins hitless for four and two-thirds innings and struck out 11 over seven innings, allowing one run. The Royals struck for four runs in the seventh, two scoring as the Twins committed two errors on one play, when third baseman Trevor Plouffe mishandled a Jonny Gomes line drive he briefly lost in the shadows before Rosario, the left fielder, threw wildly home. The Twins loaded the bases in the ninth before Wade Davis finished off the game with two strikeouts. The Angels had kept pressure on the Astros, coming from behind to beat Texas, 11-10. But the Twins were done.Several players stopped by Torii Hunter’s locker with jerseys and other memorabilia for him to autograph. A Twins farm system product who left as a free agent after the 2007 season, Hunter, 40, returned this season as a right fielder and mentor. Hunter, who spoke in the postgame meeting, said he was not sure if he would retire, play again for the Twins or go elsewhere. He conceded that Sunday could be his last game. “Some people might say you’re not successful,” he said of the season. “All the critics, all the analysts, all the sabermetricians, everybody you can name, said the Twins were going to be in last place. You’re wrong. We did a great job.”But not great enough.“The curtain came down, so to speak, but it was a pretty good show,” Molitor said. “Some of the acts were a little sketchy at times as we tried to move on the next scene. The body of work was good. We’ll be better in the long run for it.”Advertisement