AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressThe Los Angeles Angels rallied for five runs in the ninth inning Saturday, taking their playoff hopes into the final day of the regular season with an 11-10 win at Texas that again kept the Rangers from clinching the American League West title.Rangers closer Shawn Tolleson, pitching for the fifth straight day, entered with a 10-6 lead and allowed consecutive home runs to Erick Aybar and Kole Calhoun to start the ninth.Ross Ohlendorf (3-1) relieved Tolleson and retired Mike Trout on a ground ball, then gave up a double to Albert Pujols. It was a difficult pop-up to short right that ricocheted off the glove of first baseman Mike Napoli, whose back was to home plate.C. J. Cron, David Freese, Carlos Perez and Johnny Giavotella had consecutive two-out singles, with Cron, Perez and Giavotella driving in runs.ASTROS 6, DIAMONDBACKS 2 Collin McHugh earned his 19th victory, Colby Rasmus homered twice, and Houston won in Arizona to clinch at least a tie for the American League’s second wild card.The Astros remained in contention for the A.L. West title as well as the league’s first wild card.McHugh (19-7) allowed a run and six hits in seven innings to improve to 6-0 in his last seven starts. Jose Altuve homered and doubled for Houston.ROYALS 5, TWINS 1 Minnesota was eliminated from the A.L. wild-card race, getting stifled by Yordano Ventura for seven innings in a loss to visiting Kansas City.Blaine Boyer (3-6) allowed two runs, one earned, while getting two outs for Minnesota. The Twins committed two errors in a costly four-run seventh inning for the Royals.DODGERS 2, PADRES 1 Zack Greinke earned the National League E.R.A. title, and host Los Angeles beat San Diego to clinch home-field advantage in its playoff series against the Mets.The Dodgers’ win, combined with Washington’s doubleheader sweep of the Mets, ensured that Los Angeles would open the division series at home Friday against starter Jacob deGrom.Greinke (19-3) allowed one run and four hits in eight innings to conclude the regular season with a 1.66 E.R.A., beating out the Cubs’ ace, Jake Arrieta, who finished at 1.77.RAYS 4, BLUE JAYS 3 Tim Beckham hit a two-run single with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning, and Tampa Bay beat visiting Toronto.Edwin Encarnacion homered for the fourth consecutive game for the Blue Jays, who fell to one game behind Kansas City for the A.L.’s best record and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs. Toronto holds the tiebreaker.REDS 3, PIRATES 1 A. J. Burnett was outpitched by the rookie Brandon Finnegan in the final regular-season start of his career, and Cincinnati prevented the Pirates from clinching home-field advantage in the N.L. wild-card game by winning in Pittsburgh, ending a 13-game skid.Pittsburgh still needs to win Sunday, or the Cubs to lose, to host the one-game playoff Wednesday night.CUBS 1, BREWERS 0 Kyle Hendricks allowed one hit and struck out eight in six innings, and Chicago won at Milwaukee.Chicago won its seventh straight game behind a stellar effort from Hendricks (8-7). He held Milwaukee without a base runner until Martin Maldonado singled with one out in the sixth.Advertisement