AdvertisementSupported bySpurs 94, Knicks 84By Scott CacciolaGregg Popovich, the coach of the San Antonio Spurs, said he was unfamiliar with the latest version of the Knicks before their game Monday night at Madison Square Garden.“I don’t watch film on other people at this point in the season,” he said. “I don’t even know what I’m doing yet. So it’s kind of a waste of time to watch other people.”The game, then, provided Popovich with his first peek at Kristaps Porzingis, the first-year forward for the Knicks and the organization’s presumptive future. Porzingis made an impression. Consider his emphatic dunk in the third quarter, when he climbed over the Spurs’ LaMarcus Aldridge for a putback dunk.Porzingis, all 7 feet 3 inches of him, screamed and glared at the crowd, which went bonkers. The only problem was that the Knicks were on their way to a 94-84 loss.The Knicks (2-2) are showing plenty of early-season promise, and their refurbished offense and improved defense were on display against San Antonio. Porzingis collected 13 points and 14 rebounds in his finest game of the season — make that career. But he left the game late in the fourth quarter after colliding with Carmelo Anthony, and the Spurs withstood every rally.“I thought the effort was solid,” Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said. “But we’re not good enough yet to just have solid effort against a good team like San Antonio. We’re just not in that position. We have to have maximum effort every time we touch the floor.”Anthony finished with 19 points but shot 4 of 17 from the field. Aldridge scored 19 points for the Spurs, and Kawhi Leonard added 18 points and 14 rebounds. With 2 minutes 49 seconds remaining in the game, Porzingis became tied up with the Spurs’ Tim Duncan, and Anthony toppled over them. Porzingis appeared dazed and clutched his head and neck as team trainers tended to him. He was eventually helped to his feet and departed for the locker room. Porzingis had a strained neck, the team said. X-rays were negative. His status for Wednesday’s game against the Cleveland Cavaliers was unclear.“It doesn’t feel too good,” he said, “but it’s nothing serious.”On Monday, the Knicks got their first crack at the renovated Spurs, who made a splash in the off-season by signing Aldridge, one of the summer’s most coveted free agents. Aldridge has been searching for his role, but against the Knicks, he began to reveal his full package of skills: the pump fakes and spinning runners, the back-to-the-basket post-ups and smooth jumpers.The Spurs, a model of stability, also leaned on Duncan and Leonard, who scored on a 3-pointer and a jumper as the Spurs mounted a big run to stretch their halftime lead to 47-35. The Knicks shot 33.3 percent from the field in the first half.The Knicks stuck around in the third quarter. After Anthony stripped a pass from Manu Ginobili, the Knicks pushed the ball to Jerian Grant, who threw a layup in off the glass to whittle the Spurs’ lead to 68-62 with 1:58 left in the third. The Knicks were defending at one end and moving the ball at the other.The Knicks trailed by 5 entering the fourth, and Kevin Seraphin, who made his first appearance for the Knicks, knocked down a jump shot to cut the lead to 77-73. But Ginobili responded with a 3-pointer, and the Knicks labored to get stops.The Knicks were fresh off a 117-110 win over the Washington Wizards on Saturday night — on the road, no less. After two substandard shooting games, Anthony appeared to find his rhythm against the Wizards. He scored 37 points and shot 11 of 18 from the field, including 4 of 5 from 3-point range. Concerns about his surgically repaired knee seemed to evaporate.Historically, though, Anthony has struggled against the Spurs. He entered Monday’s game averaging 20.3 points a game against San Antonio, his lowest scoring average versus any opponent. The recipe, Popovich said, is common sense: Treat him as the focal point of the Knicks’ offense, and rotate defenders throughout the game.“We know this season there’s going to be a lot of grind-out games,” Anthony said. “We have to figure out a way to win those games. We don’t expect to get a lot of blowouts this season.”Porzingis played with energy throughout. After rebounding an early miss by Duncan, Porzingis drove the lane for a layup. He collected five rebounds in the game’s first four minutes. “Those guys are legends,” he said of the Spurs’ longtime core of Duncan, Tony Parker and Ginobili.Late in the fourth quarter, after his collision with Anthony, Porzingis left to a warm ovation. In the locker room after the game, Porzingis said he felt stiffness on the left side of his neck and along his spine. He gave himself a prescription.“Get some rest,” he said.REBOUNDSThe Knicks’ Arron Afflalo, who has a hamstring injury, missed his fourth straight game to start the season. Advertisement