By TOM WORGONOV. 2, 2015
WASHINGTON — The Washington Capitals have elevated losing Game 7s in the N.H.L. playoffs into a masochistic art form. They have been eliminated in a Game 7 six times in the past eight years, including three straight by the Rangers.That is why it was no accident that the newly acquired right wing Justin Williams was given a locker next to Washington captain Alex Ovechkin.Coach Barry Trotz put Williams there in the hopes that such a close association with a player who owns three Stanley Cup rings and holds the N.H.L. record with 14 points in seven career Game 7 victories will rub off on Ovechkin, a three-time Hart Trophy winner who has yet to lead his team to a championship.Ovechkin remains the team’s undisputed leader and superstar, but the Capitals seem to be constantly grasping for that extra edge, that missing piece, to propel them to the Stanley Cup finals.AdvertisementUndoubtedly, that was the rationale for bringing in Williams as a free agent and acquiring the American Olympic star T. J. Oshie in a trade with the St. Louis Blues.AdvertisementSo far, it seems to be working for the Capitals, who are off to an 8-2 start and in a first-place tie with the Rangers in the Metropolitan Division. The teams meet for the first time this season Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden.Williams and Oshie, both wings, provide scoring depth for Washington, which has struggled to produce goals in the postseason. The Capitals’ most recent flameout came in the Eastern Conference semifinals in May against the Rangers, when they scored two goals or fewer in six of seven games.Through 10 games, Oshie has four goals and four assists, and Williams has two goals and six assists.“It takes a little pressure off the other guys offensively,” Capitals General Manager Brian MacLellan said, referring to Ovechkin and center Nicklas Backstrom. “We are a deeper offensive team now. Williams and Oshie are both great additions and I am excited about them. Both can play a two-way game.”MacLellan made it clear that the Capitals are rapidly approaching a win-now-or-else stage.“Ovie and Nick have been around a long time,” he said. “They are both hitting the 30-year-old mark. There’s a little more urgency now. We can make a good run at it. We feel we were close last year.”The NBC analyst Jeremy Roenick described the acquisitions of Williams and Oshie as pitch perfect.“They added character,” Roenick said. “I think the Capitals have been missing a little of that. Williams knows what it takes to win. He was a key piece to those Stanley Cups. Then you have Oshie, who everybody loves. He is a guy who loves being around his teammates and his teammates love being around him.”Oshie played seven years in St. Louis before joining the Capitals, but he is best known for helping to beat Russia with four shootout goals in the 2014 Sochi Olympics. Oshie, a first-round draft pick in 2005, had a career-high 21 goals and 39 assists during the 2013-14 season.Oshie, 28, solves a problem that plagued the Capitals last year, when they used eight different wings on Ovechkin’s line. To pry Oshie away from the Blues, the team dealt forward Troy Brouwer, the promising goalie Phoenix Copley and a third-round pick.AdvertisementOshie’s combination of speed, energy and toughness appeal to Trotz.“He gives us a stable guy,” Trotz said, referring to the first line. “We didn’t have a guy like Oshie there before.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Oshie said he believed he was headed for big things playing with Ovechkin and center Evgeny Kuznetsov, the Capitals’ leading scorer with five goals and eight assists.“I played with a lot of very good players, but I’ve never played with an Alexander Ovechkin,” Oshie said. “The things that open up on the ice with him are different than what I’ve seen in the past. Offensively, I think I get more chances than I’ve ever had.”Williams should see his share of scoring chances, playing with Ovechkin’s longtime center, Backstrom, who led the league in assists last year with 60, and left wing Marcus Johansson.The Capitals are looking for more than on-the-ice skill from Williams, who won the Conn Smythe Trophy for the 2014 playoffs. He led the Kings to their second championship in three years with 9 goals and 16 assists in 24 playoff games.Williams, 34, also won rings with Los Angeles in 2012 and Carolina in 2006.“Now, we have the opportunity to put Justin Williams next to Ovechkin,” Trotz said. “I like doing that because it helps Ovie grow on and off the ice.”He added, “There are certain experiences he hasn’t had that he can learn from Williams.”Williams’s postseason résumé puts him in a special position even though he is still getting to know his teammates. By the time the playoff push rolls around in the spring, Williams will be much sought after.“I want to ask him what the Kings’ room was like before games and what it was like when they were down,” defenseman Karl Alzner said. “They were down in quite a few series and found a way to fight back. At that time of year, it’s not hard for bad stuff to creep into your head.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.