By THE NEW YORK TIMESNOV. 2, 2015
New York Times writers who covered the Mets’ loss to the Royals in the World Series offered their final thoughts.Agony to Ecstasy and BackThe Mets are about to steal Game 1, a clever burglar crawling off with a diamond brooch. In the eighth inning, Juan Lagares strokes a single and steals second base. Wilmer Flores grounds to the Royals’ first baseman, Eric Hosmer, who boots it (Bill Buckner, Bill Buckner, the evil internal chant of Mets fans).Lagares sprints home, and the Mets are up, 4-3. In the bottom of the ninth, Jeurys Familia, the closer, runs in with those long strides of his. In nine-plus innings this postseason, he has given up two hits and no runs.He is our Dr. Death.The first batter grounds out. Up comes Alex Gordon, a fine professional hitter. Whatever. Time to make postgame dinner plans.AdvertisementThen, a quick pitch.Gordon puts the swing on. Familia snaps around — wait, no, this isn’t supposed to. ...The ball disappears beyond the 410 sign. In the press box, where fandom is a deeply internalized affair, my stomach feels a snakelike twist.AdvertisementFriday, three days later, offers a happier memory. I’m at home in Brooklyn with Evelyn, our boys, and their wife and girlfriend. Oh, yeah — dog, too. The Mets trail, 2-0, in this series. The giant Noah Syndergaard gazes impassively, rears and tosses a 98-mile-per-hour lightning bolt over the head of the Royals’ leadoff hitter, Alcides Escobar.We are carnivores, dancing tribalists. Thor has announced we are back in the series. Which we are — until we aren’t. MICHAEL POWELLA Fateful DecisionThere is, of course, that moment, in retrospect the only moment: those spare few minutes between the bottom of the eighth and the top of the ninth, a Mets dugout scene playing out like a silent movie, as captured on television. The pitching coach telling starting pitcher Matt Harvey, Great job — eight scoreless innings! — but you’re out of the game. Harvey saying no way and going straight to Manager Terry Collins to complain. The agonizing discussion about what to do. The decision to stick with Harvey — a decision that, at that moment, I thought wise. Then Harvey walks the leadoff batter in the ninth.Even before the double that followed, you knew a terrible mistake had been made. Now Collins was faced with the painful decision to pull Harvey. And he just couldn’t do it. What ensued had me howling so loudly that I woke my wife, the dog started barking, and the smoke detector went off. DAN BARRYDoomed From the StartWhen I was a kid, I paid special attention to the first pitch my favorite team threw in a game as an indicator of what was to come. A first-pitch strike was a portent of a glorious result; a ball was oh so ominous. An inside-the-park home run? Just turn off the TV.If ever a first pitch provided a peek into a doomed future, it was Matt Harvey’s initial offering in Game 1 of the World Series. It was a strike, all right, and Alcides Escobar hit a fly ball to the gap. Not only did Yoenis Cespedes miss it, but the ball bounced off his leg (not the last time that folly would take place) and rolled away from him as Escobar rounded the bases.It was the first of several jaw-dropping defensive blunders by the Mets that set the tone for a sloppy, but exciting, series. The Royals capitalized on all of them, including David Wright’s error in the 14th inning that allowed the winning run to reach base in Game 1, Daniel Murphy’s stunning fielding goof in Game 4 and Lucas Duda’s wild throw to the backstop in the ninth inning of Game 5.AdvertisementThe Mets had ample time to make up for Cespedes’s miscue on that first pitch. Instead, it set a gloomy precedent for many more mistakes. DAVID WALDSTEINSorrow at Second When second baseman Daniel Murphy stood at his locker on Saturday night, awaiting wave upon wave of reporters, answering the same questions about the ground ball that went under his glove, the one that probably cost the Mets a victory, there was one person in the clubhouse who knew how he felt.That person, Tim Teufel, the Mets’ third-base coach, is the only active link to the 1986 Mets, the franchise’s last championship team. But 29 years ago, he stood at his Shea Stadium locker after Game 1, answering the same unanswerable questions.A second baseman, Teufel allowed a seventh-inning ground ball hit by Boston’s Rich Gedman to go right through his legs, allowing Jim Rice to score from second. The Mets lost, 1-0.“You’re always thinking about it — it cost us the game, and you let your teammates down,” Teufel said. “But I stood at my locker for an hour and 40 minutes answering questions on how did I miss the ball. I explained it over and over again. After that I was done with it. It’s over.”He added, “That’s what we’re taught — to move on.”Perhaps it is the fate of Mets second basemen. Before Teufel, there was Felix Millan, who let Bert Campaneris’s grounder scoot through his legs in the opener of the 1973 World Series, leading to both runs in Oakland’s 2-1 win over the Mets.The Mets lost that series in seven games.In that respect, Teufel was fortunate. The Mets, thanks to their miraculous comeback in Game 6, overcame his mistake and won the 1986 World Series — a cherished second chance for a Mets second baseman, playing a position that often requires one. BILLY WITZA Stiff Upper LipIn the final inning of the Mets’ season, a Fox camera focused on Daniel Murphy’s face, waiting for a reaction. Murphy had just made his second error in two games, flubbing what looked like a routine play. A ground ball had bounced off the heel of his glove.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Come on,” Murphy mouthed to himself.Murphy retook his position and, with the camera still trained on him, pulled lip balm out of his back pocket, applied it and puckered his lips. A camera had caught him doing the same thing after his far more costly error the night before.AdvertisementIt was a little ritual in two moments of stress, and it became a sad signoff to Murphy’s wild postseason. He performed so well in the first two rounds that he became an instant celebrity, and then he performed so poorly that he became an instant goat. His rise and fall mirrored that of the entire team.In the clubhouse after Game 5, as reporters peppered Murphy with questions about the Series and his impending free-agent status, he even sounded as if he were speaking for the team.“I didn’t play as well as I wanted to,” Murphy said. “I wish I would’ve swung the bat better, wish I would have made a couple more plays. But I can’t get it back now.” TIM ROHANOne Triumph in DefeatFew teams have a history as equitable as the Mets’. Fifty-four seasons in the National League, five pennants, spaced at intervals that have now given almost every significant player a chance at ultimate glory.Of the 20 players with the most wins above replacement for the team, as calculated by Baseball-Reference.com, 16 have now played for the Mets in the World Series. The exceptions are David Cone, who missed by one game in 1988; Carlos Beltran and Jose Reyes, who missed by one game in 2006; and John Stearns, who made it as a coach in 2000.A title in 1969 and another pennant four years later. Then a 13-year wait before a title in 1986. Then a 14-year wait before another N.L. crown, and a 15-year wait before this year’s. David Wright, who has more hits, runs and at-bats than any other Met, seemed to grasp this after winning this year’s National League Championship Series at Wrigley Field. Now, he said, these Mets will stand beside the others.Wright had a trying postseason, with 10 hits in 54 at-bats, for a .185 average. He looked worn down from a season nearly ruined by a serious back injury. But in his first New York at-bat in the World Series, in the first inning of Game 3, Wright, the captain, came through. He hit a home run. He lived a dream.Advertisement“Running around the bases,” Wright said, “it’s just like floating.”The Mets won easily, their only tension-free night of the World Series. They held a lead in the eighth inning or later in four of the five games, but they never seemed comfortable; another Royals rally was always bubbling up.But the Mets got one win. They will always have that. And Wright — a player of uncommon dignity and patience, in a market that often lacks both — will always have his moment.“When I look back on this year, it will be the best time that I ever had on the baseball field,” Wright said after the final defeat. “This truly was special.” TYLER KEPNERA version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Memories of Moments to Forget.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »