AdvertisementSupported byOn BaseballBy Tyler KepnerThe Mets’ history is not as bleak as their fans sometimes suggest. But this much is true: Blue-and-orange joy rides, like the one that just ended, should be treasured.Remember that night in July when the Mets used John Mayberry Jr. and Eric Campbell to bat fourth and fifth against Clayton Kershaw? No Mets fan would have refused this deal, if offered then: Your team will reach the World Series and hold a late lead in four of five games, but from there, you take your chances.Somehow, that really happened. Somehow, Wilmer Flores went from crying on the field, when he thought he had been traded, to standing at home plate, in Mets blue, as the final hitter of the 2015 major league season.It was a rollicking season — the Mets were no-hit twice at home! — and a bizarre little World Series. Closer Jeurys Familia pitched five innings, allowing three hits with no walks, no hit batters and no wild pitches. Yet he became the first pitcher in history with three blown saves in a World Series.“I understand baseball,” Familia said. “This is a crazy game.”The Kansas City Royals left no doubt about which team was best. Yes, the Mets had their chances, but the Royals were professional agitators. They never let up. “You can play the what-if game; that’ll drive you crazy if you start doing that,” the Mets’ David Wright said. “There’s no lead that’s safe with these guys, especially a one- or two-run lead. You’ve almost got to play it where you need a few more than that to even feel comfortable in the late innings, because you know that they’re going to make a run. It’s not a matter of if; it’s a matter of when.”The Royals became the first team in 26 years — since the 1989 Oakland Athletics, under General Manager Sandy Alderson — to win the World Series after losing it the previous season. The Mets’ goal, of course, is to be the next. “Only one team goes home happy every year,” Alderson, now the Mets’ general manager, said after a 7-2 loss in 12 innings in Game 5 on Sunday night, “and we’re not that team.”Inevitably, though, next season’s pursuit will be framed differently. One World Series loss, after 14 seasons without a pennant, should rightly be hailed as a success. Another would be a letdown.Four National League teams won more games than the Mets in the regular season. Another, Washington, wildly underachieved, and another, San Francisco, has won three of the last six World Series. So the competition will be fierce again.The Mets have reason for optimism in their stable of young starters: Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Noah Syndergaard, Steven Matz and, before long, a recovered Zack Wheeler. But Manager Terry Collins — refreshingly candid till the end — sounded a cautious note after Game 5.“This is going to be a short off-season for a lot of them,” Collins said. “They pitched more innings than they ever have, so my concern is what they’re going to be like when they show up at spring training. When are those arms going to bounce back?”An even bigger issue could be the Mets’ offense. Healthy seasons from Wright and Travis d’Arnaud would help, and Michael Conforto offers promise. But the team’s late offensive surge came largely against a weak schedule. To beat four aces in the N.L. playoffs — Kershaw, Zack Greinke, Jon Lester and Jake Arrieta — the Mets needed an otherworldly performance from Daniel Murphy.Murphy stopped hitting in the World Series, going 3 for 20, just like Yoenis Cespedes, whose torrid late summer helped the Mets run away with the N.L. East. Both players’ final fade takes some shine off the case to keep them in free agency.If the Mets lose them, though, they will be shedding the Nos. 3 and 4 hitters from a World Series lineup. It might be prudent, but it would also be cavalier. The Mets hit just .193 against the Royals, looking helpless to sustain rallies. They scored no runs in 17 innings against the power relievers Wade Davis, Kelvin Herrera, Luke Hochevar and Ryan Madson. Murphy and Cespedes were part of those struggles, but they are clearly solid, everyday hitters.Theo Epstein, the architect of the Chicago Cubs, said during the league championship series that whichever teams won would become the trendy models. In the Royals’ case, that means aggressive hitters, speed, defense and dominant relievers.The Mets are not constructed like that. They pair their rotation with an offense built, ideally, on patient hitters who seek to do damage. Speed and defense are not their strengths.If Dilson Herrera takes over for Murphy, he will help balance a left-leaning lineup. But Herrera is not yet 22 years old. If Cespedes leaves, Juan Lagares will bring his Gold Glove back to center field every day. But Lagares cannot approach Cespedes’s power.The Mets have never reached the playoffs in the year following a World Series appearance. Returning to this stage will be arduous. But they know how it feels, at least, and that might count for something.“It’s not just talk anymore,” Wright said. “We’ve proven we can be a World Series contender. It’s going to be a confident feeling going into spring training and something we can rally around and say, ‘We were close last year; let’s do it this year.’ ”Advertisement