AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaWith Ryan Fitzpatrick having sustained ligament damage to his nonthrowing hand and his backup Geno Smith having bruised his nonthrowing shoulder, Jets Coach Todd Bowles suggested that the team’s quarterback for Sunday’s game against the Jacksonville Jaguars might not yet be on the roster.In a conference call Monday with reporters, Bowles described the status of Fitzpatrick and Smith as day to day and did not rule out either player for Sunday. Bowles indicated that the rookie Bryce Petty, viewed as a raw talent, was in the mix but added, “We’re looking at some others.”Bowles said that Matt Flynn, a veteran quarterback who joined the Jets during training camp but was released before the opener, was under consideration. Another option could be a trade for a quarterback in advance of the deadline Tuesday at 4 p.m. Eastern, although General Manager Mike Maccagnan might have to overpay in such a deal, given the team’s need.“We’re looking at everything right now,” Bowles said.A magnetic resonance imaging examination Monday revealed that Fitzpatrick had at least one torn ligament and would ultimately need surgery to repair the damage. Bowles said Fitzpatrick’s availability would depend on the pain he felt when he received the ball under center or handed off. Smith has a significant bruise but no structural damage.Although Fitzpatrick is with his sixth team in 11 years, he emerged as the steadying influence the Jets needed after the erratic Smith sustained a broken jaw when he was punched by linebacker Ikemefuna Enemkpali in a locker-room altercation on Aug. 11.Fitzpatrick, accustomed to the system of the offensive coordinator Chan Gailey from their years together with the Buffalo Bills, started the season’s first seven games, which left the Jets at 4-3. Teammates praised him for his poise and leadership, and he completed 133 of 215 passes for 1,518 yards. Fitzpatrick also avoided the kind of critical mistakes Smith and other recent predecessors had made, throwing for 11 touchdowns with seven interceptions.Fitzpatrick, 32, was injured during the opening series of Sunday’s 34-20 loss at Oakland when he dived headfirst at the end of a 12-yard scramble. It appeared that he hurt his thumb when cornerback Charles Woodson tried to tear the ball loose.The injury was exasperating for Bowles and his staff because they had emphasized since their arrival the need for running quarterbacks to slide to limit the potential for injury. Smith, 25, completed 27 of 42 passes for 265 yards in relief of Fitzpatrick, with two touchdowns and an interception, but he failed to protect himself and absorbed a tremendous hit from cornerback David Amerson when he stayed inbounds at the end of a 29-yard dash in the fourth quarter.“They both should have slid,” Bowles said, adding, “I can’t fault the competitiveness, but we’ve got to be a lot smarter.”No matter how the Jets fill their starting quarterback position, the solution will certainly be less than ideal as they try to rebound from consecutive defeats. “We just have to rally as a team and not put so much on that position and play better everywhere else,” Bowles said.Advertisement