
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
NOV. 2, 2015
David Glass, the owner of the Kansas City Royals, stood outside the team’s crazy clubhouse Sunday night, savoring the pandemonium and drying off after the Champagne showers from players celebrating their World Series championship.Like every player I spoke with after Game 5, Glass said that not a day had gone by this season when he had not thought about Game 7 of the 2014 World Series, which ended with the Royals’ potential tying run on third base against the San Francisco Giants. Redemption themes are a staple of sports narratives. Usually they are overblown clichés.Not with Kansas City.What drove the Royals — indeed what united them — from spring training through the dog days of summer to this weekend’s victories at Citi Field was an unshakable commitment to replacing the pain of last season’s defeat with a championship.The lingering image of Alex Gordon stranded at third as the 2014 season ended had become a recurring nightmare. The nightmare ended Sunday.“I never got over the seventh game of last year’s World Series,” Glass said. “I really felt that the only way we could fix that was to win it all this year. I’ll let you guys know in a day or two whether it did.”AdvertisementAs outfielder Lorenzo Cain celebrated with teammates on the infield, he, too, talked about how the loss had ruined his off-season.Advertisement“It was just so painful, coming that close,” Cain said. “It was something you think about every day, but it was also something that brought us together.”The Royals, much as the Golden State Warriors did during their run to an N.B.A. title last season, emphasized the power and might of team play, of pulling together, of accepting and playing roles. The Royals have no superstars to speak of, no player larger than the team itself. The bullpen works as a collective, with players taking pride in doing their jobs — no more, no less — when called upon. It is a common theme in the Kansas City clubhouse.Jarrod Dyson scored the decisive run Sunday, after entering the game as a pinch-runner in the 12th inning. He stole second, went to third when Gordon grounded out to first and scored on Christian Colon’s pinch-hit single. Before that at-bat, Colon had not appeared in a postseason game.In a Series with twists and turns, with booted plays and clutch home runs, the 12th inning was the perfect way for the Royals — all the Royals — to add an exclamation point. But it also highlighted Mets Manager Terry Collins’s decision to lead with his heart, to stick with his star, in the ninth. It was that decision — when Collins reversed himself and allowed starting pitcher Matt Harvey to talk himself back into the game — that allowed Kansas City to force extra innings.I saw Harvey’s insistence as part competitive spirit, but also part self-centeredness, which made the game about him, and not his team.Cain did not see a blunder in Collins’s call, or in Harvey’s pressing to stay in.“He was pitching a great game,” Cain said. “I wouldn’t expect anything less. He wanted to come out, and we wanted him to come back out. That was the guy we wanted to face after he pretty much dominated us the entire game.”Until that point, Harvey had suffocated the Royals. Had Harvey been a member of the Royals, he might have accepted a job well done and let the bullpen do its job. Instead, he pressed to finish himself, just as the Giants’ Madison Bumgarner had done to the Royals in the final game of last year’s Series. Except this time, the ending was different.Advertisement“Eventually, we got to him,” Cain added. “That’s why you play nine innings. You got to get it done through all nine.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite the loss, and encouraged by the Mets’ mix of youth and hype, some fans in New York are talking about this surprising season being the beginning of a winning tradition.How could it not be, with the young arms of Harvey, Jacob deGrom and Noah Syndergaard as the pillars?Don’t be so sure. Glass said he remembered watching the Royals’ last World Series victory and feeling the same way. He could not have imagined in 1985 that three decades would pass before he would celebrate another one.The difference between Kansas City and the Mets is that these Royals are a complete team, a mature group that had focus, humility and purpose — and the defining collective memory of a devastating World Series loss.The Mets will spend the winter talking about booted plays and wild throws and about the decision to let Harvey pitch. They will note the Royals’ aggressiveness on the basepaths and their tenacity.The source of that tenacity was a quality that could not be measured by numbers. From the owner to the last man on the roster, the most significant difference between the Royals and the Mets was an unwavering, season-long commitment to redemption.Email: wcr@nytimes.comWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »