By ANDREW DASNOV. 2, 2015
It’s a busy week, starting with Harry Kane in London on Monday afternoon and ending with Major League Soccer in four cities on Sunday. Plenty of good stuff in between, too.A victory for Paris St.-Germain or Real Madrid in its Tuesday meeting in Spain (2:45 p.m. Eastern time, Fox Sports 2) sends the winner through to the knockout rounds, where both will probably end up anyway. But they played a dreary tie in Paris on the last matchday, so maybe seek out Manchester City, which can punch its ticket at Sevilla. On Wednesday, Barcelona (home to BATE) and Zenit St. Petersburg (at Lyon) have a chance to advance with wins, while Chelsea will see if its Dumpster fire of a season can get worse when it hosts Dynamo Kiev (2:45 p.m., Fox regional networks).Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Roma and Lazio square on Sunday in Serie A’s Rome Derby (9 a.m., beIN)), and Arsenal and Tottenham will meet in the North London Derby right afterward (11 a.m., NBCSN). … Ajax, the greatest club in the world and one you should consider supporting, faces archrival Feyenoord on Sunday morning in the rivalry game known as De Klassieker (8:30 a.m., NGSN streaming). Feyenoord won the last meeting, 1-0, last week in the Dutch Cup, but this one carries more weight since Ajax leads Feyenoord by only 3 points atop the Eredivisie table.The FIFA under-17 World Cup in Chile concludes this week, and it’s worth a look if you have not been watching. Nigeria forward Victor Osimhen (eight goals), for one, has been a really skinny man among boys. The final two quarterfinals are Monday, and the semifinals are Thursday. The final is Sunday (5 p.m., FS2).M.L.S. will play the second legs of its conference semifinals on Sunday, the league’s second straight national TV quadrupleheader. Lesson No. 1 from the first leg? Pace yourself if you’re going to attempt to watch four games in a row. Lesson No. 2? The Red Bulls might be for real. They were the only road team to win in the first leg, and will take that 1-0 victory over D.C. United home to Red Bull Arena on Sunday (3 p.m., ESPN) in the day’s first game.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.