AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonGiants (1-2) at Bills (2-1)1 p.m., FoxMatchup to watch: Bills’ pass rush against a young Giants offensive lineThe Bills have only six sacks, but the front four is a fearsome group, and Coach Rex Ryan always dials up inventive, changeable blitz schemes to put added pressure on the quarterback. The Giants’ offensive line has played far better than expected, but this will be its biggest challenge so far. And it’s important to remember that the Giants’ blockers are still learning to mesh as a unit. Center Weston Richburg and left guard Justin Pugh are playing their first N.F.L. seasons at their positions. Left tackle Ereck Flowers, who may be limited Sunday because of an ankle sprain, is a rookie. If Flowers cannot play, Pugh will slide to left tackle, which is more change on a line already under pressure.The offensive line has protected Eli Manning well this year, but keeping him unhurried is going to be more essential than ever because the Giants will very likely have to win the game through the air. The running game has been streaky, and it will be going against the league’s best rushing defense. The combination will probably force Manning to pass often. Expect Manning to look to running back Shane Vereen for short passes and screens to avoid some of the Bills’ pressure tactics.Number to watch: 3That is how many sacks the Giants have in three games. The defensive coordinator Steve Spagnuolo has been trying to get to opposing quarterbacks more often with cornerback blitzes. That has not helped yet. The Giants are going to have to find some way to get into the backfield in passing situations. It is going to be hard to be a playoff-contending team if the defense averages only one sack per game.Quotation of the Week: ‘I’m going to go out every day and I’m going to have fun. I’m going to dance. I’m going to laugh. I’m going to smile and I’m going to try and encourage my teammates to do the same.’Giants wide receiver ODELL BECKHAM JR., who spent much of his time between practice plays Thursday dancing on the field, showing off an impressive array of moves that when they reach YouTube will surely earn him an invitation to “Dancing With the Stars.”Advertisement