By BENJAMIN HOFFMANNOV. 2, 2015
The reports of Peyton Manning’s demise may have been exaggerated.Derided for his soft passes, and his recent propensity for turnovers, Manning responded to his critics by airing the ball out against one of the top defenses in the N.F.L. on Sunday night. His turn-back-the-clock performance helped the Denver Broncos beat the Green Bay Packers, 29-10.In a rare matchup this late in the season between undefeated teams — it was the fourth time teams with records of 6-0 had faced each other — the Broncos gained 500 yards of offense while their team’s top-ranked defense limited Aaron Rodgers and the Packers to 140. And with the win, opponents who had begun to shift their focus entirely to solving the riddle of Denver’s suffocating defense will now have to worry about Manning as well.It was not always pretty, as Manning’s arm seems to struggle to keep up with his mind, but at 39, he kept aggressively attacking the Packers’ secondary, using all of his body to launch the ball downfield. Many of the passes were not spirals, and several involved his receivers having to fight for the ball. But somehow, some way he repeatedly found his target, completing 21 of 29 passes for 340 yards. He threw an interception late in the game with the result no longer in doubt.Despite his weakened arm strength, Manning threw six passes of 20 or more yards, with much of the distance coming with the ball in the air. Much of his attention was focused on Demaryius Thomas, and the big wide receiver put on an acrobatic show, catching eight of the 11 passes thrown his way for 168 yards.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve been pretty close,” Manning said in an on-field interview after the game when asked about his connections with Thomas. “We’ve been long in some games and short in others and so we were kind of looking for that in-between and we found that tonight.”AdvertisementThe strong performance followed a three-game stretch in which Manning combined for two touchdown passes and seven interceptions. With talk all year that coming back for an 18th season might have been a mistake, the game was portrayed almost as a must-win for him despite his team’s flawless record and its three-game division lead over Oakland. Even with the win, his seven touchdowns and 11 interceptions for the season are alarming.AdvertisementBut for this game, Manning and Denver’s running backs seemed to feed off each other. With the passing game no longer punchless, C.J. Anderson carried the ball 14 times for 101 yards and a touchdown, breaking the 100-yard mark for the first time this season. Ronnie Hillman tacked on 19 rushes for 60 yards and two touchdowns.As encouraging of a game as it was for Denver on the offensive side, the true stars were the Broncos’ defenders, who essentially eliminated Rodgers and the Green Bay passing game. Rodgers completed 14 of 22 passes for just 77 yards. It was the first time in his career that Rodgers started and played the entire game but failed to break 100 yards of passing.While the defensive effort was unsurprising, as Denver came into the game having allowed the fewest yards a game of any team in the N.F.L., it is hard to say if the offensive effort was a fluke or if the team came out of its Week 6 bye with a revitalized game plan that can continue to work going forward. But for at least a week, Manning will not have to answer for a poor performance, and the Broncos can prepare for next week’s game against Indianapolis in peace.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.