AdvertisementSupported byBy David WaldsteinMoments after Salvador Perez was presented the World Series Most Valuable Player Award, he cradled the metallic trophy in his arms like a baby, put his head down and went jogging from the clubhouse tunnel back out to the field to find a woman he wanted to share in the moment.He pushed his way through a crowd of people, mostly friends and family members of the Royals, all standing in front of the visitors’ dugout at Citi Field, and when he saw Yilda Diaz, his mother, he handed the trophy to a family friend and gave her a long, powerful embrace that both seemed to want to last forever.This was a moment they had anticipated a year ago. But their hug after Game 7 of the 2014 World Series was more out of consolation and regret, for Perez had made the final out with the potential tying run on third base. He popped out against Madison Bumgarner, and it was the San Francisco Giants who celebrated in Kansas City, not the Royals.“That was very, very painful last year,” Diaz said through a family friend, Rafi Cedeno, who translated from Spanish. “It was really painful because they fought so hard and I thought they deserved it. But they came back and did it this year. What a joy.”A year after losing in Game 7 to the Giants, the Royals turned the trick on the Mets by winning Game 5, by 7-2, to take their second World Series title, and their first since 1985. Jarrod Dyson scored the winning run, but only after pinch-running for Perez, who led off the 12th inning with a single.That came three innings after they wiped away a two-run deficit against Matt Harvey in the ninth.“We never quit,” Perez said. “We never put our heads down. We never think, O.K., the game is over. No.”It was the signature characteristic of the Royals. They never surrendered, even when facing daunting odds in late-inning deficits, and Perez often had a hand, a knee, a bat, a chest or a face mask stuck in the middle of it all.There were many heroes, but if anyone represented Kansas City’s steadfast commitment to turn last year’s disappointment into this year’s triumph, it was Perez.“He’s a beast,” said Lorenzo Cain, whose three-run double in the 12th inning put the final seal on the game. “He’s a monster. He’s our monster. That guy gives everything he has. Without him, we aren’t here right now.”Perez, 25, inherited a lot from his mother, she said proudly, including his toughness. A former softball pitcher in Venezuela, Diaz helped Salvador learn to hit as a boy in Valencia by throwing bottle caps for him to swing at. If he could hit those, a baseball would be easy.“I am so happy for this,” she said while cradling her son’s new trophy. “Really, really happy. I never expected this award. This team is so good, and there are so many good players.”It is true that there are many good players on the Royals. But among a group that formed the core of this championship team, Perez, who was signed by the Royals out of Venezuela in 2006, stood apart in some ways, just as the trophy signified. He was 8 for 22 in the World Series for a .364 batting average, scored three runs (a fourth was scored by Dyson in his place) and had two doubles and two runs batted in. One of those R.B.I. tied the score in the ninth inning of Game 5.For the second time in two years, Perez came to the plate with the tying run on third base in the ninth inning of a clinching World Series game. Even if his mother acknowledged the pain of 2014, Perez would not.“Who cares what happened last year?” he said.This time, he hit a bouncing ball to third base, and when David Wright collected it and threw to first base, Eric Hosmer boldly broke for home. When first baseman Lucas Duda’s throw to the catcher went wide, the score was even, 2-2.As fate would have it, Perez was not in the game to secure the final out this time, unable to bookend his final out from last year. He led off the top of the 12th with a single down the right-field line and was removed for Dyson, who scored on a hit by Christian Colon.So when the bottom of the 12th inning came along and Wade Davis entered to pitch, Perez was on the bench and Drew Butera was catching. After two outs, Wilmer Flores came to the plate.Flores, who is a friend of Perez’s from Valencia, took a called third strike for the final out. Perez led the charge out of the Royals’ dugout for the celebration. As the Royals danced and jumped and shouted, a Major League Baseball official went to Butera and authenticated the game ball, which the backup catcher slid into his back pocket. Perez, bobbing and shouting with his teammates, did not even notice.But Royals Manager Ned Yost did, and he regretted having to pinch-run for Perez.“He just had a phenomenal series,” Yost said. “I really wish that Sal could have been out there to jump in Wade’s arms when we got the final out.”As a former catcher, Yost knew the physical toll Perez endured in the playoffs. He was beaten down by so many foul tips and bad bounces, it was hard to count. One hit his mask and he admitted to feeling dizzy. Another hit the inside of his leg, and one, in Game 4, drilled him in the clavicle, knocking the breath out of him. But he remained in the game.“I think it’s part of my job,” Perez said. “Take a foul ball, a wild pitch.”Cain, who drew the leadoff walk against Harvey in the ninth inning, lauded Perez’s mental and physical toughness. But he, Hosmer, Alcides Escobar, Ben Zobrist, Mike Moustakas, Alex Gordon and certain pitchers possess it, too. It is part of what made the Royals so difficult to beat.It took a memorable performance by Bumgarner in relief to do it last year. So this year, Cain said, they yearned for the chance against Harvey, the Mets’ bull of an ace, even if it meant waiting until the ninth inning.“We wanted him to come out for the ninth,” Cain said. “He was dominating us all game. So we wanted to do it against him, and we did.”Cain started that rally in the ninth with a walk, and Perez began the one in the 12th with a hit.“Salvi has so much desire and heart,” General Manager Dayton Moore said. “No matter what, you always want Salvi in the middle of clutch situations.”Advertisement