AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam BordenMOSCOW — In Russia, where monkey chants directed at black players and Nazi salutes by fans have been persistent problems at soccer matches, local organizers of the 2018 World Cup have created a job that sets their preparations apart from those of previous hosts: antiracism inspector.The job, much like the issue of racism in Russian soccer generally, is complex. As evidence, consider that in a rare interview, the man appointed to fill the role, Alexei Tolkachev, pledged his office’s commitment to eradicating racism in Russian soccer even as he disputed the notion that Russian soccer was rife with racism at all.“We in Russia take this problem very seriously,” Mr. Tolkachev said at one point during a conversation at an Italian restaurant here. He then added, seconds later, “We don’t consider it as a serious problem.”This contradiction is not uncommon in discussions of discrimination in Russia. Depending on one’s perspective (or choice of reading material), Russian soccer is either overrun with abhorrent fan behavior — like the unfurling of flags bearing swastikas, the displaying of banners endorsing white power and the chanting of taunts featuring racial epithets — or unfairly characterized based on the foreign news media’s sensationalizing of isolated events involving uncultured fans.Examples of both views abound. Alexei Smertin, a former Russian national team player and ambassador for the World Cup bid, dismissed concerns about racism this year when he told the BBC that “there’s no racism in Russia because it does not exist.” A British newspaper, meanwhile, published an article in July that suggested England should consider boycotting the 2018 World Cup, for which it has not yet qualified, if the situation in Russia “does not improve.”Interviews with players, fans and executives in Russia found that most acknowledged that there was, at a minimum, a problem. High-profile episodes, like the jeering of visiting black players and the frequent taunts aimed at the Brazilian forward Hulk, who plays for Zenit St. Petersburg, have contributed to the perception that Russian fans are intolerant. And an action by the Russian Football Union this summer — it suspended Emmanuel Frimpong, a Ghanaian, for making an obscene gesture at fans who he said had been racially abusing him but did not punish the fans or the club they were supporting — adds to the concerns about institutional ignorance.For a more overt example, critics still point to 2012, when one of the largest groups of Zenit supporters publicized a manifesto urging the club never to sign either “dark-skinned” players (calling their absence “an important tradition” at Zenit) or gay players (who are “unworthy of our great city”).According to a soon-to-be-released report compiled by the SOVA Center, a Moscow-based research organization that focuses on nationalism and racism, and the Fare network, an organization that fights discrimination in European sports, there were 85 episodes of discriminatory behavior (classified in the report as either racist or “far-right” manifestations) in Russia from May 2014 to May 2015.A copy of the report, which is expected to be made public in the next week but was viewed by The New York Times, includes details on cases involving monkey chants, fans making Nazi salutes and a coach who referred to Ebola during a news conference when asked about injuries to players on his team. The same coach later disputed the notion that he might have interest in acquiring a Cameroonian player in a transfer because, he said: “We have six blacks already, so do you want me to get the seventh one now? I already don’t know where to hide from them.”The report, however, also notes that while the rate of total episodes recorded has increased — 99 were recorded in the previous two years combined — the cases were largely “less aggressive” than in the past. Natalia Yudina, who worked on the report in her role at the SOVA Center, said that in a country that was under Soviet rule until 1991 and that still has a largely homogeneous population, it was unrealistic to think that near-uniform tolerance would appear overnight. Progress, such as it is, will be slow, she said.“Before, it was murders and attacks — they were using knives, and it was much more dangerous,” Ms. Yudina said in an interview. “Now, it is more symbols, like flags and shirts and banners. This is something, O.K., but there is clearly a long way to go.”Ms. Yudina added that she did not expect significant cases of racism at the 2018 World Cup, in large part because of the traditional Russian commitment to putting the country’s best foot forward when hosting international events. Increased policing and government monitoring of the most aggressive fans, known as ultras, will almost surely “make the tournament safe and comfortable for everyone,” said Alexey Sorokin, the head of the local organizing committee.The larger issue, though, is how safe players and fans will feel when the spotlight of the World Cup is not illuminated. While most publicized examples of bigotry in Russian soccer have involved the country’s higher-profile clubs — two Russian teams, Zenit and CSKA Moscow, are playing in the European Champions League this season — the issue is present at all levels.Ted Ntirubuza, a defender for the second-division club Solyaris Moscow, was born in Russia but has a Burundian father and is dark-skinned. He said his first encounter with racism came when he was 7 and was taunted by other boys for “being dark.” He got into fights over race when he was younger, he said, but after years of hearing a racial epithet used casually, he became largely numb to it.“If I was white, I might even use it, too,” he said, shrugging. Players of all races, he added, simply accept that a large segment of ultras will use racism as part of their chants; when Ntirubuza was 18, he recalled, he played with Spartak Moscow’s youth team and even heard monkey noises from fans of his club. “My teammates were like, ‘Wow, now you’re a star,’ ” he said.Bananas — thrown on the field or simply held out by fans in the stands — and monkey noises are common forms of racist taunting in Russia and elsewhere in Europe. They are also one of the schism points in the debate about racism in Russia, as outsiders are almost universally offended by any such incident while Russian officials often play them down.Yevgeny Selemenev, a longtime fan of Spartak Moscow and a former member of one of the club’s most famed groups of ultras, said many of the most racist aspects of ultras’ behavior had faded in recent years. There are still online shops where ultras can buy Nazi-branded clothing, he said, but members have taken steps to self-police in recent years and now limit plainly racist or fascist banners.Monkey chants, he added, are a lingering aspect of what he called behavior from an “older time,” and he contended that the chants often came from younger fans who were simply repeating what they had heard from their fathers or uncles.“All fans have different levels of cultural education,” Mr. Selemenev said. “I did monkey chants when I was 15 or 20, and the average age of fans in present Russian stadiums is about that age, and they do what they remember. They do it because it was done before and because they don’t know any better.”He added, “I think a lot of the people who do monkey chants during the game go to try and take photographs with the players they shouted at after the game.”Mr. Tolkachev, the antiracism official, said that in his opinion, “monkey chants are difficult to classify, as it is something that is not spelled out anywhere,” but he allowed that the Russian government was “inclined to consider it as a demonstration of racism.” Separately, he disputed Fare’s inclusion of the imperial Russian flag on its list of discriminatory symbols, saying that flag was “part of our country’s history.”Mr. Selemenev, and others, also said that the Western news media did not scrutinize racist episodes in other European countries’ soccer leagues to the same degree it did the Russian cases. Three Polish clubs, for example, were sanctioned by European soccer’s governing body after events reported by Fare from July 2013 to May 2014. In that period, a single club in Croatia was punished for three cases, and clubs in Greece, Italy and Spain were penalized as well. Numerous other episodes were reported from domestic league matches in Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria.As recently as two weeks ago, black fans were attacked in the stands during a Champions League match in Ukraine.“People are worried about what will happen at the Russia World Cup, but I think it will be fine from the Russians,” Mr. Selemenev said. “Of course, if fan groups from Poland, Germany, Ukraine and Russia are in the same city, it will happen. But it will not differ from what is happening in any other country in the world.”The larger concern is clearly more layered, and it is difficult to predict what will happen in the next three years. Ms. Yudina and others have called for increased education about diversity for young people in Russia as a way to overcome embedded cultural divisions in a country in which an overwhelming majority of citizens are light-skinned, and Mr. Tolkachev seemed to agree with the premise that reaching the younger generation of fans would be crucial in sustaining any sort of progress with anti-discrimination efforts.Yet when asked if his office planned to enact any new education programs for players, coaches or fans, Mr. Tolkachev demurred, saying instead that “this is not a systemic problem.”Pressed about the reports from the monitoring groups, Mr. Tolkachev, most likely unintentionally, offered an apt summation of the prevailing Russian paradox when it comes to racism.“We are of course concerned and find such incidents unacceptable,” he said with a solemn nod, before adding, with a shrug, “but one should not make a problem out of nothing.”Artur Petrosyan contributed reporting.Advertisement