AdvertisementSupported byBy Pat BorziMINNEAPOLIS — Two tense games in the W.N.B.A.’s Western Conference finals reduced Minnesota Lynx Coach Cheryl Reeve’s voice to a rasp. It had mostly recovered by midweek, when Reeve, dressed in blue-and-gray Lynx sweats, directed practice. But it was not exactly right, and that bothered her.“Is it better?” she asked. “I tried everything. It’s hard this time of year.”Part teacher, part taskmaster and part tactician, Reeve is as much the voice and driving force of the Lynx franchise as the American Olympians Maya Moore, Seimone Augustus and Lindsay Whalen are the faces.The Lynx qualified for the playoffs only twice in 11 seasons before Reeve, a former college head coach and W.N.B.A. assistant, arrived in 2010. After a 13-21 first season, Reeve directed the Lynx to the league finals four times in five years, winning titles in 2011 and 2013. Reeve has the best regular-season winning percentage of any coach in league history (140-64, .686), and the second best in the postseason (26-8, .742), trailing only the former Phoenix coach Paul Westhead.Moore, Augustus, Whalen and the rugged forward Rebekkah Brunson, all captains, hold everything together. Last Sunday, Moore’s steal and subsequent foul shot on a controversial call in the final seconds capped a 40-point performance and helped the Lynx eliminate Phoenix, the defending champion, 72-71, to advance to the best-of-five finals. The Lynx will meet the Eastern Conference champions, the Indiana Fever, on Sunday in Game 1 at Target Center.But the winning culture stems from Reeve, the daughter of a career Air Force noncommissioned officer. She is an intense competitor who demands excellence from herself and everyone around her, referees included. During a game this season, officials mishandled an unusual free-throw situation. Reeve, who was a Rhodes Scholarship nominee at La Salle University, cited the proper procedure and added, “I don’t know if the officials really understand the rules.” That drew an undisclosed fine from the league.And basketball fans may remember what Reeve calls “the infamous jacket toss” in Game 2 of the 2012 W.N.B.A. finals. Protesting a noncall in an extremely physical game, Reeve drew a technical foul and then flung her gray jacket at the bench, where the assistant coach Shelley Patterson caught it. It took another assistant coach, Jim Petersen, a former N.B.A. player, and the veteran center Taj McWilliams-Franklin to calm her down. The Lynx won that game, but they lost the next two and the series.Reeve said the Lynx had complained to the league before Game 2 that the physical play was getting out of hand. When it continued, she felt frustrated, which led to her reaction. “I can’t say I regretted it,” Reeve said. “It was just me, how the fiery passion was displayed. I try to catch myself. You can only do those things once in a lifetime. I just have to be me. In the moment, I can tell you, the overriding feeling was I had to protect my players, and what was happening was wrong.”A former point guard at La Salle, Reeve earned a master’s degree in business administration and interned with the Internal Revenue Service, but she preferred coaching. She came to Minnesota after 12 seasons as a college coach and nine as a W.N.B.A. assistant, the final four under Bill Laimbeer in Detroit. When the Shock moved to Tulsa, Laimbeer joined the Minnesota Timberwolves as an assistant. He urged the Lynx’s executive vice president, Roger Griffith, to hire Reeve, whose only head coaching experience had been at Indiana State from 1995 to 2000.The Lynx already had Augustus and Brunson, and Griffith acquired Whalen a month after Reeve arrived. Reeve took a cerebral approach to the game. She stressed defense and rebounding, keeping track of deflections and statistics related to hustle. She demanded that Augustus, a scorer, become her best defender. When the Lynx drafted Moore and signed McWilliams-Franklin as a free agent in 2011, Reeve had all the pieces to succeed. “She is the most prepared coach I’ve ever met in my life,” Augustus said. “She knows numbers, statistics, the rate at which we score, plays, possessions, timing, you name it. She can break the game down to a mustard seed. It opened our minds to watching game films, breaking down our games, seeing where we can be effective on the court. That made me 10 times better than what I was when I got here in 2006.”Though demonstrative on the bench, Reeve is not intense all the time. She pushes players but knows when to back off and encourage. “When you have someone constantly showing you the proper way to do something, cheering you on when you do it and scolding you when you don’t, you know you can play for them,” said McWilliams-Franklin, now the head coach at Post, a Division II university in Waterbury, Conn. “You can work your hardest. She doesn’t overwork you and expect you to consistently perform. That’s the kind of loyalty she inspires because you know she wants the best for you.”Reeve and her staff may have done their best coaching this season, integrating center Sylvia Fowles and guards Anna Cruz and Renee Montgomery — none of whom were with the team in training camp — into their system while Augustus (right knee surgery and sprained left foot) and Whalen (strained right Achilles’ tendon) missed stretches.“This year, there’s no question: Nothing has been easy,” Reeve said. “Externally, everybody goes, ‘Ah, they’re going to be in the finals.’ There’s not a person that is a part of this who had any foregone conclusions, and getting there is so hard. You don’t know if you’re ever getting back to the finals. We didn’t get into the finals last year.“When the buzzer sounded to get us in the finals, the older ones, you could kind of see it in the celebration afterward. They were so thankful and so appreciative to Renee Montgomery, Anna Cruz, Sylvia Fowles, coming and staying together and figuring it out.”Advertisement