By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 3, 2015
Chelsea’s troubled season took another turn for the worse on Saturday when Southampton inflicted a fourth loss in eight games on the reigning Premier League champions.Southampton seized on defensive frailties to win 3-1 at Stamford Bridge in London, leaving Chelsea 10 points behind the leader, Manchester City, and only 4 points above the relegation zone.The result made Manager José Mourinho raise the prospect of Chelsea’s firing him — just as the owner Roman Abramovich did in 2007 after three years with Mourinho in charge. However, Mourinho said he would not walk away from the challenge of turning things around.“If the club wants to sack me, they have to sack me, because I’m not running away,” he said. “If the club sacks me, they sack the best manager that this club has had.”AdvertisementMourinho was brought back in 2013 and he delivered the title by 8 points in May.But the team has rarely looked like champions this season, not even at Stamford Bridge. Two of Chelsea’s losses have come at home, where Mourinho had only been beaten once in the league before this season across his two stints as manager.AdvertisementWillian gave the hosts a 10th-minute lead by curling in a free kick, but Steven Davis leveled before halftime. Sadio Mane and Graziano Pelle sealed Southampton’s win after the break.Chelsea was booed off as Southampton won at Stamford Bridge for the first time in almost 14 years.BARCELONA FALLS AGAIN Barcelona’s misfiring forward line left Manager Luis Enrique scratching his head again as last season’s treble winners went down to a 2-1 defeat at Sevilla.The Catalan side’s trident attack hit a record 122 goals as Barca won the Spanish league, the Spanish Cup and the Champions League, but they have struggled to reach that level this season.Lionel Messi has missed the last two matches because of an injury, but even before that he was not at his best, while both Neymar and Luis Suárez have lacked sharpness.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With the goal flow slowed, Barca’s defending has come under the spotlight. The team was thrashed 4-1 at Celta Vigo, and a second successive away defeat followed at Sevilla.In between there was a 2-1 win over newly promoted Las Palmas and a 2-1 home defeat of the Bundesliga team Bayer Leverkusen in the Champions League. (REUTERS)LYON WINS Lyon striker Alexandre Lacazette scored his second league goal this season to give his struggling club a much-needed 1-0 win over Reims.Lacazette, the French league’s best goal scorer last season, missed a penalty when he hit the crossbar in the 41st minute, but he made amends before the interval with a low shot into the corner.AdvertisementFollowing consecutive losses against Bordeaux in the league and Valencia in the Champions League, Lyon put on a spirited display at the Stade Gerland. (AP)A FIRST FOR CARPI Carpi recorded its first ever Serie A win with a 2-1 victory over Torino for the new Manager Giuseppe Sannino.Sannino was hired Tuesday to replace Fabrizio Castori, who was fired after six matches, with Carpi bottom of the table with just 2 points.Carpi broke the deadlock with a bit of luck as Gabriel Silva’s effort crashed off the left post and went in off Torino goalkeeper Daniele Padelli’s shoulder. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: Southampton Sends Chelsea to Another Loss.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.