By DAVE CALDWELLNOV. 3, 2015
Rangers center Derick Brassard said he was merely trying to shovel a pass to his linemate Rick Nash, parked on the other side of the Washington goal. But the puck bounced off the stick of Washington forward Marcus Johansson and rolled into the goal instead.The Rangers created enough breaks like that Tuesday to outlast the Capitals, 5-2, at Madison Square Garden. The Rangers (8-2-2) also took over first place in the Metropolitan Division from the Capitals (8-3-0), who had won seven of their last eight.Some regular-season games mean more than others, even in November, and this was one, especially because the ever-lethal Washington forward Alex Ovechkin has a retooled and noticeably speedier supporting cast. But despite their victory, the Rangers were underwhelmed by their own play.“We are not jumping in the air right now,” Brassard said.Forty-two seconds after Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault was forced to burn his only timeout because the relentless Capitals had the Rangers pinned in their zone, Brassard scored the Rangers’ fourth goal at 6 minutes 59 seconds of the second period.But the Rangers were outshot in the period, 14-2, and later had to kill a high-sticking penalty on the rookie forward Oscar Lindberg, who earlier had a goal and an assist. The Rangers gave up only one goal in the period, by Johansson with 1:07 left.Advertisement“It’s good to know we can win without playing our best,” said Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, who stopped 32 shots.AdvertisementLundqvist was, again, the Rangers’ best player. Ovechkin tied the score at 1-1 late in the first period by chipping the puck over Lundqvist at high speed, but Lundqvist later ventured out from the crease to knock aside a shot from a charging Ovechkin and send him flying.That tactic drew a roar from the sellout crowd. Earlier in the period, the grinding forward J. T. Miller earned another big cheer by laying out to block a slap shot from the left face-off circle by Ovechkin.These teams figure to be scrapping with each other at the top of the standings all season. While the Rangers hope to be better by the time they meet again Dec. 20, Ovechkin sounded as if he wanted another chance at them.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Lundqvist is a top goalie in the league, and he makes big saves to keep them in the game,” Ovechkin said. “We didn’t get any success from in front of the crease.”The Rangers’ first goal was scored by a player who was not on the team in the spring, when these teams clashed in a thrilling seven-game playoff series that ended with an overtime goal by Derek Stepan at the Garden on May 13.Lindberg, the energetic rookie forward, tapped in the rebound of a missed shot by Kevin Hayes for his sixth goal of the season 7:59 into the game.Dan Girardi set up the goal by chasing down the puck in the Capitals’ zone after a turnover by defenseman Brooks Orpik, then turning and firing in one motion. His shot hit Orpik, but Hayes had barged to the net and collected the rebound.AdvertisementGoaltender Braden Holtby stopped Hayes’s shot, but Lindberg beat forward Evgeny Kuznetsov to the rebound and knocked in his second goal in three games. The Rangers are 6-1-1 in games in which they score first.Ovechkin adeptly chipped a shot over Lundqvist at 15:45 for his sixth goal of the season and his 23rd goal in 40 career regular-season games against the Rangers. But the tie lasted only two minutes, with Lindberg and Hayes creating another spark.Lindberg fished out a loose puck at center ice and flipped it to Hayes, who cruised into the Capitals’ zone, with forward Viktor Stalberg joining him and only Orpik back on defense. Hayes flicked a shot over Holtby’s glove for his third goal of the season.“I thought that line was our best line tonight at both ends of the rink,” Vigneault said.But even Lindberg, the 24-year-old with only 13 N.H.L. games under his belt, was somewhat dismayed after the game.“I thought we spent too much time in our own zone,” he said. “Eleven shots after the first two periods, and that’s not enough.“But we were effective and scoring on our chances, so that’s a positive thing.”A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: The Rangers Get Some Luck Against a Familiar Rival.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.