By BILLY WITZOCT. 3, 2015
BALTIMORE — After a lackluster loss in the opener of a doubleheader, when the Yankees’ play matched the cold, dreary conditions, Alex Rodriguez channeled his inner Yogi Berra when asked about the mounting pressure to win home-field advantage for Tuesday’s wild-card playoff game.“Pressure’s running out,” Rodriguez said with a laugh. “There’s only two games left. It can’t mount anymore.”If pressure is running out, panic is steadily filling the room.The Yankees lost both games of a doubleheader to the Baltimore Orioles on Saturday, 9-2 and 4-3, giving them five losses in six games and reducing the opportunities they have to ensure that they do not have to travel to Texas — to face either the Rangers or the Houston Astros — for the one-game playoff.For the game to be played in the Bronx, the Yankees must win Sunday, or the Astros must lose to the Arizona Diamondbacks, whom the Astros defeated, 6-2, on Saturday.Advertisement“I think you’d have to have your head in the sand to not know what we need to do,” Manager Joe Girardi said. “We need to win.”AdvertisementAfter being routed in the first game, the Yankees put forth a more engaged effort in the second, but they were undone by the wildness of Dellin Betances, whose second wild pitch of the eighth inning brought home Paul Janish with the deciding run.The Yankees had a chance in the ninth when Rodriguez singled with one out, but pinch-runner Rico Noel — running on the first move of the left-hander Zach Britton — was picked off and thrown out at second. Britton then retired Chase Headley to end a taut game.The Yankees may have shrugged after losing the opener, but the atmosphere in the clubhouse was much tenser by the end of the night, after the team had gone a combined 3 for 19 with runners in scoring position in the two games.“We’re not hitting with runners on base; we’re not pitching great,” Headley said.He added: “We’ve got to find a way to play better and not worry about what everybody else is doing. We’re frustrated because we’re not playing the way we want to.”If the Yankees have to travel to Houston, it would considerably raise the degree of difficulty of advancing. Not only has the Astros’ ace, Dallas Keuchel, thrown 16 shutout innings against the Yankees this season, he is 15-0 at home with a 1.46 E.R.A.Such concerns did not occupy the Yankees earlier. Perhaps it was the 53-degree weather or lingering effects of the celebration after Thursday’s playoff-clinching win or thoughts about Tuesday’s wild-card playoff.Whatever it was, the Yankees gave little indication during the matinee that they were interested in playing October baseball that had no grave consequences.AdvertisementIt began with the lineup that Girardi sent out: Jose Pirela in right field, Austin Romine at first base and Chris Young batting cleanup. It continued with mental mistakes: Brendan Ryan was easily thrown out trying to race from first to third on a Brett Gardner single to left-center in the third inning, and the Orioles’ Gerardo Parra, who had four hits and three R.B.I., got such a jump in the bottom of the third that he stole third base without a throw.Then there were matters of execution. With the Orioles leading, 1-0, Young tripled to lead off the second, and the Yankees were in good position to draw even. But with the infield in, Headley popped out, John Ryan Murphy struck out, and Pirela popped out.There was more bad baseball — but it came after the game’s outcome was no longer in doubt, although Girardi was contesting it. He challenged a call that Chris Davis had been hit by a pitch in the seventh inning; the call was overturned, sending a runner back to third and depriving the Orioles of a 10th run.Girardi said before the game that he was interested in making certain that the wild-card playoff would be in the Bronx, but there were other interests, too.Catcher Brian McCann, right fielder Carlos Beltran, center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury, shortstop Didi Gregorius and first baseman Greg Bird — all left-handers except for the switch-hitting Beltran — were on the bench against the left-hander Wei-Yin Chen.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In declaring that no regulars who started the first game, including Rodriguez, the designated hitter, would start the second game, Girardi said, “The one thing that’s probably more important than home-field advantage is probably the health of our players, and I’m not going to risk that.”Another calculation was to start Ivan Nova in the opener and hold Luis Severino for the second game. Girardi hoped that if the Yankees had won the first game, they could preserve Severino in case the wild-card game went into extra innings.But that plan quickly unraveled. Nova gave up eight hits and five runs and walked three in five and two-thirds innings, and it might have been far worse had a frigid day not turned two deep drives by Steve Pearce into warning-track outs rather than three-run homers.AdvertisementIt was an unsatisfying finish to Nova’s uneven season. He returned from Tommy John surgery on June 24 with a flourish, holding Philadelphia to three hits in six and two-thirds scoreless innings, but he was dropped from the rotation in early September after being pounded by Toronto. When Nathan Eovaldi was hurt, he regained his spot but not any semblance of consistency.Asked to assess his season, Nova said, “Bad.”He added: “I lost 11 games. I didn’t pitch the way I would like to pitch.”His health, he said, was the only positive thing. He is 6-11 with an E.R.A. of 5.07.Severino also endured a rare rocky start. Nolan Reimold belted Severino’s second pitch for a home run to left field, and Pearce doubled in Davis, who had been hit by a pitch. But Severino settled in after that, allowing five hits in seven innings, although one was a solo shot by Manny Machado in the third, his 35th home run of the season. Both of the home runs Severino allowed were on fastballs.The Yankees climbed back from a 3-1 deficit in the fifth on a run-scoring double by Slade Heathcott and a bases-loaded walk by Beltran, but the Yankees could not deliver a pivotal blow. McCann, once ahead by 3-0 in the count, hit a fly ball to center.The missed opportunity proved costly when Janish led off the eighth with a bloop single to right, just out of the reach of the diving second baseman Rob Refsnyder. Janish advanced to second on a wild pitch, and after Betances struck out Reimold, Parra dropped a bunt down the third-base line against a shift, which let Janish advance to third. When Betances uncorked a fastball that went to the backstop, Janish scored. It was the first run Betances had given up against the Orioles since Aug. 13, 2014, a span of 13⅔ innings.As the clubhouse emptied, the coaches watched the final innings of the Astros’ game at Arizona.“You know, it’s kind of been like that all year,” Girardi said. “We’ve been up and down. We’ve always seemed to have bounced back when we need to bounce back. So we’ve got to do it tomorrow.”A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Itching to Clinch an Advantage, the Yankees Look Inept and Falter Twice in a Day .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.