AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro BasketballBy Harvey AratonThis is a story about a player’s core values more than it is about a franchise’s valued core, R. C. Buford insisted early Monday night in the bowels of Madison Square Garden.It is about the inner David West more than it is about the inimitable San Antonio Spurs.Buford is the Spurs’ longtime general manager, a stealth operator in the dominion of Gregg Popovich, power coach and team president of the five-time champions. Coming off their 2013-14 N.B.A. title, the Spurs were strong enough to win 55 games last season. But in July, Buford and Popovich added a premier free agent, luring LaMarcus Aldridge to San Antonio, never before a destination for the N.B.A.’s most talented and leveraged.That wasn’t even their most startling summer signing. David West was. Now 35, he walked away from a $12.5 million player option with the Indiana Pacers and — apparently without the inducement of hypnosis or blackmail — signed a San Antonio contract for about $11 million less.He also turned himself into a bench player after years as a power-forward cornerstone.“I thought it was brilliant from his standpoint to be able to say, I’ve done all this, I know my family is secure and I can do what makes me happy,” Buford said.It was about 45 minutes before the Spurs defeated the Knicks, 94-84, in a spirited early-season game ultimately decided by a San Antonio offense that routinizes poetic motion to the point of near monotony. Buford was reminding us that West had opted out of his Indiana deal before free agency officially commenced — and so it was technically inaccurate to say he repudiated the Pacers’ riches to team with Tim Duncan.West, Buford said, could easily have gone elsewhere — Golden State, for instance — in pursuit of his first championship.Phil Jackson, the Knicks’ team president, strolled by, and he could have vouched for Buford’s revisionist modesty. Put it this way: Jackson was determined to bid for the 6-foot-11 Aldridge, who reportedly was not interested in the Knicks’ proposal of playing him at center, alongside the slender rookie Kristaps Porzingis. Then he signed with the Spurs, who have forever listed Duncan as a power forward.When Duncan rested Monday night, Aldridge sure looked like the only Spurs player who could be classified as a center. The upshot is that positional labels mean little on accomplished teams laden with players who understand and embrace the diversity of roles and skills required to win at the highest level.That is why West, having prepared for and reached the age of true career reflection, decided the veteran’s minimum deal of $1.4 million — all the Spurs could offer — was enough, at least for now.His money quote: “For me, in terms of basketball, I needed every night to mean something, in order to keep going,” he said.Did we mention that West — with career averages of 15.5 points and 7.1 rebounds a game — logged only seven minutes against the Knicks, scored a basket, grabbed two rebounds and had three assists? He should not worry about playing time. Still unwrapping his ingredients, Chef Popovich will find plenty for him across the long season as he begins to torment the commissioner’s office by selectively resting his stars.Originally a 2003 first-round draft pick of New Orleans, West spent the last four seasons with the Pacers, the adult in a locker room of younger players muscling up to challenge the supremacy of a dynasty created by decree upon LeBron James’s 2010 signing in Miami. Indiana came close in consecutive years, falling short and then apart.West did not want to play the blame game, did not appreciate management’s scapegoating of the sensitive center Roy Hibbert.“It was a great environment, but I got to the point where I felt it was time to move in a different direction,” he said.West had long admired the Spurs and especially Duncan, four years his senior and a role model in professionalism. He called Duncan, spoke of his interest in the Spurs.Duncan told him it would be a “very productive experience, a good choice.”First, there was a matter of the money, the forfeiture of millions.“You get later in your career, you want to get into the position — and this is me talking to myself — to make decisions based solely on basketball,” West said. “That took a lot of settling down, being very patient, very deliberate with spending, with habits, things like that.“Ultimately, I didn’t want to have to scratch every little penny out of basketball. I never let the illusion of the lifestyle consume me, never got that you’re supposed to live a certain way because you’re in the N.B.A. I knew very early that we have a short window — you might get four years, you might get 10 years, you might be lucky enough to get 15. But you still have the majority of your life to live, so there’s got to be some clarity that allows you to make decisions, figure things that are going to be important to you long after you’re done playing.”In other words, West wanted more to recount in his old age besides “every little penny.”He is known for charity work he does with impoverished youths in his native North Carolina. He drives a 10-year-old Lexus. But while West chatted casually, barefoot in the pregame locker room, let’s not pretend that a player with career earnings of roughly $87 million will ever have to stretch his Social Security check in his golden years.Let’s also try not to make this a directive for all — or even the more tempting superstar cases, whose maximum money has hamstrung their team’s chances to compete — to sacrifice in a business in which the television revenue is soon to explode and the franchise value to the owners has soared.This is a situational story about West, a singular player, and the unique Spurs, whose franchise hub, Duncan, while still a vital performer, is earning $5.2 million this season, or about a quarter of Aldridge’s take.It is about the quality of life, understanding that there is a point when enough is enough, provided, as Buford said of West, “the life planning has been done.”If there is a lesson for the N.B.A.’s young to glean from West, it is not necessarily from the sacrifice he has made to play for the Spurs. It is about the life in perspective he has lived all along.Advertisement