AdvertisementSupported byBy Ken BelsonThe N.F.L. said that it would play at least three regular-season games over the next three years at Twickenham Stadium in London, the latest to host the league in Britain.By agreeing to play at Twickenham, which is controlled by the Rugby Football Union, the league has signaled that it plans to play a fourth regular-season game in London as soon as next season.Since 2007, when the league began playing regular-season matchups in London, every game has been played in Wembley Stadium, including three matchups this season.The N.F.L. had said it was considering playing more games in London each year. But scheduling constraints at Wembley forced the league to look for other venues.The league has agreed to play at least two games a year at the stadium Tottenham Hotspur is building in north London, but that site will not open until 2018 at the earliest. Last month, the N.F.L. also extended its agreement to play at least two games a year at Wembley through 2020.COLTS RELEASE COORDINATOR Indianapolis fired the offensive coordinator Pep Hamilton less than 24 hours after a 29-26 overtime loss at Carolina on Monday night. The former Browns coach Rob Chudzinski will replace Hamilton as the play-caller.In a statement, Coach Chuck Pagano said the offense had not played with the necessary consistency and it was “his responsibility” to give the Colts (3-5) their best chance to succeed.Hamilton was hired in 2013 after spending three seasons as an assistant at Stanford, where he worked with Andrew Luck, now the Colts quarterback. (AP)MANZIEL MAY START THURSDAY The Cleveland Browns’ backup quarterback Johnny Manziel is preparing to start at Cincinnati on Thursday night because Josh McCown is still struggling with a painful rib injury that has affected his breathing and sleep.McCown, 36, took several hard hits Sunday in a loss to Arizona, and with only a few days to recover, the Browns might turn to Manziel, who was roughed up in a 30-0 loss to Cincinnati last season. Browns Coach Mike Pettine said he had not yet made a decision on his starter. (AP)CHARGERS’ ALLEN ON I.R. San Diego Chargers wide receiver Keenan Allen was placed on injured reserve and is out for the season after injuring a kidney while making a spectacular touchdown catch in a loss to the Baltimore Ravens on Sunday.Allen, 23, was second in the N.F.L. with 67 catches this season and third in receiving yards with 725. He had four touchdown catches. (AP)COWBOYS WAIVE RANDLE Dallas waived running back Joseph Randle, a third-year player who started the first six games of the season but was already away from the team to deal with an unspecified personal issue.Randle had been ruled out of Sunday’s game with a back injury before he took the personal time. The Cowboys lost to Seattle. (AP)PROTEST UNDER INVESTIGATION The N.F.L. and the Carolina Panthers are investigating how protesters got rappelling gear into the team’s stadium Monday night and suspended themselves by cables from the upper deck while holding a protest banner during the Panthers’ nationally televised overtime victory against the Indianapolis Colts.The police arrested four people — the two who rappelled and two others who assisted them — and charged them with second-degree trespassing and resisting a public officer.The protest was against Bank of America, which owns the stadium’s naming rights.The Panthers’ director of security, Lance Emory, said the protesters bought tickets through an exchange site, but he was not sure how they got their equipment through security. (AP)Advertisement