By ROB HUGHESNOV. 3, 2015
LONDON —  Two funerals, and an unforgettable display of spontaneous giving, show how sports can be a thread through our lives.Both of the funerals took place at Liverpool’s Anglican cathedral and had deep connections to the Everton F.C. soccer club. The first, last Thursday, commemorated Howard Kendall, who many will always think of as one of the greatest players and managers in Everton’s history.The second, on Monday, drew police officers from all over Britain to honor Police Constable Dave Phillips, who was mowed down by a stolen Mitsubishi pickup truck last month. One of the unfulfilled dreams Constable Phillips had was to take his daughter Abigail, 7, and her younger sister, Sophie, 3, to see his beloved Everton play in the Premier League.Everton’s Goodison Park stadium has held emotional tributes to Kendall and to the Phillips family this past week. As if by some eerie coincidence, the anthem that rings out every time Everton plays there is “Z-Cars” — the theme tune that accompanied a BBC television series of police fiction that ran from 1962 through 1978.AdvertisementThose were the prime years of Kendall as an Evertonian, a gifted technical player who, together with Alan Ball and Colin Harvey, conducted a midfield symphony of movement and passing that earned the trio the sobriquet “The Holy Trinity.”AdvertisementAnd it was Kendall who came back, twice, as a coach and a manager, to build a team in his own style to win the English league title in 1985 and again in 1987. In going out to find, mostly in lower divisions, players he could inspire to do that, Kendall came as close as any man could to play the game according to the club’s motto “Nil Satis Nisi Optimum” (Latin for “Nothing but the best is good enough.”)Kendall was anything but aloof. He was a persuader of men, and marvelous company, especially with a beer or a glass of wine in his hand. He wasn’t Everton-born. In fact the club paid Preston North End the princely sum of 80,000 pounds for him (now about $123,000 dollars, or the equivalent to an arm or a leg of modern pros).The great and the good of soccer, from Alex Ferguson to those teammates who survive Kendall, were among the 1,700 people in the cathedral last Thursday. Out in the streets leading all the way to Goodison Park, where a giant picture of Kendall illuminated the outer wall of the stadium, thousands more stood and applauded on the grayest of days.Kendall, 69, had left them too soon and left the rest of us who knew the warmth of his company too soon. I spent a full day with him in Spain where he briefly managed Athletic Bilbao but was longing to return to Everton.He served other clubs, including Birmingham City, Stoke City and Blackburn Rovers as a player, and managed Manchester City, Skoda Xanthi in Greece, Notts County, Sheffield United and Ethnikos Piraeus in a nomadic life in soccer. But always, and to the end, Everton was his club.He used to tell his players “think Champagne, drink Champagne.” And he once said that managing ManCity was just an affair; Everton was a marriage.The sum of his career amounted to 276 of his 721 games as a midfield creator for Everton, and 523 games out of his 870 in management were also for the blue side of Liverpool. And he had a twinkle in his eye whenever anyone raised the subject that Liverpool, the near neighbor, tried and failed to sign him first.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Everton he leaves behind is very different. The stadium, the music, the memories appear locked in time, but the team that beat Sunderland 6-2 last Sunday is coached by a Spaniard, Roberto Martínez, and was led in attack by the Ivorian Arouna Koné, who scored a hat trick.AdvertisementStill, they remembered Kendall with ringing applause in the fourth minute, which reflects the No.4 Kendall mostly wore.Liverpudlians and Evertonians stood side by side in the streets and inside the cathedral on Monday for the funeral of PC 6554, Dave Phillips. It is rare for a police officer to be killed on duty in Britain, and there is little comfort to anyone that an 18-year-old man is in custody, pending his trial for murder.Sport, in this respect, might seem irrelevant, except that Everton, the team Phillips followed, has done what it could by holding a solemn homage to his memory — one that his daughters will take some time to fully understand.What happened at Twickenham Stadium in South London on Saturday night was rare and uplifting in a different context. New Zealand’s All Blacks had imposed their might, their exceptional handling skills, on Australia in the Rugby World Cup final.Amid the euphoria at the end of the game, a child burst free from the stands to run toward the players.A security guard chased and caught the boy, slamming him down to the ground in the manner that the rugby players do. Sonny Bill Williams, a 238-pound All Black who has also been a sometime heavyweight boxer, intervened.He picked up the boy and shepherded the steward away. “The young fella looked only about 8,” Williams explained. “He snuck onto the field and he got smoked by a security guard who was” a full grown man.Williams gave the boy — who turned out to be 14 — a hug and led him back toward his folks in the stands. Then, the big All Black took the medal from around his own neck and put it around the neck of the youth.“Rather than my medal hanging up at home,” Williams said, “That medal is going to be around this young guy’s neck.”AdvertisementThe incident went viral on YouTube. The tournament found a replacement medal for Williams at a gala the following evening, and even if this set a precedent that the sport might struggle to deal with in future, it came as light relief to more somber remembrance in Liverpool.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.