By HUW RICHARDSNOV. 3, 2015
LONDON — Proclamations of “biggest and best” are as inescapable a part of major modern sports tournaments as the sideline announcers imploring crowds to “make some noise” in attempts to generate atmosphere that more often succeed in inhibiting it.But the claims made by the organizers of rugby union’s 2015 World Cup in England and Wales, which concluded Saturday with New Zealand’s 34-17 victory over Australia, have substance. They can point both to the numbers — record crowds totaling close to 2.5 million and gate receipts of 250 million pounds, or about $386 million — and to some vital intangibles.The rugby was more exciting, and the matches more competitive, than at previous tournaments. Those big crowds brought real enthusiasm, often to unlikely places. Ireland’s fans made Cardiff, the Welsh capital, their own. Fijians captivated the town of Milton Keynes and Argentina’s followers made a fiesta of every city and stadium they visited. Disappointed as English fans were by the host team’s unprecedentedly early elimination, most adopted other favorites and stayed interested until the end.And as the game looks forward to the next tournament, in 2019, there is real hope that the two teams that made the most effective assault on rugby’s ancient, intractable hierarchies are also acquiring the means to take the next step.AdvertisementBoth the tournament semifinalist Argentina and the 2019 host Japan, which produced the biggest shock in World Cup history by beating two-time champion South Africa in the pool stages, will enter professional franchises in Super Rugby — the league that features most of the best players from New Zealand, South Africa and Australia — beginning in 2016.AdvertisementA frequent, and generally justified, complaint of rugby’s aspirant nations is that the established ones deny them the competitive contact they need to raise standards. Argentina’s admission in 2012 to the Rugby Championship for the main southern nations was a crack in that glass ceiling, and the creation of these professional franchises gives Japan and Argentina a chance to expose their best players to top-flight league competition.“You’ve got to stay at it and keep trying to improve and keep testing yourself,” Australia’s coach, Michael Cheika, pointed out after Australia’s defeat in the final Saturday. “We’re lucky to play in the Rugby Championship, so we can keep on trying to improve and measure ourselves against the best.”Biggest and best does not mean perfect, so the organizers of Japan 2019 will want to learn from where England’s tournament fell short. The most obvious flaw was having the draw as early as December 2012, little more than a year into the four-year tournament cycle. It may have helped with planning and commercial exploitation, but it was unfair to players and fans.Based on a snapshot of World Rugby’s official rankings at that point, the all-too-predictable outcome was that one pool would prove by 2015 to be brutally tough. England, eliminated by Wales and Australia, was the conspicuous victim, but Fiji, which finished fourth in the same pool when it would have contended for second in most other groups, was just as unlucky.England’s departure was part of a general pattern of failure by the leading Northern Hemisphere nations, all of which were eliminated before the semifinals for the first time. The one surprise about this was that anybody was terribly surprised. The southern nations have dominated for as long as there has been north-south competition, with the one significant change the emergence of Argentina as a fourth force in the south. When the quarterfinal draw offered four north-south clashes, the outcome was predictable.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The southern teams undoubtedly played the more exciting rugby. Their superior handling, use of the whole width of the field and search for open space rather than contact were particularly evident in Australia’s clashes with England and Wales, Argentina’s defeat of Ireland and New Zealand’s historic demolition of the French.But not every World Cup will be played in conditions so conducive to open rugby. The excellent weather was good luck for the organizers, less so for England and the other European countries.At least their losses moved attention away from television match officials, who threatened early in the tournament to outshine any player. Rugby’s complexity, creating a multiplicity of judgment calls, makes defining clear and effective video review protocols tough — and the process clearly still has some way to go.AdvertisementBut World Cups ultimately come down to the players. Their end inevitably brings a host of departures. Most poignant of all was the Irish giant Paul O’Connell, waving to fans from a motorized stretcher as he left the field at Cardiff, a modern version of the warrior carried out on his shield.Yet new heroes invariably rise to replace the old. No player from a leading nation now comes to a World Cup unknown, but men like the Japanese fullback Ayumu Goromaru, the South African-born Canadian wing D.T.H. van der Merwe, the Uruguayan scrumhalf Agustín Ormaechea, the Romanian back-row forward Mihai Macovei and the Fijian lock Leone Nakarawa also rapidly earned themselves reputations.And some arrive and leave in quick succession, as England’s rugby league convert, Sam Burgess — who was asked to adjust to a new game in impossibly quick time and became a lightning rod for heated debate both about England’s tactical incoherence and the merits of the two types of rugby — seems likely to do.Beyond that are the moments of triumph and despair — the ecstasy of the Japanese on beating South Africa, the horror of the Scots as a shock quarterfinal win over Australia was taken from them by a contentious refereeing call and the final triumph of undoubtedly the best team in the tournament, perhaps one of the best of all time.Next up, Japan. Their tournament will doubtless be proclaimed biggest and best. The challenge is to make those words real.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.