By SETH BERKMANOCT. 3, 2015
Throughout a marathon day of baseball at Citi Field, Washington’s ace, Max Scherzer, was forced to watch the Mets repeatedly drill home the fact that they, and not the preseason-favorite Nationals, were the 2015 National League East division champions.There were scoreboard video packages replaying the final out of the Mets’ clinching game last week at Cincinnati. Between innings, there were advertisements for commemorative apparel on sale at the ballpark. And in right field, fluttering in the cold, windy night, was the Mets’ latest flag saluting their most recent pennant.In a modicum of revenge, Scherzer crushed the Mets’ hopes of gaining home-field advantage in their division series, tossing a no-hitter Saturday for a 2-0 win in the second game of a day-night doubleheader. The Mets fell, 3-1, in the first game, and the Dodgers locked up their playoff position with a victory later in the evening, ensuring the that Mets would open the postseason in Los Angeles.Scherzer’s dominating performance was his second no-hitter this season. On June 20, he was one strike away from a perfect game against the Pirates when he hit Jose Tabata with a pitch. On opening day, he carried a no-hitter against the Mets into the sixth inning in Washington.AdvertisementScherzer became the sixth pitcher in major league history to throw two no-hitters in a season and the first to throw two during the regular season since Nolan Ryan in 1973.Advertisement“When you start talking about that stuff, you don’t even have words for it,” Scherzer said.Since August, the Mets had been heavily advertising this final series of the regular season, thinking that it could decide the division crown.Scherzer versus Matt Harvey with two games to play and a pennant on the line would have sold out the ballpark and been one of the most important games in franchise history.Though much of the hype was deflated from the matchup, Scherzer and Harvey still traded exquisite performances over the first six innings. Harvey allowed an unearned run in the sixth, leaving the game after 91 pitches and 11 strikeouts. He finished the season with a career-high 1891/3 innings pitched.“It’s almost like playing a game of H-O-R-S-E,” Scherzer said. “He makes a shot, you got to make a shot. For me, that’s what it felt like tonight. If I can just go out there and keep executing my pitches, I’m going to give my best effort to try and match him.”In the end, Scherzer’s touch was slightly more refined than Harvey’s, and he set the tone early by striking out eight Mets over five perfect innings.In the bottom of the sixth, Kevin Plawecki hit a ground ball to third baseman Yunel Escobar, whose throw bounced in the dirt in front of first baseman Clint Robinson, who failed to scoop the ball cleanly. An error was charged to Escobar, canceling Scherzer’s bid for perfection. He quickly regrouped, though, for two quick outs before setting down Curtis Granderson on a 97-mile-per-hour fastball, the first in a string of nine in a row.“He was great, we were bad,” said Mets Manager Terry Collins, who rested many of his regulars in the second game. “When you pitch as good as he did, it’s tough to take good swings.”AdvertisementAfter Scherzer struck out the side in the seventh and eighth innings, he had 15 total. Wasting no time after Tyler Moore made the final out in the top of the ninth, he was one of the first Nationals on the field.The Mets countered Scherzer’s dominance by sending their most feared slugger, Yoenis Cespedes, to pinch-hit and lead off the ninth. A raucous “Let’s Go, Mets” chant broke out, and the building began to evoke a pennant-clinching atmosphere before Cespedes unfurled a vicious cut, only to miss on a fastball.Cespedes worked a 2-2 count before going down on a 96-mile-per-hour fastball, Scherzer’s eighth consecutive strikeout, and a Nationals record.Collins then sent up Lucas Duda as a pinch-hitter, who, just like Cespedes, went down on a 96-mile-per-hour heater, setting a career high for Scherzer and a Nationals record at 17 strikeouts. The teams combined for 35.Finally, Granderson popped out weakly to Escobar. Scherzer’s teammates stormed the mound, creating a sea of red.Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite his personal glory, Scherzer was cognizant that the celebration was not the one his team hoped for a few weeks ago.“It’s been a disappointing season for our team, it’s no doubt about that,” Scherzer said. “That’s why this is bittersweet. We wish we were playing longer in October, but we’re not.”Rain postponed Friday’s series opener, which was to be a welcoming party for the Mets after they won the division on the road.AdvertisementMany Mets hung their champagne-stained goggles in their lockers, but chilly and wet conditions left the ballpark dominated by empty seats. Instead of a crowd clamoring with thundersticks and congratulatory banners, there were lone balloons and hot dog wrappers floating around the infield.Despite dropping their fifth straight, the Mets tried to keep a positive spin on a stretched-out, demoralizing day.In the first game Saturday, Noah Syndergaard was superb, closing his rookie season with 10 strikeouts and one run on two hits in seven innings. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, Syndergaard and Harvey became the first pitchers to record 10 or more strikeouts for the club on the same day since Jon Matlack and Jerry Koosman combined for 21 on April 14, 1974.Asked after the game if he was concerned, Collins said no.“I’ve seen this team rise up when they needed to time and again, and I know we’ll do it again,” he said.The Mets have been in similar situations recently. Saturday’s game was also the second time this season the Mets were held hitless. On June 9, San Francisco’s Chris Heston threw a no-hitter in a 5-0 win at Citi Field.But perhaps Collins was right not to fret. Only one other team was no-hit twice this season: the Los Angeles Dodgers, the club the Mets will face in a division series.The Mets are already looking forward to the matchup.“I think we’re going to give it to the Dodgers anywhere we are,” Syndergaard said.A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Scherzer’s No-Hitter Will Cost the Mets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.