By KEN BELSONNOV. 4, 2015
The N.F.L. said that any of its teams found to have been paid by a branch of the military for promotional purposes would have to return the money.In a letter to Senators John McCain and Jeff Flake, both Republicans from Arizona, Commissioner Roger Goodell said that the league was conducting an audit of all contracts between the league’s 32 teams and various branches of the military.“We strongly oppose the use of recruitment funds for anything other than their proper purpose,” Goodell wrote in a letter to the senators. “If we find that inappropriate payments were made, they will be refunded in full.”The letter, which was sent on Monday, was included in a report issued by the senators, who noted that the Department of Defense had spent more than $10 million on sports marketing contracts in the past four years. The senators said that N.F.L. teams, including the Atlanta Falcons, the New England Patriots and the Buffalo Bills, had been paid more than $6 million for so-called paid patriotism services, like on-field swearing-in ceremonies and honoring officers.Advertisement“It is time to allow major sports teams’ legitimate tributes to our soldiers to shine with national pride rather than being cast under the pallor of marketing gimmicks paid for by American taxpayers,” the senators wrote.AdvertisementPIERRE-PAUL SAYS HE’S READY Giants defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul seemingly is ready to play Sunday against the Buccaneers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.All he has to do is persuade the Giants’ medical staff to let him play with the right hand that he injured in a fireworks accident on Fourth of July weekend.Pierre-Paul picked up his workload at practice Wednesday and seemed confident he would be able to return to his Pro Bowl form. He lost his index finger in the accident and had a couple of other fingers damaged.A confident Pierre-Paul said he had been able to shed blockers and grab opponents since rejoining the team last week and practicing for the first time since being injured.“Yeah, I want to play, yeah,” Pierre-Paul said. “But it’s up to the medical staff; like I said, they’re taking me slowly.”The Giants’ pass rush has suffered with Pierre-Paul sidelined. He had a team-high 12 ½ sacks last season. The Giants have nine in eight games this season. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Teams Will Have to Return Improper Military Payments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.