By SCOTT CACCIOLANOV. 4, 2015
CLEVELAND —  Carmelo Anthony and LeBron James go way back. They knew each other in high school. They entered the N.B.A. together as lottery picks in 2003. They became friends.James has reached the pinnacle of their shared profession, winning two championships and four Most Valuable Player Awards. He is, as the Knicks’ first-year forward, Kristaps Porzingis put it, the “best player in the world.”Anthony, too, has achieved a great deal. He is an eight-time All-Star and extraordinarily wealthy. But his postseason record is not glowing. He has never reached the finals. So whenever Anthony sees James and imagines his vast assemblage of hardware, he cannot help but dream.“I want it,” Anthony said. “I want a ring. It doesn’t matter if he got it or someone else got it.”AdvertisementThe Knicks have a long road to travel before they can talk about the playoffs. And although they are clearly making progress in the wake of a season to forget, their lapses cost them Wednesday night in a 96-86 loss to the Cavaliers at Quicken Loans ArenaAdvertisementThe Knicks (2-3) were undone late by foul trouble, poor transition defense and lackluster shooting. It was a recipe for disaster against James, who had troubles of his own — he ripped the sleeves of his jersey in the first half — but played well enough to lead his team to another win in a career full of them.James finished with 23 points for the Cavaliers (4-1), who trailed by 15 points in the first half.“They execute much better than they did last year,” James said of the Knicks.Anthony labored with his jump shot again, scoring 17 points while shooting 6 of 18 from the field.“I know that it’ll come back,” Anthony said. “Those shots that I’m taking are shots that I normally make, so I’m not too concerned about that. But I do want them to go in.”Porzingis added 13 points in 21 minutes. But he could not stay on the floor.Not long after Porzingis rattled in a 3-pointer for a 49-38 lead early in the second half, he picked up his fourth foul and went to the bench. The Cavaliers mounted a run, eventually taking the lead when Matthew Dellavedova threw a lob to Tristan Thompson for an alley-oop dunk.Porzingis was whistled for his fifth foul early in the fourth, and again the Cavaliers capitalized. James soared for a fast-break dunk off a turnover. After the Knicks’ Kyle O’Quinn launched an errant 3-point try at one end, Anthony fouled James on a 3-point attempt at the other. James sank two of three free throws, pushing the Cavaliers’ lead to 6. The Knicks were done.Anthony, who had knee surgery in February, has endured his share of early-season struggles. He was shooting 37.2 percent entering Wednesday’s game.Anthony said he was laboring to regain the pop in his legs. He has gone through loads of game tape to study his form. His mechanics, he said, are fine.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s just that lift, that power coming back into game shape,” Anthony said before the game. “It’s just the legs. The shot is right there. Some of them I’m shooting long, and some of them I’m shooting short. It’s just about getting that rhythm back.”AdvertisementAnthony drew a shooting foul 14 seconds into the game, a sign of early aggression. He later shot a jumper over the top of Timofey Mozgov for a 24-9 lead, and the situation began to look dire for the Cavaliers. The Knicks sank 11 of their first 19 shots, their offense looking as fluid as it had all season. They went into the second quarter leading, 32-18.Cleveland was without Kyrie Irving, who has yet to play after fracturing his left kneecap in June, and two former Knicks: J. R. Smith, who sat with a right knee contusion and quadriceps tendinitis, and Iman Shumpert, sidelined with a wrist injury.Despite their absences, James operated as a facilitator — at least early on. Last season, the entire offense ran through James, and he carried an enormous load. The Cavaliers appear to be taking a more democratic approach this season in hopes of preserving his health and building confidence among some of the team’s lesser lights.With his team struggling in the second quarter, James made a wardrobe adjustment, ripping the sleeves of his special-issue jersey — a garment known in uniform circles as a shirsey. James has never been a huge fan of the shirsey, which teams wear on occasion.On Wednesday, James killed his shirsey. Coincidence or not, the Cavaliers’ play improved.The Knicks went into halftime ahead by 46-38. Anthony shot just 2 of 9 from the field in the first half but collected nine rebounds.REBOUNDSArron Afflalo missed his fifth straight game as he continued to nurse a strained hamstring. Afflalo said he had been making progress, though, and ran a series of sprints at the team’s pregame shootaround. He was expecting to participate in five-on-five drills at practice as early as Thursday. “The more I run, the more I sprint, the more I fatigue myself and bounce back with positive results, the closer I feel as if I’m ready to play,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Cavaliers, Taking Cue From James’s Sleeves, Go on Tear to Beat Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.