AdvertisementSupported byBy Brett Michael Dykes8:25 p.m. Eastern, NFL NetworkLine: Bengals by 12 ½As just about any sports fan can attest, a mark of a great team is the ability to pull out victories even when the going gets tough. Cincinnati — a team that has been consistently good, but never great, under Coach Marvin Lewis — earned just such a win in Pittsburgh against the rival Steelers on Sunday, even as quarterback Andy Dalton had his roughest outing of the season, posting a season-low 64.7 passer rating. The Bengals scored a late touchdown and intercepted Ben Roethlisberger twice in the fourth quarter, rallying for a 16-10 victory. For the first time in franchise history, the Bengals moved to 7-0.“We’re playing for something greater than being 7-0,” wide receiver A. J. Green, who scored the winning touchdown, told reporters after the game. “We’re trying to win a championship. We feel a game like this helps us build resiliency going into the postseason.”Now four games up in the loss column on second-place Pittsburgh in the A.F.C. North, the Bengals are a virtual lock to win the division and are vying with two other unbeaten teams, the Patriots and the Broncos, for home-field advantage in the playoffs and a first-round bye. If the Bengals win on Thursday night, they will be only the 33rd team in N.F.L. history to start 8-0.Standing in their way are the Browns, but the challenge Cleveland presents does not appear to be all that daunting. This is a team, after all, that had been rumored to be offering up its best players for trades in a fire sale that would have constituted throwing in the towel on the season. Additionally, the Browns may be without the services of the Pro Bowl cornerback Joe Haden and safety Donte Whitner, each of whom sustained a concussion in the team’s loss to the Cardinals on Sunday.The Browns’ regular starter at quarterback, Josh McCown, is also banged up — he had to leave the game against Arizona in the second half after hits to the ribs aggravated injuries that were already causing him to have trouble sleeping and breathing — so Johnny Manziel will get the start.Manziel, though, will most likely have a difficult time remaining upright against a stout Bengals defense fueled by a frenzied home crowd.Pick: BengalsAdvertisement