AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzWhen the Yankees were shut out by the Houston Astros in the American League wild-card game, the crowd at Yankee Stadium saved its most vociferous boos for one of its favorite players, Brett Gardner, the Yankees’ only homegrown starter.When Gardner, an outfielder who had already struck out three times, grounded out meekly in his last at-bat, he became an object for the crowd’s frustration toward an offense that had mirrored his performance — a strong start to the season, a second-half decline and a petering-out in the final weeks.Afterward, Gardner brushed off questions about his health. Manager Joe Girardi said a few days later that he was baffled by Gardner’s drop-off.On Wednesday, the Yankees’ new hitting coach, Alan Cockrell, offered a plausible explanation: Gardner was dealing with a wrist injury for a significant part of the season. “If you don’t feel strong, if there’s pain, something that inhibits you being able to hold the bat in your hands and throw the barrel, it’s really tough,” Cockrell, who was the team’s assistant hitting coach last season, said in a conference call. “When you have a hand injury, you start to use different parts of your body in the swing to compensate a little bit.”Cockrell said the injury was the result of Gardner’s being hit by a pitch, although he could not recall which wrist was hit or precisely when it happened. Cockrell said Gardner had taken cortisone shots to ease his discomfort. Gardner was hit on each wrist early in the season — on the left against Toronto on April 8 and on the right at Baltimore on April 13, the latter instance requiring a magnetic resonance imaging test. Gardner had surgery on his right wrist after the 2010 season to ease inflammation.Gardner was also hit by pitches at Baltimore on June 12 and at Texas on July 29. Those incidents correspond with his decline in running the bases and in hitting.He had stolen 15 bases in 18 attempts through June 12, ranking among the league leaders. But Gardner did not attempt a stolen base after that until Aug. 11 and did not successfully steal a base until Aug. 15. For much of the season, Gardner ran the bases with an oversize protective mitt on his left hand.Gardner had a superlative first half hitting, with a .302 average, an .861 on-base plus slugging percentage and 63 runs scored — good enough for him to be named an All-Star for the first time. After he was hit by the Rangers’ Colby Lewis on July 29, Gardner’s hitting numbers dropped drastically. He hit just .192 the rest of the season, with a .561 O.P.S. One of his few bright spots in the second half came after he took a few days off to rest a sore shoulder in September; he returned by smashing three home runs and driving in eight runs in a series against Toronto.After the wild-card loss, Gardner was asked about his second half, which mirrored his decline in 2014, when he was hampered by an abdominal injury.“I’m not going to sit and make excuses,” Gardner said. “I was inconsistent, or you could say I was consistently bad. I could never seem to get in a groove and get things going like I had in May and June.”Asked directly about his health, Gardner said: “I was healthy enough to be out there. I’m not going to blame my performance on something that was going on. I didn’t play as well as I should have.”Gardner’s teammate Jacoby Ellsbury experienced a similar decline after spending six weeks on the disabled list with an injured right knee. Jeff Pentland, the Yankees’ hitting coach this past season, said in September that Ellsbury was reluctant to put weight on his right leg.“It’s tough to hit if you don’t have legs, and it’s tough to hit if you don’t have hands,” Cockrell said. “It was probably a bigger thing than either of those two actually let on.”The Yankees were second in the major leagues with 764 runs in the regular season, but they struggled to produce at the end of the year when they faced top-shelf pitching — particularly left-handers. They were too often reliant on home runs and on too many occasions did not have productive at-bats, such as moving a runner up with an out.“I’m not going to say playing the game like the Kansas City Royals did,” Cockrell said, but the Yankees need “the little things that add a dimension to a club that pitchers just don’t want to face you.”INSIDE PITCHThe Yankees sold the rights to pitcher Chris Martin to the Nippon Ham Fighters in Japan for $750,000. The team also reinstated pitchers Domingo German, Jacob Lindgren, Chase Whitley and Mason Williams from the 60-day disabled list and added pitcher Vicente Campos to the 40-man roster. Pitcher Andrew Bailey, whose club option was declined, turned down an outright assignment and elected to become a free agent.Advertisement