AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressLaurel J. Richie, the W.N.B.A. president, is stepping down after more than four years on the job.The league said in a news release Wednesday that Richie was leaving to pursue other opportunities, including work for nonprofit institutions and being an advocate for girls and young women.Beginning next week, Mark Tatum, the deputy commissioner of the N.B.A., will oversee the W.N.B.A. until a new president is hired.“The league’s quality of play and depth of talent have never been better,” Tatum said in a statement. “We remain steadfast in our commitment to achieving growth in fan interest and future business performance reflective of the extraordinary state of the on-court product.”Richie assumed her role with the league in May 2011, becoming the first African-American to lead a major sports league.“I am proud of what the W.N.B.A. has been able to accomplish during my tenure and am grateful for the opportunity to play my part in setting the stage for the 20th season and beyond,” she said.In her five seasons at the helm, Richie led initiatives to improve the visibility of the league’s players.She helped ensure a measure of financial stability for the teams by completing an eight-year collective bargaining agreement with the players and extended a contract with ESPN through 2025.Richie’s departure comes about six weeks after N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver made public comments about the state of the W.N.B.A., indicating he thought that the league “would have broken through by now” and that it was “not where we hoped it would be.”The league closed out its 19th season with a stellar, five-game W.N.B.A. Finals, which the Minnesota Lynx won and garnered strong ratings.Yet the W.N.B.A. experienced its lowest average attendance in the league’s history. Some of that was because San Antonio moved arenas while its home court was being renovated.Richie faced several challenges this past year, including the star Brittney Griner being arrested for domestic violence and then her brief marriage to her fellow All-Star Glory Johnson. Griner and Johnson were suspended seven games.Diana Taurasi was paid by her Russian team to skip the W.N.B.A. season. Candace Parker missed the first half of the season to rest.Richie also oversaw the Tulsa Shock’s move to Dallas this year and the purchase of the Los Angeles Sparks by Guggenheim Partners and Magic Johnson Enterprises in 2014.Advertisement