By TOM PEDULLANOV. 4, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  The Jets’ quarterback woes do not appear as severe as the team had feared.Coach Todd Bowles said Ryan Fitzpatrick would start Sunday against the Jacksonville Jaguars despite having a torn ligament in his left thumb.Fitzpatrick and Geno Smith, who has a bruised left shoulder, practiced without visible limitations Wednesday after being injured in Sunday’s 34-20 road loss to the Oakland Raiders. Both players are right-handed, and their injuries have seemingly not affected their ability to throw.Fitzpatrick, wearing a protective glove on his injured hand, took snaps from under center and executed handoffs without any apparent difficulty. Smith threw with good velocity and did not appear to be restricted by his injury.In a conference call Monday, Bowles said Fitzpatrick’s availability depended on his threshold for pain and spoke of the possibility of trading for a quarterback or signing a free agent. Bowles appeared much more comfortable with Fitzpatrick on Wednesday, after the team’s first practice of the week.Advertisement“He’s a tough guy; he can tolerate some pain,” Bowles said. “The way they’ve got it bandaged up, he should be O.K.”AdvertisementFitzpatrick, 32, wore a heavy ice pack on his injured thumb after practice but expressed optimism that he could operate effectively.“It’s more painful to sit on the sideline and not be there for your teammates,” he said.With a 4-3 record, the Jets have already equaled their victory total of last season. Fitzpatrick, acquired from the Houston Texans in the off-season, has been one of the keys to the team’s resurgence under Bowles. He has started every game, completing 133 of 215 passes for 1,518 yards, with 11 touchdowns and seven interceptions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fitzpatrick’s willingness to persevere may provide a lift when one is needed, with the team coming off consecutive losses to the New England Patriots and Oakland.“When you look at a guy who has been through so much, he has to have mental toughness to last this long in the game,” wide receiver Brandon Marshall said.Fitzpatrick, a former seventh-round draft choice out of Harvard, has played for six teams in 11 seasons.He can look to his former Bengals teammate Carson Palmer for an encouraging precedent. Palmer, a right-hander, sustained ligament damage to his left thumb in the fifth game of the 2009 season. He went on to lead Cincinnati to the A.F.C. North title and was chosen to the Pro Bowl before he had surgery.Fitzpatrick said Palmer texted him before Sunday’s game was over and invited him to have a phone conversation. Palmer offered assurances that he could play through the injury, Fitzpatrick said.Bowles has said that Fitzpatrick’s injury will eventually require an operation.Fitzpatrick was hurt when he failed to slide after a 12-yard scramble during the opening series against the Raiders. He relieved Smith for two plays when Smith, too, elected not to slide at the end of a fourth-quarter run. Bowles criticized both quarterbacks for failing to protect themselves as much as possible.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Fitzpatrick Set to Start, Easing Jets’ Quarterback Concerns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.