AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichFantasy football analysis for Thursday night’s game between the Cleveland Browns and the Cincinnati Bengals. Check back Friday for analysis on Sunday’s games and Monday’s matchup between the Chicago Bears and the San Diego Chargers. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy.Cleveland Browns (2-6) at Cincinnati Bengals (7-0)8:25 p.m. Line: Bengals by 10.5Andy Dalton (CIN) — The Browns secondary is in a dreadful state, with cornerback Joe Haden and safety Donte Whitner dealing with concussions. Cleveland has permitted five 20-point fantasy days to the position in eight games and is considered a top 10 fantasy matchup for quarterbacks. We expect Dalton to bounce back in a big way after last week’s subpar outing.Johnny Manziel (CLE) — Manziel gets the keys to the car, with starter Josh McCown dealing with a rib injury. The Bengals are yielding 258.4 passing yards per game (23rd in N.F.L.), but held Ben Roethlisberger to 8 fantasy points last week, and have permitted only 14 fantasy points per game to the position over the last three weeks. There are likely to be safer QB2 plays this weekend than Manziel.Jeremy Hill/Giovani Bernard (CIN) — The Browns are fantasy’s best running back matchup after eight games and the league’s worst run defense, allowing 147 yards per game. Hill received 15 carries in Week 8 compared with Bernard’s one.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.Duke Johnson (CLE) — He is the only flex play worth considering from the league’s 31st ranked rushing offense. The Bengals have allowed double-digit fantasy performances in all but one contest this year and have struggled to contain pass-catching threats with a similar skill set.A.J. Green/Marvin Jones (CLE) — No Haden is a bonus for Green owners, not that they needed more incentive to start fantasy’s 10th best receiver (12.7 F.P.P.G.). Arizona’s Larry Fitzgerald and Michael Floyd combined for 194 yards and two scores against the Browns last week.Travis Benjamin (CLE) — The Bengals are the 10th worst fantasy matchup for receivers, but have permitted double-digit fantasy performances to an opposing WR1 in four of their last five games. Benjamin should not see a downgrade based on Manziel’s starting, as he totaled 115 yards and two touchdowns in Manziel’s last start (Week 2 against Titans).Tyler Eifert (CIN) — The Browns’ decimated secondary made Arizona’s Troy Niklas a fantasy star last week by gifting him two touchdowns on two targets. Eifert remains a must-start despite last week’s lackluster effort.Gary Barnidge (CLE) — He has been matchup proof with McCown as his quarterback, but with Manziel there could be some regression. Barnidge saw just one target in Week 2 and did not transform into the second coming of Tony Gonzalez until McCown solidified the job. The Bengals are permitting just under 7 F.P.P.G. to the position.Advertisement