AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanThe Mets held a postseason news conference Wednesday that, for the first time in years, was celebratory in nature. Manager Terry Collins wore a teal dress shirt and black slacks and a satisfied expression. Sitting next to him, General Manager Sandy Alderson announced that the Mets had agreed to give Collins a two-year contract extension, a reward for leading the team to its first pennant in 15 years.The two men talked about the Mets’ unexpected World Series run, the sting of losing in five games to Kansas City and the raised expectations for 2016. After the news conference, reporters surrounded Alderson, peppering him with more questions about a team that has now joined baseball’s elite and will be scrutinized as such. After one of the questions, Alderson paused, considering how to answer, and then turned white and slowly started to fall. Reporters helped him to the ground, where he lay for about 30 seconds. A public relations staff member asked everyone to back up. A security guard called into his radio for emergency assistance. Someone brought Alderson a water bottle as he came to and was helped to his feet. He sat in a chair, crossed his legs and looked around at the stunned members of the news media. “O.K., where were we?” he said, smiling.The remark was pure Alderson, who has often resorted to humor in his five years in New York regardless of whether the Mets are good or bad. However, in this instance, reporters did not try to ask him any more questions. Instead, a Mets public relation employee escorted him away so he could be examined by the team’s training staff.A team official, who did not want his name used because he was not authorized to speak publicly about the situation, said Alderson, who will turn 68 this month, had not eaten breakfast Wednesday and began to feel lightheaded while sitting in front of the television lights during the news conference.About 20 minutes after the incident, the official said, Alderson was eating, and his condition had notably improved. As the day progressed, he elected not to seek treatment at a hospital and stayed at work.Alderson fainted as he was being asked about the physical condition of center fielder Juan Lagares, who had to deal with a painful right elbow that at times seemed to inhibit his throwing this season. Lagares, though, is not expected to have surgery. His condition is one of a number of issues the Mets will have to address this off-season, and Alderson, until he passed out, discussed all of them, during the news conference and afterward, without revealing much.But there were moments when he offered a few hints.“We can’t simply rely on the four or five starting pitchers that we have and the back end of the rotation,” he said. “We understand that. We’ve got to figure out ways to score more runs and, at the same time, be a little better defensively as well.”How Alderson goes about that remains unclear. He indicated that the revenue the Mets had earned from their lengthy playoff run would help him increase the payroll. The Mets’ opening day payroll in 2015 was about $103 million, Alderson said, and he guessed that the payroll next April would be “somewhat higher.” He also expected to have room to expand the payroll at the 2016 trade deadline, as he did when he acquired Yoenis Cespedes on July 31.Alderson did not rule out pursuing Cespedes, a power-hitting outfielder, now that he has become a free agent, but Alderson indicated that the Mets would be unlikely to splurge on him. Cespedes, who just turned 30, is expected to seek a contract lasting perhaps six years and worth more than $100 million.“That’s not something we like to do,” Alderson said, speaking generally about giving lengthy contracts to players in their 30s. “Those contracts often don’t work out.”If Alderson has to replace Cespedes in the middle of the lineup, he indicated, he would prefer to do so without trading one of the four young starting pitchers — Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom, Noah Syndergaard and Steven Matz — who make up the core of the rotation.Collins noted that he had already spoken with Dan Warthen, the Mets’ pitching coach, about ways the team could protect its young starters from overwork next season. One way, he said, was to have them delay their first outings in spring training.Three of the Mets’ top pitchers threw more this season than they ever had, even with starts being skipped and others spread out with the use of a six-man rotation. Noah Syndergaard pitched a total of 1982/3 innings in the minors, the majors and the playoffs. Jacob deGrom threw 214 innings in his first full major league season. Matt Harvey pitched 216 innings in his return from Tommy John surgery. That was more than anyone else on the staff and a good deal more than the 180 that his agent, Scott Boras, had suggested was Harvey’s limit.As for the contract extension, Alderson praised Collins for his authenticity, for his communication skills, and for being as honest as he could be with the New York news media without alienating his players or calling them out in public. Alderson even praised his manager — the only one he has had in New York — for keeping the team united during the four seasons before this one, when the Mets lost more games than they won.If Collins works through the end of his extension, he will become the longest-tenured manager in Mets history. Collins indicated he would take it year by year. At 66, he is already the oldest manager in baseball.“When I get up every morning, I know there’s a challenge ahead,” Collins said. “I’m serious. You know what? When you get to be my age, you’ve got to have that. That’s what makes it fun. “I come to the ballpark every day knowing there’s going to be something that goes on that I have to deal with, that’s unexpected.”On Wednesday, the unexpected was suddenly seeing Alderson grow faint. The moment passed, and Alderson seemed O.K., ready for an off-season full of challenges as he tries to give Collins a team that can go at least as far in 2016 as it did this year. Advertisement