AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherN.B.A. teams have played only three to five games so far. But that has been plenty of time for the best players to assert themselves.The early scoring leaders include Stephen Curry, Russell Westbrook and Blake Griffin. The top rebounders are Andre Drummond and DeAndre Jordan, who were also the top two last year. Ricky Rubio and Kevin Durant have returned from injury to reclaim their places at the top of their best categories.But a few names stand out as surprises. Probably the biggest is point guard Kyle Lowry of the Raptors. After some decent years with Memphis and Houston, Lowry blossomed after going to Toronto three years ago. He earned his first All-Star selection last season, but at age 29 he seems ready to make this year his best.He is averaging 20 points, 8 assists, 5 rebounds and a league-leading 3 steals a game, all of which would be career highs. That adds up to heady ratings in the advanced catchall statistics tracked by Basketball-Reference. Lowry ranks fifth in win shares, and second only to the superhuman Curry in box plus-minus and value over replacement player. (All statistics are going into Wednesday night’s games.)The Raptors are benefiting from Lowry’s play. At 4-0 for the first time in team history, they are one of three undefeated teams left in the league. Lowry’s game Tuesday night against Dallas was his best: 27 points on 9-for-15 shooting and 10 assists.Lowry’s improvement may have been heralded by a new, slimmer physique, which was noticed in the preseason.His teammate Patrick Patterson told CBS Sports in September: “I see him in the locker room the other day and I’m like: ‘Man, I’ve never seen this before. You’ve always been this short, chunky, bulldog fat kid that I’ve known since my first year in the N.B.A. Like, seeing you like this, it’s like the evil twin brother or something.’”Toronto fans will hope Lowry’s improved conditioning helps ward off a late-season fade. Last season, he lost games to a back injury and struggled in a first-round playoff sweep by the Wizards.Another player who seems to have improved offensively and defensively this season is center Hassan Whiteside of the Heat. He ranks first in field goal percentage and third in blocks per game. His averages of 16 points, 9 rebounds and 3.5 blocks would all be career highs.A second-round pick out of Marshall, Whiteside bounced around the D-League, China and Lebanon before finally landing a steady N.B.A. spot with Miami last season. His teamwork with Dwyane Wade this season has led to a lot of easy buckets. “When I have the ball,” Wade told The South Florida Sun-Sentinel, “his eyes light up.”If Whiteside continues to be a productive scorer down low this season, one of his weaknesses may become more important. He is not a good free throw shooter, hitting at .500 last year and 5 for 9 so far this year. Haq-a-Hassan, anyone?Among the scoring leaders, the name that sticks out along with the likes of Curry, Westbrook and Durant is shooting guard Bradley Beal of the Wizards, who is averaging 25.3 points a game, sixth in the league. That’s 10 points higher than his average last year. At 22 in his fourth year in the league, he has led the Wizards in scoring all three games, giving the team a second threat along with his backcourt mate, John Wall.Beal was also in the news Monday when his agent said that contract talks would be delayed until after the season, when he becomes a restricted free agent. Washington may favor the move because they will have more cap space then. But if Beal can keep up his fast start, his value, like that of Lowry and Whiteside, may soar.Advertisement