By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 4, 2015
EDMONTON, Alberta — Connor McDavid, the Edmonton Oilers’ star rookie forward, will be out indefinitely because of a broken left collarbone. He was expected to have surgery Wednesday, with a long recuperation period to follow.“We’re talking about months,” Oilers General Manager Peter Chiarelli told a news conference. “We don’t have a particular time frame, but as I said, plural, months. There will be plates and screws involved.”McDavid was injured Tuesday night in the Oilers’ 4-2 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers.Racing down the left wing toward the Flyers’ goal late in the second period, with Philadelphia defenders Brandon Manning and Michael Del Zotto beside him, McDavid appeared to lose the edge on his skate.The three players fell and plowed hard into the end boards. McDavid struggled to his feet and skated slowly to the bench.Advertisement“He was upset,” Chiarelli said. “He loves to play the game and he won’t be playing it for a while.”AdvertisementMcDavid, 18, has age and character on his side, Chiarelli added.“The silver lining is that he’s young, he’s a strong kid mentally and physically, he’s still developing so he’ll come back probably even stronger,” Chiarelli said. “In my experience with these significant injuries with younger players they come back stronger.”McDavid, the No. 1 pick in the 2015 draft, went down in the 13th game of his rookie season. But in that time he had already established himself as one of the key players and catalysts on the Oilers.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.McDavid has five goals and 12 points in 12 games. He was the N.H.L.’s rookie of the month for October.The Oilers are 5-8 and fighting to return to the playoffs for the first time in a decade.“Injuries are a part of a hockey, but to be out that long this early in his career, I’m sure he’s pretty heartbroken,” said winger Taylor Hall, the Oilers’ leading goal scorer. “We’re going to try and be there for him and make sure that he gets through it well.”It is the latest in a string of injuries to key Oilers, including winger Jordan Eberle (shoulder) and defenseman Justin Schultz (back).Eberle is close to returning, and Coach Todd McLellan said the team would have to go on without McDavid.“We’ve played without key people; now we’ll play without Connor,” McLellan said.Some fans took to social media to criticize Manning for appearing to grab McDavid on the way down.AdvertisementMcLellan said he did not see it that way.“It’s a hockey play,” he said. “You could watch it 100 times and there’s nothing dirty about it.“When the pile of three went down, it was self-survival. All three of them were in a dangerous situation with the boards coming at them very quick.It is McDavid’s second major injury in less than a year. Last Nov. 11, while playing for the Erie Otters of the Ontario Hockey League, he broke a bone in his right hand in a fight.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Hockey; Oilers Rookie Expected to Miss Months.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.