By BRUCE WEBERNOV. 3, 2015
Luther Burden, better known as Ticky, a sharpshooting guard who played briefly for the Knicks in the 1970s but whose life took an ignominious turn when he was convicted of robbing a Long Island bank in 1980, died on Thursday in Winston-Salem, N.C. He was 62.His daughter Gracie Mae Burden confirmed the death, saying that her father had numerous health problems and that he had contracted pneumonia in the week before he died. The actual cause of death, she said, was most likely heart failure.Burden honed his ball-handling and shooting skills on the playgrounds of Albany, where he earned the nickname Ticky from the sound the ball made going through the basket.He was a prolific scorer in high school there and later at the University of Utah, where he was a first-team all-American (along with the future Hall of Famers Adrian Dantley and David Thompson) for the 1974-75 season, when he averaged 28.7 points per game.AdvertisementIn Burden’s first season as a professional, he scored 19.9 points per game for the Virginia Squires of the American Basketball Association. The franchise folded in 1976 (the year the league merged with the National Basketball Association), and Burden joined the Knicks. The Knicks hoped he would be part of the next-generation backcourt after the departures of Walt Frazier and Earl Monroe, who were nearing the ends of their careers.AdvertisementBurden was slowed by knee problems, however, and his time in pro ball ended abruptly in 1977 — he was not a favorite of the Knicks’ coach at the time, Willis Reed — after he had played in just two games in his second season with the team.Burden subsequently had money problems — “I went a little wild with my bread,” he acknowledged in a 2012 interview with The Times Union, the Albany newspaper — and in 1981 he was convicted of taking part in a bank robbery in Hempstead, N.Y., the previous summer, after three other participants in the crime, including one of his oldest friends, testified against him.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Burden, who maintained long afterward that he was an innocent scapegoat, was sentenced to six to 18 years in prison, but he was released after two years when the conviction was overturned by the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, which ruled that the arrest of Burden was illegal because the police had searched his home without a warrant.“You can be good all your life and make one mistake in trusting friends, who are supposed to be friends, with your well-being, and they’ll get you in trouble,” Burden told The Times Union in 2010. “So you have to watch how you do things.”Luther Dean Burden was born in Haines City, Fla., in the center of the state, on Feb. 28, 1953. His father, Jake, was a bricklayer; his mother, Gracie Mae Allen, died when he was 8. The story about the family’s move to Albany, Gracie Mae Burden said, was that after young Luther was nearly bitten by an alligator, the family immediately packed up and left.“My dad has never been fond of Florida,” Ms. Burden said.Burden lived for more than 20 years in Winston-Salem, where he coached youth basketball and had a financial consulting business, his daughter said.He is also survived by his wife, Cynthia; three brothers, Jake, Curtis and Larry; a sister, Alberta Burden; five children from two previous marriages; five stepchildren; four grandchildren; and nine stepgrandchildren.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Luther Burden, 62, Knick Who Went to Jail.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.