AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikPatricia Canning Todd, who won four Grand Slam tennis tournaments in 1947 and 1948 but lost the chance for another title when she refused to play on a side court at the 1948 French singles championships, died on Sept. 5 in Encinitas, Calif. She was 93.Her death, which was not widely reported at the time, was confirmed by her son, Whitney.Todd played relentlessly, using a devilish backhand to beat stars like Gussie Moran and Louise Brough Clapp. She peaked at No. 4 in the United States Lawn Tennis Association rankings in 1947 and 1949. The New York Times called her “as determined a fighter as there is on the court.”In 1947, Todd won the Wimbledon women’s doubles title with Doris Hart and then defeated her for the French singles title.Todd was favored to repeat her singles victory in France in 1948, but she refused to play in the semifinals against Nelly Landry after their match was moved to a side court. The court did not have sufficient linesmen, she said, and was narrower than center court.“I told the committee yesterday I would play only on center court,” Todd was quoted as saying by United Press on May 28, the day after her match was scheduled. “I’m the defending champion, and I don’t see why I can’t play in center court instead of another women’s singles match.”The French Lawn Tennis Association declared that Todd had forfeited.Landry went on to win the women’s singles championship. Todd went on to win in doubles, with Hart, and mixed doubles, with Jaroslav Drobny.But Todd vowed never to return, and when her 1948 ranking dipped to No. 6, she contended that the United States Lawn Tennis Association had penalized her because of the incident.Todd also won singles and doubles titles at two tournaments in India in 1950. That year, she broke her vow and returned to the French championships, where she lost in the singles final to Hart, her regular opponent and doubles partner.Mary Patricia Canning was born in San Francisco on July 22, 1922. She grew up in Alameda, Calif., and first played tennis when she was 8.She attended Alameda High School and began playing competitively as a teenager. She met Richard Bradburn Todd while she was playing at the United States nationals in Forest Hills, Queens.They married on Christmas in 1941, and Patricia Todd gave birth to their daughter, Patricia, in 1943. Todd was married and a mother for most of her tennis career, a rarity in the 1940s and ’50s.Her career was curtailed by World War II. When she returned to tennis full time, her mother, Winifred, cared for her daughter. She stopped playing in major tournaments in the early ’50s.In addition to her son, she is survived by her daughter, P. Todd Higley; a grandson; and a great-grandson.Advertisement