AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt HigginsORCHARD PARK, N.Y. — First there was Michael Vick, who preceded him at quarterback for Virginia Tech and offered career guidance. Then there was the influence of Joe Flacco, the starter for the Baltimore Ravens while he spent four seasons as the backup.For Tyrod Taylor, the Buffalo Bills’ latest quarterback, his years as an obscure protégé appear to have been time well spent. As a starting quarterback in N.F.L. Week 4, the 26-year-old Taylor is a threat to run or pass, and has efficiently led Buffalo to a 2-1 record.“Whether you’re a player or a coach, you always have a lot of people that allowed you to be in this position,” the Bills’ offensive coordinator, Greg Roman, said as Buffalo prepared to host the Giants (1-2) on Sunday at Ralph Wilson Stadium.Last week Roman gave credit for his coaching start to Richard Williamson, a retired colleague and friend who died last month at 74 in Charlotte, N.C.Roman was a 23-year-old offensive line assistant for the Carolina Panthers in 1995 when he met Williamson, the team’s receivers coach. A former player and coach under Bear Bryant at Alabama, Williamson advanced to become the head coach for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers during the 1990 and 1991 seasons.“For a lot of players and coaches over the years, including myself, he was able to mentor and teach them a lot,” Roman said.Taylor can appreciate such sentiment. He has had his own role models.A four-year starter at Hampton High School in coastal Virginia, he was a prized recruit whose strong arm and scrambling ability invited comparisons to Vick, whom he followed to Virginia Tech. With the Hokies, Taylor was the Atlantic Coast Conference player of the year as a senior, but his stature, 6 feet 1 inch and 215 pounds, perhaps gave N.F.L. teams pause.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.“Pro football and college football are like chess and checkers,” Roman said. “It’s a different game. That’s why a lot of college quarterbacks aren’t successful in the N.F.L.”Nine years older, raised in the same region of Virginia as Taylor, and featuring a similar playing style, Vick offered counsel on making the transition to college and, later, the pro game.“I’m not the next Mike or anything,” Taylor said of Vick’s influence. “I’m me. I’m doing it the way I’m going to do it. Growing up, looking up to him, there’s some things I try to take from his game and introduce into mine.”In the 2011 draft, Taylor was selected in the sixth round by Baltimore, where he had few opportunities to demonstrate what he could do outside practice. Flacco led the Ravens to the Super Bowl in the 2012 season and held a firm grip on the starting job.During four seasons in Baltimore, Taylor appeared in only 14 games, throwing a mere 35 times.“I tried to learn as much as I could from him,” Taylor said of Flacco, whom he still consults. “The way he played the game, from the pocket, bettering myself from the pocket and learning from the different coordinators.“In my four years, we had three different coordinators. It’s a bunch of knowledge to gather from those guys, and I try to learn as much as possible.”Although he had other offers, Taylor signed as an unrestricted free agent in Buffalo last spring because he believed he would have a chance to compete to be the starter.He won a three-way competition against E J Manuel, who was drafted in the first round by Buffalo in 2013, and the veteran Matt Cassel, who has since been traded to the Dallas Cowboys.“I just worked my butt off each and every day,” Taylor said. “I had to learn a new offense, and Coach Roman’s offense isn’t the easiest to learn in a short amount of time.”Taylor’s off-season workout regimen and his poise have impressed Coach Rex Ryan.“He’s been an even-keel guy,” Ryan said. “Nothing rattles him. Nothing fazes him. He’s a very confident young man.”A major infusion of offensive talent in Buffalo has helped.Buffalo traded the promising linebacker Kiko Alonso to Philadelphia for the All-Pro running back LeSean McCoy, and signed tight end Charles Clay as a free agent from Miami. Receiver Percy Harvin was signed as a free agent to complement Sammy Watkins.What resulted has been a multidimensional attack that will look to exploit the Giants, who have the N.F.L.’s lowest-rated pass defense.Buffalo leads the league in rushing with 152.7 yards per game. Taylor has played a big role, rushing for 96 yards and a touchdown while showing the accuracy of his arm. He has completed 74.4 percent of his passes for 714 yards and seven touchdowns, with three interceptions.One of those touchdowns came in Week 1, a 27-14 victory against the Indianapolis Colts. Taylor heaved the ball 51 yards to a streaking Harvin in the end zone.Harvin, on his fifth team in five seasons, said that with the Bills, he finally felt at home. He has known Taylor since they faced off in high school in football and basketball back in Virginia.“I’m just so proud of the way he’s handled everything, from the quarterback battle,” Harvin said. “He stayed true to himself, stayed confident, and he prepared. You get that chance where your number is called, you’ve got to be able to answer.“He’s done it perfectly.”Advertisement