AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom PedullaFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Dexter McDougle, in his second year at cornerback with the Jets, enters Sunday’s N.F.L. Week 4 game against the Miami Dolphins at Wembley Stadium in London with one special-teams tackle. That is a seemingly meaningless statistic — but not to McDougle.After losing most of his senior season at Maryland to a severe shoulder injury and all of his rookie year to a knee injury, it means everything to McDougle merely to play again.“Definitely, when it is taken away from you, you realize how special the game is, how fast it can go, so you make the most of it while you’re out there,” he said.McDougle finds himself well down the depth chart at what became a position of enormous strength for the team. Jets General Manager Mike Maccagnan spent heavily to reacquire the star cornerbacks Darrelle Revis and Antonio Cromartie. He also signed defensive back Buster Skrine as a free agent.But McDougle’s relentlessness and his rugged style of play for a 5-foot-10, 195-pound cornerback are making a strong impression on Todd Bowles, the Jets’ first-year coach.“Dex is a tough, scrappy corner,” Bowles said. “He’s becoming a technician. Before, he was playing with a lot of physical tools and not a lot of mental. And now he’s starting to put the mental with the physical. I think Dex has a bright future.”Bobby April, the special-teams coordinator, noted that the time lost to injury was costly because it kept McDougle, 24, from gaining valuable experience. April compared McDougle to a highly regarded but raw baseball prospect who must survive in the major leagues without an ideal foundation.“He probably could see more pitches; he could see more plays to be in position to make tackles in space,” April said. “But I see him as a quality player.”When McDougle is not looking to survive in the helter-skelter world of special teams, he is soaking up knowledge from Revis and Cromartie.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.“These are good guys to learn from, some of the best to ever play,” McDougle said. “I’m using that to my advantage in the meeting room and on the practice field.”He added, “When my name is called, I will be ready.”The former Jets general manager John Idzik and the former coach Rex Ryan took McDougle in the third round of last year’s draft based on the promise he showed on film and the way he responded to a shoulder injury that cost him the final nine games of his senior season. In a game against Connecticut, one in which he had already made two interceptions, returning one for a touchdown, a fired-up McDougle smashed a ball-carrier he estimated was 60 pounds heavier.He fractured his scapula and dislocated his shoulder. McDougle, at first believing the problem was limited to a dislocation, begged trainers to pop his shoulder back into place so he could return to the field and to a season that was critical to proving himself as an N.F.L. prospect. He had already gained attention by making 71 tackles, with a team-leading 58 unassisted tackles, as a junior. Doctors told him the combination of injuries was most commonly found in car wrecks.McDougle so impressed Maryland coaches by continuing to attend practice, watch film and help his teammates that they presented him with the inaugural Dexter McDougle Ultimate Team Player Award to close his collegiate career.McDougle was impressing the Jets’ coaching staff as a rookie last year when he tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee before the season. He was working one-on-one against a receiver in a red-zone drill on Aug. 10 when he went to jump for the ball. “I didn’t even get off the ground,” he said.He crumpled to the turf. “Oh God, you’ve got to be kidding me,” he was overheard saying as the medical staff examined him. His body told him the season was lost to a freakish noncontact injury before the doctors could.Still, McDougle was as devoted to putting the knee injury behind him as he was the shoulder injury. He displayed the grit, the resilience, that he said his father, Dexter, instilled in him the first day he played in a youth league in Woodbridge, Va. The younger McDougle made his debut at running back. On his first carry, he was leveled. On his second, he cut the corner and glanced back to see every defender in hot pursuit. He wanted none of it. He chucked the ball to the sidelines and sought refuge in the stands.“McDougles don’t quit,” his father said, scolding him.The elder McDougle sought to reinforce the point and toughen his son, then about 7, when they returned home.“I had this guy about 10 years old and I told him, ‘I want you to hit him every time I throw him the ball,’ ” the elder McDougle said. “We did it about six times, and this kid would run over him. The seventh time I threw it to him, he plowed the guy over and said, ‘I want to play football again.’ ”Some may wince at that scene. McDougle views it as a moment that helped him cope with setbacks that broke him physically and tested him emotionally.“I’ll always remember that day,” he said. “Since that day, I always strived to be the best.”Advertisement