
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
NOV. 5, 2015
WASHINGTON — With great fanfare and no small amount of trepidation, the Washington Nationals, a laughingstock for the last few days, finally introduced a new manager on Thursday: the affable Dusty Baker.Baker was not the organization’s first choice, a leaked detail that was publicly danced around by team officials but privately conceded. Nonetheless, he became Major League Baseball’s lone black manager — and the second oldest — only after Bud Black turned down the job because he felt the Nationals’ offer — reportedly a one-year deal below market pay — was insulting.While General Manager Mike Rizzo said that Baker’s name was never out of consideration during his search for Matt Williams’s replacement, Baker spoke on Thursday about being in the mountains of Santa Cruz, Calif., on a book tour, smarting from news reports that Black had been given the job.“I just resigned myself to the fact that I had to deal with another disappointment,” Baker said.Baker said he was “a little bewildered” because no one had told him that he had not gotten the job.Advertisement“I found out later that they hadn’t made up their minds,” he said.Actually, the team was negotiating with Black but keeping Baker on the line as a backup plan. Rizzo would later tell reporters that the process was “a unique situation.”AdvertisementWhatever the truth may be, the great part about this marriage is that Washington was relieved when Baker said yes, and Baker was overjoyed that the Nationals had come back and asked.That set up an upbeat news conference Thursday. Baker was in typical good humor, defusing what could have been a testy event centered on the Nationals’ bungling. Instead, the focus was on Baker’s vision for the team.He recited his résumé of managing great players, of taking each of his three previous teams — the Giants, the Cubs and the Reds — to the postseason, and of reaching the World Series with San Francisco.“The only thing left is a championship,” he said.That ties in perfectly with the aspirations of the Nationals, who watched the Mets catch, pass and then hold off a young Washington team that was reduced to bickering — with at least one physical altercation caught on national television. The lingering image of Washington’s season was of the Nationals’ impetuous young slugger, Bryce Harper, being choked by a teammate, closer Jonathan Papelbon, in the season’s final days. Someone asked Baker about the dysfunction. He spoke about the need for love and compassion.“When you say that, people look at you like you’re crazy,” he said. “A team has to be close. I can not only bring X’s and O’s, I can bring closeness to the team.”Baker was asked his impressions of Harper, a talented but hotheaded All-Star outfielder. Clearly impressed by Harper’s potential (“He can really play,” Baker said), he made clear that he had managed a long line of great players — Barry Bonds, Ken Griffey Jr., Sammy Sosa — who had performed at high levels over long periods.“I’m not intimidated by stars,” said Baker, who played 18 seasons in the majors, “because I was a star. I wasn’t the brightest star, but I was a star.”AdvertisementBaker spoke about being a young player and batting cleanup behind Hank Aaron. “I thought I was the cat’s meow,” he said. “I got kind of jacked up a couple times by the older guys. One time I had somebody’s hand around my throat. I was a little cocky, too. But you learn.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Baker’s point was not to diminish Harper but to simply remind him that he was standing at the foot of a mountain of great players; it will take humility to climb that mountain and carry a team with him to a championship.“This game, sooner or later, will humble you,” Baker said.The Nationals were humbled as they collapsed down the stretch, and now they may be more embarrassed than humbled by a clumsy managerial search that brought them Baker. I filtered the decision to hire him not through race or experience but through baseball, though when Baker appeared to be passed over for Black, it seemed that Washington had fallen back on a familiar old boys’ network.Black is a baseball lifer with a reputation for handling pitchers. But the Nationals’ issues go far beyond a manager’s ability to handle pitchers; they extend to preventing a talented but immature team from imploding.Washington is expected to win, and Baker has a history of taking teams that were supposed to win and doing just that with them. He also has a history of doing a lot with a little. Baker joked on Thursday that for a change, he wants to do more with more.Baker’s hiring should not take baseball off the hook for its continuing dearth of black and Latino managers, but it was a good sign for a disappointed, and fairly desperate, franchise trying to keep a team with World Series potential from fading into oblivion.“This was an extremely unique situation,” Rizzo said. “At the end of the day, it came down to who we were most comfortable with, and Dusty was the right choice.”Sometimes the baseball gods grant franchises unearned miracles, and second chances.This was not a smooth process. But just as the Nationals stumbled down the stretch of a season that held so much promise, they have stumbled into the perfect choice for a manager.I’m no soothsayer, but the Nationals, in spite of themselves, appear to have gotten this one right.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Nationals Keep Making Errors but Stumble Into a Winner.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »