By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 5, 2015
Andy Dalton connected with tight end Tyler Eifert for three scores and played lead blocker on Mohamed Sanu’s reverse for a touchdown, setting up host Cincinnati’s 31-10 victory over Cleveland on Thursday night.The Bengals improved to 8-0 for the first time in franchise history, their longest winning streak within a season.Coming off an emotional 16-10 victory in Pittsburgh on Sunday that gave them control of the A.F.C. North, the Bengals dominated the Browns (2-7) and Johnny Manziel in the second half.Manziel had some of his best moments in the opening half, which ended with Cincinnati up by 14-10. He led a 10-play, 92-yard drive late in the first half that cut the Bengals’ lead to 14-10, scrambling to throw a 12-yard touchdown pass to Duke Johnson with 19 seconds left.AdvertisementBut in the second half the Browns managed only 32 yards and two first downs, and Manziel finished 15-of-33 for 168 yards and was sacked three times.AdvertisementDalton’s 19-yarder to Eifert midway through the fourth put Cincinnati in control and gave Eifert nine touchdown catches, tying the Bengals’ record for a tight end and giving him the N.F.L. lead.Dalton finished 21-of-27 for 234 yards with a 139.8 passer rating.SHAKE-UP IN DETROIT The one-win Detroit Lions, looking nothing like the team that reached the playoffs last season, fired the team president Tom Lewand and the general manager Martin Mayhew and promised to bring in new leadership to put a consistent winner on the field.“We are very disappointed with the results of the season so far and believe a change in leadership was necessary,” the owner, Martha Firestone Ford, said, reading from a prepared statement. She did not take questions.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Lions are an N.F.C.-worst 1-7 under the second-year coach Jim Caldwell, whose staff was not affected by the changes a week after he replaced some assistants, including the offensive coordinator Joe Lombardi.Sheldon White, the Lions’ vice president of pro personnel and a 19-year veteran of the organization, will be the team’s acting general manager. Allison Maki, the chief financial officer, will oversee business operations.Lewand was in his 20th season with the Lions, and his sixth as president. Mayhew became general manager early in the 2008 season when the team fired Matt Millen.MANGOLD PRACTICES Nick Mangold took a big step toward playing again for the Jets. The veteran center was limited at practice Thursday, the first time he participated in team drills since injuring his neck late in the Jets’ loss at New England on Oct. 25.AdvertisementThat has the Jets feeling optimistic that Mangold could be back to start Sunday against the Jacksonville Jaguars. “I sure plan on it,” Mangold said.Wide receiver Brandon Marshall (toe/ankle) was also limited at practice, while wide receiver Eric Decker (left knee), safety Calvin Pryor (sprained left ankle) and guard Willie Colon (knee) sat out. Decker has already said he expects to play.LOCKETTE OUT OF HOSPITAL Seahawks receiver Ricardo Lockette said on social media that he had been released from a Dallas hospital after surgery to stabilize ligaments in his neck.Lockette was injured Sunday in Seattle’s 13-12 win over Dallas on a hit from Cowboys safety Jeff Heath during a punt return.STEELERS SIGN RETURNER The Steelers signed the veteran receiver and return specialist Jacoby Jones, hoping to give their special teams a boost. Jones was released by San Diego earlier this week after averaging 21.4 yards per kickoff return.TITANS RECEIVER OUT Titans receiver Kendall Wright has been ruled out of Sunday’s game against the Saints because of a sprained medial collateral ligament in his left knee sustained in the Titans’ 20-6 loss to the Texans last Sunday.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Eifert’s Three Touchdowns Carry the Bengals to 8-0.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.