AdvertisementSupported byOn Pro FootballBy Ken BelsonIn this age of always-on media attention, there are few more effective ways to silence most professional athletes than to ask a pointed political question. Schooled to carefully manage their public personas, many players will studiously sidestep anything with a whiff of controversy.The same goes for many league officials and owners. As nationwide entertainers, they steer toward the neutral middle, defending themselves with platitudes and bromides. They have businesses to run, and sports and politics, they insist, do not mix, even if Jackie Robinson and Muhammad Ali proved otherwise.As the former N.F.L. commissioner Paul Tagliabue said a quarter-century ago, “The N.F.L. is not a political advocacy group.”Yet it often is dragged into politics, however unwillingly.The latest example came Wednesday, when the league said unequivocally that it would plow ahead with plans to host the 2017 Super Bowl in Houston, even after voters there repealed an ordinance that outlawed discrimination based on factors like race, religion and sexual orientation.The league, as it and other sports organizations have done in the past, seemed to let the practical matter of logistics trump any move to take a stand on a delicate social issue.The league insists that it does not tolerate discrimination. But it implied in its decision that putting on events like the Super Bowl takes years of planning, and finding an alternative on short notice is difficult.“We will work closely with the Houston Super Bowl Host Committee to make sure all fans feel welcomed at our events,” Brian McCarthy, a league spokesman, said in a statement Wednesday. “Our policies emphasize tolerance and inclusiveness, and prohibit discrimination based on age, gender, race, religion, sexual orientation, or any other improper standard.”The N.F.L. was not alone in bending to logistics. The N.C.A.A. said it would continue with plans to hold the Final Four in Houston next year because it was too late to move the event. But Dan Gavitt, the vice president for men’s basketball championships, said the city’s vote could affect any decision on future events there.Some believe that by not taking that extra step, the N.F.L. missed a chance to take a stand.“I think it’s the league’s opportunity to make a statement about a social-justice issue,” said Richard Lapchick, the director of the Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport at the University of Central Florida. “I have no doubt if the N.F.L. took action, it would have impact.”Lapchick, who pushes sports leagues to do more to promote equality, said the N.F.L. had wielded a powerful sword before. In 1990, Tagliabue, who had just taken over as commissioner, recommended that the N.F.L. abandon plans to host the Super Bowl in Arizona in 1993 if voters there did not recognize Martin Luther King Jr. Day as a state holiday.“Why should politicians or pundits force the league to become stuck at the center of prolonged political debate when it can be minimized” by moving the game elsewhere? he said.When voters in Arizona again rejected a measure to celebrate the holiday, the N.F.L. moved the game to Pasadena, Calif. Two years later, voters reversed course, which paved the way for Phoenix to bid again for the Super Bowl. The game was played in Tempe, Ariz., in 1996.It is unclear whether Roger Goodell, Tagliabue’s successor, reflected on these events when he chose to stick to the league’s plans in Houston. But the league has been reluctant to take a stand and slow to react to controversies in recent years.In July 2014, Goodell suspended the former Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice for two games after video was made public of him dragging his then-fiancée from an Atlantic City casino elevator. Advocates for victims of domestic violence protested that the punishment was much too light, and a month later, Goodell, to his credit, apologized. But then more graphic video was released that showed Rice punching the woman, and Goodell suspended Rice indefinitely.In other cases, the league has held its ground. Goodell has long defended the right of Daniel Snyder, the owner of the Washington Redskins, to keep the team’s name even as thousands of schools have dropped logos and monikers that Native American groups consider offensive.Without mentioning the Redskins by name, President Obama on Thursday took a shot at the league for its approach. “If you’re living in a society that devalues your culture or perpetuates stereotypes, you may be devaluing yourself,” he said at a Tribal Nations Conference at the White House. “We have to preserve those bonds, break stereotypes. I believe that includes our sports teams, because we all need to do more to make sure that our young people feel supported and respected.”This spring, the league was also largely silent after lawmakers in Indiana passed a law that allows business owners to refuse service to same-sex couples on the basis of religious objections. In addition to having a franchise in the state, the N.F.L. hosts its annual scouting combine in Indianapolis.Only after the N.C.A.A. — which has its headquarters in the city — and executives at some of America’s largest corporations spoke out, did state lawmakers say they would amend the law.It is uncertain what steps lawmakers in Houston will take. But if Goodell came out more forcefully on the issue, they would have to sit up and listen.“I can’t judge what the N.F.L.’s motive is in this,” Lapchick said. But there “is an opportunity to get this right.”Advertisement