AdvertisementSupported byKeeping ScoreBy Benjamin HoffmanIn August and September, as Yoenis Cespedes went on an offensive tear that helped carry the Mets to the postseason, the dollar figures bandied about for what he might earn as a free agent became comical. A Cuban-born outfielder who made his major league debut in 2012, Cespedes has been around long enough for most of the baseball world to be plenty familiar with him, but he was suddenly on his way to 35 home runs and a contract worth the gross domestic product of a midsize country.There is no question that the midseason trade to the Mets improved Cespedes’s position as a free agent. But when October rolled round, the streaky slugger reminded everyone of his volatility by scuffling through much of the playoffs.Friday is the deadline for contract options to be exercised and for teams to make qualifying offers for pending free agents, so the pursuit of Cespedes and other top free agents will begin in earnest. The biggest names available include the pitchers Zack Greinke, David Price and Johnny Cueto and the outfielders Jason Heyward and Justin Upton. But one of the most intriguing questions will be whether teams will base their evaluation of Cespedes on the 57 regular-season games he played for the Mets, or the preceding 518 games.In truth, Cespedes, while valuable, has plenty of flaws. At 30, he has a reliance on power above contact that makes him unlikely to age particularly well as a hitter. His great 2015 season came after a two-season stretch in which he hit a combined .251 with a .298 on-base percentage, making him less valuable than the 48 home runs he hit in those seasons would suggest. His defense can be spectacular from a corner outfield position, but he was miscast as a center fielder for the Mets.If a team were looking to make a nine-figure investment, it would be far better off with Heyward of the St. Louis Cardinals.At 26, a rare age for a player to reach free agency, Heyward is among the best defensive players in baseball and a productive hitter, even if he has not quite lived up to expectations. Those came even before he hit the third pitch of his major league career, from Carlos Zambrano, more than 430 feet.Heyward, primarily a right fielder, is especially intriguing because of his potential, but even if he does not improve, one could argue that he is the superior player. By wins above replacement, Heyward edged Cespedes this season, 6.5 to 6.3. The difference was greater last season, when Heyward topped Cespedes, 6.2 to 4.1. And since Heyward is just entering his prime, the difference could grow larger.Much of Heyward’s value comes from his play in the outfield, where he has 92 defensive runs saved over all since 2012 (Cespedes has 15). He has also been a better hitter than some might realize. Adjusted for league and home ballpark, Cespedes has been 22 percent better than the average batter, according to Baseball-Reference, while Heyward has been 14 percent better. Heyward has been more disruptive as a runner, with 43 steals in 50 attempts over the last two seasons to Cespedes’s 14 in 21 attempts.Both players are likely to receive contracts of $100 million or more — perhaps far more — but four or five years down the road, the team that signs Heyward is likely to be much happier with the contract.The Top TierBeyond Heyward — who may represent the greatest reward, if not the most value — Greinke is the top free agent. The 2009 American League Cy Young winner, Greinke is 32 and just had the best season of his career with a 1.66 E.R.A. over more than 220 innings. Greinke signed with the Los Angeles Dodgers as a free agent, and over three seasons he has been better than they could have anticipated, going 51-15 with a 2.30 E.R.A. in 92 starts. It would be wise for him to re-sign in Los Angeles, where he is comfortable, but any team would be lucky to have him.Price, 30, is just a hair behind Greinke no matter how much teams are turned off by his postseason struggles. Beginning with his dominant third season for the Tampa Bay Rays in 2010, Price has been incredible in the vast majority of his 189 regular-season starts, so judging him on eight postseason starts would be misguided.Worth the InvestmentThere are a number of players below the top tier who can help a team win but, for a variety of reasons, will not command deals quite as lucrative. The list includes three key members of the Kansas City Royals.Ben Zobrist, who can play in the infield and the outfield, has quietly been among the most productive players in baseball since 2009, with his 39.3 WAR trailing only Robinson Cano’s, Miguel Cabrera’s, Adrian Beltre’s and Joey Votto’s in that time. But he got off to a rocky start this season with Oakland before being traded to Kansas City, and at 34, he may be closing out his prime.Alex Gordon’s stock has been volatile, but at 31, he is a three-time All-Star and a quality defensive left fielder. He missed 58 games this year but was remarkably durable over the four previous seasons.Johnny Cueto went from being one of the best pitchers in the National League over several seasons to being a huge disappointment for the Royals after a midseason trade. But when he became the first A.L. pitcher since 1991 to throw a complete-game win in the World Series, he probably did enough to erase any doubts about his ability. At 29, he could provide as much value as Greinke or Price, if he finds the right situation.Other productive players, if imperfect ones, include Upton, first baseman Chris Davis, pitcher Hisashi Iwakuma, outfielder Colby Rasmus, pitcher Jordan Zimmermann and second baseman Howie Kendrick.Players to AvoidIt is not uncommon for a player to inflate his value artificially after a dominant stretch of play, but Mets infielder Daniel Murphy is an extreme example. Well established as someone who can give a team about 2 WAR a season with moderate power and adequate defense, Murphy thoroughly confused everyone with a terrific postseason in which he flashed so much power that it was surprising when his at-bats did not end in home runs. But at 30 years old, and with no reason to believe his power surge was anything but an aberration, Murphy seems like a great example of a player who will almost assuredly disappoint any team hoping he can play that way regularly.At least with Murphy, the inflated contract would be a result of something he did. For Matt Wieters, a large contract would be based on little more than his name and the persistent belief that he will eventually put everything together. It is easy to see how teams would find a switch-hitting catcher with the power to hit 20 home runs intriguing, but he has played in only 101 of Baltimore’s last 324 games, and in 2013, which was the last time he played a full season, he was a below-average hitter in terms of adjusted O.P.S. despite his 22 home runs. Wieters will turn 30 in the second month of the season, and while he may return to the player he was in 2011 and 2012, it is hard to believe that it would last long.Perhaps the biggest head scratcher in terms of value is pitcher Scott Kazmir. He may be only 31, but few players have experienced as many highs or lows. A dominant first half with Oakland had him primed for a big payday, but he faltered drastically after a trade to Houston, and that, combined with his complicated health history — his only season of 200 or more innings came in 2007 — should at the very least give teams pause.Advertisement