AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzA New York baseball star whose off-the-field activities are fodder for the city’s gossip pages was chosen Thursday as a comeback player of the year.Alex Rodriguez?No, it was Matt Harvey.Rodriguez exceeded all expectations last season in his return to the Yankees from a yearlong suspension for his role in a performance-enhancing drug scandal. But he was beaten by the Texas Rangers’ Prince Fielder for the American League comeback player award; Harvey, the Mets pitcher, won the award in the National League.The honors were voted on by the 30 beat reporters who cover each team for MLB.com.Harvey, who missed 2014 after Tommy John surgery, was 13-8 with a 2.71 E.R.A., helping anchor a starting rotation that was among the best and deepest in baseball as the Mets reached the World Series for the first time in 15 years.Fielder helped the Rangers get to the playoffs after missing most of 2014 because of a herniated disk in his neck. Fielder returned to hit .305 with 23 home runs, 98 R.B.I. and an .841 on-base plus slugging percentage.Rodriguez, 40, had a strong case for the award. He hit .250 with 33 home runs, 86 R.B.I. and an .842 OPS. Like Fielder, Rodriguez was mostly used as a designated hitter, and his chances might have been hurt because his absence in 2014 was self-inflicted.Rodriguez’s comeback extended beyond numbers. He softened some critics by being a model citizen for the Yankees. He even publicly turned the other cheek when the team refused to pay a $6 million marketing bonus tied to his climb up the career home run list. (The dispute was later settled in a compromise.)He also earned praise for his work as a television analyst in the playoffs.Meanwhile, Harvey’s return was not so free of bumps.He appeared tentative in September when his agent, Scott Boras, and the Mets’ general manager, Sandy Alderson, went back and forth in the news media over an innings limit for Harvey this year. Eventually, Harvey asserted himself, and he and Manager Terry Collins came to an agreement that he would pitch whenever called upon.But Harvey then created headlines when he showed up late for a workout during the playoffs, saying he had overslept.There was also some mild criticism awaiting him after the final game of the World Series, in which he harangued Collins into letting him pitch the ninth inning with a 2-0 lead. But he allowed a walk and a double and then was replaced as the Kansas City Royals tied the score and won in extra innings, clinching the championship.In that regard, Harvey had something in common with Rodriguez, who had a chance to change the direction of the Yankees’ wild-card loss to the Houston Astros with one swing. But he flied out with the tying runs on base, their last real threat.It was an unsavory end to a gratifying season for Rodriguez and Harvey, providing them both with something else to come back from.EXTRA BASESMets right fielder Curtis Granderson underwent surgery Thursday to repair a torn ligament in his left thumb, which was injured when he slid into second base in Game 3 of the National League Championship Series. He is expected to be ready for spring training, the team said.Advertisement