By KATIE ROGERSNOV. 5, 2015
Serena Williams is a world-class athlete and is seen as a living embodiment of the phrase “girl power,” but it appears that a man who seemed to try to steal her phone on Tuesday was due for a reminder. Even so, surveillance video suggests the encounter was not quite as dramatic as Ms. Williams’s widely shared tale on Facebook.In that account, Ms. Williams, 34, the top-ranked tennis player in women’s singles, posted a picture of herself in a superhero outfit and described a dramatic ordeal that she said took place at a Chinese restaurant, where a man stood next to her and lingered a bit too close to her table for comfort.“My phone was sitting in the chair but I just didn’t feel right,” she wrote. “He was there too long. ‘Is he a customer?’ I thought ‘Is he waiting on the bathroom?’  ”Ms. Williams said her “superhero sense” proved correct when the man grabbed her phone and ducked out of the restaurant. She chased him, as she explained in her post:“He began to run but I was too fast. (Those sprints came in handy) I was upon him in a flash!”There were few details about the episode from her Facebook post. Ms. Williams did not say what city she was in, what type of phone she had or the identity of her dinner companion. Surveillance footage broadcast by “Good Morning America” on Thursday offered more information.The video shows Ms. Williams dining with a man in a restaurant in San Francisco, the outlet reported, and another man can be seen walking up next to her and lingering before he snatches the phone. Ms. Williams then rushed to follow him out of the restaurant.AdvertisementThe footage shows Ms. Williams walking quickly to catch up with the man, who does not appear to be running. The video doesn’t exactly show a superhero phone rescue, as she recounted on Facebook, but it’s a fast-moving, calm one carried out by a professional athlete.AdvertisementShe said in the post that she used the “most menacing yet calm no nonsense voice I could muster” to ask “if he ‘accidentally’ took the wrong phone.” The man then returned the device.
            Next on @GMA: exclusive video of @serenawilliams​ stopping alleged thief who grabs her phone https://t.co/fO5FJolRxy pic.twitter.com/aKSPJWVvLY Ms. Williams said that she was able to retrieve her phone after passing the whole thing off as a mistake. There was no arrest. Anastasia Villanueva, a waitress at the restaurant, told “Good Morning America” that Ms. Williams said she was looking to avoid conflict with the man.Crime experts generally advise against Ms. Williams’ self-reliant approach, and multiple people have been murdered during botched thefts of smartphones. Even so, the danger does not seem to deter people from trying to get back their mobile devices. In 2013, San Francisco was among the cities to join the Secure Our Smartphones movement, a nationwide initiative that called for manufacturers and carriers to create better technology to track and lock devices.It was unclear whether Ms. Williams was targeted for having a nice phone — the model was unknown — or because she is a famous athlete. And there may be a bit of mythmaking going on here, as well.Ms. Williams urged women to step up and protect themselves from thieves. “Just because you are a lady don’t be afraid to step up to any challenge and not be a victim but a hero!” she wrote. Read her full account below:Soooooo yesterday at dinner the CRAZIEST THING happened to me. I was sitting enjoying some Chinese food (delicious may I...We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.