AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt HigginsBUFFALO — Chicago Blackhawks right wing Patrick Kane, one of the N.H.L.’s highest-profile players, will not face charges related to a claim by a woman that he raped her during the summer at his off-season home here in Erie County. Frank A. Sedita III, the Erie County district attorney, released a statement Thursday that announced the end of a three-month investigation of the case, which included leaks to the news media and a number of bizarre turns. The statement cited insufficient physical and DNA evidence and said there were “significant material inconsistencies between the complainant’s accounts and those of other witnesses.”According to the statement, DNA results did not corroborate a “claim of penetration, a required element of proof for a rape charge,” and physical and forensic evidence “tend to contradict the complainant’s claims that she was raped on Kane’s bed.”The “proof,” the statement concluded, “does not sufficiently substantiate the complainant’s allegation that she was raped by Patrick Kane, and this so-called ‘case’ is rife with reasonable doubt.”Sedita, who did not hold a news conference about the end of the investigation, will not present the matter to a grand jury.The woman, a 21-year-old college student, recently signed an affidavit informing the district attorney’s office that she no longer wanted to pursue a criminal prosecution.Kane, who has not spoken to investigators, issued a statement Thursday through a Blackhawks spokesman. “I have repeatedly said that I did nothing wrong,” he said. “I have respected the legal process, and I am glad that this matter has now been closed, and I will have nothing further to say going forward.”Drafted No. 1 over all by Chicago in 2007, Kane, 26, is a gifted skater, puckhandler and playmaker. In July 2014, he signed an eight-year contract worth $84 million with the Blackhawks.Kane has courted legal trouble and developed a reputation for carousing. In 2009, Kane and his cousin James were arrested in Buffalo, where Kane grew up, after being accused of punching a cabdriver in a dispute over a fare. The two eventually pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct and were given conditional discharges.In 2010, Kane and two of his teammates at the time, Kris Versteeg and John Madden, were photographed shirtless in the back of a limousine in Vancouver, British Columbia, with a group of women. Kane apologized for that episode and again in 2012 for photos showing him apparently intoxicated at Cinco de Mayo celebrations at the University of Wisconsin.Kane’s latest legal problems came to light in early August.On Aug. 7, the police in Hamburg, a town 20 miles south of Buffalo, confirmed that they were investigating an incident that was said to have occurred at Kane’s summer home the previous weekend. Kane met a woman at a Buffalo nightclub Aug. 1, and she accompanied him home that night. Later, she contacted the police and accused Kane of raping her.A turn in the investigation came Sept. 23 when Thomas Eoannou, then the lawyer for Kane’s accuser, called a news conference to say that an evidence bag with his client’s identifying information had been anonymously dropped on the doorstep of the accuser’s mother. Eoannou said the bag had once contained a rape kit with forensic evidence. He said DNA evidence could have been tampered with and called for an independent investigation.A day later, Eoannou resigned from the case because of concerns about whether his client’s mother had lied to him about how she came to possess the evidence bag. The next day, Sedita broke a self-imposed public silence to describe the mother’s actions as an “elaborate hoax.”The mother will not face charges, Sedita said, because it is not illegal to lie to a lawyer, except under oath.Advertisement