AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Given what happened at the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, it is remarkable how that country’s flesh and blood remain central to seemingly every decent team in Europe.If there is one player who has stood head and shoulders above the disintegration of Chelsea this season, it is Willian — and he was the club’s savior once again on Wednesday, when his immaculate free kick pulled out a 2-1 victory for the Blues over Dynamo Kiev.Willian’s goal was reminiscent of the art Brazilians mastered 60 or more years ago, the ability to give a dead ball the spin that drives it up and over a wall of defenders, then arching down beneath the crossbar beyond the goalkeeper’s reach.It is the fifth time Willian has scored in Chelsea’s troubled season, and every one of those goals has been a free kick from 20 yards or more.If you prefer the flowing movement of the ball at the feet of a moving athlete, then you needed to look no further than Munich where, also Wednesday, Bayern shot Arsenal to pieces. The midfield conductor of this movement for the German champion was Thiago Alcântara, and the maker of so many chances in Munich’s 5-1 win was Douglas Costa, a sorcerer on either wing.How, one wonders, did this Costa get nowhere near the Brazil team that lacked the skills to go beyond the semi-final of a World Cup on Brazilian soil? How did this fellow, so fleet of foot, so adept at skipping past opponents and so accurate in providing crosses, not get a place on the poorest roster of players in his nation’s memory?Of course, in the Bayern Munich club he is in a team of all the talents. There’s Thiago for a start, and while this midfield maestro was born in Italy of Brazilian parents (and in fact chooses to represent Spain at national team level) there are clues everywhere to his inheritance.His father, Mazinho, played in the Brazil team that won the World Cup in 1994, in the United States. And the full family name includes do Nascimento, the same name as that of Edson Arantes do Nascimento, known to the world simply as Pelé.So it is in the genes, despite the fact that Thiago and his younger brother Rafael, known as Rafinha, enrolled with the Barcelona academy. It was from there that Pep Guardiola plucked Thiago for Bayern, and surely Guardiola was aware that had his protege stayed he was the logical successor to Xavi Hernández at Barça.So, while Thiago was stroking the ball around for Bayern this week, it took two goals from Neymar to help carry Barça through to the knockout stage of the Champions League (and it was another Brazilian, Hulk, who created the goals by which Zenit St. Petersburg also qualified for the next round on Wednesday).As suggested, the Brazilians are everywhere in the league of champions.It would be hard to put a price on the contribution of Willian if his club manager, José Mourinho, escapes being fired by Chelsea this season. Mourinho seems to have aged in a month with the deep concern over the way his team, the English champion six months ago, has capsized this term.Yet Chelsea’s fans, remembering what Mourinho brought them in the past, spent Wednesday shouting at the top of their voices in support of the manager. “What they did for me is not normal,” the manager said after the narrow win. “Maybe they don’t read papers or listen to the TV pundits, or they have a big heart and a great memory of the great moments I brought them. Until my last day at this club, I will give everything for them.”Thanks to Willian in particular, there will be other days in the Champions League for Chelsea. Not simply because of his free kick, but because of his energy, his never-say-die attitude, Willian is dedicated to turning the season around.When a team is in such a trough, it needs a friend, and Chelsea found one during the first half when, from Willian’s teasing cross, Kiev’s defender Aleksander Dragovic put his head to the ball, and diverted it into his own net.On 78 minutes Dragovic atoned by striking the shot that, via a deflection off the arm of John Terry, squared the score. Then, within five minutes, Willian guided the free kick that won the game and gives Chelsea every chance of progressing in the tournament.For Bayern, there never was any doubt. Robert Lewandowski was left criminally unmarked when he backpedaled and headed the opening goal, Thomas Müller’s ability to slip unseen into the penalty area and strike with either foot claimed two more goals, and David Alaba — nominally a defender — hit a searing drive past the Arsenal goalkeeper, Petr Cech.And Arjen Robben scored with his first touch of the ball less than a minute after entering the field as a substitute for the 19-year-old Frenchman Kingsley Coman who is yet another winger with speed and good footwork.In London last month, Arsenal had beaten Bayern 2-0. Here, weakened by the absence of injured players, Arsenal was bewitched and bewildered. Costa’s run for the final goal took four Arsenal players out of the play in one 30-yard dash before laying on the chance for Müller.Douglas Costa hasn’t suddenly come from nowhere. He is one of the young Brazilians recruited by Shakhtar Donetsk in their mid-teens, and after five seasons in Ukraine he was purchased by Munich this summer. He has shone week after week for Bayern, outrunning and outwitting Germans who humiliated Brazil in 2014; yet his home nation ignored him that year.Arsenal’s defender Per Mertesacker, part of the victorious German team two years ago, now knows all about Douglas Costa. “They were brilliant tonight,” Mertesacker said in Munich. “But we played without courage. We let them get into their rhythm.”Advertisement