AdvertisementSupported byLakers 104, Nets 98By Andrew KehBilly King tilted his shoulder against a wall early Friday night as a group of assembled reporters lobbed questions about the Nets’ troublesome start to the season.King, the team’s general manager, insisted that he was still “upbeat and positive” about the group, which had lost its first five games. Things were not all bad, he said, pointing to a good half the Nets played last week against the San Antonio Spurs (a game they lost, 102-75) and the fact that center Brook Lopez had looked pretty strong.But perhaps the most positive thing King could say about those games was that the Nets had one fewer meeting remaining with each of the teams that had beaten them.“I knew it was going to be rocky,” King said of the early schedule, which included games against the Chicago Bulls, the Memphis Grizzlies and the Atlanta Hawks. “There are some other teams we’re maybe on par with. I do think we’ll get better.”On cue, the Los Angeles Lakers arrived. Like the Nets, the Lakers were winless. Like the Nets, they were struggling to form an identity. Here, finally, was a softer opponent, a team more reasonably on the Nets’ level.And the Nets lost anyway, 104-98, at Barclays Center, extending their winless start to six games.“Hopefully we can find a win next game, and then once we taste a bit of winning, it can transition over, and we can continue to get games,” said Thaddeus Young (14 points).The Nets, who will play eight of their next 10 games on the road, never led in the second half, and though they managed to get close in the waning seconds, they bungled a chance to tie. Jarrett Jack hit a shot with his toe on the 3-point line with 29.5 seconds left in the game to cut the Lakers’ lead to 3. Jack then broke up the Lakers’ inbounds play, forcing the ball out of bounds off Lou Williams to give the Nets possession. But Young could not find a teammate on the Nets’ inbounds play, and he was called for a five-second violation with 24.2 seconds left, effectively ending the game.The play left most of the Nets scratching their heads and at a loss for an explanation. No one took the blame for the miscue. Young said the play that had been drawn up was designed for an inbounds closer to the basket, near the free-throw line. Placed near midcourt, he hesitated with the ball until it was too late.The Nets, who got a game-high 23 points and 10 rebounds from Lopez, are still looking for answers and winning combinations. Rondae Hollis-Jefferson, a rookie, started for the first time this season, and before the game, he beamed as he reminisced about how he idolized Kobe Bryant growing up in Chester, Pa., a half-hour drive from where Bryant went to high school.Early in the first quarter, as the teams walked off the court for a timeout, Bryant stepped over to Hollis-Jefferson and patted him encouragingly twice on his backside. Bryant had the crowd transfixed, even as he struggled, scoring a team-high 18 points while shooting 5 for 16. He was cheered every time he touched the ball. Bryant joked that he did not appreciate the warmth he has felt in opposing arenas now that his career was winding down.“I’d rather enjoy the hostility,” Bryant said with a smile.Bryant’s body language and facial expressions wavered between steeled determination and frustration. He took a free throw for a Nets technical foul with five minutes left in the second quarter, and when the ball clanged out, he veered to the side of the court, cursing at himself.Two quarters later, Bryant made four straight free throws after the Nets’ five-second violation. Moments after that, he walked out of Barclays Center with one arm raised in the air.“I feel good,” Lakers Coach Byron Scott said. “We won a game.”The Nets have not been able to say the same.REBOUNDSThe Nets on Friday announced they had acquired the right to own and operate an N.B.A. Development League team beginning in the 2016-17 season. The team, the Long Island Nets, will play its first season at Barclays Center before moving permanently to the renovated Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum. The Development League will expand to 21 teams, and the Nets will become the 12th N.B.A. team to fully own its affiliate. The Nets have not had an affiliate since before the 2014-15 season, when they ended a relationship with a team in Springfield, Mass. Billy King said the proximity of the teams and the ability to have a unified philosophy would help the organization. “As we become a younger team, it’ll give us a chance to develop our players, and not only players, but coaches as well,” King said.Advertisement