By SCOTT CACCIOLANOV. 6, 2015
It had already been an eventful week for Kristaps Porzingis. On Monday, he absorbed the full force of Carmelo Anthony’s 220-pound frame on the side of his neck. Two days later, Porzingis got his first up-close look at LeBron James when the Knicks visited the Cleveland Cavaliers.On Friday, Porzingis arrived at Madison Square Garden for the sixth game of his N.B.A. career. He defended and rebounded. He shot 3-pointers and soared for putback dunks. He tantalized fans and created problems for the Milwaukee Bucks. It was all there — everything except a victory.The Knicks fell flat in the fourth quarter of their 99-92 loss to the Bucks, who survived enough flashes from Porzingis to pull away in the closing minutes.“Finding a group of five guys that collectively can finish a game is going to be important for us,” Coach Derek Fisher said.AdvertisementIt was the third straight loss for the Knicks (2-4), who committed 18 turnovers, several of them late, and were undone by an addiction to the 3-point line, shooting 4 of 24 from beyond it.AdvertisementPorzingis finished with his second double-double in his last three games, collecting 14 points and 13 rebounds.Anthony, who entered the game shooting 36.5 percent from the field, worked to establish more of a rhythm. Each time he hit a jump shot, the crowd roared — mostly encouragement for a player coming off knee surgery. Still, he struggled. He had 17 points while shooting 6 of 16.“I try not to let it frustrate me,” Anthony said. “I know it’s coming.”The Knicks’ early-season schedule has been a mixed bag. Growing pains were inevitable. On Wednesday, the Knicks’ offense stalled in the second half of a loss to the Cavaliers. It was more of the same against the Bucks (3-3).“We gave them this game,” Anthony said. “This was a winnable game, and we gave it to them.”The Knicks were slipping into a hole in the third quarter when Porzingis followed up an errant jumper by Anthony with a dunk. Langston Galloway capitalized by making a 3-pointer, and the crowd came alive. Later in the quarter, Porzingis dunked again off a miss by Galloway to reduce the Bucks’ lead to 64-62.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I’m just trying to bring energy to the team,” said Porzingis, who anticipated increasing attention from future opponents. “No one wants to get dunked on.”In the fourth, the Knicks tied the score three times but never led. The Bucks mounted a big run behind John Henson, who scored 7 straight points. He finished with a game-high 22.When the Knicks opened their season with a 25-point win over the Bucks on Oct. 28, they were facing a team that was absent two stars: Giannis Antetokounmpo, who was serving a one-game suspension stemming from last season’s playoffs, and Jabari Parker, who was in the final phase of his rehabilitation from knee surgery.AdvertisementOn Friday, Antetokounmpo scored 20 points, while Parker had 6 points in 17 minutes.The Knicks, meanwhile, received minimal production from their starting backcourt of Sasha Vujacic and Jose Calderon, who combined for 2 points.Help could be on the way. Arron Afflalo, who entered training camp as the team’s starting point guard, missed his sixth straight game to start the season with a hamstring injury. But he has made progress. While he would not rule out playing Sunday against the Los Angeles Lakers, he said that he was more likely to return Tuesday against the Toronto Raptors.“Ready to play,” Afflalo said. “I know the things that I bring will definitely help.”Foul trouble has plagued Porzingis, who entered the game having committed 22 fouls — the most in the league. Against the Bucks, he largely kept his hands to himself. Early in the game, he scored from the perimeter (18-foot jumper) and in the lane (double-clutch layup). A couple of weeks ago, Porzingis was bobbling entry passes from teammates. He has since grown more poised, more confident. Jason Kidd, the coach of the Bucks, had high praise for him.“He gets better every time he takes the floor,” Kidd said.The real issue for the Knicks early on was their defense. The Bucks made their first five shots, and the Knicks labored to gain any sort of traction. Antetokounmpo, with his extension-cord limbs, was a force. He glided to the basket for layups and blocked a 3-point attempt by the Knicks’ Derrick Williams.Behind Antetokounmpo, the Bucks took a 30-20 lead into the second quarter and continued to build on it. Milwaukee did much of its damage against the Knicks’ second unit. By the time the team’s starters returned to the game midway through the quarter, the Knicks were down by 14.They chipped away at the deficit. Anthony found a favorite target in Robin Lopez, who created space along the baseline. Porzingis, too, was solid. His effortless 3-pointer from the top of the key whittled the Bucks’ lead to 48-46 late in the half.“We’re right there, right in the game with everybody that we play,” Anthony said. “We just have to figure out a way to pull these games out.”A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Porzingis Tantalizes, but Knicks Lose Their Third in a Row.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.