

 David Waldstein
 

ON BASEBALL
NOV. 6, 2015
Even the most casual baseball fan who watched the postseason could easily see what most trained experts have long known. Daniel Murphy, the Mets’ second baseman, can be a terrific hitter, but he also has glaring limitations in the field.Whether one can overcome the other is a question that teams will consider if Murphy decides to become a free agent. The Mets on Friday formally extended a one-year, $15.8 million qualifying offer to Murphy, who has a week to accept or reject it.Murphy is not worth that kind of money, but for the Mets, it was a gamble worth taking. If Murphy rejects the offer and signs elsewhere, the Mets will receive a draft pick as compensation. Teams covet draft picks as the most cost-effective way to build a roster.Some players and agents oppose the qualifying-offer system because the draft pick compensation limits free agents’ appeal. In 2014, Stephen Drew rejected an offer from the Boston Red Sox, never got a suitable offer in free agency from teams unwilling to part with their draft picks and ended up re-signing with Boston in May. He was traded to the Yankees that July.AdvertisementMurphy must decide whether to reject the Mets’ offer, which is almost twice his current salary of $8 million, in the hope of getting a multiyear deal with the Mets or another team that would very likely be for more money over all, but almost certainly would have an average annual salary of less than $15.8 million.AdvertisementNo major league player has ever accepted a qualifying offer.If Murphy, who will be 31 next season, accepts the offer, he will remain a Met and be paid more than he earned the past two years combined. He could also negotiate a separate multiyear deal with the Mets.While the Mets’ infield defense was a glaring weakness in the World Series, the team will also look to upgrade its hitting, especially if Yoenis Cespedes and Murphy leave.General Manager Sandy Alderson indicated that he would not put emphasis on Murphy’s errors in Games 4 and 5 of the World Series, but Alderson also is unlikely to expect Murphy to hit as well as he did in the first two rounds of the playoffs, when he homered in a record six consecutive games.“When you play five games, one or two mistakes get magnified,” Alderson said. “Were we vulnerable to those types of mistakes? I think the answer to that is probably yes. But what we have to do in all cases is evaluate players, evaluate our team on a net-net basis, and realize we may be relying on certain strengths to offset certain weaknesses.”Since being selected by the Mets in the 13th round of the 2006 draft, Murphy has worked diligently to make himself a starting player, even if it was difficult at times to find a position. He has played at least 60 games at third base, second base, first base and left field.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But there was never a doubt he could hit. A career .288 batter, Murphy has a .331 on-base percentage and averaged 32 doubles a year since his rookie season in 2008 (228 doubles over all). Home runs were always seen as a bonus from Murphy, although he hit a career-high 14 this season. He had half that many in his first seven games of the postseason, a record streak in which he amassed 39 total bases.The Royals’ pitchers cooled him off in the World Series (he went just 3 for 20 for a .150 batting average, though he also had five walks) and his error in Game 4 allowed the Royals to tie the score.Advertisement“If you look at the World Series, we didn’t really hit,” Alderson said, “and that put pressure on the starting pitching, it put pressure on the bullpen, it put pressure on the defense.”If Murphy leaves, the Mets could use Dilson Herrera, who with Class AAA Las Vegas this year batted .327 with an .893 on base plus slugging percentage. Or they could pursue a free agent like Ben Zobrist without giving up a draft pick. For now, it remains unclear how much money the Mets will be willing to spend this off-season.Murphy was one of several players to receive qualifying offers. Alex Gordon of the Royals is expected to turn his down, especially after he declined a 2016 player option valued at $13.75 million. He is likely to get a multiyear deal elsewhere.The St. Louis Cardinals extended offers to pitcher John Lackey and to outfielder Jason Heyward. For Lackey, the offer is roughly 10 times his salary this season ($507,000), but after an excellent year, he is almost certain to get a lucrative multiyear deal, even at age 37.The Los Angeles Dodgers extended offers to Zack Greinke, who will be one of the elite starting pitchers available on the free-agent market; Brett Anderson, also a starter; and second baseman Howie Kendrick.David Price is another elite starter who will be a free agent, but the Toronto Blue Jays could not make the qualifying offer to Price by rule because they acquired him in a trade in July. The same goes for the Mets and Cespedes, and Zobrist and Johnny Cueto with the Royals.The Los Angeles Angels did not make an offer to third baseman David Freese, and the Washington Nationals did not make offers to outfielder Denard Span or pitcher Doug Fister. The Nationals did make a qualifying offer to starter Jordan Zimmermann.Other players receiving qualifying offers include Marco Estrada of the Blue Jays, Colby Rasmus of the Astros, Dexter Fowler of the Cubs, pitcher Hisashi Iwakuma of the Mariners and Jeff Samardzija of the Chicago White Sox.The Rangers extended the offer to pitcher Yovani Gallardo, and the Baltimore Orioles gave it to the catcher Matt Wieters, first baseman Chris Davis and pitcher Wei-Yin Chen.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Gamble $15.8 Million in Offer to Murphy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »