AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy Agence France-PresseDomestic violence charges against the Dallas Cowboys star defensive end Greg Hardy have been formally expunged, his lawyers confirmed on Friday as graphic photos depicting injuries he inflicted on a former girlfriend emerged. Hardy was found guilty by a North Carolina judge of assaulting his former girlfriend Nicole Holder in May 2014. Hardy appealed the verdict, and the case was dismissed when Holder later failed to cooperate with prosecutors; it was reported that she had reached a settlement. Hardy missed most of the 2014 season for the Carolina Panthers but was signed by the Cowboys in March on a lucrative one-year deal before being hit with a 10-game N.F.L. suspension, which was later reduced to four. Despite queasiness in some quarters about Hardy’s signing, the Cowboys have stood behind him, with the team’s owner, Jerry Jones, praising Hardy as a “leader.”Hardy had requested to have the assault claims formally wiped off his record in North Carolina in April, a request a judge granted this week. But Hardy faced renewed scrutiny Friday after the website Deadspin released dozens of police photographs detailing the injuries sustained by Holder in her assault.The police photos showed a series of large bruises across Holder’s back, shoulders and arms after the attack in May 2014.‘VERY POSITIVE’ ON PIERRE-PAUL The Giants will decide on Saturday whether to activate Jason Pierre-Paul. Coach Tom Coughlin said Friday that everything was positive at this point for Pierre-Paul, but that the medical staff wanted to look at him once more before clearing him to play at Tampa Bay on Sunday. Pierre-Paul, 26, has not played since losing his right index finger and injuring a couple of other fingers on the hand in a fireworks accident on July 4. A two-time Pro Bowl selection, he led the Giants with 12 ½ sacks last season and was expected to be the force in defensive coordinator Steve Spagnuolo’s new defense, a unit that has a league-low nine sacks in eight games.Pierre-Paul rejoined the team last week and has practiced every day, increasing his workload this week. “He’s done everything we’ve asked him to do, and we’re very positive about it,” Coughlin said. “But tomorrow we’ll just work out in the morning, we’ll tell you.” (AP)MANGOLD READY The veteran center Nick Mangold is set to return to his spot in the middle of the Jets’ offensive line. Mangold was listed as probable for the game Sunday against the Jacksonville Jaguars after fully participating in practice Friday. He sustained a neck injury in the Jets’ loss at New England on Oct. 25. Mangold missed only the fourth game of his 10-year career on Sunday at Oakland. Asked how he would characterize the neck, Mangold said: “It’s a neck. It attaches the head to the body.” (AP)NO FINE FOR COWBOY The N.F.L. will not fine Cowboys safety Jeff Heath for his hit on Sunday on Seahawks wide receiver Ricardo Lockette, who needed surgery to stabilize ligaments in his neck. Seattle defensive end Michael Bennett was fined $20,000 for his late hit on Dallas quarterback Matt Cassel in the same game.Cincinnati safety George Iloka was docked $23,152 for a helmet-to-helmet hit on Pittsburgh tight end Heath Miller; Oakland linebacker Ray-Ray Armstrong was fined $17,363 for his hit to the midsection of Jets quarterback Geno Smith; Arizona linebacker Kevin Minter was fined $8,681 for unnecessary roughness after his hit on a sliding Cleveland quarterback Josh McCown; and New Orleans cornerback Brandon Browner and Giants defensive tackle Johnathan Hankins were each docked $8,681 for hits on separate plays in the Saints’ 52-49 victory. (AP)Advertisement