AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartIn 2011 and 2012, the landscape of the N.F.L. appeared to be changing, with the game turning into one dominated by the young quarterbacks who had just entered the league. Cam Newton, Andy Dalton, Colin Kaepernick, Andrew Luck, Robert Griffin III, Russell Wilson, Ryan Tannehill and Nick Foles were each drafted in one of those two years. And in both seasons, about half of all passing yards came from players 28 or younger. But a lack of quality young quarterbacks entering the game in the surrounding years, combined with the continued ability of older players to play at a high level, has shifted the average age since then.Through eight weeks this season, over half of all passing yards have come from quarterbacks who are on the “wrong” side of 30. The same is true of passing touchdowns. Through eight weeks, 48 percent of all games were started by quarterbacks 30 or older, and 55 percent of all wins have come from those quarterbacks — and over a third of the wins have come from quarterbacks 33 or older. Peyton Manning and Tom Brady, the two oldest starting quarterbacks in the N.F.L., start for two of the four 7-0 teams. What is more surprising is that the four players with the most passing touchdowns through eight weeks were 34 or older: Brady, Carson Palmer, Philip Rivers and Eli Manning. And the seven leaders in passing yards through eight weeks were 30 or older: Rivers, Brady, Matt Ryan, Palmer, Drew Brees, Joe Flacco and Eli Manning. Of the 10 quarterbacks with at least four wins and at least 10 touchdown passes, only three — Dalton, Newton and Derek Carr — are still in their 20s. So while the 2011 and 2012 N.F.L. drafts brought some great young quarterback prospects into the league, those drafts were surrounded by a pair of unimpressive ones. The quarterbacks from the 2013 N.F.L. draft — highlighted by E. J. Manuel, Geno Smith and Mike Glennon — have all lost their starting jobs, while Sam Bradford is the only starting quarterback remaining from the 2010 draft. As a result, the 2015 season is one being dominated by older passers.Detroit’s CollapseThe Lions were one of the surprise teams in the N.F.L. in 2014, winning 11 games and making the playoffs in the first season under Coach Jim Caldwell. Detroit’s success was buoyed by its defense, a unit that ranked in the top three in points, yards, yards per carry and interceptions. But this season, the Lions have collapsed, to depths rarely reached by teams that made the playoffs in the prior season.Detroit is only the fourth team since 1970 to win 11 games in one season, then begin the next season with a 1-7 record (or worse). The first three? The 2010 Dallas Cowboys fired Coach Wade Phillips and replaced him with Jason Garrett after the 1-7 start. The Carolina Panthers made the Super Bowl in 2003, but injuries to Steve Smith, Stephen Davis and several offensive linemen torpedoed an encore, as Carolina lost its first game, won its second and lost its next six. And in 1993, the Houston Oilers were 12-4, but they collapsed in 1994, losing 14 of their first 15 games.Much has been made of the Lions’ offensive struggles this season, but the once stout defense has collapsed. The Lions have allowed a league-high 245 points and are struggling against both the run and the pass. Detroit allowed just 69.3 rushing yards per game last season, the best average in the N.F.L.; this year, the defense is allowing 133.8 yards on the ground per game, second worst in the league. Opposing passers have completed 73.1 percent of passes and produced a passer rating of 111.1; both figures rank in the bottom two in the N.F.L. And the Lions have allowed 40 plays of 20 yards or more this season, the second-highest total in the N.F.L., after allowing 54 such plays in all of 2014.The numbers are not much better on the other side of the ball. Detroit ranks last in rushing yards, with 557, and is tied with the Indianapolis Colts for the most interceptions thrown, with 12. In nearly every category, the Lions’ offense ranks below average, including a 25th-place ranking in yards per pass play.The biggest change in the off-season was the loss of defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh, who signed with Miami. That loss was compounded by the departures of C. J. Mosley and Nick Fairley, the team’s other top defensive tackles. But the drastic turnaround cannot be pinned on the loss of a few defensive linemen: The Lions are in the middle of one of the worst collapses in recent history.The team’s failures this year have prompted swift action from the organization. On Oct. 26, Detroit fired the offensive coordinator, Joe Lombardi; the offensive-line coach, Jeremiah Washburn; and the assistant offensive-line coach Terry Heffernan. On Thursday, the owner, Martha Ford, fired President Tom Lewand and General Manager Martin Mayhew. In 2014, the Lions won 11 games for the first time since 1991. But Ford is taking the view that 2014 — and not the ugly start this year — was the true outlier performance.Advertisement