
Extra Bases By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 3, 2015
The elevators behind the Vin Scully Press Box at Dodger Stadium are notoriously slow. Take them to the ground floor, though, on the clubhouse level, and they are worth the wait. The sparkling main foyer and the hallways around it are lined with awards: Gold Gloves, Silver Sluggers and the most prestigious annual honors given by the Baseball Writers’ Association of America.Those awards include the Cy Young, which has been won by eight different Dodgers pitchers, including three times in the last four years by Clayton Kershaw. The Dodgers’ other ace, Zack Greinke, is a former winner, too, capturing the American League Cy Young for the Kansas City Royals in 2009.Kershaw has 294 strikeouts this season. Greinke, through Friday, had a 1.68 earned run average. In almost any other season, either would be a safe bet to add another trophy to the cases at Dodger Stadium.But 2015 has not been like other seasons, and another Dodgers honor is no guarantee. The B.B.W.A.A. gives out four awards in each league — Most Valuable Player, Cy Young, Rookie of the Year and Manager of the Year — and most of the races seem unusually close.AdvertisementWriters for The New York Times do not vote, per company policy, but those who do can hardly go wrong with several choices. Parsing the reasons to choose Superstar A over Superstar B is where it gets tricky. Here’s how the most deserving candidates look from here, with all statistics through Friday.AdvertisementAMERICAN LEAGUE MOST VALUABLE PLAYER Josh Donaldson, Toronto.The Angels’ Mike Trout, almost certainly, will finish first or second for this award. If he does, as ESPN’s Jayson Stark noted recently, it would make Trout just the second A.L. player to do that four years in a row. The other was another favorite son of New Jersey: the late, great Yogi Berra, from 1953 to 1956.Berra won twice in that span, and Trout — last year’s winner — could, too. He has a career high in homers, with 41, and leads the A.L. in on-base plus slugging, at .987. He is a defensive marvel in center field and the engine of a contender.Donaldson, a third baseman, has comparable numbers in almost every category, and he, too, is a strong defender. A separator is runs batted in — and in Trout’s case, this is just a matter of bad luck.Both have been extraordinary hitters with runners in scoring position — Donaldson batting .356 in those situations, Trout .352. Donaldson has just had more opportunities: with 175 plate appearances with runners in scoring position, compared with 125 for Trout.That translates to more runs driven in, a statistic that is largely team-dependent. It is fitting, then, that Donaldson should benefit: The Blue Jays distinguished themselves all year with their run differential, and as the M.V.P., Donaldson represents them all.NATIONAL LEAGUE MOST VALUABLE PLAYER Bryce Harper, Washington.Can the M.V.P. come from a player on the most disappointing, dysfunctional team in recent memory? He sure can, when his season was as dominant as Harper’s.Harper, the 22-year-old right fielder, had a season for the ages. His OPS is 1.107, with 41 home runs. The steroid era might have numbed us to the rarity of a season like that, but consider that from 1970 through 1992, nobody had a season with those numbers.AdvertisementIn the last decade, the only man to do it was Albert Pujols, in 2006 and 2009. Forget all the noise about Harper’s swagger or supposed habit of not hustling. He was, by far, the best thing about the 2015 Nationals, and easily the best player in the league.AMERICAN LEAGUE CY YOUNG AWARD David Price, Detroit/Toronto.The race for A.L. Cy Young is not nearly as simple. As with the N.L. version, there is no wrong choice among the top contenders. In this case, that means Price, who split his season between the Tigers and the Blue Jays, and Houston’s Dallas Keuchel. Each has endorsed the other on Twitter.Keuchel was 15-0 at Minute Maid Park, making him the first pitcher to go undefeated at home with that many wins. He was ordinary on the road (5-8, 3.77 E.R.A.), but on measure he was terrific, roughly the same as Price in every category.In a strange way, Keuchel’s home dominance works against him. Price was outstanding at home and on the road, and after his trade to Toronto, he went 3-1 with a 1.71 E.R.A. against the Yankees, helping the Blue Jays win their division.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over all, Price was 18-5 with a 2.45 E.R.A. Keuchel was 20-8 with a 2.48 E.R.A. But his one blemish was a big one: He gave up nine runs in four and two-thirds innings at Texas on Sept. 16. The Astros could have reclaimed first place with a win, but they lost, 14-3, and have chased the Rangers ever since.NATIONAL LEAGUE CY YOUNG AWARD Clayton Kershaw, Dodgers.When he won his Cy Young Award in 2009, Zack Greinke named Fielding Independent Pitching as his favorite statistic. It measures a pitcher’s effectiveness, regardless of his fielders. “That’s pretty much how I pitch,” Greinke said on his conference call the night he won, “to try to keep my F.I.P. as low as possible.”Greinke had the best F.I.P. in the majors in 2009, at 2.33, and he set a career high in strikeouts, with 242. He was 25 years old that season, and some 1,200 innings later, he dominates differently. His earned run average this season is 1.68, but his F.I.P. is 2.75.Kershaw, his 27-year-old teammate, has the best F.I.P. in the majors, at 2.04, thanks largely to his 294 strikeouts, the most in the majors since Randy Johnson and Curt Schilling topped 300 in 2002. Kershaw also has a 2.16 E.R.A. and will finish the season with the most innings in the N.L.AdvertisementThe Cubs’ Jake Arrieta has more wins than both, with 22, and a 1.77 E.R.A. Arrieta was outstanding in the first half and historically good since then. His 0.75 E.R.A. after the All-Star break is the best in major league history, and his F.I.P. (2.40 before Friday’s games) also sparkles.All three of these pitchers deserve the award. But Kershaw — who spun a one-hit shutout with 13 strikeouts to clinch the N.L. West on Tuesday — has been the best example of durability and dominance, the two hallmarks of an ace.AMERICAN LEAGUE ROOKIE OF THE YEAR Carlos Correa, Astros.Houston’s Correa and the Cleveland Indians’ Francisco Lindor were born in Puerto Rico within a year of each other, drafted high in the first round and promoted to the majors this June, and they should be among the majors’ best shortstops for years to come.Lindor has the edge in batting average (.317 to .282), and his defensive metrics score higher. But Correa did not struggle for his first month, as Lindor did, and he has hit more home runs (22 to 12). And Minnesota’s designated hitter, Miguel Sano, has played about 20 fewer games than the shortstops but has better on-base and slugging percentages than either of them.There is really no wrong choice. But the feeling here is that Correa, who is comfortable as a leader and a middle-of-the-order force for a team that held a playoff spot almost all season, should be the winner.NATIONAL LEAGUE ROOKIE OF THE YEAR Kris Bryant, Chicago.Last season, the Mets’ Jacob deGrom made his debut on May 15 and needed only 22 starts to convince voters that he was the N.L.’s best rookie. This season, Noah Syndergaard arrived on May 12 and has had similar success.But while deGrom’s main competitor for Rookie of the Year was Cincinnati’s Billy Hamilton (who had lots of stolen bases but little else to make his case), Syndergaard faces a crowded field, including Matt Duffy and Chris Heston of the San Francisco Giants, Joc Pederson of the Dodgers and Pittsburgh’s Jung Ho Kang.But Chicago’s Bryant stands out above the others, hitting .277 with 26 homers, breaking a Cubs rookie record set by the Hall of Famer Billy Williams in 1961. Bryant made good on his preseason hype, and the Cubs can live with his strikeouts (196) as a trade-off for his production.AdvertisementAMERICAN LEAGUE MANAGER OF THE YEAR Jeff Banister, Texas.The three A.L. teams with the most losses last season were Minnesota (92), Houston (92) and Texas (95). All changed managers, and all had winning records this season. The Twins’ Paul Molitor and the Astros’ A. J. Hinch deserve a salute.But the Rangers’ Banister was closing in on a division title, and he did it despite losing his ace, Yu Darvish, to Tommy John surgery in spring training. It was an instant crisis for a first-time manager, and his guidance helped the Rangers stay respectable until late-July trades propelled them to October.“One man’s down, but that doesn’t mean anything — the guys we have in this room can still get it done,” the Rangers’ Prince Fielder said last week, distilling Banister’s message. “He said, ‘We’ll save a locker for him.’ But whenever your leadership brings that much confidence in you, it can only trickle down.”NATIONAL LEAGUE MANAGER OF THE YEAR Mike Matheny, St. Louis.When Adam Wainwright tore an Achilles’ tendon in April, Cardinals Manager Mike Matheny did not yet know the extent of the other obstacles his team would have to overcome. Injuries to several important hitters followed, and the N.L. Central would also include both wild-card teams, the hard-charging Pirates and Cubs.Under Matheny’s direction, the Cardinals responded by becoming the majors’ first 100-win team since 2011.Joe Maddon did what the Cubs hired him to do, easing the transition of talented rookies. Terry Collins steered the Mets to their first playoff berth in nine years, and Don Mattingly led the Dodgers to the playoffs for the third year in a row, something that franchise had never done. But Matheny’s award reflects the continual excellence of the Cardinals, who consistently groom young talent for Matheny to expertly deploy.A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page SP2 of the New York edition with the headline: Some Close Calls, but the Winners Are ...  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »