By FRED BIERMANNOV. 6, 2015
When Gary Danielson joined CBS and began covering Southeastern Conference football in 2006, SEC teams had won four national championships in the previous 20 years. Starting that year, SEC teams began a run of seven consecutive national titles, and the SEC game of the week became one of the most eagerly awaited broadcasts in college football.This week, Danielson and his broadcasting partner, Verne Lundquist, will travel to Tuscaloosa, Ala., to call Saturday night’s Louisiana State-Alabama game. In a 30-minute phone call, Danielson talked about his favorite memories from the Alabama-L.S.U. rivalry, the differing approaches of Coaches Nick Saban and Les Miles, and whether it was fair to make college football players wait several years to turn pro.Q. The year you began covering the SEC coincided with a remarkable run of success for the conference. Did you see that coming? A. I have to be honest: I did. At the time, I actually was quoted as saying that the SEC was about to burst out. I knew what was happening with the recruiting; I knew the commitment that the league was making financially with facilities, coaches’ salaries. I actually said that in the next five years, two or three SEC champions would be in the playoffs. And I was a little low.AdvertisementQ. L.S.U.-Alabama has become one of the biggest games of the season, but it was not always that way. How did it get to be so big? A. It’s intertwined with the fact that Nick Saban built the L.S.U. program. He left, and for the L.S.U. fans, who adored Nick Saban for building that program, for him to return to the one school in college football that they didn’t want to see him go to has put the intensity into this rivalry. And then the fact that early in Les Miles’s career he won the national championship with quote-unquote Nick’s players has always been a bit of a sticking point for the L.S.U. fans and a little bit for Les, I believe.AdvertisementThe pinnacle was the 2011 game and the rematch. The rematch changed college football. I think it brought about the playoff. I don’t think there’s any doubt. I think it was a little bit unfair — I said it at the time, I thought it was unfair to L.S.U. to have to beat Alabama twice that year. But Alabama was pretty darn good. As we went through it, 45 players from that game played in the N.F.L.Q. Should some of those players have been in the N.F.L. already?A. That is the one thing that separates the sport that I cover from any other sport — it’s the fact that because of the unique rules that our best athletes cannot turn pro. It’s the only sport like that. They have to stay in college, and these games get distorted by the Patrick Petersons, Amari Coopers and Percy Harvins that could have and should have been playing in the N.F.L.Q. Is that fair to the players? A. No, absolutely not. I’ve been doing this for 25 years. College basketball is surviving. Selfishly, it’s not the way it was, I get that, but everyone’s fine. I think it’s very unfair for these players who are good enough. College football could survive.Q. How would you compare the approaches of Saban and Miles?A. I could see myself playing for either one of these guys and enjoying it. I really love Nick Saban’s no-nonsense, clinical approach to coaching. When you go there, you know what you’re going to get. He’s building N.F.L. players in a program to win the championship. When you go with Les Miles, that’s like playing for your favorite uncle. He loves his players. His players love playing for him. They hug each other; they sing the school song.I don’t know if there are two better recruiters in all of college football. Nick is fantastic at explaining to potential N.F.L. players why it’s important to come to Alabama, and there’s nobody better than Les Miles at an in-home visit talking to parents about how he will take care of their sons. The contrast is unbelievable.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I will say this. Both don’t get enough credit for their left hand. We talk about the homespunness of Les. He’s a better X’s and O’s coach than he gets credit for. He kind of likes playing the Columbo role. He likes to sneak up on you. And Nick enjoys his team, and they have a little bit more fun than people give him credit for.AdvertisementQ. It seems as if you and Verne Lundquist have been paired forever, but that is not the case. How did you develop that rapport? A. We’re almost like a second marriage, where we don’t have to sleep in the same bedroom and still know we have a good marriage. We fit each other pretty darn well. And I think the contrast of how we do a game works. When I do a game, I try to be a doctor. I just X-and-O it like I was a quarterback when I played. Verne has got great bedside manner. It works. Verne loves the story lines and the history of it.Q. What do you see happening on Saturday night? A. The difference in this matchup has always been at quarterback. When Matt Flynn was playing well, L.S.U. could win. When Jarrett Lee had his good games, L.S.U. could win. When Greg McElroy and A. J. McCarron and Blake Sims were finishing games, then Alabama could win.It’s very interesting in this game. With Brandon Harris and Jake Coker, both teams started off the season trying to not let either quarterback lose them a game. Brandon Harris was a liability a year ago, and he was closely managed at the beginning of the season. Jake Coker was supposed to start a year ago, but he couldn’t beat out a fifth year quarterback who was an ex-running back and defensive back. He was considered a liability. But they’ve both improved.There’s two pictures in this matchup that will always stay with me. A. J. McCarron, who had been a national championship quarterback, led a two-minute drive to beat L.S.U., and he was crying after the game because he understood how huge this game was. And then Zach Mettenberger played a tremendous game against Alabama, and he went off the field like a warrior. He crawled off the field; he wouldn’t even let his teammates help him off. It just epitomized the warriorlike attitude in this game.This interview has been condensed and edited. A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Insider’s Take on SEC Showdown .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.