By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 3, 2015
NASHVILLE —  The speculation started even before the Nashville Predators lost in the Western Conference quarterfinals last season: that goaltender Pekka Rinne was working a bit too much during the regular season and would be worn out for the games that mattered most.The Predators talked about whether fatigue played a role in their ouster from the postseason, then dismissed the idea.So does Rinne.“I’m not too worried about the number,” said Rinne, who started 64 games last season and was still tied only for seventh among the workhorse goalies in the N.H.L. “Obviously, going deeper this season, you want to feel fresh and you want to be able to give everything you have and help this team. But in the past, I’ve played a lot of games, and I feel like that helps me, too, having that experience.”Balancing a goalie’s workload over an 82-game season is tricky. Earning a playoff berth usually means playing the best goalie as often as possible — even when the team will need him in the long postseason when he is the player who can steal a game and even a series in the chase for a Stanley Cup title.AdvertisementSo how much is too much?Nobody played more games in the N.H.L. last season than Braden Holtby, the Washington goalie. He was in net 73 games, and he also led the league by winning 91.1 percent of his team’s victories: 41 of the Capitals’ 45. Holtby said he simply felt better when he plays more.Advertisement“If you can just keep rolling, it makes things easier,” Holtby said. “But at the same time, it’s great if you’re not getting fatigued, mentally fatigued, with injuries or whatnot, so that just depends on the season. You can’t plan on those things. You just take it one day at a time and see where it ends up.”Holtby’s workload was on Washington Coach Barry Trotz’s mind when he ran into Martin Brodeur at the N.H.L. draft in June. Brodeur started 78 games for the Devils in 2006-07 and 77 games in three other seasons. Only Grant Fuhr started more games in a single season, with 79 for St. Louis in 1995-96. Brodeur won two of his three Stanley Cups in seasons he started 72 and 73 games.Trotz said Brodeur believed he got into a rhythm playing game after game, and off days hampered the run. Trotz saw how hard Brodeur worked on a day off in Nashville while coaching the Predators. Brodeur took part in the Devils’ morning skate and kept working, still on the ice when Trotz returned from lunch, stopping possibly 400 pucks compared with 25 he might have faced in the game.Brodeur suggested that most goalies could play 70 games a season, a number posted by many in the Hall of Fame.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I guess a body-in-motion-stays-in-motion type thing,” Trotz said.Patrick Roy always tried to talk coaches into letting him play more, only to be kept around 60 games a season (his career high was 68 in 1993-94). Now coaching Colorado, Roy is using that approach with Semyon Varlamov.Managing travel and the time change is a bigger issue for Western Conference teams, especially with goalies stuck on planes for hours. Roy left Varlamov home for a preseason game at Calgary, and he noted the proximity for Brodeur and the Devils to teams like the Rangers, the Flyers and the Islanders.“It’s the traveling you have to look at,” Roy said. “Varly will tell us. We’ll see. We’ll manage that.”AdvertisementBuffalo’s new coach, Dan Bylsma, wanted Marc-Andre Fleury playing no more than 65 games when he coached the Pittsburgh Penguins. Out of the league last season, Bylsma said he watched closely as goalies played 30 games or more in a row with games stacking up to 70 for others. Jonathan Quick started 71 of his 72 games as Los Angeles missed the playoffs, while Tuuka Rask started 67 of his 70 games for Boston, which also missed the postseason.“I don’t know what the number is,” Bylsma said. “And maybe there’s different numbers for different goalies, and maybe there’s different concerns. But we did look at it, and I was pretty closely watching some of the scenarios last year to see what happened. You see some of those goalies when they went into the playoffs.”After playing in 73 games, Holtby was in net for 13 of 14 playoff games as Washington lost in the second round.Devan Dubnyk set the standard last season, playing 38 straight games after Minnesota acquired him from Arizona in January.Dubnyk started 39 of 40 games over all, with a 1.78 goals-against average, and the Wild went 27-9-2 with him in net. Dubnyk said he felt good during that stretch, needing only practices off between games to recuperate. Dubnyk then played every playoff game as the Wild beat St. Louis before being swept by Chicago.The rush of stopping pucks under the lights certainly seems to helps a goalie forget the sore hips and knees.“It’s nothing that every single guy who plays in the league doesn’t deal with,” Dubnyk said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.