AdvertisementSupported byOn College FootballBy Marc TracyTUSCALOOSA, Ala. — Last November, an Alabama team ranked fourth by the College Football Playoff selection committee hosted an undefeated Southeastern Conference rival ranked higher and, foreseeably, won.Why should this year be any different?In 2014, the opponent was Mississippi State, which was on one of the best runs in its history. On Saturday, it was Louisiana State, a more familiar victim, that was overwhelmed by the Crimson Tide.With a ferocious defense that held the Tigers sophomore Leonard Fournette, the Heisman Trophy front-runner, to 31 yards on 19 carries, No. 7 Alabama (8-1, 5-1 SEC) ran away with the game in the second half, winning by 30-16 and dropping No. 2 L.S.U., which Coach Les Miles had guided to its best start since 2011, to 7-1 over all and 4-1 in the conference.“It was really a well-played game by our team,” Alabama Coach Nick Saban said. Coming from a well-documented perfectionist, that was high praise.L.S.U. had not given up so many points all season, nor had it scored so few.The star of the game was, as usual, Alabama’s defensive front, where Saban’s recruiting prowess has placed players with unfair combinations of speed and size, making the Tide look like the 33rd N.F.L. franchise. They harassed L.S.U quarterback Brandon Harris, who finished 6 of 19 passing for 128 yards, and the Alabama senior linebacker Dillon Lee had an interception on the second half’s opening drive, draining the Tigers of what was left of their offensive mojo.In the college football playoff rankings, many analysts focus on the teams. That’s the wrong way to think about the playoff picture.Alabama running back Derrick Henry rushed for 210 yards on 38 carries and scored three touchdowns. He has, rightfully, been overshadowed this season by Fournette, but his 1,044 rushing yards this season ranked 10th in the Football Bowl Subdivision entering Saturday.“I can’t say enough about Derrick Henry,” said Saban, whose only concern appeared to be how much was asked of Henry as Alabama looked to run out the clock late in the game.The senior linebacker Reggie Ragland said of Henry: “He ran the ball. That’s what grown men do.”Alabama’s special teams were close to perfect. Adam Griffith, the kicker of perhaps the most infamous field-goal attempt in football history (widely known as the kick six), was 3 for 3 on field-goal attempts this time, including a 55-yarder near the end of the first half that gave Alabama a lead it never surrendered. Twice the L.S.U. punt returner Donte Jackson was halted within 3 yards of his catch as the crowd exulted.The fans probably had certain expectations for Saturday night’s game. As they strolled on the elegant brick walkway on each side of the field at Bryant-Denny Stadium before the game, watching the teams warm up, they resembled theatergoers peeking into the orchestra pit before the curtain is drawn.Every L.S.U.-Alabama game of the Miles-Saban era has been a defense-dominated slugfest. In 2011, when top-ranked L.S.U. came here to play second-ranked Alabama, L.S.U. won by 9-6. This ninth installment — or 10th, counting the national championship game in January 2012 — began in just such a fashion. At the end of the first quarter, the score was 0-0, and the teams had combined for 134 yards. Fournette had rushed for 5 yards on five carries, which does not calculate to a stellar average. At one point, the Tigers avoided a safety only because they had committed a delay-of-game penalty.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.Afterward, Henry referred to the game as a “15-round fight.”The game was close for a while, with Harris cutting into Alabama’s 10-0 lead in the second quarter by finding Travin Dural in single coverage with a perfectly placed 40-yard pass. At halftime, Alabama led by just 13-10.Even in the first half, though, Alabama appeared to have found a rhythm on offense. Last season — with the help of Lane Kiffin, then newly installed as offensive coordinator, and wide receiver Amari Cooper, a Heisman finalist — Alabama at times resembled one of those Big 12 teams that think nothing of throwing several dozen times a game. But Cooper plays for the Oakland Raiders now, and Saturday’s game plan was more traditional: a steady diet of over-the-tackle runs and screen passes. Quarterback Jacob Coker finished 18 of 24 passing for 184 yards, with no touchdowns but also no interceptions.Saban is now 7-3 against Miles and has won five of their last five matchups, dating to the 2011-12 national title game.Alabama is in a solid position to compete for its fourth national championship of the Saban era. The win over the Tigers, combined with Mississippi’s 53-52 overtime loss to visiting Arkansas (after the Razorbacks converted on a fourth-and-25, a play that included a 10-yard backward lateral), means that the Tide control their destiny in the SEC West.Still to come are two competitive road games — at Mississippi State (20th in the College Football Playoff rankings) and Auburn — before a conference championship game that will feature Florida, which looked vulnerable on Saturday even as it clinched its division by holding off Vanderbilt at home, 9-7.Saban sounded a cautious note. “Every team we play in the SEC West could beat us if we don’t play well,” he said.L.S.U. can brush the dirt off, run the table the remainder of its season and finish 10-1. (Its first scheduled game, against lower-tier McNeese State, was canceled because of the weather.) It would then have a decent Playoff case.As in 2011, it is possible that there is no more than one team in college football better than the Tigers — and that they just happened to play that team Saturday night.With the game all but over, the Tigers still tried to advance the ball down the field. On one third-and-10, Harris dropped back, narrowly escaped a sack and tossed what looked like a well-designed screen — to his left tackle. L.S.U. punted.The Tigers enjoyed good field position on their next drive thanks to a fumble by Henry, and an 18-yard rush by Fournette brought the Tigers close. A questionable defensive pass interference call brought them closer. It took Fournette two tries to punch it in with 9 minutes 18 seconds left. Alabama blocked the extra-point attempt and then ran out the clock.Advertisement