By INFORMATION from THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 8, 2015
KE’SHAWN VAUGHN AND JOSH FERGUSON Illinois entered its game at Purdue ranked last in the Big Ten in rushing, averaging 114.6 yards a game and only 67.2 yards during its first four conference games.But the Illini solved that problem for at least one week, getting 16 carries for 180 rushing yards and two touchdowns from Vaughn, a freshman; 12 carries for 133 yards from Ferguson, a senior in his first game back from injury; and a total of 382 yards on the ground in a dominating 48-14 victory over the Boilermakers.LUKE FALK The Washington State sophomore threw for 497 yards and five touchdowns as the host Cougars topped Arizona State, 38-24, to become eligible for a bowl game for the second time in Coach Mike Leach’s four years with the program. Falk completed 36 of 55 passes, with one interception.KYLE BOLIN A third-string quarterback at Louisville, Bolin threw for a season-high 362 yards and three touchdowns as the host Cardinals routed Syracuse, 41-17, for their third straight victory.AdvertisementSTACY COLEY The Miami junior wide receiver finished with 132 yards, including a 67-yard score, as the host Hurricanes became bowl-eligible by topping Virginia, 27-21.News and NotesA STRIKE AT MISSOURI Black players at Missouri, including the team’s starting running back, Russell Hansbrough, announced on Twitter that they would not participate in team activities until the university president was removed from office.AdvertisementThe move aligns the team with campus groups that have been protesting the way Tim Wolfe, the university president, has dealt with issues of racial harassment during the school year. Jonathan Butler, a black graduate student, is in the sixth day of a hunger strike to call attention to the issue.The statement from the players included a photograph of 32 black men, including Butler. The message read, in part, “The athletes of color on the University of Missouri football team truly believe ‘Injustice Anywhere is a threat to Justice Everywhere.’ ”Missouri last played Thursday night at home, losing to Mississippi State to fall to 4-5. The Tigers have three more games scheduled.SIGN IS CONDEMNED Alabama denounced a fan sign targeting Louisiana State that used Hurricane Katrina to mock the Tigers.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pictures of the sign began circulating on social media on Friday ahead of a game between the No. 7 Crimson Tide and the No. 4 Tigers in Tuscaloosa, Ala. The sign, which was reportedly displayed at an off-campus apartment complex, read, “Finish What Katrina Started,” and included the script “A” Alabama logo.Alabama said on the university’s Twitter account that it was “appalled that anyone would display a banner with such an inappropriate and offensive statement.” The university said the banner had been removed.AdvertisementGRIEF AT MISSISSIPPI STATE The Bulldogs were mourning after a crash killed a Mississippi State player and his father, a former Bulldogs linebacker.Keith Joseph Jr. and Keith Joseph Sr. were driving in a pickup Friday afternoon, heading to a game at Pascagoula High School in Mississippi, where both played.Joseph, 18, was redshirting this season as a freshman defensive lineman. The elder Joseph, 44, played for Mississippi State from 1989 to 1992 and is ranked 10th in team history in sacks.The No. 24 Bulldogs did not play this weekend.Information from The Associated PressA version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page SP5 of the New York edition with the headline: The Day’s Best.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.