By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 3, 2015
SALT LAKE CITY —  Winning a national championship puts a coach in an exclusive group. Winning multiple titles moves a coach into an entirely different realm.Ten coaches have won multiple national championships since 1970. Nine of them never worked on a coaching staff as anything less than a head coach afterward, according to the statistics agency Stats.The 10th is Dennis Erickson — who is quietly toiling in relative obscurity as the running backs coach for No. 10 Utah.Some on the outside wonder why Erickson, 68, would work as a position coach at a growing program, given his credentials: He won two titles at Miami; is the only person named Pac-10 coach of the year at three universities; and he led two N.F.L. teams.AdvertisementBut he is perfectly content.“I’m not big on titles or anything like that,” Erickson said. “I don’t have an ego, basically. I never got into the game or played the game or coached to win a national championship.”He added: “My goal when I was in college was to be a high school coach, and that’s where I started. I could have been happy doing that all my life, because I like being around the players.”Erickson’s career seemed to be at an end after being fired from Arizona State in 2011. He was named conference coach of the year after going 10-3 in 2007, but that was his lone winning season with the Sun Devils. Erickson used the year after his dismissal to travel and play golf, but that got old in, he said, “probably about two days.” So when Utah Coach Kyle Whittingham called, Erickson was ready.The two had formed a relationship as fellow Pac-12 coaches, but Erickson did not make his desire to return known.“I just thought, you know what, I’m going to give Dennis a call and take his temperature and feel it out and see what his mind-set would be to get back in,” Whittingham said.AdvertisementErickson certainly was interested. And Utah is not an odd location for Erickson. He is known for his time in Miami but is a native of Seattle who coached at Montana State, Idaho, Wyoming, Washington State and Oregon State. Erickson was familiar with this part of the country and the league.His original title was co-offensive coordinator along with Brian Johnson, also in charge of running backs. Both were demoted to position coaches after one season, when Dave Christensen was named offensive coordinator.Again, it goes back to ego with Erickson — or the lack thereof. He just wanted to coach and be a mentor to young coaches.Erickson’s résumé speaks for itself, but he was a relative unknown when he replaced Jimmy Johnson at Miami. He had no ties to the area, and people wondered how an outsider would recruit in Miami and in the Deep South. Kevin Patrick, a former Hurricane who is now the defensive line coach for North Texas, said humility was what made Erickson successful.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Miami musician Luther Campbell remembered looking for a young act he was managing named No Good But So Good during Hurricane Andrew in 1992. Campbell eventually found them living with Erickson — they went to the same school as Erickson’s son.“Coach Erickson will have a conversation with a homeless person,” Campbell said. “He’s just a beautiful person.”Gino Torretta, who won the Heisman Trophy as the Hurricanes’ quarterback in 1992, said that Erickson had the self-confidence to implement his offensive system at Miami but also accepted input from players who had been successful under Jimmy Johnson. He even kept Tommy Tuberville as defensive coordinator.The former Florida State coach Bobby Bowden said he was not surprised Erickson is still going.“It’s in his blood,” Bowden said. “And as you get older, I think there’s a tendency to kind of fall back and relax and enjoy life. Do something that you love to do. He’s kind of getting up there where you can look back and enjoy what you did and finish up by not having all the pressure you did when you were younger.”Erickson said he feels healthy and works out regularly, but another head coaching position is out of the question.Advertisement“Been there, done that,” Erickson said. “I’ve been at the top of the mountain and been at the bottom of the mountain. Long as I have energy and as long as I can do some good things for the University of Utah, I plan on coaching. Who knows? We’ll see what happens.”A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Coach With Two Titles Happily Takes a Back Seat.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.