By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 7, 2015
Antti Raanta shut out the Arizona Coyotes for all but the final five seconds on Saturday night, and the Rangers won their fifth in a row with a 4-1 victory in Glendale, Ariz.Rantaa, the backup to the starter, Henrik Lundqvist, had 39 saves. He has allowed two goals in his three games and has the Rangers’ only shutout of the season.Jesper Fast, J. T. Miller, Chris Kreider and Kevin Hayes scored for the Rangers.SABRES 3, CANUCKS 2 Rasmus Ristolainen scored two goals, including the winner with 16.8 seconds left, leading Buffalo to a home victory over Vancouver.Canucks goaltender Ryan Miller played his first game back in Buffalo since being traded in 2014 after more than 11 seasons with the Sabres.AdvertisementKINGS 4, PANTHERS 1 Drew Doughty and Anze Kopitar scored 55 seconds apart late in the second period to lead host Los Angeles over Florida.AdvertisementHURRICANES 3, SENATORS 2 Jordan Staal scored 2 minutes 51 seconds into overtime to give Carolina a victory over visiting Ottawa.With the goalie pulled for a sixth attacker, the Hurricanes tied it when Jeff Skinner scored with just 3.3 seconds remaining in regulation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.FLYERS 3, JETS 0 Michal Neuvirth made 28 saves, Brayden Schenn and Wayne Simmonds scored on power plays, and Philadelphia won at Winnipeg to end a six-game losing streak.CANADIENS 4, BRUINS 2 David Desharnais scored on a power play with 1:08 left in regulation to lift Montreal at home over Boston. Max Pacioretty added an empty-netter.CAPITALS 3, MAPLE LEAFS 2 Alex Ovechkin had a goal in regulation and scored in the fourth round of the shootout to lift Washington to a victory over visiting Toronto.Nicklas Backstrom tied it with less than a second left in regulation for the Capitals.BLUES 4, PREDATORS 0 Jake Allen made 45 saves, and St. Louis scored three times in the third period to win at Nashville.WILD 1, LIGHTNING 0 Devan Dubnyk made 31 saves, and Minnesota beat visiting Tampa Bay. Jared Spurgeon scored the lone goal for Minnesota.A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Rangers Win Fifth Straight as Raanta Stifles Coyotes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.