AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated Press“Next man up” is the mantra for using players who are second-stringers or lower on N.F.L. Week 4 rosters. But when that next man up is standing behind center and running the offense, it can lead to upheaval everywhere.Don’t kid yourself into believing that many backup quarterbacks can step in and perform as well as the starters. There aren’t 32 quality No. 1 quarterbacks in the league. In most cases, the backup is a veteran who has flopped elsewhere or a youngster waiting his turn to show what he can — and can’t — do.Already this season, seven teams have used more than one quarterback in key parts of games. Most of them — Pittsburgh, New Orleans, Cleveland, Dallas, Oakland and Chicago — were because the starter got hurt. The other, Houston, was a coaching decision when Brian Hoyer was benched for Ryan Mallett.As the season progresses, don’t be surprised if the Jets, the Bills and the Redskins look elsewhere at the position. Plus, it seems inevitable that other quarterbacks will join an injured list that already includes Drew Brees, Tony Romo and Ben Roethlisberger.Whenever and wherever it occurs, the switch is as disruptive as nearly anything that can happen on a football team.“It has an effect for everyone: the head coach, the offensive and defensive coordinators, the guys on the offensive line, even the defensive line,” said Jim Miller, who started 27 games in a six-year professional career for the Steelers and the Bears, and also spent time with the Patriots.“Certainly for the receivers and the running backs,” Miller said. “They’ve become used to a certain way the starting quarterback does things, and now someone else is in there and rarely does he do things the same.”Miller, now an analyst for SiriusXM NFL Radio, pointed to instances last Sunday as proof that upheaval in inevitable.“The problem that weekend, two specifically, were with Brandon Weeden in Dallas and, from my standpoint, Jimmy Clausen in the Bears game at Seattle,” he said. “The Bears went into the game down in manpower, with serious injuries at key positions. So already they are kind of up against it. Then Clausen has to play, on the road, managing a very difficult environment. They started the game with a delay call. The quarterback has to be able to handle the environment, and for some of these backups, they haven’t been in such an environment.“For Weeden, they started well and he passed a lot more than Clausen, but he was in the confines of home. But in the second half, he wasn’t able to generate much of anything.”Coaches will scale down the offense, sometimes significantly; Chicago did, Dallas and New Orleans not so much.Sometimes, a change in personnel necessitates altering schemes. Johnny Manziel in Cleveland is not the same kind of quarterback as Josh McCown. The Same with Michael Vick and Roethlisberger in Pittsburgh.“Probably the play-calling becomes the most difficult, trying to figure out what works best in each situation,” Miller said. “The backup hasn’t had the reps, and the coaches and coordinator are trying to get that player to feel comfortable and get the most out of him.“Your job is to really man the ship and keep everything under control. You want to be emulating what the starter was doing — snap count, structure. How the play should be run, how the O.C. wants the plays to be run.“Granted, you’re going to be a different kind of leader. Saying and doing it are two different things.”Advertisement