
On Pro Basketball By                     
 HARVEY ARATON
 
NOV. 7, 2015
Do Kobe Bryant a favor and spare him the pregame testimonials, the gold-plated plaques, the sporty cars and easy chairs. Just deposit his check, give him the ball and get in his way.Or so he says.“The biggest sign of respect to me would be to approach it just like it was any other game and try to kick our butts just like it was any other game,” he said. “Those are the things I hold extremely dear.”Dear Lord, will the Nets ever win a game? Before a loss in Milwaukee on Saturday night, their season record had fallen to a New Jersey throwback 0-6 when they were beaten by Bryant and his previously winless Los Angeles Lakers, 104-98, Friday night at Barclays Center, in Game 1 of his purported farewell swing through New York.Sunday’s stop at Madison Square Garden promises to be more sentimental than the one in Brooklyn, despite the Nets’ alleged fan base’s embracing Bryant with cheers and chants, or what he — more accustomed to less tender shows of respect — called “an uncomfortable hug.”AdvertisementLike Michael Jordan, another coldhearted assassin and Bryant’s spiritual ancestor, he has never been the cuddliest of roadshow superstars. But the Knicks are steered by Phil Jackson and coached by Derek Fisher, both of whom he is emotionally tethered to by five Lakers titles. And unlike in Brooklyn, where the Nets have played only three full seasons, Bryant has a long history in Midtown Manhattan, where he broke the Garden scoring record in February 2009 with a 61-point explosion against the Knicks.Carmelo Anthony reclaimed it by one for the home side five years later. With both shot-happy warriors experiencing a lack of leg propulsion because of injuries or age or both, a high-voltage Kobe-versus-Melo duel is unlikely, and not what their coaches, rebuilding with youth, would prefer.Given Bryant’s and Anthony’s competitive conceit, it wouldn’t be shocking if they tested the waters early to determine if it’s possible.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What Bryant insisted we would not see around the country during what he has said, though not sworn, would be his 20th and last season is a ceremonial fuss. Friday, a Lakers spokesman said there had been no discussions with opposing teams, especially those in the Eastern Conference that he only visits once.Bryant probably could live with a video tribute. As for gifts, he said, “Don’t do that.”With Bryant, the self-fashioned Heir Jordan, or No. 23 plus one, there has always been one overriding question: What would Michael have done? So it was no surprise that, after scoring 18 points on 5-for-16 shooting, he conjured up a memory of Jordan’s final All-Star appearance in 2003, a baton-passing moment.Advertisement“He and I were catching up in the locker room and he says, ‘You know, I just want you to approach it like any other game, compete against me just like it’s any other game,’ ” Bryant said. “I said, ‘Michael, what the hell about me made you think I was going to approach this any differently?’ ”His voice rose to the loudest it got during interviews both before and after the game when he spoke in near-funereal tones. Was this his way of lending gravitas to the first of many such occasions? Bryant’s stated preference for nothing more than a competitive salute aside, his career-long love of stage and spotlight make it difficult to believe that he doesn’t dream of finishing with a flourish.The chances of him getting what he most wants — a sixth championship, equaling Jordan’s haul with the Bulls in Chicago — are less than remote. But it has become a little too fashionable for people to blame Bryant for his own predicament of finishing with an N.B.A. bottom-feeder because he signed a salary cap-clogging $48.5 million, two-year extension in November 2013.The Lakers weren’t forced at gunpoint to make the offer. They did it at least as much to mollify their Kobe-struck fan base as to reward Bryant for meritorious service. And when they did have ample cap room to sign a premier free agent last summer, they whiffed, as Jackson did in New York.Hollywood no doubt remains a draw for stars on the move, but the franchise will have more curb appeal once Bryant’s baggage is no longer cluttering the living room. On his way out, the Lakers are hoping he will share the secrets of his ultracompetitive character — if not his propensity for making teammates invisible — with their youthful core of Julius Randle, Jordan Clarkson and D’Angelo Russell.All three played well against the Nets, and with Clarkson and Russell starting in the backcourt, it was strange seeing Bryant operate at small forward, setting up in a corner, not as much at the point of attack. Along with the legs, that probably helps explain the 32-percent early-season shooting that recently evoked a self-evaluation as the league’s 200th best player.“I was being facetious,” he said after starting slowly but making a few trademark shots in the second half. “I really don’t think that.”He believes he’ll be better. He’s probably right. But while Bryant will dominate the headlines, he can no longer be the franchise focus the way Anthony is in New York, even as attention inevitably shifts to Kristaps Porzingis.AdvertisementBryant does have his full hand of unquestioned greatness, a ring for each finger, even if there will be no sixth, no iconic Jordan-in-Utah N.B.A. finals closure next June.The 38-year-old Jordan resurfaced in Washington three years after the Bulls’ last title run, but Bryant, 37, dismissed Jackson’s recent assertion that he might eventually play elsewhere, setting off speculation of his joining Anthony in New York.“I’ve said it so many times,” he said. “I’m here. I’m a Laker for life. I’m not playing anywhere else, no matter what.”Twenty years, five titles, with a $48.5 million gift contract thrown in. Uncomfortable hugs aside, what else does he need?A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page SP3 of the New York edition with the headline: Hoping to Finish With a Flourish That Isn’t Orchestrated.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »