AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressChelsea, the Premier League defending champion, returned to crisis Saturday as the team lost, 1-0, at Stoke, with its manager, José Mourinho, absent.Chelsea’s defeat, its third straight in the league and its seventh in 12 matches, left the team 16th in the standings, just 3 points above the previously unthinkable relegation zone.Mourinho missed the game after receiving a stadium ban for his behavior toward match officials in a 2-1 defeat at West Ham in October.Elsewhere, Manchester United ended its Premier League scoring drought with a 2-0 win over visiting West Bromwich Albion, and Leicester striker Jamie Vardy scored for the ninth straight league match, a 2-1 home victory over Watford.Both United and West Brom labored in the first half, and it was not until early in the second that Jesse Lingard broke the deadlock with his first goal in United colors.United doubled its lead in second-half stoppage time from the penalty spot after Anthony Martial was felled by Gareth McAuley. McAuley was dealt a straight red card, and Juan Mata converted the kick.United had not scored in a league game since a 3-0 win at Everton on Oct. 17. Vardy, of Leicester, netted his 12th goal of the season from the penalty spot to double his team’s lead. He needs to score in one more game to equal Ruud Van Nistelrooy’s 12-year-old record of 10 straight games with a goal. CELTA ROUTED AT HOME Paco Alcácer and Dani Parejo each scored two goals to lead Valencia to a commanding 5-1 victory at Celta Vigo in the Spanish league.Augusto Fernandez tied the score for Celta in the 24th minute, but Parejo dipped a free kick over the wall and into the corner of the net just before halftime to restore Valencia’s advantage.Alcácer added to the lead seconds after the restart and set up Parejo to score again in the 64th.Parejo got a third assist when Shkodran Mustafi headed home his cross in the 79th.Celta remained 3 points behind first-place Real Madrid.ANOTHER RECORD FOR BAYERN Bayern Munich got back to winning in the Bundesliga with a 4-0 home rout of Stuttgart. Bayern needed 11 minutes to break the deadlock on a counterattack when Arjen Robben appeared to score with his stomach.Thomas Müller crossed for Douglas Costa seven minutes later and for Robert Lewandowski’s 14th league goal of the season in the 37th. Müller switched from provider to finisher three minutes later.Bayern’s 34 points from 12 games is a Bundesliga record.Andre Schubert’s six-game winning start in charge of Borussia Mönchengladbach ended with a bad-tempered 0-0 draw with visiting Ingolstadt. The referee, Marco Fritz, issued nine yellow cards.IBRAHIMOVIC STRIKES AGAIN Zlatan Ibrahimovic scored twice as Paris St.-Germain crushed visiting Toulouse, 5-0, to move provisionally to 13 points ahead of Lyon at the top of the French league.P.S.G. took only six minutes to find the net as the winger Ángel Di María scored.Ibrahimovic, P.S.G.’s leading career scorer, made it 2-0 after 18 minutes and now has nine goals in eight French league games. The winger Lucas scored midway through the second half, Ibrahimovic got his second goal in the 75th, and Ezequiel Lavezzi finished off the rout.16-YEAR-OLD LEADS MILAN A.C. Milan’s winning streak was ended by visiting Atalanta in a 0-0 draw in Serie A, although the 16-year-old goalkeeper Gianluigi Donnarumma was crucial to the Rossoneri’s earning a point.Milan, which had won its previous three matches, moved provisionally to fifth as Donnarumma pulled off stunning saves in quick succession about an hour in. It was the fourth start for Milan for Donnarumma, the youngest goalkeeper to start a Serie A match at 16 years 8 months 6 days. He has let in just two goals.Advertisement