AdvertisementSupported byBy Grant GlicksonBAY SHORE, N.Y. — On a recent Sunday on Long Island, Joe Gaeta sprinted nearly 10 miles over the course of a four-and-a-half-hour workday. Wearing an exercise tracking device, Gaeta put in the kind of day that has become rather routine for him over the last quarter-century: He officiated four Police Athletic League youth football games, jogging across the gridiron more than three dozen times to back up a fellow official’s call. He dashed 100 yards on three occasions to follow long scoring plays and sprinted to the end zone a dozen other times to chase touchdown jaunts of more than 40 yards. What is unusual about Gaeta is that he is 88 years old.“People look at me as if I’m some kind of miracle,” said Gaeta, sipping a Gatorade between games. “They tell me that I set a positive example and that I inspire them.”Gaeta, who officiates an average of eight games a week during football season, is also a senior aide in charge of physical activities at five senior centers in Islip, N.Y. In his spare time, he works out at a gym three days a week and helps maintain his stamina by jogging at least a mile every day except Sunday.“I’m 55 years old, and I can’t run the field the way Gaeta does,” said Al Procida, a P.A.L. representative for Bay Shore football. “And he lets me know it, too.”John Russell, a college official for almost 20 years who worked in three P.A.L. games with Gaeta last month, said he was in awe of him. “It’s amazing that he’s 88 and still sharp as a whip,” Russell said. “Knowing that my father is 90 and my mother is 87, and then I look at him, running up and down the field, it makes no sense.”It makes plenty of sense to Gaeta, who grew up in Astoria, Queens, playing baseball with Whitey Ford, the Hall of Fame Yankees pitcher. Gaeta has remained active on the playing field by combining his stringent exercise regimen with a diet that includes plenty of fish, fruit and vegetables and little red meat. He is 5 feet 6 inches tall and still weighs 145 pounds, his fighting weight from his Navy days during World War II.“I have 100 guys who work for me, and not everyone runs up and down the field,” said Rich Platia, the 52-year-old director of officials for P.A.L. in Suffolk County. “Joe gives 120 percent effort in every game. You always see him chasing the 7-year-olds because they are running 60-yard plays every play. Joe is right behind them. He’s not going to miss a down. He’s looking to work with a partner who runs like him. He hustles. He calls the game like I like to call it.”Gaeta, a long-retired bricklayer, said he was most proud of helping other seniors stay active. Gaeta, who has worked at senior centers for the last 16 years, runs a Sit and Get Fit program that includes exercise routines and an aerobic swimming class. He also has his fellow seniors feeling younger by encouraging them to play Wii sports video games and compete in billiards and bocce tournaments. He accompanies them on long walks, either at one of the senior centers or at a Long Island mall.“I’m amazed what Joe Gaeta can do,” said Shelly Jeter, a neighborhood aide who knows Gaeta through one of the senior centers, in Oakdale, N.Y. “He just has this aura about him that attracts people, and they want to be involved in what he’s doing. He’s a great motivator because he shows that just because you are a senior citizen, you don’t have to stop doing physical activities. “He breaks the mold when it comes to be able to get up every day and do what he does.” According to Platia, Gaeta is nine years older than the next-oldest active P.A.L. football official in Suffolk County. Gaeta also officiates junior high school, junior varsity and occasional varsity games for Section XI, which encompasses all public school games in Suffolk County. Mickey Kane, president of the Suffolk County Football Officials Association, said he believed Gaeta was also the oldest in Section XI. Thoughts of putting his whistle in storage or retiring from his work with seniors are nowhere to be found in Gaeta’s playbook. “A lot of people ask me when I am going to pack it in,” he said. “My answer is that as long as I can keep up with a wide receiver and am at the goal line before he gets there, I will never retire. I’m 88 years old, and I’m still in the kind of shape that keeps me right there with these younger players.”Advertisement