By ZACH SCHONBRUNNOV. 7, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  In Australia, Brad Wing explained recently, kickers are a big deal. They are not called kickers; they are called scorers. In Australian rules football, the nation’s most popular sport, the men who kick the ball typically play full-forward, a focal position, where they call the plays, direct the offense and become sort of like, well, a quarterback.“Kids there don’t grow up wanting to be Peyton Manning or Eli Manning,” Wing said. “They grow up wanting to kick.”This is to say that Wing, who was raised in Melbourne, is used to being the center of attention, and in his two years at Louisiana State and two years in the N.F.L., he has remained committed to that. He was acquired by the Giants in September to replace punter Steve Weatherford, a loquacious showman in his own right, whose appearances on the covers of men’s fitness magazines broke some barriers for specialists, who are often overlooked and underestimated. Wing had no problem filling his shoes in that regard.Suddenly it seems as if everyone in the Giants’ organization has an impression of an Australian accent. Receiver Odell Beckham Jr., who grew close with Wing at L.S.U., said he was peppering his conversations with “mate.” “He does his job extremely well and, on top of that, he’s a stand-up guy,” Beckham said. “He’s got his mind right.”AdvertisementLast Sunday, after dropping a punt on the 2-yard line as softly as a petal onto a pond, Wing stopped in his tracks and feigned a golf swing. He later was flagged for a costly face-mask penalty that put the New Orleans Saints in range to hit a winning field goal. But it was the golf swing that seemed to resonate. Indianapolis Colts punter Pat McAfee mimicked Wing with a similar celebratory gesture, and a trend may have been born.AdvertisementWing, 24, shrugged. “My friends texted me that I need to widen my stance,” he said, practicing the motion at his locker last week.After all, celebrations have sort of become his thing. At L.S.U., as a freshman in 2011, Wing made headlines by becoming the first player in the country to be have a touchdown called back for excessive celebration. A 52-yard score on a fake punt was revoked.“I had a whole flag situation,” Wing said. “You probably heard about it.”Indeed, the penalty might have infuriated Coach Les Miles, but it gave Wing cult-celebrity status in Baton Rouge, La. Students created a music video inspired by the so-called Brad Wing dance. They showed up to games wearing T-shirts adulating his “swag.” His reputation preceded him so much that as the 2013 N.F.L. draft approached, teams were reportedly concerned that his fame would be problematic.Mind you, this is a punter.“It was definitely frustrating,” Wing said, adding that he thought that the stories about him, which also focused on a suspension for a violation of team rules, kept him from being drafted.“Looking back now, I can see a lot clearer and can understand a lot more where teams were coming from,” Wing said, adding: “At the time, I was bitter with it. But I’ve grown up since then.”Wing signed with the Philadelphia Eagles as a free agent. He lost a position battle with Donnie Jones and returned to Baton Rouge demoralized. It was the second time in his life he had been cut. The first came while he was in high school, hoping to sign a professional contract, when he was released by his Australian rules club, the Sandringham Dragons.His father, Dave, who had tried out as punter for the Detroit Lions, grabbed a bag of Wilson footballs out of the family’s garage and began working with Wing on American-style kicking, which features more of a drop. (The ball is considerably smaller and lighter, too.) An obsession with American footballs began. Wing began carrying a ball with him everywhere — around the house, into restaurants and classrooms — always practicing his drops.AdvertisementWhen a program like L.S.U. began recruiting him, it seemed to take the entire family by surprise.“I remember going on a tour and we were amazed at the facility,” Wing’s mother, Kathleen, wrote in an email. “I remember saying to my husband (whispering actually), ‘Are you sure it’s Brad they want?!’ ”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But suddenly, after not making the team in Philadelphia, Wing was thinking about quitting football altogether.“The thought of Australia was still in my head; getting to the very end and not quite making it,” he said. “I thought, are you good enough to do it? Do you want to do it? And can you handle it if you don’t make it? After factoring all that in, it was the right decision to keep chasing it.”Entering Sunday, Wing was tied for the N.F.L. lead with 17 punts inside the 20-yard line, and had a return average of 6.8 yards, good for sixth in the N.F.C. Tom Quinn, the Giants’ special-teams coordinator, praised Wing’s hang time and location precision, although he noted that one of Wing’s punts, in the third quarter against the Saints, sailed into the end zone for a touchback and gave New Orleans the field position it needed to go ahead by two scores.“It’s like he’s getting a little too aggressive,” Quinn said. “I’d rather have him kick to the 8 or the 10 with a fair catch than bounce it at the 3. And if you can make the fantastic play, keep it out, but last week we didn’t.”Wing, who can kick with either foot, punts predominantly with his left, creating some unusual movement of the ball, which Quinn referred to as a boomerang effect. Dwayne Harris, who catches Wing’s punts in practice, said his end-over-end kicks tended to drift in toward the defense, which caught him off guard.“It’ll curve on you,” Harris said. “It takes a little getting used to. You can’t overrun it.”And when Wing strikes perfectly, the ball rising at a steep arc before tomahawking back to earth, he is never bashful.“It’s just my personality,” Wing said. “In Australia, I was always very involved. You’re in the middle of the field, calling plays, directing the action, sort of like a midfielder in soccer. Here, you only get a few opportunities to be on the field. So I try to have fun out there.”Tom Pedulla contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: Punting Well, and Letting Everyone Know It .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.