AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe N.H.L. has been transformed from a North American league to a truly international one over the last two decades.Nicklas Lidstrom of Sweden and Sergei Fedorov of Russia had a lot to do with that.“Those guys were in the first wave,” said Jim Lites, the Dallas Stars’ president. “Twenty-five years ago, Europeans were extras in the league. Those guys were once-in-a-generation superstars. And the N.H.L. hasn’t been the same since, because every team has players from all over the world.”More than two decades after Lidstrom and Fedorov arrived in Detroit, they are set to be inducted Monday into the Hockey Hall of Fame along with Phil Housley, Chris Pronger, Angela Ruggiero, Bill Hay and Peter Karmanos Jr.The Red Wings drafted Lidstrom in the third round and Fedorov in the fourth in 1989. Lidstrom won four Stanley Cups, becoming the first European-born captain to win an N.H.L. title in 2008.Fedorov started playing in Detroit in 1990 and left in 2003 as a free agent, signing a $40 million, five-year deal with Anaheim. He went on to play for Columbus and Washington.Fedorov won the Hart Memorial Trophy as most valuable player of the league and the Frank. J. Selke Trophy, the first of two, as the top two-way player during the 1993-94 season.The 6-foot-6, 220-pound Pronger was among the biggest and toughest defensemen in N.H.L. history. He helped the Ducks hoist the Cup in 2007.Housley made the jump from playing at South St. Paul High School in Minnesota to being on the Scotty Bowman-led Buffalo Sabres the next year in 1982. He retired after the 2002-3 season with 1,232 points, the most by an N.H.L. defenseman born in the United States.Ruggiero was on the United States team for four Olympics, winning gold in 1998. Hay, a Canadian player, earned a spot in the class in the builder category. He flourished in executive roles with the Hockey Hall of Fame, Hockey Canada and the Calgary Flames. Karmanos, who is from Detroit, is also going into the hall as a builder for playing an important role in the development of amateurs and owning the Carolina Hurricanes.Advertisement