AdvertisementSupported byBy Brett Michael DykesHere’s a look at the best games of N.F.L. Week 9, and who we think will win them.Packers (6-1) at Panthers (7-0)1 p.m. EasternLine: Packers by 3In 2014, the Panthers entered December with a 3-8-1 record. They have not lost a game since, a streak of 11 consecutive regular-season victories. Yet they do not seem to strike fear into the hearts of opponents the way the N.F.L.’s other undefeated teams do, especially the Patriots and the Broncos. Perhaps this is because the Panthers win ugly — they blew a 17-point, fourth-quarter lead to the Colts last week before winning on a field goal in overtime — and rarely blow out opponents (six of their wins have been by 11 points or fewer).Possibly outside of winning in Seattle, against a then 2-3 Seahawks team, the Panthers have yet to stake claim to a signature win, something with an exclamation point attached to it. This could be that game for them.The Packers, meanwhile, are looking to get back on track after their first loss of the season, 29-10 in Denver. Quarterback Aaron Rodgers had one of the worst games of his career, throwing for only 77 yards against the league’s top-ranked defense. Though the Panthers’ defensive unit is one of the N.F.L.’s best, it’s hard to imagine Rodgers and the Packers’ offense struggling in two straight games.PICK: PACKERSRams (4-3) at Vikings (5-2)1 p.m. Line: Vikings by 2You would be forgiven if you looked at the standings and wondered how the Vikings were 5-2. There is a good chance you are not alone. Minnesota is one of the stealthiest 5-2 football teams in N.F.L. history. It is as if everyone wrote off the Vikings after they were throttled by the 49ers — a team that has largely lived up to low expectations — on the Monday night of the opening weekend, and Minnesota has been winning its games on an island somewhere ever since.The Rams certainly seem to have gotten more attention, possibly because their living, breathing highlight reel of a running back, Todd Gurley, does something almost each week that causes jaws to drop. A rookie out of Georgia, he may just be the N.F.L.’s best running back at the moment, averaging 115 yards rushing a game, a full 15 more than the player in the No. 2 spot, Minnesota’s Adrian Peterson, who counts himself as a Gurley fan.“I love what this young guy’s doing,” Peterson told the NFL Network about Gurley. “I wish him well, but not this week against us. He’s a talented young guy. He’s hungry.”If you like watching teams that run the ball and play tough defense (the Rams and the Vikings rank fifth and sixth in total defense), this might be your game of the week.PICK: RAMSBroncos (7-0) at Colts (3-5)4:25 p.m. Line: Broncos by 4.5While the 2015 struggles of Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning have been well documented, he will return to Indianapolis on the heels of perhaps his best performance of the year, throwing for 340 yards in a 29-10 win against the Packers. It could be the last time Manning plays in front of the Indianapolis crowd that supported him for years as a Colt, so you know he will be looking to have a memorable performance. And it just so happens that if Manning can throw for 284 yards or more in this one, he will pass Brett Favre to become the N.F.L.’s career leader in passing yards.The Colts, meanwhile, still sit atop the A.F.C. South, despite losing three straight and not beating any team outside their division. The Colts’ last such win came in the 2014 playoffs: a 24-13 win against Manning and the Broncos. Denver has not lost since.PICK: BRONCOSRaiders (4-3) at Steelers (4-4)1 p.m. Line: Steelers by 4.5Steelers fans were elated last week to see quarterback Ben Roethlisberger return from a knee injury, but then lost running back Le’Veon Bell for the remainder of the season, also with a knee injury. DeAngelo Williams, who was cut by Carolina in the off-season after nine seasons as a Panther, will now assume the role of starting running back.“I’m encouraged because he’s an established, capable guy, a guy we know can deliver,” Steelers Coach Mike Tomlin said about Williams. “He delivered for us and he delivered for Carolina for 10 years in the league.”The Raiders have had success against the Steelers in recent years despite not fielding many good teams — Oakland has won four of the last five in the series since 2006 — and the 2015 Raiders are pretty good. Two of their three losses were to the Bengals and the Broncos, both undefeated. With those teams running away with the divisions Pittsburgh and Oakland play in, this matchup may prove integral to each team’s playoff hopes.PICK: STEELERSGiants (4-4) at Buccaneers (3-4)4:05 p.m. Line: Giants by 2.5You have to feel for Eli Manning. He returned to New Orleans on Halloween weekend, affording him the rare opportunity to trick-or-treat in his hometown. He threw six touchdowns and engineered an offense that scored 49 points, but the Giants still lost.The defeat is obviously not on Manning’s shoulders. The same cannot be said, though, for the Giants’ defensive coordinator, Steve Spagnuolo. His return to New Orleans, where he oversaw the worst defense in N.F.L. history in his lone season as the Saints’ coordinator, will probably haunt him for a while. The Giants’ defense gave up 614 yards of total offense in that game, while failing to sack Saints quarterback Drew Brees.On the bright side for the Giants, this game could include the return of their star defensive lineman Jason Pierre-Paul, who lost his index finger in July in a fireworks incident. Pierre-Paul played his college home games in Tampa’s Raymond James Stadium while at South Florida.PICK: GIANTSJaguars (2-5) at Jets (4-3)1 p.m. Line: Jets by 2.5The Jets are looking to get back on the winning track after losing two straight on the road, to New England and Oakland, but they will have to do it with some injuries at quarterback. Coach Todd Bowles announced Wednesday that Ryan Fitzpatrick would start despite sustaining a torn ligament in his nonthrowing thumb last week. His backup, Geno Smith, is nursing a shoulder injury. Of equal concern is the Jets’ defense, which started the season strong but gave up 30 points or more in each of the aforementioned losses, while forcing no turnovers in either game.The Jaguars are a half-game out of first place in the A.F.C. South — which says everything you need to know about that division — and have the N.F.L.’s easiest schedule the rest of the way. The thought of a 5-11 or 6-10 Jaguars team hosting a playoff game in January is both ridiculously hilarious and wildly infuriating. And yet it could happen.PICK: JETSEagles (3-4) at Cowboys (2-5)8:30 p.m. Line: Eagles by 2.5The Cowboys cannot seem to win without Tony Romo at quarterback. They have not won since beating the Eagles, 20-10, in Week 2, the game in which Romo broke his collarbone. Though he participated in team drills this week, Romo cannot return to action until Nov. 22 against the Dolphins.For now, Dallas will have to continue to make do with Matt Cassel and Brandon Weeden. Perhaps the only thing working in the Cowboys’ favor is that the N.F.C. East is the conference’s version of the A.F.C. South, though not quite as bad. Anyone can still win it, and whichever team does may do so with a laughably poor record.While the Eagles are still at the mercy of the inconsistent play of quarterback Sam Bradford, they have at least been able to establish some semblance of a running game of late. After a dreadful start to the season for running back DeMarco Murray, who rushed for 2 yards in a Week 2 loss to his former team, he has averaged 86 rushing yards in Philadelphia’s last three games. Ryan Mathews has also come on of late and is averaging 6.1 yards per carry for the season.PICK: EAGLESTitans (1-6) at Saints (4-4)1 p.m. Line: Saints by 9If anything can cure what ails a defense that gave up just under 50 points last week, it might be lining up against a team that ranks 31st in total offense and that just fired its coach, as the Titans did this week when they canned Ken Whisenhunt.Saints quarterback Drew Brees, the subject of trade rumors and rampant speculation about his physical decline earlier, suddenly looks like the Brees of old, and the Saints can get above .500 after starting the season 0-3 with a fourth straight win.PICK: SAINTSThese player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.Dolphins (3-4) at Bills (3-4)1 p.m. Line: Bills by 3You have to think that if either of these teams is going to make a run for an A.F.C. wild card, it will be the winner of this game. The Bills do have a leg up, though, having thumped the Dolphins, 41-14, in Week 3. But that game was against a Joe Philbin-coached Dolphins team that resembled a cold bowl of oatmeal compared with the spicy breakfast burrito of a team we saw immediately after Dan Campbell took over.The suddenly resurgent Dolphins did suffer some setbacks last week, though, getting beat handily by the Patriots, 36-7, and losing the four-time Pro Bowl defensive end Cameron Wake to a torn Achilles’ tendon.Tyrod Taylor is expected to return as the starting quarterback for the Bills. He was 3-2 in that role before sustaining a knee injury that forced him to miss the last two games, both losses.PICK: BILLSRedskins (3-4) at Patriots (7-0)1 p.m. Line: Patriots by 14It is possible to talk yourself into thinking the Redskins can upset the Patriots on the road this weekend. The Patriots’ offensive line is in shambles, after all, and the Redskins seem like one of those teams that can beat any team or lose to any team from week to week. But Washington cannot seem to stop the run and its secondary might be just as injury-riddled, if not more so, than New England’s offensive line. Plus, it has to deal with Tom Brady.PICK: PATRIOTSFalcons (6-2) at 49ers (2-6)4:05 p.m. Line: Falcons by 7The 49ers are benching quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who led them to the Super Bowl in 2013, in favor of Blaine Gabbert, who has a 5-22 record as an N.F.L. starter and who once used Twitter to ask Paula Deen for menu suggestions when dining in one of her restaurants. Football, like life, is often filled with strange and unpredictable twists.PICK: FALCONSBears (2-5) at Chargers (2-6)8:30 p.m. (Monday) Line: Chargers by 4The Bears and the Chargers enter this game missing important components to their offensive units. Chicago will be without running back Matt Forte, who injured his knee in last week’s loss to the Vikings, and the Chargers will be missing wide receiver Keenan Allen, who sustained a lacerated kidney in a loss to the Ravens and is done for the year. Allen had been on a pace for a potentially record-setting season — his 67 catches placed him third in N.F.L. history through eight games. Chargers quarterback Philip Rivers paid Allen a visit in the hospital.“He was down, as you can imagine,” Rivers told The San Diego Union-Tribune.The Allen-less Chargers will host a Bears team that may be better than its 2-5 record suggests. Chicago’s last two losses came down to game-ending field goals (one in overtime, one as the clock expired in regulation). Interestingly, each of Chicago’s wins in 2015 have come against A.F.C. West competition (Oakland and Kansas City).Finally, both defenses are among the league’s worst — each giving up over 28 points a game — so do not be surprised if this one turns out to be a high-scoring affair.PICK: CHARGERSPicks do not reflect the betting line.Advertisement