

      By VICTOR MATHER

NOV. 9, 2015

The scandal now enveloping track and field was as simple as it was audacious. Russian athletes doped, then paid bribes to track officials to keep their positive tests a secret.  On Monday, the World Anti-Doping Association released a lengthy report  describing a pervasive doping culture among Russia’s sports programs.  Here’s a look at some of the key figures in the scandal.
Related Article
The scandal now enveloping track and field was as simple as it was audacious. Russian athletes doped, then paid bribes to track officials to keep their positive tests a secret.  On Monday, the World Anti-Doping Association released a lengthy report  describing a pervasive doping culture among Russia’s sports programs.  Here’s a look at some of the key figures in the scandal.The former president of track and field’s governing body and a former long jumper, soccer coach and government official in Senegal. Diack is under criminal investigation in France on corruption and money-laundering charges, accused of demanding money to hide positive drug tests by Russians. Diack, 82, from Senegal, ran the I.A.A.F. from 1999 until August. In an interview with the BBC in February, he dismissed reports of widespread doping by Russian athletes as a “joke.”His son Papa Massata Diack and other track officials are also under investigation.A Russian marathoner who won three times in Chicago and once in London. She was permitted to compete at the London Olympics despite abnormalities in her biological passport, according to reports, after paying a bribe of 450,000 euros ($483,000) to the Russian track federation. She was eventually barred, then reinstated after cooperating with the WADA investigation. The report judged her to be “open and honest” about drugs and a Russian cover-up.The head of the Russian track federation, the A.R.A.F., from 1991 until earlier this year. He also left the I.A.A.F. in the wake of reports on German television about the Russian doping scandal. The WADA report said Balakhnichev was “ultimately responsible, both individually and as an A.R.A.F. representative, for the wrongful actions that occurred while he was president.” In a letter to the I.A.A.F. earlier this year, he said that allegations were a “well-orchestrated plot against me.”The chief of the Russian track federation’s medical commission. The report said he provided banned substances to Russian athletes and was “very active in the conspiracy to cover up athletes’ positive tests in exchange for a percentage of their winnings.” WADA recommended a lifetime ban for Portugalov. Lifetime bans were also recommended for Alexey Melnikov, Russia’s coach for endurance; Vladimir Kazarin, an 800-meter coach; Vladimir Mokhnev, a 1,000- to 3,000-meter coach; and Viktor Chegin, a racewalking coach.Gold medalist at 800 meters at the London Games. According to the report, she was captured on tape discussing her use of prohibited substances and how positive drug tests were covered up. Savinova stated: “Well, really, what should we do? How should it go differently? That is our system and in Russia that only works only with pharma.” Savinova has never been suspended for doping, but now faces a lifetime ban.Russian 800-meter runner. The WADA report said she “aggresively refused to cooperate” with investigators. She has been recommended for a lifetime ban, along with Ekaterina Poistogova, an Olympic bronze medalist at 800 meters in London; Kristina Ugarova and Tatyana Myazina.Advertisement