AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanHere are the best games to watch in N.F.L. Week 4:Vikings (2-1) at Broncos (3-0)4:25 p.m. Line: Broncos by 7“Who is a better running back than me?” Vikings running back Adrian Peterson asked a group of reporters last week. He may have a point.Peterson, 30, is at an age when running backs tend to wear down, but after being suspended for 15 games last season, he has emerged as an example of how an extended break from the rigors of competition can rejuvenate an aging star. Through three games, he leads the N.F.L. with 291 rushing yards, and last week he uncorked a 43-yard touchdown run that had fans checking their calendars to see if they had traveled back to 2012.One could argue for Jamaal Charles, Le’Veon Bell or Matt Forte as the game’s best running back, but Peterson is certainly in the discussion.The question now is whether Peterson’s two-week outburst, in which he shredded the Lions and the Chargers, is a fluke or a sign that he and the Vikings are back.Peterson will face a bigger test this week against the Broncos, whose defense has held opponents to 82.7 rushing yards a game, sixth best in the N.F.L.Fans can talk all they want about Peyton Manning’s comfort level, his arm strength and the Broncos’ offensive formations, but the days of Denver living and dying on Manning’s ability to put up glittering passing statistics are over. The team’s unbeaten record is largely a result of its versatile and talented defense. The Broncos have the luxury of being able to win even when Manning is playing below his best.This is the only game this week pitting teams with winning records. And since both are placing much of their offensive burden on 30-something stars who may be playing on borrowed time, it could fail to live up to expectations as the de facto game of the week.PICK: BRONCOSTexans (1-2) at Falcons (3-0)1 p.m. Line: Falcons by 7Just two running backs have carried the ball 30 or more times in a game this season. Chances are you didn’t guess they are Alfred Blue of the Texans and Devonta Freeman of the Falcons. But neither may have the chance to do it again this week. Depending on the health of his team’s starting running back, Blue or Freeman may find himself on the bench.Formerly a benchmark of a hardworking running back, a workload of 30-plus carries has largely fallen out of favor. Larry Johnson of the Chiefs did it 11 times from 2005 to 2006, but last season the total was reached only 11 times by the entire league.Freeman looked unstoppable last week against Dallas, rushing 30 times for 141 yards and three touchdowns. A second-year player out of Florida State, he had not done much in his first two games. But given a start with Tevin Coleman sidelined, he thrived. Coleman did not practice Wednesday, and if he does not play Sunday and Freeman comes up big again, Coleman could be out of a job.Blue, on the other hand, will almost certainly give up his job once Arian Foster is healthy despite an impressive game last week, rushing 31 times for 139 yards and a touchdown. Foster practiced in a limited way Wednesday, and his status will probably be a game-time decision, no doubt drawing the ire of fantasy football fans.PICK: FALCONSRams (1-2) at Cardinals (3-0)4:25 p.m. Line: Cardinals by 7 ½The Cardinals sound like a setup for a feel-good Hollywood movie: A 62-year-old coach with a 36-year-old quarterback and a 32-year-old wide receiver who are going against opponents who grew up with posters of them on their walls. But Bruce Arians, Carson Palmer and Larry Fitzgerald have done more than enough this season to justify General Manager Steve Keim’s comparing them, during a radio appearance, to fine wine. They may have gray in their beards, but they also are the driving forces behind the highest-scoring offense in the N.F.L.Add to that a defense that intercepted four of Colin Kaepernick’s first 10 passes last week — returning two for touchdowns — and it is easy to view Arizona as a title contender. But anyone who watched last season’s implosion knows the team can go only as far as Palmer’s surgically repaired legs can take it, so some caution against a hard-hitting Rams team may be in order. One bad hit could take this movie from “As Good as It Gets” to “Wild Hogs.”PICK: CARDINALSJets (2-1) at Dolphins (1-2)9:30 a.m. Line: Jets by 1In his first start at right guard for the Jets, Brian Winters will be asked to block Ndamukong Suh, who has endured a week of being blamed for Miami’s inability to stop the run. Fans and pundits have been calling him a disappointment, and as he has only six solo tackles and no sacks through three games, it is easy to understand why.Coach Todd Bowles, who has shown a subtle sense of humor with the Jets, is not letting a slow start convince him that Suh has lost a step. When asked what the key was to slowing down Suh, Bowles said, “Him not playing.”At some point, Suh and Cameron Wake will get back to doing what they do best, which is hitting quarterbacks very hard, and with Ryan Fitzpatrick showing a pronounced problem with turning the ball over, the Jets’ trip to London may not feel like much of a vacation.PICK: DOLPHINSGiants (1-2) at Bills (2-1)1 p.m.Line: Bills by 5 ½The Bills have had unlikely contributions all over the field. Quarterback Tyrod Taylor has gotten much of the attention by stabilizing a position that has seemingly been in flux since Jim Kelly retired. But beyond Taylor, the Bills have also succeeded because of strong play by two rookies and two reclamation projects.The rookies, Ronald Darby and Karlos Williams, both drafted out of Florida State, in the second and fifth rounds, have had to do some intense on-the-job training. Darby, forced to start at cornerback when Leodis McKelvin was injured, has been picked on heavily by opposing teams but has held his own, with 10 passes defended. Williams, a running back, has a touchdown in each of the team’s three games, and last week, when LeSean McCoy was forced out, he rushed 12 times for 110 yards.Buffalo has also received solid production from guard Richie Incognito and wide receiver Percy Harvin. Those two talented players had seen their public image tarnished over the last few seasons, but they appear to have found a home with Coach Rex Ryan and are playing a big part in the team’s success.The Giants may have the more impressive trophy case, but for right now the Bills are New York’s best (and, technically, only) team.PICK: BILLSPackers (3-0) at 49ers (1-2)4.25 p.m. Line: Packers by 9 ½Colin Kaepernick has always enjoyed playing the Packers. He may have grown up rooting for the team, but he has shown it no mercy, beating it once in the regular season and twice in the playoffs. He has done it with his arm (412 passing yards and three touchdowns in the 2013 season opener) and with his legs (a record 181 yards rushing in a 2012 playoff win).After putting up a 16.7 passer rating last week against Arizona, and having two of his first four passes intercepted and returned for touchdowns, Kaepernick will be hoping his mastery of the Packers can resurface.Even Kaepernick at his best would be at a disadvantage against a red-hot Aaron Rodgers, and this could finally be the game in which the team from Green Bay conquers the kid from Milwaukee.PICK: PACKERSChiefs (1-2) at Bengals (3-0)1 p.m. Line: Bengals by 4The Chiefs’ secondary has had a hard time defending the pass, which makes a trip to Cincinnati to go against the Bengals’ thriving offense a case of unfortunate timing.Last week, Bengals wide receiver A. J. Green humiliated Baltimore with 227 receiving yards and two touchdowns. Sean Smith will be back from a suspension and will do his best against Green, but with Phillip Gaines out with a knee injury, Cincinnati’s offense may be off to the races.PICK: BENGALSCowboys (2-1) at Saints (0-3)8:30 p.m. Line: EvenThe Saints’ offense performed reasonably well with Drew Brees sidelined last week, but frustration continued as the team remained winless and finished the week three games behind two teams in its division. Brees has expressed optimism that he will be back this week, but how his shoulder woes could affect his ability to stretch the field is unknown.The Cowboys showed a conservative strategy last week in the first start of the year for Brandon Weeden, and it might have cost them the game as a halftime lead evaporated despite Weeden’s completing 22 of 26 passes and Joseph Randle scoring three touchdowns.If Brees starts, that should be enough to get New Orleans into the win column.PICK: SAINTSJaguars (1-2) at Colts (1-2)1 p.m. Line: Colts by 10The Colts were on the ropes against Tennessee last week and on the verge of an 0-3 start. Andrew Luck then threw two touchdown passes in a span of 56 seconds in the fourth quarter, winning the game and reminding everyone how good he can be.The team still has a losing record, and Luck is scraping the bottom of the barrel among N.F.L. quarterbacks with a 65.0 rating, but one quarter of playing well was enough for Indianapolis to be double-digit favorites against Jacksonville. It is hard to say if that says more about the quality of the Colts or the irrelevance of the Jaguars.PICK: COLTSPanthers (3-0) at Buccaneers (1-2)1 p.m. Line: Panthers by 3The Panthers are undefeated despite playing most of the time without Luke Kuechly or Kelvin Benjamin. The team has rarely been associated with such perseverance, but Cam Newton has the Panthers just four wins short of the team’s division-leading total from last season. The team has endured another loss, with defensive end Charles Johnson sidelined, but a trade for Jared Allen should pay dividends soon even if he is limited this week.Newton has always enjoyed playing Tampa Bay, with a combined 16 passing and rushing touchdowns in six games. That good fortune should continue.PICK: PANTHERSEagles (1-2) at Redskins (1-2)1 p.m. Line: Eagles by 3Coach Chip Kelly may have amazing offensive schemes, but thus far his players haven’t been able to execute them. Sam Bradford has looked like a bad fit at quarterback and has spent most of the season throwing his running backs short passes that get nowhere. The team has had only two plays of 25 yards or more, and the humdrum execution has been reflected on the scoreboard, with the Eagles averaging 19.3 points a game, tied for 21st in the N.F.L.Relying on the other team to trot out an even worse offense does not seem like a great strategy, but it should work this week for Philadelphia.PICK: EAGLESBrowns (1-2) at Chargers (1-2)4:05 p.m. Line: Chargers by 9The supposed quarterback controversy in Cleveland may be about page views more than reality. TMZ reported that some Browns starters were pushing for Johnny Manziel to regain the starting position. But players have flatly denied it.“My first take was that it sounded like a story that came from The Onion and not TMZ, not that TMZ’s really a reputable news source with hard-hitting journalism,” Joe Thomas, the team’s left tackle, said at a charity event. “But to me, it was just something that was crafted from thin air.”At some point, the players may want to reconsider their stance. Josh McCown is old (36) and not very good (76.4 career passer rating). Manziel is young (23), and his big-play abilities as a passer and runner would at least make the team more fun to watch, even if they did not immediately lead to more wins.PICK: CHARGERSRaiders (2-1) at Bears (0-3)1 p.m. Line: Raiders by 3High-profile trades are rare in the N.F.L., but in the last week, Chicago shipped Jared Allen to Carolina and Jonathan Bostic to New England. Now pundits are trying to figure out where Matt Forte and other Bears starters could end up. The team was already painful to watch, but now it is underdog-against-the-visiting-Oakland-Raiders bad. That is about as bad as you can get.PICK: RAIDERSPicks do not reflect the betting line. Advertisement