By JONAH BROMWICHNOV. 8, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.San Antonio at Portland, Wednesday, 10:30 p.m. Eastern, ESPNAfter a little more than two weeks, the N.B.A. season is still in its infancy. It seems safe to say that the defending champion Golden State Warriors look at least as dominant as they did a season ago. It seems safe to say that the Nets, the Philadelphia 76ers and the New Orleans Pelicans, collectively 0-19 going into Sunday’s games, are going to struggle, at least in the first half of the season. Everything else is still in flux.Though both the Spurs and the Trail Blazers are near the top of the Western Conference standings, the two franchises are in very different life stages. The Spurs, having poached the Blazers’ star player LaMarcus Aldridge, are beginning the exhaustive preparations that they hope will result in another championship. The Blazers, without Aldridge, are retooling, and it seems unlikely that they will maintain their position near the top much longer.In Aldridge’s absence, Damian Lillard has stepped into the starring role that he seemed meant for at the start of last season. In the first half of the 2014-15 season, he earned some mention as a dark-horse candidate for the Most Valuable Player Award. But the level of his play grew inconsistent as the season continued, and after having averaged 24 points per game in December, he fell back to about 20 per for the rest of the season.AdvertisementIn the Blazers’ last three games, that superstar Lillard has re-emerged. He has averaged 32 points a game and has shot extremely well from the field, especially from behind the 3-point line. Because Lillard is such a threat from deep, defenses must extend themselves to cover him, allowing him either to score inside or to set up his teammates to do so.AdvertisementHis fellow starters — shooting guard C. J. McCollum and forward Al-Farouq Aminu — have shared the scoring burden. McCollum, an unremarkable bench player last season, is playing more than twice as many minutes as he did last year and has still managed to more than triple his points totals. His shooting is also much improved, particularly from downtown, building on the flashes of promise he showed last year in the playoffs.But McCollum and Lillard have thrived because they have been able to convert shots that they are creating for themselves. In one of many signs of concern for the Blazers, the team does not assist on a high percentage of baskets, which means that if the well dries up, Portland will find it far more difficult to score. There are other concerns on offense: The scoring load is not evenly distributed across the Portland roster, and the starting power forward, Meyers Leonard, contributes very little.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Blazers’ schedule has been far from challenging. Their wins have come against the Utah Jazz, the Minnesota Timberwolves, the Memphis Grizzlies and the Pelicans — none of them a top-tier team — and they have dropped two games to the merely decent Phoenix Suns.So when they face the Spurs on Wednesday, we may see a much less potent offense from the Blazers. San Antonio has been tough defensively from the get-go, already sitting near the top of the defensive efficiency rankings.Aldridge’s implementation into the Spurs’ system remains a work in progress. He is shooting less than he did back in Portland, so much so that Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich told The Washington Post last week that “he’s deferred too much.” (Aldridge has played only one game since then, in which he attempted a season-low 10 field goals.)In the same interview, Popovich was uncharacteristically public with his praise for the Spurs’ best player, Kawhi Leonard. He spoke of Leonard in superlative terms, comparing him to Michael Jordan in his excellence at both ends of the floor. And Leonard has done plenty so far to make his coach so happy. He is averaging career highs in points and rebounds and is shooting well.The Spurs’ depth gives them an extra advantage over a team like the Blazers. In San Antonio’s most recent game, against the Hornets, it was Patty Mills, Manu Ginobili and David West, all reserves, who changed the course of the game with their play in the third quarter.But the Spurs have also had a very lenient schedule, and the Blazers represent their first real challenge since they lost their season opener against the Oklahoma City Thunder. There is no telling how the crowd in Portland will treat Aldridge, and how he will react upon his return to the only other franchise he has ever been a part of. It is possible that he will regain comfort with shooting and scoring once he is back in a comfortable arena. But it is just as likely that the spurned Portland fans will intimidate him during the game, discombobulating the Spurs and allowing the Blazers to continue their unlikely early-season success.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.