By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 8, 2015
Real Madrid lost its first game of the season on Sunday as Sevilla mounted a 3-2 comeback victory at home, letting Barcelona take over top spot in the standings in the Spanish league.Ciro Immobile scored his first goal for Sevilla before Éver Banega and Fernando Llorente added strikes to complete the rally after Sergio Ramos had put Madrid ahead. James Rodríguez scored a consolation goal with the final kick of the match, but otherwise, Madrid had no answers.Hours before, Neymar helped Barcelona take the lead in the league by continuing his scoring streak by netting two goals — with Luis Suárez scoring another — in a 3-0 win at home over Villarreal.CREW ADVANCES Kei Kamara scored two goals, his second goal in the 111th minute, and Columbus advanced to the Eastern Conference finals of the M.L.S. Cup playoffs with a 3-1 victory over the visiting Montreal Impact.AdvertisementThe Crew, the No. 2 seed, needed extra time to gain the edge in the series, winning on aggregate, 4-3.AdvertisementIn the Western Conference, F.C. Dallas beat the visiting Seattle Sounders in a penalty shootout by 4-2 to advance to the conference finals. Walker Zimmerman scored in the 91st minute for Dallas to make the score 2-1 and tie the series on aggregate, 3-3, forcing extra time, which ended without a goal.KLOPP LOSES FIRST IN ENGLAND Turning Liverpool into a title contender will be no quick task for Jürgen Klopp. As Manchester City, which leads the Premier League, and Arsenal both drew on Sunday, Liverpool suffered its first loss under Klopp, at the hands of Crystal Palace.Liverpool’s 2-1 setback at Anfield left the club with 5 points out of a possible 12 since Brendan Rodgers departed. Its only victory came against Chelsea, which has lost a majority of the games it has played in its title defense.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Manchester City could not find the net against last-place Aston Villa as Remi Garde’s managerial reign in Birmingham opened with a 0-0 draw at Villa Park.Arsenal and Tottenham also had to settle for a point apiece in a 1-1 draw in the north London derby at Emirates Stadium.FIORENTINA KEEPS LEAD Inter Milan and Fiorentina remained even on points at the top of Serie A after wins at Torino and Sampdoria, respectively, while host Roma kept up the pressure with a 2-0 victory over Lazio in the capital derby.Fiorentina won by 2-0 to remain ahead on goal difference after Inter recorded a third straight 1-0 victory.DORTMUND WINS DERBY Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang scored his 14th goal of the season to give Borussia Dortmund a 3-2 win over its bitter rival, Schalke, in the Bundesliga’s Ruhr derby.NEPAL PLAYERS CHARGED Nepal has charged five players, including the captain and the goalkeeper of its national team, with treason over allegations of match-fixing in World Cup qualifiers in 2011, an official said.AdvertisementDetectives said the arrests were made after investigations had found significant sums of money deposited in the players’ bank accounts from people based in Southeast Asia who are suspected of match-fixing. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Real Madrid’s First Loss Lets Barcelona Move Atop League.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.