AdvertisementSupported byBy Filip BondyHARRISON, N.J. — This is a long, mean rivalry, one that dates back two decades and features many spikes-up tackles. On a Sunday afternoon with so much at stake, D.C. United was not about to make life easy for the Red Bulls, refusing to play pretty soccer against one of the more entertaining, attacking teams in Major League Soccer.The result, a 1-0 win by the Red Bulls and a 2-0 victory on aggregate goals in the Eastern Conference semifinal series, was a homely affair that included tight marking, sharp elbows and nervous, wayward passes. Jesse Marsch, the Red Bulls’ coach, termed the match “chippy, just like we thought.” Then, near the end, there was cathartic relief for the sellout crowd in Harrison when Bradley Wright-Phillips finished an easy setup in front of the net from the substitute forward Gonzalo Veron, beating D.C. goalkeeper Bill Hamid. The better team — both over the course of the season, and for these 90 minutes — had been rewarded.“We adapt to it,” Wright-Phillips said of United’s physical, direct style. “But we don’t like it. We prefer to play football.”Wright-Phillips had blown a golden scoring opportunity just minutes before his winning goal.“It was a nice feeling after just missing one,” he said. “I was more happy for Gonzalo. It was his goal. And in both legs, we defended brilliantly.”What was once unexpected success this season for the Red Bulls is now considered commonplace in Harrison, where the most aggressive club in Major League Soccer sets up shop regularly in the attacking half of the field. The Red Bulls dictated play from start to finish, though the scoreboard refused to budge. The 25,219 fans hung on every missed opportunity by the Red Bulls and on occasional, dangerous counters by United.The Red Bulls entered the match requiring only a draw to advance, having scored a 1-0 away victory in the first leg, on a goal by the former D.C. captain Dax McCarty. Marsch’s coaching style, however, demanded a high-pressure strategy that would create scoring opportunities for both sides. Marsch briefly considered locking down the game by bringing in another defender late, then decided against it on principle.“We just needed to get one play right,” Marsch said. “Unfortunately, it took until the last seconds. If we could have done that earlier, we would have made our life easier.”Mike Grella had the best early opportunity, in the second minute, off a well-orchestrated, dummied corner kick that resulted in a right-footed shot off the crossbar. United, jammed into its own end, relied mostly on long outlet passes and punts from goalkeeper Hamid to produce dangerous one-on-one counters.Both sides featured significant lineup changes at central defense, one by addition and the other by subtraction. The captain Bobby Boswell, who had been suspended for one match by the M.L.S. disciplinary committee for an off-the-ball tackle, returned for United and was responsible for the giveaway that led to Wright-Phillips’s goal. Meanwhile, the Red Bulls replaced the injured Damien Perrinelle with Ronald Zubar.The Red Bulls’ defense managed a second successive shutout, and goalkeeper Luis Robles made two important saves. Robles took three cleats to the forearm in a first-half collision with Chris Rolfe, who was shown a yellow card by the referee Ted Unkel. Robles writhed in pain for a minute before he realized the agony was only temporary. Such a big part of this season, Robles was not about to leave the roughhouse match.“This game wasn’t an accurate representation of our team,” Robles said, apologizing for the lack of flair. “But our season is about changing the perception of this organization, the entire complexion of the organization.”Next up, in the Eastern Conference finals, is Columbus, a team with a far more wide-open style than United.The Red Bulls have a 20-season title drought in a league that, over time, has been made up of 10 to 20 teams. Statistically speaking, they are overdue. By comparison, D.C. United is a four-time M.L.S. champion.So there is a history in North Jersey, and not a particularly good one. This franchise has gone through 15 coaches, 10 general managers and sporting directors, three ownership groups and a name change without a postseason championship.At the M.L.S. draft in mid-January, Ali Curtis, the team’s sporting director, overheard two general managers discussing the sorry lot of the Red Bulls and predicting that his club would hemorrhage about 15 points from its respectable total of 50 in 2014.“That’s something you remember,” Curtis said.Instead of dropping points in the standings, the Red Bulls gained 10 and won the Supporters’ Shield for the best record in M.L.S. They have advanced this far, to the conference finals, only three times, and to the M.L.S. Cup only once, in 2008. The Red Bulls will now have nearly two weeks off before the first leg of the conference finals because of an international break. If they succeed in the conference finals, the Red Bulls will then host the M.L.S. Cup in Harrison on Dec. 6, a potentially frigid affair.“We want to be the first Red Bull team to win something here, not just the Supporters’ Shield,” McCarty said. “You use those failures as motivation. It’s eating at us.”Advertisement