AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressAngered by a hit to the head of quarterback Teddy Bridgewater that knocked him out of the game, the Minnesota Vikings kept their composure and earned another steely victory on Sunday, a 21-18 overtime win over the visiting St. Louis Rams.“We’re a disciplined football team,” said Vikings Coach Mike Zimmer, who seemed to be having a hard time holding back. “We do things right. That’s why we are the least-penalized team in the league — because we play by the rules.” Late in the third quarter, Rams defensive end William Hayes drew the ire of the Vikings and the crowd with a low hit on Bridgewater, who grabbed his right knee. The play did not draw a penalty. Then, early in the fourth quarter, as Bridgewater slid to protect himself at the end of a 5-yard scramble, Rams cornerback Lamarcus Joyner dived at him shoulder-first. That drew a flag.Bridgewater, who threw for 144 yards with an interception and ran for a score and the subsequent 2-point conversion in the third quarter, appeared to be unconscious after the hit. He eventually walked slowly off the field and then jogged to the locker room for evaluation. He was found to have a concussion.Asked if he felt the Rams played dirty, Zimmer said simply, “Yes.”He also said, “If we were out on the street, we probably would’ve had a fight.”Joyner and Rams Coach Jeff Fisher expressed regret about the play and wished Bridgewater well.Bridgewater was replaced by the former Rams backup Shaun Hill.In overtime, the Vikings’ Marcus Sherels tiptoed along the sideline for a 26-yard return of a 63-yard punt by Johnny Hekker. Adrian Peterson, who rushed for 125 yards and a touchdown, then helped set up a 40-yard field goal that ended the game.Greg Zuerlein made four field goals for the Rams, including a career-long 61-yarder in the second quarter and a 53-yarder with 17 seconds left in regulation.EAGLES 33, COWBOYS 27 Jordan Matthews caught a 41-yard scoring pass from Sam Bradford on the first possession of overtime, Bradford’s only touchdown throw, and Philadelphia won at Dallas in a game that featured five ties.The Cowboys’ Dan Bailey had made a 44-yard field goal with two seconds remaining in regulation to even the score for the final time.Matt Cassel completed 25 of 38 passes for 299 yards for the Cowboys. He had three touchdown passes, two to Cole Beasley, and an interception.49ERS 17, FALCONS 16 Blaine Gabbert, making his first start in more than two years, threw two second-quarter touchdown passes to tight end Garrett Celek, and San Francisco won at home.Filling in for the demoted Colin Kaepernick and playing behind an offensive line that has faced heavy scrutiny all season, Gabbert did not take a sack. Gabbert did throw an interception midway through the fourth quarter, which gave Atlanta another chance with 7 minutes 14 seconds to go. After an incompletion, Matt Ryan connected on six straight throws, but eventually he missed Julio Jones in the end zone, and the Falcons settled for a field goal. They never got the ball back, losing for the third time in four games after a 5-0 start.PATRIOTS 27, REDSKINS 10 Despite being held to a season-low point total, New England remained unbeaten with an easy home victory, with Julian Edelman and LeGarrette Blount scoring before Washington could snap the ball a second time.Tom Brady, who finished with 299 passing yards, connected with Edelman for an 8-yard score on the opening drive. The Patriots then pulled off a surprise onside kick, but that drive stalled when Edelman fumbled.Washington could manage only a single play: a Kirk Cousins pass that bounced off Pierre Garcon and was intercepted by Logan Ryan. New England then marched down the field, and Blount scored on a 5-yard run.TITANS 34, SAINTS 28 In Tennessee’s first game with Mike Mularkey as its interim coach, the Titans rallied from a 21-10 deficit to win in New Orleans, ending the Saints’ three-game winning streak.“I’m still shaking,” said Mularkey, who replaced the fired Ken Whisenhunt last week. Each team missed a field-goal attempt that would have given it the lead in the last two minutes of regulation.Drew Brees was 28 of 39 passing for 387 yards and three touchdowns, and he scored on a short keeper. However, he was sacked three times and threw a third-quarter pass to the end zone that was intercepted.STEELERS 38, RAIDERS 35 Pittsburgh earned a home victory with an 18-yard field goal with two seconds remaining, yet it again lost quarterback Ben Roethlisberger, who was to have a magnetic resonance imaging test on his left foot.Roethlisberger was in the midst of a spectacular second half when Oakland’s Aldon Smith landed on his foot during a sack. Roethlisberger, who missed a month with a sprained knee in the same leg, lay on the turf for several minutes and then gingerly went to the sideline. His backup Landry Jones turned in another steady performance in relief, though, keeping the Raiders (4-4) from reaching the halfway point with a winning record for the first time since 2001. COLTS 27, BRONCOS 24 Just five days after Indianapolis changed offensive coordinators, Andrew Luck threw for two touchdowns against visiting Denver and set up Adam Vinatieri for a tiebreaking 55-yard field goal with 6:13 to play.In earning their first win outside the A.F.C. South, the Colts snapped a three-game losing streak and ruined what many expected to be a historic homecoming for Peyton Manning, who ended up 3 yards short of becoming the N.F.L.’s career passing leader after his second interception and two Broncos penalties allowed the Colts to run the final six minutes off the clock.The result also forced Manning, who threw for 281 yards with two touchdowns, to wait at least a week to break another record held by Brett Favre: most regular-season wins by a quarterback.Luck, who broke a 17-17 tie with a pass to Ahmad Bradshaw early in the fourth, threw for 252 yards with two touchdowns in the Colts’ first game since they fired the offensive coordinator Pep Hamilton and replaced him with Rob Chudzinski.BILLS 33, DOLPHINS 17 After missing two games with a sprained left knee, quarterback Tyrod Taylor returned as Buffalo’s starter and completed 11 of 12 passes for 181 yards and a touchdown in a home victory over Miami. The Dolphins’ troubles began on their first play from scrimmage when Ryan Tannehill had Mike Pouncey’s snap go through his hands and through the end zone for a safety.Advertisement