

 Marc Tracy
 

ON COLLEGE FOOTBALL
NOV. 8, 2015
TUSCALOOSA, Ala. — The football gods must have felt that Saturday night’s Louisiana State-Alabama game was not quite historic enough in its magnitude. In the late afternoon, the rain that had threatened to flood the area halted, and an hour before kickoff, any likely possibility that the winner would not be competing for a playoff spot in December was eliminated.They work in mysterious ways, the football gods — in this case by conjuring Arkansas’ wild 53-52 overtime victory against Mississippi. On fourth-and-25 in overtime, Arkansas’ Brandon Allen completed a pass to Hunter Henry, who flung the ball backward, and Alex Collins picked it up on the bounce and ran it for a 31-yard gain. He fumbled, but his teammate Dominique Reed recovered. Then, after Arkansas scored on a 9-yard pass from Allen to Drew Morgan, its first attempt at a 2-point conversion failed, but Ole Miss’s Marquis Haynes was called for a face-mask penalty. On the next play, Allen ran it into the end zone.Ole Miss (7-3, 4-2 Southeastern Conference), No. 18 in the first College Football Playoff rankings, dropped out of The Associated Press poll. Arkansas improved to 5-4, 3-2.Although the Rebels had almost no chance for a spot in the four-team College Football Playoff, their earlier victory against Alabama meant they could have kept both the Crimson Tide and L.S.U. out of the SEC championship game in Atlanta. Now, probably not. And Alabama’s 30-16 win, sending the Tide to an 8-1 and 5-1 record and a No. 3 A.P. ranking, gave it the leg up over now-No. 9 L.S.U. (7-1, 4-1).Razorbacks Coach Bret Bielema made a verbal gaffe afterward that made the rounds on social media but summed up the joy not only in Fayetteville but in Tuscaloosa.Advertisement“I’m just looking forward to hopping on the wife — hopping on the plane,” he said, breaking out in a grin and laughing at his error, before clarifying, “Hopping on the plane with my wife.”AdvertisementIn fact, the SEC was one of five conferences that were significantly decluttered Saturday by unforeseen losses.It is fun to watch the jostling among the top 25 teams now that the playoff selection committee is releasing its rankings each Tuesday. It is also not completely irrelevant, because the rankings serve as tea leaves for what the committee thinks of the teams that it will place in or out of the Playoff on Dec. 6.But as long as there are five major conferences and four playoff spots, it is more likely than not that the final four will be made up of conference champions. So more meaningful than the week-to-week horse race between, say, Clemson and Ohio State is how difficult a path each has toward its conference championship, and how likely it is that each league’s champion will be undefeated — the closest a conference can get to guaranteeing its title winner will qualify for the Playoff.The Atlantic Coast Conference finished its homework early, establishing the likely two teams in its conference championship game Dec. 5 in Charlotte, N.C. With a decisive 23-13 home win over now-No. 19 Florida State (7-2, 5-2), No. 1 Clemson (9-0, 6-0) clinched a spot. No. 17 North Carolina’s game against Duke was reminiscent of a basketball game, not only because of the names of the participants, but because the final score was 66-31. North Carolina (8-1, 5-0) — which, in Gene Chizik, has a defensive coordinator who won a national championship as a head coach five years ago at Auburn — can clinch its appearance next weekend.On Saturday, L.S.U. was one of four previously undefeated teams, each in a different conference, to stumble. Four weeks out from the final rankings, what was once a cloudy picture is substantially more clear.SPARTANS ARE LONG SHOTS Michigan State (8-1, 4-1 Big Ten) lost to Nebraska (4-6, 2-4) in a 39-38 heartbreaker and dropped from No. 6 to No. 14. The deciding play may have involved a Nebraska receiver illegally running out of bounds.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Spartans players told reporters after the game that a potential missed call was no excuse.“I’m not going to judge that,” linebacker Riley Bullough said. “The guy made a great play.”AdvertisementThe loss meant that after weeks of hanging on — most notably last month in a win over Michigan after a botched punt led to a last-second go-ahead touchdown — the Spartans are playoff long shots. No. 2 Ohio State (9-0, 5-0) and No. 8 Iowa (9-0, 5-0) can each run the table and face off in the Big Ten championship in Indianapolis on Dec. 5.OKLAHOMA STATE A SURPRISE Saturday’s game in Stillwater, Okla., ended one Big 12 contender’s undefeated run, but most expected it would be that of host Oklahoma State. Instead, the Cowboys (9-0, 6-0) dominated Texas Christian (8-1, 5-1), intercepting quarterback Trevone Boykin four times during a 49-29 victory. They took T.C.U.’s No. 5 spot, as the Horned Frogs dropped to No. 13.The conference’s front-runners are now Oklahoma State and No. 4 Baylor (8-0, 5-0), which held off Kansas State, 31-24, on the road Thursday. Baylor has yet to play T.C.U., and both have yet to play No. 12 Oklahoma (8-1, 5-1), which dismantled Iowa State, 52-16, and whose loss to Texas is looking aberrant. If either emerges unscathed — Baylor hosts the Sooners on Saturday — it will be a strong playoff contender.GROUP OF 5 TAKES A HIT Memphis appeared to be the best chance for a team from a Group of 5 conference to make the Playoff, but after losing to Navy (7-1, 5-0 American Athletic Conference) at home, 45-20, the Tigers (8-1, 4-1) dropped from No. 15 to No. 25. Only No. 16 Houston (9-0, 5-0) is undefeated in the Football Bowl Subdivision’s other five leagues.If the Cougars finish 13-0, which would include wins over Memphis, Navy and probably Temple in the championship game, they ought to be accorded respect: the A.A.C. has four top-25 teams, compared with three each for the A.C.C. and the Pacific-12.A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: With Some Surprising Losses, the Playoff Picture Begins to Crystallize .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »