By BILL PENNINGTONNOV. 8, 2015
TAMPA, Fla. —  Trying to take the measure of the Giants’ season is like watching a leaf blow across a windswept landscape. Swiftly, the Giants have ascended, climbing to startling heights, and just as suddenly they have plummeted, grimacing through stomach-churning nose dives.Often, all of that has happened in the course of one game.It was more of the same in the Giants’ 32-18 roller coaster of a victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers here Sunday.But just past the midpoint of the team’s schedule, as the N.F.L.’s fall season lurches toward the drive for winter playoff berths, the Giants (5-4) have held their grasp on first place in the N.F.C. East. Their division may be feeble, but the Giants have, nonetheless, been in first place for a month.Moreover, one of the recurring and exasperating undercurrents of the Giants’ season — the wait to see when defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul would return from his Fourth of July fireworks accident — finally played out to a conclusion Sunday. Pierre-Paul, wearing what resembled an oven mitt on his damaged right hand, made his season debut against the Buccaneers and was on the field for roughly 75 percent of the defensive plays.AdvertisementAs they have all year, the Giants struggled on Sunday to protect a fourth-quarter lead — part of the usual ebb and flow of the season. But the presence of Pierre-Paul appeared to steady the defense in the closing moments as he applied ample pressure on Jameis Winston, Tampa Bay’s rookie quarterback. Statistically, Pierre-Paul’s impact on the game — two tackles — may not have been significant, but his teammates felt he gave the defense a boost, especially as the Giants were trying to finish off their opponent.Advertisement“He got some hits on the quarterback and some pressures,” defensive end George Selvie said of Pierre-Paul, who was credited with two hits on Winston in the passing pocket. “Those don’t show up in the box score, except that they led to incomplete passes.”With the Giants leading, 20-18, midway through the fourth quarter — the lead had been 8 points only minutes earlier — Giants kicker Josh Brown lined up for a 53-yard field-goal attempt. It might have been a risky decision to attempt such a long kick, because the surging Tampa Bay Buccaneers would have the ball at their own 43-yard line if Brown missed. But Brown, who made three other field goals Sunday, nailed the kick with 7 minutes 24 seconds left. “That was a huge play in the game because it put us up by 5 points,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said. “That made a big difference at that juncture.” Brown said he was confident approaching the kick. “We had been making those from as far as 58 yards in warm-ups,” he said.



		The Giants only punted once. Quarterback Eli Manning was not sacked in the game.The Giants host the undefeated New England Patriots on Sunday. Pierre-Paul said: “I was not perfect out there. But at the end of the game, I think we were getting enough pressure to make their quarterback feel uncomfortable.”With their eyes turning toward the season’s stretch run, the Giants had happily put the irksome Pierre-Paul saga behind them and felt another familiar surge upward.“He’s just going to keep getting better and better,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said of Pierre-Paul.Offensively for the Giants, Sunday’s victory also followed a recognizable pattern. They rushed the football with sporadic effectiveness, although they did finish with 114 yards on the ground. Quarterback Eli Manning threw often, and almost half the time in the direction of wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. Manning completed 26 of 40 passes for 213 yards, with two touchdown passes and two interceptions. Beckham had 9 receptions for 105 yards and made several pivotal third-down catches.Added together, it should have been enough for a comfortable, cruising road win. But the 2015 Giants have rarely made things easy on themselves. And Sunday was no different.The Giants entered the final quarter with a 20-12 lead, but nearing the midpoint of the period, the Buccaneers were at the Giants’ 10-yard line, threatening to tie the score.Throughout the game, the Buccaneers repeatedly struggled to get into the end zone despite driving deep into Giants territory. On this drive, however, Winston scrambled to his right on a third-down play. Under pressure, he scampered for the cone. When he reached the 3-yard line, he dived, extending the football to just cross the goal line for a touchdown that cut the Giants’ lead to 20-18 with 9 minutes 35 seconds left.AdvertisementThe Buccaneers went for the tie by trying a 2-point conversion, but Winston’s throw to wide receiver Russell Shepard was high. Shepard made the catch, but a foot was out of bounds.Winston, who was selected with the first pick of the N.F.L. draft, had an uneven day. He completed 19 of 36 passes for 249 yards but was ineffective during several crucial drives. He did run for that fourth-quarter touchdown but did not throw a touchdown pass. He was also not intercepted.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve got to get the football into the end zone on some of those situations,” Winston said outside the Buccaneers’ locker room. “I take that on me. I’ve got to find a way to make us be better at that.”After Tampa Bay cut the Giants’ lead to 2 points, two field goals by Josh Brown — one a 53-yarder — gave the Giants some breathing room.The score ballooned on the final play. The Buccaneers tried a last-ditch, multiple-lateral play from deep in their own territory. The Giants’ Trevin Wade recovered a fumble after the last lateral and ran into the end zone.The game started inauspiciously for the Giants with Manning’s first pass deflected by Beckham into the hands of cornerback Sterling Moore, who returned the interception 18 yards to the Giants’ 13.But setting a course it would replicate for most of the game, the Tampa Bay offense sputtered, especially when Winston badly overthrew his intended receiver in the corner of the end zone on third down. The Buccaneers were forced to settle for a 25-yard field goal by Connor Barth.The Giants answered with a field goal on their next possession. But their pass defense, scorched for seven touchdown passes a week earlier in New Orleans, was careless again as Tampa Bay wide receiver Mike Evans ran unimpeded down the middle of the field on the Buccaneers’ next possession. Winston passed to Evans for a 68-yard gain. But once again, he could not get the Buccaneers into the end zone, throwing two incompletions. Barth put Tampa Bay ahead, 6-3, with a 28-yard field goal.AdvertisementThe Giants mounted an impressive 12-play drive on their next possession, which culminated with an 8-yard touchdown pass from Manning to Rueben Randle. In the second quarter, a 4-yard touchdown pass from Manning to running back Shane Vereen increased the Giants’ lead to 17-6.“I thought the defense would bounce back from last week and we did,” Coughlin said. “It was key that we held them to mostly field goals. At the end of the game, we did finish things.”Then Coughlin added a sentiment that summarized the thoughts of many in the locker room. And described his team’s up-and-down season.“And having Jason Pierre-Paul back,” Coughlin said, “that gave us a lift.”EXTRA POINTSDefensive tackle JOHNATHAN HANKINS, the Giants’ best run-stopping lineman, tore his left pectoral muscle and left the game. The Giants have lost two other starters to the same injury: left tackle WILL BEATTY, who has yet to play this season, and cornerback PRINCE AMUKAMARA, who has missed the last four games.A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Giants Escape With Win and Credit Pierre-Paul With Helping.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.