
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
NOV. 8, 2015
The news out of Columbia, Mo., this weekend is disturbing yet also exhilarating.Dozens of black University of Missouri football players said Saturday that they would boycott all football-related activities — including games — until the university’s president, Timothy M. Wolfe, steps down or is removed. At issue, the players and other student activists say, are recent instances of racism directed at black students and a lack of action from administrators that the students contend have combined to create an intolerable atmosphere on campus.The reports of racial episodes are disturbing. But the players’ protest is exhilarating because it is the most high-profile example to date in a continuing revolution in which the athletes who drive the multibillion-dollar college sports machine have begun to use their visibility to demand change.What makes the Missouri team’s protest stand out even more is that it is not about the business of sports: compensation, image rights, labor issues or N.C.A.A. rules. It was initiated by black players showing solidarity with fellow black students who felt their concerns had not been adequately addressed by university administrators. It was athletes lending their standing to a fight that, on its face, did not involve them.Football teams have stood their ground before and paid the consequences. Two seasons ago, Grambling football players forfeited a game at Jackson State after they refused to travel in protest over poor facilities, transportation problems and other things they considered examples of mistreatment at their university.AdvertisementAlthough Grambling, a member of the Southwestern Athletic Conference, would never be confused with a major conference athletic program like Missouri, the Grambling players showed the power of athletes at any level to get an administration’s attention. Missouri’s players, who competed in one of the so-called Power 5 conferences, the Southeastern Conference, are positioned to do even more.AdvertisementTheir white teammates, and their coaches, completed the circle of support by joining the protest Sunday. It’s unclear if other Missouri athletes, notably the basketball team, scheduled to open its season Friday, will follow suit. But even if it does not, it is important — essential, in fact — to point out that the athletes on the football team, by lending their support to what might have been an easily marginalized campus protest, are breaking out of a cocoon that in the past has separated African-American athletes on campus from their less visible peers.At the top of the college sports ladder, black athletes, especially those who work in the football and basketball factories, are often seduced and coddled but also isolated — intellectually if not physically — from “ordinary” black students who lack visibility and voice.The Missouri players have declared, “We are one,” and it is hard to overstate the significance of that.The athletes are displaying a newfound understanding of their power in a system that relies on their gratitude and their unquestioning labor, but they are also demonstrating their willingness to bring that leverage to bear.At the country’s most prominent football and basketball programs, the ones that bring in a majority of the revenue in college sports, the largest percentage of star athletes are African-American.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At Missouri, 60 of the 124 football players are black, The Columbia Missourian reported. About 7 percent of the student population of 35,000 is African-American.In the past, the ability of mostly white head coaches and administrators to get their mostly black athletes to see themselves as separate from the larger university community often kept wider issues that affect black Americans from disrupting the system.AdvertisementBut from time to time, black athletes have broken out of the bubble to take social stands.The image of the sprinters Tommie Smith and John Carlos demonstrating on the victory stand, fists raised high, at the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City is an icon of athletic protest. As a student at U.C.L.A., Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (then Lew Alcindor) joined black student protests on campus.More recently, on the professional level, black players on the St. Louis Rams and the Cleveland Browns showed solidarity with protesters in their communities after separate shootings by the police, and N.B.A. players lent their voices to the campaigns for the ouster of Donald Sterling, the former Los Angeles Clippers owner, after he was recorded making racist comments.Derrick Rose was the first N.B.A. player to wear an “I Can’t Breathe” shirt during warm-ups last season, a reference to the words spoken by Eric Garner, who died after police officers on Staten Island used a chokehold to subdue him. LeBron James, Kyrie Irving and other players around the league followed suit.During a recent conversation, Abdul-Jabbar suggested that many contemporary black athletes now recognized that they were protected from the vagaries of racism that earlier generations had to face. That, he said, has emboldened them to respond to incidents affecting the black public at large.“They had something to say about it because they were parents of boys, and they realized that their sons can get killed just like that in the same circumstances,” Abdul-Jabbar said.There are complicating issues at Missouri that will come into play. Are the athletes violating their scholarships’ terms by refusing to practice and play? And what discipline could await Coach Gary Pinkel, who wrote on Twitter in support of the players, effectively backing them in a stand against the university?I am not ready to say that this will catch on. With a 4-5 record and not about to play in any of the most prominent bowls, Missouri’s football team has little to lose this season.But the players there have made it clear that they believe this is a human rights issue, and that they are in a position to affect the outcome. Therein lies their power.Good for them.Because of an editing error, the Sports of The Times column on Monday, about the involvement of black football players at the University of Missouri in protests about race relations on campus, described The Columbia Missourian incorrectly. It is a daily newspaper managed by professional editors and staffed by Missouri School of Journalism students; it is not “the campus newspaper.” (The Maneater is the official student newspaper.)Email: wcr@nytimes.com
A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Missouri Football Players Use Their Power Off the Field .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »