AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 99, Lakers 95By Andrew KehThe anticipatory murmurs swelled up the Madison Square Garden stands like an incoming wave each time Kobe Bryant held the basketball in his hands.Bryant’s solipsistic playing style — eyes down, delaying, waiting, as bodies swirl around him — has always seemed tailor-made for the arena’s theater-style lighting. If the game on Sunday afternoon between the Knicks and the Los Angeles Lakers proves to have been Bryant’s last time appearing on that court, New York fans at least savored his every move.Just a few games into his 20th professional season, still regaining his strength and timing after a spate of injuries, Bryant, 37, has said that he will retire next spring when the season concludes, barring a late change of mind. Amid the cheers and boos, Bryant obliged fans as best he could. He pump-faked and jab-stepped and launched ill-advised shots. Sometimes, they went in. It was the Bryant — or some version of him, at least — that people have long paid to see.It was a reflective afternoon that, among other things, reinforced the notion that Bryant’s days of single-handedly deciding games are over. Despite holding a late lead, the Lakers fell to the Knicks, 99-95. Afterward, Bryant left the court with his hand in the air.“I don’t think you understand how much I watched this building growing up,” said Bryant, who recalled watching videotapes of Knicks games from the 1970s, ’80s and ’90s when he was younger. “I was, like, truly, truly a fan.”Bryant scored 18 points, shooting 6 for 19 from the field. It was a scrappy game, one essentially decided when Langston Galloway made a 3-pointer with two minutes left to give the Knicks a 92-90 lead. Seconds later, on the other end, Bryant missed a jumper from the corner. The Lakers did not score again until 24.9 seconds remained.Carmelo Anthony scored 24 points to lead the Knicks, who notched their first victory at home and improved to 3-4.After the game, Bryant reiterated more forcefully what he had been hinting at for some time: that this season will more than likely be his last. But he has yet to speak in absolutes. “My message has been consistent all the time,” he said. “If I change my mind, I’ll come back and play.”The discussion and speculation — not to mention the tributes and ceremonial remembrances — are likely to continue over the coming weeks and months.Bryant received a warm ovation when his name was announced before tipoff. Forty seconds into the game, when he handled the ball for the first time, the stands again responded with loud applause. Bryant, wearing a long-sleeved purple shirt under his uniform, missed his first two shots. When he squared up alone near the right sideline, with his right toe on the 3-point line, and sank his first basket, the arena erupted in cheers. He drained his next two shots, a deep 2 and a 3, before taking a seat on the bench and wrapping an orange towel around his neck.It was Bryant’s first game at the Garden, a place that has some significance to him, since Dec. 12, 2012. He scored his first career point at the Garden on Nov. 5, 1996. He recalled that experience on Sunday, saying it felt as if someone had taken one of his old Knicks tapes and pressed fast-forward.On Feb. 2, 2009, Bryant scored 61 points, a record point total for the arena at the time (Anthony scored 62 in the building last year).“You know, if this is his last hurrah, I’m going to miss him,” Anthony said.Bryant’s presence, in some ways, overshadowed the game, a matchup of two rebuilding teams. On the court were two prominent rookies, point guard D’Angelo Russell of the Lakers and forward Kristaps Porzingis of the Knicks, picked second and fourth in the 2015 draft. Russell, who has had a halting start to the season, finished with 6 points and 3 assists. Porzingis had 12 points and 10 rebounds, notching his third double-double.“The kid, he’s going to be a pretty damn good basketball player,” Lakers Coach Byron Scott said of Porzingis before the game.Porzingis was active all afternoon, energizing the fans when he drilled a 3-pointer with about two minutes left before halftime to give the Knicks a 45-44 lead. His foul on Bryant in the third quarter led to the ejection of Knicks Coach Derek Fisher, who argued the call with officials.“Get tossed out for something worth debating, not that one,” Bryant joked in reference to Fisher, his former teammate.With just over a minute left in the game, Porzingis dived to the floor to secure a rebound at the feet of Bryant, who smothered Porzingis, but not before the Knicks called timeout. Bryant patted Porzingis on the back as the teams went to their benches.After the game, a beaming Porzingis called Bryant his idol and gushed about the brief interaction.“He just told me, ‘Keep working, young fella,’ ” Porzingis said.Advertisement