By BENJAMIN HOFFMANNOV. 8, 2015
The Pittsburgh Steelers finally looked like they were back to normal on offense, with Ben Roethlisberger piling up 334 passing yards against the Oakland Raiders, but a foot injury late in the game could send the quarterback back to the bench indefinitely, casting doubt onto the team’s playoff chances.Without Roethlisberger, the Steelers held on to narrowly beat Oakland, 38-35, but they finished the game with Landry Jones at quarterback after Roethlisberger injured his left foot while being sacked by Aldon Smith. Roethlisberger was carted off the field and ended up leaving the stadium for further evaluation. No updates have been provided.Roethlisberger’s injury marred a career game for Antonio Brown. The wide receiver set franchise records with 17 catches for 284 yards. He is the player who would be most affected if Roethlisberger misses a significant amount of time, as he struggled to remain productive earlier this season while Roethlisberger recovered from a knee injury. In four starts with Michael Vick and Landry Jones starting, the Steelers went 2-2 and Brown, typically among the best wide receivers in the N.F.L., had just 17 receptions for 235 yards, with most of the production coming in a Week 7 loss to Kansas City.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prior to the injury, Roethlisberger had passed Johnny Unitas and Joe Montana on the career passing yards list and now sits 14th all-time with 40,565 yards.In place of Roethlisberger, Jones completed 4 of his 6 passes for 79 yards, and a late field goal by Chris Boswell sealed the victory.There’s still time for the Steelers to get healthy. They face the struggling Cleveland Browns in Pittsburgh next week and have a bye in Week 11.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.