By VIV BERNSTEINNOV. 8, 2015
CHARLOTTE, N.C. —  The Green Bay Packers and the Seattle Seahawks have stood atop the hierarchy in the N.F.C. for years, with the Carolina Panthers a step behind and their quarterback, Cam Newton, a rung below Aaron Rodgers and Russell Wilson.It is too early to know if the Panthers this season have finally changed the natural order in the conference. But halfway through the schedule, it is now their N.F.C. to lose.Carolina has vanquished both of those teams on the way to an 8-0 record for the first time in franchise history. The latest win came on Sunday, by 37-29 over Green Bay at Bank of America Stadium.Newton threw for 297 yards and three touchdowns, though the Panthers nearly blew a 23-point lead in the fourth quarter before holding on in a breathless finish when linebacker Thomas Davis intercepted Rodgers at the Panthers’ 4-yard line with 1 minute 53 seconds to go.The Panthers, the only undefeated team in the N.F.C., now have a two-game lead in the battle for home-field advantage through the conference playoffs; Atlanta is the only team on their schedule in the second half of the season with a winning record. Green Bay dropped to 6-2, tied with the Minnesota Vikings atop the N.F.C. North.Advertisement“We knew that this game was going to prove a lot, not only to the league but to the conference, but to ourselves,” Newton said after the game. “Playing a great team, a team that we know is going to most likely be in the playoffs, with the talent level they have there, just stepping up to the challenge. Like I said, it wasn’t pretty at times, but yet we’re doing something that’s hard to do in this league, and that’s become 8-0.Advertisement“Are we satisfied? No. We know that perfect Panther game is still out there.”This one was far from perfect.It started out about as well as the Panthers could have hoped, particularly after what happened when the teams met at Green Bay a year ago. The Panthers fell behind, 21-0, in the first quarter and were blown out, 38-17.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They weren’t going to let that happen again, particularly in Charlotte. Newton asserted his home-field advantage even before the game. He spotted a Green Bay Packers banner hanging on the stadium wall — there were thousands of Packers fans on hand — and he tore it down.“You’re not going to sell a Whopper at a McDonald’s,” he explained later.That home-field advantage came alive in the second quarter. Down by 7-3 after the first quarter, the Panthers dominated in the second, piling up 24 points to build a 27-7 halftime lead. Newton threw for 209 yards in the half and tossed two second-quarter touchdowns. He also ran for a score in a game that looked to be a blowout.By the fourth, the lead was 37-14 after Newton had found the rookie Devin Funchess for a 14-yard score, the first touchdown catch of Funchess’s career, with 9:27 remaining.Remember last week, when the Panthers blew a 17-point lead to Indianapolis before eking out a 29-26 victory in overtime? Something similar nearly happened on Sunday.Rodgers directed consecutive touchdown drives against the suddenly wavering Panthers defense to pull to within 37-29. On the first play of the next drive after the Packers scored, Newton was intercepted by Damarious Randall. The Packers suddenly had the ball at the Carolina 22-yard line with 3:43 to go.AdvertisementGreen Bay made it to the 4, with Rodgers connecting with Randall Cobb on a fourth-down play to keep the drive alive. But Rodgers could not pull it off again. With a fourth-and-goal at the 4, Rodgers was pressured by defensive lineman Kawann Short, who forced Rodgers to throw toward the end zone. Davis leapt for an interception.“This was a good win, a great win for this team, this organization and the fans,” the Panthers’ veteran safety Roman Harper said. “But at the end of the day, we’ve got a lot of mistakes we’ve got to get corrected. We’ve got to learn how to choke teams off, we’ve got to learn how to finish and we’ve got to keep going, man. There’s no reason.“I don’t care who these quarterbacks are, who this offense is — we’ve got to go out there and play, and we’ve got to finish and execute, and when we get fourth downs and big third downs, we’ve got to get off the field.”When Rodgers watched a replay of the Davis interception, he realized Cobb was wide open.“Yeah, there are frustrations in this game,” said Rodgers, who passed for 369 yards and four touchdowns, along with the interception. “It’s a frustrating game. It’s exhilarating, and also frustrating when you make a mistake like that. I had the easy opportunity there for a pitch-and-catch touchdown, but I got scared by something. I can’t explain it. It was a mistake by myself.“I will definitely be thinking about that one on the ride home.”A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: By Holding Off Packers, the Panthers Make the N.F.C. Theirs to Lose .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.