AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaStep by step, the Islanders are trying to become part of the Brooklyn landscape, playing at a new home rink while trying new methods to build their fan base.On Tuesday — in their ninth game at Barclays Center — the Islanders wore black and white alternate uniforms, a departure from their traditional blue and orange and a color scheme similar to that of their co-tenants, the Nets of the N.B.A. The Islanders defeated the Devils that night and perhaps won over a few more fans in the process.Harry Tomback, a 22-year-old fan from Brooklyn sporting a black No. 55 Johnny Boychuk jersey, committed to the new look when the sweaters were unveiled in mid-September.“I dig the look,” Tomback said. “I think it’s really sharp, and you can wear black with anything. This look is very Brooklyn. I hope they keep winning wearing these.”That is the sort of sentiment that Barclays Center’s chief executive, Brett Yormark, is seeking as the Islanders try to carve out a new fan base in New York City while maintaining links to Long Island, where they played for 43 years. Yormark said that on average, about 5,700 fans were taking the Long Island Rail Road to the team’s games in Brooklyn. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority relayed an average closer to 5,000. But either way, the number is significant. Yormark said that the Islanders’ new jersey had roots with the Nets, who adopted the colors when they moved to Brooklyn in 2012, and that the idea came from Jay Z, who owned a small percentage of the Nets at the time.“Jay Z felt, if you go back to the 1950s and ’60s, the subway stations had black and white tiles,” Yormark said. “He really thought about what our brand palette should look like, and he said, ‘We have to go black and white and speak to the inspiration of Brooklyn.’ ”The Islanders’ black and white jerseys retain a hint of blue and orange in the collar, and the white “NY” logo on the front includes orange lines. A “B,” for Brooklyn, in the hem of the jersey has orange stripes, too.Sales of the sweaters have been brisk at the team store at Barclays Center. The N.H.L. said it was the third-highest-selling jersey at the league store in Midtown Manhattan.“I have to be honest: I really like them,” right wing Cal Clutterbuck said after Tuesday’s 2-1 victory. “I think they make us look intimidating.”A 2-1 home loss to the Boston Bruins on Sunday dropped the Islanders to 5-3-2 at Barclays Center and 7-5-3 over all. They have struggled of late, with their game in their alternate jerseys last week representing their lone win in six games, a stretch in which they have nine goals.Winning at their new home rink will be imperative for the Islanders, who earned a playoff berth last season with the help of 25 victories at Nassau Coliseum in their final year there.The Islanders, whose loud crowds at the Coliseum gave the team a decided advantage, are averaging just over 12,000 fans at Barclays, which has a hockey capacity of 15,795. That figure has the team near the bottom of the N.H.L. in average home attendance.Still, Yormark said the color combination of the new sweaters, which the Islanders are wearing in 12 of 41 home games, seemed to be working as it did for the Nets.“Blue and gold are the official colors of the borough, but no one really speaks to that,” he said. “The adopted colors are black and white. That is what people wear. When we launched the Nets and their jersey, it became a lifestyle movement. We’re using the same playbook here. We want people to think the jersey is hip and cool.”Left wing Matt Martin often speaks with reverence of Nassau Coliseum, where he played for his first six seasons. But he is willing to embrace the team’s new home and its bold fashion statement.“I love our classic jerseys, but this is a nice change,” he said. “I really like them. We look bigger and meaner.”Advertisement