AdvertisementSupported byJets 28, Jaguars 23By Ben ShpigelEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The Jets reached the midway point of their season Sunday, when they played their second game of November, that month in N.F.L. circles akin to moving day of a golf tournament: a time to get into position for the final push.No longer is it early. Perhapses and maybes matter less. Pretenders fade, and contenders endure. Through seven games, the Jets occupied a realm somewhere in between. They still do after eight, despite edging the Jacksonville Jaguars, 28-23, to reach 5-3. The victory produced divergent opinions among players whose efforts produced six sacks, four takeaways and four touchdowns but also a final score that was far closer than it should have been, or needed to be. One faction championed the zero-sum nature of the league: The Jets came; they played (with a thin secondary, a diluted offensive line and a quarterback, Ryan Fitzpatrick, facing surgery for a thumb injury); and they won. “It doesn’t matter how it looks,” receiver Brandon Marshall said. “It doesn’t matter how it feels.”Another segment acknowledged the lapses that fueled the Jets’ inability to distance themselves from Jacksonville — allowing one touchdown with 12 seconds left in the first half, another with 2 minutes 16 seconds remaining in the second half — and how those struggles could portend difficulty, if not doom, as soon as their next game, Thursday night against Buffalo (4-4), when Rex Ryan returns to MetLife Stadium. “We’ve got to beat teams we’re supposed to beat,” defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson said. “Put them away.”More teams of Jacksonville’s ilk will soon be lining up across from the Jets. Of their remaining eight games, only two — New England (8-0) and the Giants (5-4) — are against teams with winning records.It is possible the Jets will play some of those without Fitzpatrick. Wearing a glove that protected a left thumb ravaged by a ligament tear, Fitzpatrick supplied the sort of steady performance — 21 of 34 for 272 yards and two touchdowns, with no interceptions — that has endeared him to coaches and teammates. All along, Fitzpatrick has known that the injury — sustained on his nonthrowing hand in the first drive of last week’s loss at Oakland — would require surgery at some point. He said last week that he was “extremely confident” that he could play through the discomfort, but he told CBS that he would “probably” have surgery before the end of the season.Asked if he would have surgery Friday, as CBS’s sideline reporter Jamie Erdahl speculated, Fitzpatrick said: “I don’t know. It’s still kind of up in the air.” Asked whether surgery Friday is a possibility, Fitzpatrick deflected the question, saying: “Yes. I have to get surgery at some point.”Coach Todd Bowles, when asked last week, said the team was unsure. But the absence of Fitzpatrick, however temporary, would thrust Geno Smith into the position of helping the Jets vie for a playoff berth. It is a possibility the Jets will confront at the appropriate time. More pressing is how they can revive a sagging running game. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, Chris Ivory’s 26 rushing yards were the fewest ever for a player with at least 23 carries. During the past three weeks, the Jets have averaged 2.5 yards per attempt.“The yards aren’t there right now,” right tackle Breno Giacomini said, “but we’ve done it.”The stagnation on Sunday hampered their ability to control possession and extend drives, particularly at the end of the first half. With all three timeouts and the ball at their own 15-yard line, the Jets opted to run the ball on three straight plays, gaining 4 yards. A short punt gave Jacksonville the ball at midfield, and two completions from Blake Bortles to Allen Hurns, the second on a 30-yarder that badly beat Antonio Cromartie (who later left with a left thigh injury), drew the Jaguars within 14-10 at halftime. The victory played out in tribute to a man sitting on Jacksonville’s side of the press box. In two years as the Jets’ general manager, that man, John Idzik, now a Jaguars executive, presided over front-office dysfunction and assembled a team that was summarily dismantled — and improved — by his successor.Several of Idzik’s acquisitions are long gone from the Jets, but three bested the Jaguars on Sunday. His first (and only) major free-agent signing, Eric Decker, amassed 79 receiving yards on six catches, including a 7-yard touchdown that erased an early 3-0 deficit. His first (and only) draft-day trade netted Ivory, whose struggles away from the 1-yard line — 21 carries for 24 yards — were balanced by two touchdowns. His first (of three, perhaps) shrewd in-season move last year, signing Marcus Williams to the practice squad, produced two interceptions. Of the Jets’ six sacks of Bortles, none were more important than Calvin Pace’s strip and subsequent fumble recovery with 5:29 left. It defused a promising series by Jacksonville, which, trailing by 21-16 at the time, had driven as deep as the Jets’ 10-yard line.“A momentum changer,” cornerback Darrelle Revis said.The Jets, after recovering on their own 34, went three-and-out. But after Kellen Davis recovered Nick Marshall’s muffed punt, Fitzpatrick connected with Brandon Marshall on a diving 20-yard touchdown that restored their lead to 28-16. A late score from Bortles to Bryan Walters, created by the eagerness of Jets cornerback Buster Skrine, provided the margin of victory.Linebacker David Harris described the exercise of reviewing the film of last week’s loss at Oakland as “disgusting.” Confronted by a short week, the Jets might not even watch Sunday’s game again. The second it ended, they resumed preparation for Buffalo and for Ryan, whose homecoming was greeted with little more than a shrug.“We had bad seasons,” Richardson said, “but it was just a good time.”So it was. The Jets are in a good place with Ryan’s replacement. They hope to be in a better one by this time next week.EXTRA POINTSNick Mangold started at center after missing last week’s game with a neck injury, but a recurrence forced him out Sunday after four possessions. “Hopefully, things go better,” Mangold said. ... Todd Bowles said he was hopeful that the other member of the Jets’ injury-ravaged offensive line, guard Willie Colon (knee), who was inactive Sunday, could play Thursday night. ... With Nick Folk unavailable to kick (right quadriceps strain), punter Ryan Quigley assumed the kickoff duties and made all four extra-point attempts. Bowles said he would have a better sense Monday whether the Jets will need to bring in a kicker this week. ... The rookie linebacker Lorenzo Mauldin contributed the first two sacks of his career.Advertisement