AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — In English soccer, as in life, the pauper can be king for a day.With a third of the season gone, Leicester City is still up near the top of the Premier League, while Chelsea still cannot get a win to start its climb from near the bottom of the standings.A Leicester player, Jamie Vardy, has now scored in nine straight games, the first Englishman to do so in the top division since the Blackpool striker Stan Mortensen back in the early 1950s. Vardy’s quickness, along with his streak of goals, has propelled him from non-league soccer to a spot on the English national team.And over Chelsea’s last nine games, its Brazilian-born striker Diego Costa has appeared more likely to throw punches than fire in goals. Chelsea Manager José Mourinho was banned from attending Saturday’s game at Stoke City following his incessant outbursts against referees, and the team’s fall has been deeper and faster than that of any other champion in the Premier League era.Leicester Manager Claudio Ranieri — whose team is third in the standings — insists his target for the season remains staying safe in the Premier League and not the lofty ambition of qualifying for the Champions League. And with Chelsea 16th in the 20-team league, any players of Mourinho’s who dare to speak to the media are saying they are trying everything they know and will turn this around.The news wasn’t just from the top league. Way, way down in the seventh league of English soccer, a substitute, Richie Allen, scored the goal of a lifetime in the F.A. Cup. With his back to goal and three defenders close enough to touch him, Allen suddenly turned around, exchanged short passes with a teammate and then curled a shot between the goalkeeper and the far post.The movement and control of that execution was more in the class of Johan Cruyff than of a part-time player in the lower leagues. When local reporters asked Allen where that inspiration came from, he answered, “I had the ball. I was trying to do something with it, but I was just going further and further from the goal.“I needed to try something, and I guess it was a miracle.”That “miracle” gave Salford City a 2-0 win against Notts County, which at one time was a grand old club in England. One of Salford’s owners spoke of experiencing a high he had not felt in soccer for years. “It puts faith back into you of what football can be like,” said Gary Neville.In fact, Neville has never known that feeling. He is one of five former Manchester United players who started out together as schoolboys chosen by Alex Ferguson to grow up together as game winners for United.Gary and his brother Phil Neville, Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes and Nicky Butt invested in Salford in March 2014, after their careers had run their course at United. They started at the top, so they could never have known what it felt like to be giant killers until this weekend, when their team beat the odds.It is known as “The Magic of the Cup.” What Vardy is accomplishing is also a kind of magic.Week after week, Vardy, 28, reminds himself that he would be nothing if he were not working at his game. He dedicates hours studying videos of opposing defenses, making his own luck.Vardy is gifted with speed and has discovered perseverance. On Saturday, he played on after being injured when he was taken down by a high tackle from Watford’s Brazilian goalkeeper, Heurelho Gomes. Vardy picked himself up and hit the resulting penalty kick as hard as a ball can be hit, straight down the middle.Leicester won, 2-1, to stay at the top of the league alongside Manchester City, Arsenal and United. Vardy is just one goal away from tying the former United striker Ruud van Nistelrooy as the only player since the Premier League started in 1992 to score in 10 straight games.However, the Dutchman van Nistelrooy’s achievement was spread over two seasons, while Vardy would be the first to do it in one.And Chelsea? Mourinho watched on television as his team went down, 1-0, at Stoke City. Unable to score, and unable to prevent the opponents from doing so, Chelsea is in the midst of an unprecedented downturn.Mourinho’s job is on the line four months after he signed a contract extension with Chelsea. His players say they are giving everything for him, but the evidence is not a pretty sight for the owner Roman Abramovich and his management team.A splendid goal by Stoke City’s Marko Arnautovic sealed Chelsea’s seventh loss in 12 league games. It was splendid because of the athleticism and improvisation as Arnautovic readjusted his body in midair and side- volleyed the ball into the goal from 10 yards out.Mark Hughes, the Stoke manager, was reminded after the game that the goal was reminiscent of the way he used to score for Manchester United, Barcelona and Chelsea.Hughes said the acrobatics were needed just because he could not head a ball, and maybe Arnautovic is the same. But managers are part of a clan, and Hughes believes Mourinho has earned the right to pull his team out of this nosedive.The problem is that the spiral seems relentless, and now there is a two-week break from league play for national team games. Mourinho will have little contact with the players during that time, but he still is accountable to the owner.Advertisement