AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressIllinois fired Athletic Director Mike Thomas, saying that he had done nothing wrong but that a change was needed with the department in crisis after football and women’s basketball players said they had been mistreated by their coaches. Thomas will be paid $2.5 million to buy out the remainder of his contract.The university also released the final reports, more than 1,200 pages in all, stemming from investigations into the allegations. The football report found that Coach Tim Beckman, who was fired in August, had pressured players to play while hurt. The women’s basketball inquiry found no evidence to back up allegations from former players that, among other things, they had been pressured to play while hurt. ■ Five women joined a lawsuit filed against the escort Katina Powell, saying that in her book, she falsely alleged that they had participated in prostitution at the University of Louisville. The lawsuit was filed by a student who accused Powell of damaging the university’s reputation in her book, “Breaking Cardinal Rules: Basketball and the Escort Queen,” in which she alleged that a staff member with the men’s basketball team had hired her and other dancers to strip for and have sex with recruits and players. (AP)■ Ohio State Coach Urban Meyer announced that J. T. Barrett, back from a one-game suspension, would start at quarterback. On Saturday, Cardale Jones started and led the team to a win over Minnesota. (AP)■ The fourth-year junior receiver Micheal Summers, who started for much of the past three seasons, quit Georgia Tech’s team. Asked if Summers gave him a reason, Coach Paul Johnson said only that “he didn’t want to play anymore.” (AP)■ Utah Coach Kyle Whittingham said the redshirt freshman Chase Hansen would miss the rest of the year after he injured his leg during the final play of a win over Washington on Saturday. Hansen, who was making his first start at safety and led the 10th-ranked Utes with 11 tackles, is expected to be ready for 2016. He has been expected to be the starting quarterback next season. Advertisement