By MARC TRACYNOV. 9, 2015
COLUMBIA, Mo. —  Jonathan Butler’s hunger strike to protest what he viewed as systemic racism at the University of Missouri, where he is a graduate student, was raised to the level of national news Saturday night, when black Missouri football players went on strike pending the removal of the university system president, Tim Wolfe. On Sunday, the rest of the Tigers squad joined in, and their coach backed them.A couple of hours after Wolfe resigned Monday afternoon — a week after Butler’s hunger strike began — the protester Ayana Poole smiled when she told a crowd of hundreds gathered on Missouri’s Mel Carnahan Quadrangle that the team was back in action.“They will continue to practice,” she said of the Tigers (4-5, 1-5 Southeastern Conference), who will host Brigham Young (7-2) in Kansas City, Mo., on Saturday night.The scene illustrated the team’s ability to effect change.“Football has a long history in America of always bringing people together and making attention,” said Payton Head, the president of the Missouri Student Association. Noting that the first homecoming game was generally thought to have been played here in 1911, he added: “They came back to be home. They unified around a game.”AdvertisementPastor James Gray, who had helped lead protesters in prayer, referred to the $1 million Missouri would have forfeited had the B.Y.U. game not taken place.Advertisement“When we got together with the football team, it hit them in the purse,” he said. “It makes a difference.”Even Athletic Director Mack Rhoades acknowledged the team’s effort. “They decided to be leaders on this issue,” he said.Several football players recognized early on their potential power, and by Saturday night, they realized they possessed the leverage to exert it.Gary Pinkel, the University of Missouri football coach, explained why he chose to support his players when they said they would not play until the president of the university stepped down.“We just wanted to use our platform to take a stance for a fellow concerned student on an issue,” safety Ian Simon, a team captain, said in a statement Monday.Coach Gary Pinkel said at a news conference Monday that he was persuaded to back his players not because of politics or a desire to see Wolfe removed, but because of their concern for another student’s life.“I believe they felt if we don’t help him, if he doesn’t start eating, he’s going to die,” Pinkel said, referring to Butler.He added: “I just know my players were suffering and they felt awful. And, again, I’m like their dad, you know? And I wanted to help them in any way.”AdvertisementWide receiver J’Mon Moore said Monday that a friend told him about Butler. He first met him Wednesday, and as they talked, Butler collapsed, spurring a sense of urgency. Moore and safety Anthony Sherrils began making plans for a strike on Thursday, although there had been no plans to boycott that night’s home game, a 31-13 loss to Mississippi State.“White teammates were aware, and once we explained to them the things that were going on on campus, and we informed them some of the issues, they were definitely on board,” Moore said. “They understood where we were coming from.”Pinkel said that on Saturday night several players asked him if it was O.K. if they visited the encampment on Carnahan quad that had been struck up in solidarity with Butler. Pinkel agreed. They called later that night, determined to strike.“They were very emotional; very, very concerned for his life,” Pinkel said. “At that time, they were discussing what they would plan on doing.”Pinkel suggested several alternatives. At other colleges, he noted, teams have marched through campus or put decals on their helmets to draw attention to causes.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We went back and forth,” he said. “I kept asking, was it the right thing to do, should we wait? And I’m now talking to guys with tears in their eyes, crying. And they asked me if I was going to support them.”He did, and although he tried to persuade them to wait until the next morning, they sent out a Twitter message announcing the strike that night. Pinkel acknowledged that some players had most likely learned of the strike via Twitter.According to The Missourian, the players communicated their plans to protesters earlier Saturday via Pat Ivey, the strength and conditioning coach and a former player, as well as another former player. Ivey is the leader of Mizzou Men for Men, a group for athletes that discusses topics including race and treatment of women. He declined to comment Monday.AdvertisementPinkel pointed to Men for Men as a way for athletes to engage with campus issues, noting that two weeks ago the group discussed race and came up with things the team could do that would be of benefit.“There are problems on our campus, and the good news is we’re going to make it better,” Pinkel said.On Sunday, Pinkel posted on Twitter a photo of the players and a message: “The Mizzou Family stands as one. We are united. We are behind our players.”On social media and in person Monday, several black players articulated support and affection for Pinkel, who is white.“I knew from the jump that Coach Pinkel was going to support us,” Moore said. “Coach Pinkel supports his players. We’re all his sons.”Pinkel and Rhoades denied that any kind of precedent had been set. In his 39 years of coaching, Pinkel said, he had never experienced anything like this.“We run a very disciplined, structured program here,” he said.“But under these circumstances, you back off a little bit.”Steve Walentik contributed reporting from Columbia.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Charting the X’s and O’s of a Protest Movement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.