AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Ryan Fitzpatrick has a torn ligament in his left thumb that only surgery can repair. That surgery, he hinted strongly, is likely to occur Friday so that he can maximize recovery time before the Jets’ next game. “We’ll see,” Fitzpatrick said, with a laugh. “You’ll probably know something by Friday.”Fitzpatrick addressed the status of the thumb on his nonthrowing hand the day after the CBS reporter Jamie Erdahl reported before the Jets’ 28-23 victory against Jacksonville that he would “probably” have the procedure before the end of the season. She then speculated that it would be Friday, the day after Buffalo visits MetLife Stadium, so that Fitzpatrick would have nine days to let the incision heal before the Jets’ Nov. 22 game in Houston. It would not make sense, Fitzpatrick said, to have the surgery any other day during the season besides Friday. From what he has been told, Fitzpatrick said waiting too long could complicate the nature of the procedure.“Obviously, I don’t want to miss any time or any games,” Fitzpatrick said. “The decision’s really going to be based off that.” Fitzpatrick initially said he was confident that he would wait until after the season before having his thumb fixed. But his ability to practice all last week with a padded glove and play Sunday — and play well, completing 21 of 34 passes for 272 yards and two touchdowns, with no interceptions — with a molded brace changed the calculus. He said that he did not feel much pain, and that there were only two plays when he noticed it.“I was surprised at how little of an issue it was,” Fitzpatrick said.Heading into Thursday night’s game, Fitzpatrick might actually be one of the healthier Jets. Their secondary must absorb the absences of safeties Calvin Pryor and Dion Bailey, who both have high ankle sprains, and, perhaps, cornerback Antonio Cromartie, who sustained a deep thigh bruise Sunday.Coach Todd Bowles mentioned Rontez Miles and Ronald Martin, currently on the practice squad, as potential starters at safety.The Jets also held tryouts for a new kicker Monday after learning that Nick Folk, who strained his right quadriceps before Sunday’s game, is expected to miss four to six weeks.It is unclear whether center Nick Mangold, who left Sunday’s game with a recurrence of the neck injury that sidelined him last week, will be healthy enough to play. Advertisement