By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 9, 2015
Bears tight end Zach Miller made a stunning one-handed grab of a Jay Cutler pass for a 25-yard go-ahead-touchdown with 3 minutes 19 seconds to play, and Chicago edged the Chargers, 22-19, in San Diego on Monday night in a matchup of struggling teams.The Bears improved to 3-5, and the Chargers fell to 2-7.Cutler broke the franchise record for touchdown passes when he found Martellus Bennett for a 1-yard score. Cutler had been tied with the Hall of Famer Sid Luckman with 137 with the Bears.Cutler, who began his career with the Broncos, completed 27 of 40 passes for 345 yards. His lone interception was returned 63 yards for a second-quarter touchdown by Jason Verrett.Jeremy Langford, who had 72 yards on 18 carries, had a 1-yard rushing touchdown for the Bears.San Diego’s Philip Rivers completed 26 of 42 passes for 280 yards, including a 14-yard toss to Danny Woodhead that gave the Chargers a 7-0 lead.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PATRIOTS’ LEWIS ON I.R. The New England Patriots put running back Dion Lewis on injured reserve, ending his season a day after a serious injury to his left knee in a win over Washington.AdvertisementLewis had been a big surprise for the undefeated Patriots, with 622 combined yards rushing and receiving in seven games. He was hurt Sunday after catching a 14-yard screen pass. His left leg buckled as he tried to make a cut.AdvertisementRAMS PICK UP WELKER The St. Louis Rams signed the 34-year-old free-agent wide receiver Wes Welker.Welker was with the Denver Broncos in 2013 and 2014 but has not played this season. He topped 100 receptions in five of six seasons from 2006 to 2012 but has a history of concussions.TWO RECEIVE SUSPENSIONS St. Louis Rams wide receiver Stedman Bailey has been suspended four games for violating the N.F.L.’s substance abuse policy, and Denver cornerback Aqib Talib was given a one-game ban for poking Indianapolis Colts tight end Dwayne Allen in his right eye on Sunday.Rams Coach Jeff Fisher said that he was "very, very disappointed” in Bailey and that he had had "numerous conversations" with him.Bailey served a two-game suspension for performance-enhancing drugs last season.Talib was penalized for unnecessary roughness late in a loss at Indianapolis that knocked the Broncos from the ranks of the unbeaten. He poked two fingers into Allen’s face mask after Allen and Von Miller were shouting and shoving after a play.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Bears Edge Chargers as Cutler Sets Record.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.