By MATT HIGGINSNOV. 9, 2015
ORCHARD PARK, N.Y. —  Maybe it was sleep deprivation. Maybe it was the excitement surrounding his return to the New York metropolitan region to face his former team for the first time. But Buffalo Bills Coach Rex Ryan, normally a champion talker, uttered a few uncharacteristic linguistic lapses and malapropisms on Monday.During remarks to the news media, he referred to his star receiver Sammy Watkins as “Sammy Williams.” He talked about the possibility of nominating players from Maryland to act as captains for the game.“Where are we going?” Ryan said when asked to clarify. “Three hours of sleep. ... Are we playing Baltimore? How funny is that?”But Ryan knew exactly where his team was headed: to the Meadowlands, where the Bills (4-4) will take on the Jets (5-3) Thursday night in the first game between the A.F.C. East division rivals since Ryan was fired by the Jets after the 2014 season and then hired by the Bills.AdvertisementAlthough Ryan coached the Jets for six seasons, he and most of the Bills stuck to a script that refused to acknowledge that the matchup would hold any added personal significance.Advertisement“This is going to be a passionate game, it’s going to be an exciting game,” Ryan said, “not for the reasons you may be thinking. This is strictly about us against another opponent. Both teams are battling to try to get to the playoffs.”Ryan has only inflamed the passion by revealing that linebacker Ikemefuna Enemkpali will serve as a Buffalo captain. Enemkpali was cut by the Jets in August after he punched the starting quarterback Geno Smith and broke his jaw, reportedly over a $600 debt. The Bills quickly signed him off waivers.“If IK went out there by himself, maybe that would be a different statement,” Ryan said, referring to Enemkpali’s participating in the coin toss. “But that’s not what we do.”Ryan has a history of finding symmetry with opponents when selecting captains. Against Miami he selected the starting offensive guard Richie Incognito, who was dismissed by the Dolphins in 2013 as a result of a locker room bullying scandal.Last month against Jacksonville, Ryan chose his offensive line, a nod to Doug Marrone, who was the Bills head coach in 2014, and now serves as offensive line coach for the Jaguars.Still, Enemkpali is not a starter, and his selection seems intended to get under the skin of the Jets and their fans.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Everything is obvious,” Enemkpali said. “As far as me, I’ve just got to prepare and get ready to play Thursday night.”AdvertisementHe acknowledged that there would be extra motivation to perform for Ryan, if not for himself. “He’s a player’s coach,” Enemkpali said. “He believes in every player on this roster, and that’s a guy you love to go out there and fight for on Sundays every play.”In the Jets’ locker room, wide receiver Brandon Marshall, who joined the team during the off-season, called Enemkpali’s selection “typical Rex.”“That’s a Rex Ryan move,” Marshall said. “Are you guys surprised?”Marshall said he and the Jets would focus on football Thursday, and Coach Todd Bowles said he had not considered whether to make Smith a captain.There is more at stake for both teams than personal rivalry.The Bills and the Jets ended two-game losing streaks Sunday and will be facing a compressed schedule of two games in five days. The Bills defeated the Dolphins, 33-17, and the Jets held off the Jaguars, 28-23.Both teams remain in the thick of the playoff race.Buffalo center Eric Wood said that Ryan stressed blocking out the emotion of his return to the Meadowlands in order to be ready mentally and physically for one of the team’s few games in prime time.“It’s really tough on your body,” Wood said of playing two games in less than a week. “It’s really tough mentally from a game-planning standpoint.”Still, he said, he enjoys the challenge of Thursday night games. “We don’t play a ton of prime-time games, and it gives us a chance to show what we’re about,” Wood said.After a run of injuries, Buffalo is relatively healthy. Running back LeSean McCoy did not participate in practice Monday because of a sore shoulder, but he has not been ruled out for Thursday. McCoy and the rookie running back Karlos Williams rushed for a combined 222 yards against Miami. They can expect more resistance from a Jets defense that leads the N.F.L. against the run, with an average of 80 yards per game.AdvertisementBuffalo’s defense has underachieved, surrendering 353 yards per game — 397 to the Dolphins.“We’ve got to be better than what we’ve been,” Ryan said. “Can we get better? We think we will get a lot better.”Ryan built his reputation with stout defenses while with the Jets.“It was a great opportunity for me,” he said.As for the future, he would make only one prediction about his reception at MetLife Stadium, and it concerned an unambiguous gesture.“There will be a lot of waving out there — with one finger,” he said of the fans. “That much is a given. There’s no doubt.”Ben Shpigel contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Preparing for Jets, Ryan Finds Way to Needle Them .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.