AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzBOCA RATON, Fla. — The general manager meetings are usually a somewhat sleepy cousin to baseball’s winter meetings, but that could change this year.As teams’ top baseball executives arrived Monday for the start of the meetings, which will take place Tuesday and Wednesday, there appeared to be more activity than usual — more conversations with agents and with other teams.“It hasn’t typically been busy G.M. meetings over all in years gone by,” Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman said. “But it feels like the dialogue’s been a lot more active throughout October than in any other year prior, so who knows?” One general manager who will not be in attendance is the Mets’ Sandy Alderson, who is skipping the meetings to have an undisclosed medical procedure. Representing the Mets are John Ricco, the assistant general manager; Paul DePodesta, the vice president for player development and amateur scouting; and J. P. Ricciardi, a special assistant to Alderson.Ricciardi said the procedure had been delayed because of the Mets’ run to the World Series. The team would not say whether the need for the operation was related to Alderson’s fainting spell at a news conference last week. (At the time, a team official said Alderson had skipped breakfast and felt lightheaded under the television lights.)“We’ll be talking to him every day,” Ricciardi said. “This won’t affect anything. We’ll be in constant contact with him.”Several factors could be driving the apparent increase in activity at the meetings, said Dave Dombrowski, the Boston Red Sox’ new president for baseball operations. A lot of team executives are new in their posts and eager to reshape their clubs, and a lot of aggressive agents are eager to sew up deals for their clients, with this free-agent class rife with pitching. In addition, many teams were out of playoff contention early this year, so they have had lots of time to create shopping lists.“I’ve had many more conversations — and serious conversations early,” said Dombrowski, who was fired as the Detroit Tigers’ president and general manager in August. The questions for the Mets seem to be how they will address their offense, particularly if they do not retain the free agents Daniel Murphy, a second baseman, and Yoenis Cespedes, an outfielder. For the Yankees, there seem to be fewer big-ticket items — although the Yankees are always capable of making a splash.It appears unlikely that the Yankees will pursue Murphy, with Cashman saying the profiles of Rob Refsnyder and Dustin Ackley — currently the team’s top candidates to start at second — mirrored that of Murphy, a better hitter than fielder.Cashman also said that C. C. Sabathia’s recent monthlong stint in an alcohol rehabilitation clinic would not factor into his projection of what the pitching staff would look like.“Listen, we got knocked out of the playoffs after one game,” Cashman said, referring to the Yankees’ 3-0 loss to Houston in the American League wild-card game. He added: “So that means our roster’s obviously not quite good enough yet, and so my job is to see ways to put a better team on the field so that we can dream bigger, whether that’s rotation, bullpen, positionally, organizational supplements, all of the above.”INDIAN HAS SURGERY Cleveland outfielder Michael Brantley had surgery on his right shoulder and will need as long as six months to recover. The team said Brantley underwent an arthroscopic procedure on Monday to repair a small tear in his labrum. He injured his shoulder trying to make a diving catch in Minnesota on Sept. 22. (AP)PUJOLS ON THE MEND The California Angels slugger Albert Pujols is recovering after having surgery last week to repair the plantar plate in his right foot. The team said that Pujols was expected to resume full baseball activities in four and a half months, which would be late in spring training. (AP)TWINS PURSUE KOREAN SLUGGER Minnesota won the bidding for negotiating rights to Byung Ho Park, a 29-year-old first baseman who hit a total of 105 home runs over the past two seasons in the Korea Baseball Organization.Major League Baseball announced the notice from Park’s team in South Korea, the Nexen Heroes, that Minnesota’s bid was the highest. The posting fee was not disclosed by M.L.B. or the Twins.  (AP)Advertisement