By ANDREW DASNOV. 9, 2015
Put away your favorite club’s jersey and get your flags out: it’s international break time again.Copious amounts of ink and Internet bandwidth will be sacrificed this week fretting over the United States national team, which opens qualifying for the 2018 World Cup on Friday night with a game against St. Vincent and the Grenadines (7 p.m. Eastern time, ESPN2) in St. Louis. Do not buy in to most of it. Unless, of course, the United States loses to St. Vincent and the Grenadines, in which case you may just want to dig a big hole in the yard and sit in it for a while.The week’s best two games take place a day earlier, when Chile hosts Colombia and Argentina welcomes — well maybe not welcomes — Brazil to the Estadio Monumental in Buenos Aires (7 p.m., beIN). Argentina needs a win more than any of them: It has a loss and a tie from its first two qualifiers, and after the Brazil game comes a trip to Colombia on Tuesday.While the teams in Europe that took care of business in European Championship qualifying play friendlies this week, eight of the ones that narrowly missed out get a second chance at booking a place in France next summer. Norway-Hungary (Thursday), Bosnia-Ireland (Friday) and Ukraine-Slovenia (Saturday) might not get the juices flowing, but Sweden-Denmark might. Zlatan Ibrahimovic and the Swedes narrowly missed out on last year’s World Cup by losing a playoff, and the clock will be ticking on him if he misses this one, too. Kickoff is on Saturday at 2:45 p.m., Eastern time (ESPN2).If you prefer your matches to be more leisurely, there are several blue-chip friendlies Friday, most of them on ESPN’s streaming service. Among the marquee matchups are: Spain-England, France-Germany and Italy’s visit to Belgium, the new No. 1 team in the FIFA world rankings. That game was originally scheduled to be played in Kuwait, but was moved to Brussels when FIFA suspended Kuwait’s soccer association.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.