By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 10, 2015
Jake Allen made 24 saves for his second straight shutout, Martin Havlat scored against his former team, and the St. Louis Blues beat the Devils, 2-0, on Tuesday night in Newark.Allen, coming off a career-high 45 saves in a 4-0 win Saturday over Nashville, had an easier time against the Devils, earning his third shutout this season and the eighth of his career.Havlat, who signed with St. Louis last week after spending last season with the Devils, opened the scoring while making his season debut. The goal was set up by Scott Gomez, who also played for the Devils last season.Both landed with the Blues as free agents.Magnus Paajarvi added a goal in the third period as the Blues won for the sixth time in seven games.AdvertisementAVALANCHE 4, FLYERS 0 Matt Duchene scored twice, and Reto Berra made 25 saves to help Colorado start a seven-game trip with a victory over Philadelphia.AdvertisementJarome Iginla and Cody McLeod also scored for the Avalanche, who won for just the second time in their last six games.Philadelphia has just one victory in its last eight games.SABRES 4, LIGHTNING 1 The rookie Jack Eichel had a goal and an assist to help visiting Buffalo beat Tampa Bay.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Buffalo also got goals from Cody Franson, Marcus Foligno and Rasmus Ristolainen.CANUCKS 5, BLUE JACKETS 3 Brandon Sutter scored the tiebreaking goal with 5 minutes 8 seconds remaining, and Jannik Hansen had a career-high 4 points with a goal and three assists, to lift Vancouver to a win over host Columbus.Henrik Sedin had two goals and an assist, and Daniel Sedin added a goal and three assists to help the Canucks end a three-game losing streak.PANTHERS 4, FLAMES 3 Jaromir Jagr scored the tiebreaking goal in the third period, and Florida beat visiting Calgary to end a five-game losing streak.Aaron Ekblad, Reilly Smith and Vincent Trocheck also scored for the Panthers. Roberto Luongo made 25 saves.RED WINGS 1, CAPITALS 0 Andreas Athanasiou scored 4:06 into the third period and Petr Mrazek had 38 saves, lifting Detroit over visiting Washington.AdvertisementAthanasiou scored his first career goal in his second N.H.L. game from an improbable angle. He shot from the goal line near the left corner, getting the puck between goaltender Braden Holtby and the left post.WILD 5, JETS 3  Thomas Vanek scored twice during a four-goal frenzy in the second period by host Minnesota on the way to a victory over Winnipeg.Nino Niederreiter scored first for Minnesota, and Erik Haula and Chris Porter supplemented Vanek’s outburst with goals in the second period as Winnipeg pulled goalie Ondrej Pavelec after falling behind by three goals. Pavelec stopped only eight of the 12 shots on net against him.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Second Straight Shutout Carries Blues Over Devils .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.