By BEN SHPIGELNOV. 10, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. —  The Jets and the Buffalo Bills will play football this week. If Thursday ever comes.As a whole, players do not like the N.F.L.’s midweek tradition. It is mayhem on their bodies, which are afforded three fewer days to recover. It dilutes the quality of the game — in this case a divisional one.This week, the Jets are grateful to play Thursday. This week, more than any other, they are grateful to have only two days of news media obligations.Two days to discuss the Return of Rex Ryan, the Punch, Geno, More Rex, IK, Even More Rex.Ryan’s six years coaching the Jets. His dysfunctional relationship with the former general manager, John Idzik. His decision to select, as a game-day captain, Ikemefuna Enemkpali — known to friends as IK; known to the greater public as the player who socked Geno Smith in the jaw over an unpaid debt.AdvertisementIt was Monday when that decision was announced. And it was Tuesday when a passive-aggressive spat for the social media age played out, with the second-year Jets safety Calvin Pryor reading details of Ryan’s news conference from Orchard Park, N.Y., on Twitter — which began with Ryan’s wearing a Clemson helmet — and tweeting that Ryan “does anything for attention,” which led to a reporter’s mentioning it to Ryan, which led to a zing from Ryan, which led to a riposte in the Jets’ locker room from Pryor, which, well.AdvertisementPryor characterized Ryan as a “good defensive coach” and a “funny guy.”Then, he was asked whether Ryan was a good head coach, too.“Uhh,” Pryor said. “No comment on that.”Among players surveyed since Sunday, when this week of Rexmania began, Pryor’s opinion of Ryan qualified as by far the most critical. Seeing him again will be strange, they said. A little disorienting, but nice. That reaction applied to Smith, who said he was hardly surprised that Ryan opted to name his attacker as a captain.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s just a decision,” Smith said. “I really don’t think anything much about it. I don’t take it personal, if that’s what you’re asking.”A reporter then asked Smith why he did not take Ryan’s choice personally.Smith: “I mean, why would I?”Reporter: “Because he punched you.”Smith: “Next question, man.”There were more of those. More responses of “next question” — the reaction of Muhammad Wilkerson, when asked to share his memories of playing for Ryan. And more and more and more questions to Smith, who said he had not spoken with Enemkpali since the Jets released him Aug. 11 or, for that matter, thought about what he would say if he walked past Enemkpali during warm-ups.“That’s a tough question,” Smith said. “That’s like asking me what I’m going to eat for lunch tomorrow.”Tough question, indeed.There was more rehashing and revisiting and reflecting upon a time that ended nearly 11 months ago, with the departure of Ryan and Idzik — “No, I haven’t talked to John,” Ryan said Tuesday on a teleconference — ushering in Todd Bowles and Mike Maccagnan, Brandon Marshall and Ryan Fitzpatrick, Antonio Cromartie and Darrelle Revis, all players Ryan wished he had.AdvertisementEven compressed, this workweek has resembled, in spirit, so many during Ryan’s time with the Jets: defined by antics and verbal barbs and misdirection, the focus shifted to anything and everything but the game.The proceedings on the field will matter a great deal, with the winner seizing control of a wild-card berth. Ryan knows this, that he is now the enemy of sorts, which is why he might consider amending his wardrobe for the occasion.Asked if he intends to wear that Clemson helmet for protection — his son Seth is a receiver for the nation’s top-ranked team — Ryan laughed.“When I walk in the stadium,” he said, “maybe I should.”EXTRA POINTSThe Jets added a new kicker, signing Randy Bullock to replace Nick Folk, who was placed on season-ending injured reserve with a right quadriceps strain. Bullock converted 80.3 percent (61 of 76) of his field goals for Houston before being released after the Texans’ third game ... Todd Bowles said center Nick Mangold (neck) would start Thursday, but he was pessimistic about the availability of cornerback Antonio Cromartie (thigh bruise) and guard Willie Colon.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: More Rex, More Geno, More ... Is It Thursday Yet? .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.