

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
NOV. 10, 2015
WASHINGTON — On Tuesday morning, about 30 reporters and 10 television cameras formed a semicircle around Kevin Durant after the Oklahoma City Thunder’s morning shootaround at Verizon Center. Durant wore a camouflage jacket (which did little good) and large headphones that he had draped around his neck.His sole focus, he said, was on preparing for the Thunder’s game Tuesday night against the Washington Wizards. He did acknowledge that it had been nice to visit with his family.“Haven’t seen them in a while,” he said, adding that his mother had been tasked with handling ticket requests. “She’s a super woman, so she’s taking care of everything.”Durant, who grew up in Seat Pleasant, Md., and whose free agency next summer has been a borderline obsession for championship-starved basketball fans here, made his brief time on the court count in his lone scheduled trip to Washington this season.AdvertisementIn the Thunder’s 125-101 victory, he collected 14 points and 10 rebounds in just 17 minutes before he left the game — already a blowout — with a left hamstring strain.“It was just a free-flowing, smooth game for us,” Durant said.He added: “It was a long process for me to get back, and to get hurt again, it’s unfortunate. But whenever I’m ready to play again, I’ll play.”AdvertisementDurant’s performance was enough to tantalize fans (imagine him doing this for the Wizards next season!) while simultaneously demoralizing them (why would he ever leave the Thunder?), Durant had made clear that he was thinking only of the present.“I really just focus on our team,” he said before the game. “I’m happy that I’m playing again and that kind of takes over my thought process.”The free-agency subplot has become an inescapable part of the modern N.B.A. landscape. This season, that stage belongs to Durant, who, in the run-up to his homecoming here, repeated what has already become a mantra for him: He does not know what he will do next summer, and he will not address his future until then. He is eligible for free agency on July 1.Adept at dismissing questions on the topic, Durant has chosen to concentrate on his play after fractures in his right foot limited him to 27 games last season. His injury played an outsize role in keeping the Thunder — a perennial contender — out of the playoffs entirely.The Thunder, under the first-year coach Billy Donovan, are finding their rhythm. Durant entered Tuesday’s game averaging 30.1 points and 6.9 rebounds while shooting 50.3 percent from the field. Wizards Coach Randy Wittman seemed to anticipate what was coming about an hour before the tip.“He looks like he’s right back to where he was,” Wittman said.A deep dive into platitudes — taking one game at a time, focusing on the team — is the safe choice for an athlete of Durant’s magnitude approaching free agency. Others have lived more dangerously. Consider Carmelo Anthony. In October 2013, with a full season still to play for the Knicks, Anthony said he was already thinking about free agency, which was some nine months away.Advertisement“I want to be a free agent,” he told The New York Observer.Sure enough, Anthony got to experience all the wining and dining he craved once the Knicks closed out a 45-loss, playoff-free season. He wound up re-signing for $124 million.Durant has cast his indecision in far more muted terms by refusing to discuss free agency, other than to bemoan the attention it has already drawn. This week, he told USA Today and Yahoo that he did not like the process.But he also recognizes that it is unavoidable.“This sort of thing has been happening for a while,” Chris Webber, an analyst for NBA TV, said in a telephone interview. “But I’ve never seen these things be a distraction unless the player wants it to be a distraction. Guys can actually use it to motivate themselves. If you’re a teammate, it might mean that even more eyes are on you, watching you. That’s not a negative.”When the Thunder visited Verizon Center last season, fans brandished “KD2DC” signs, wore Durant T-shirts and generally went berserk whenever he did anything remotely interesting in the game. The halftime entertainment was a scrimmage featuring the freshman team from Montrose Christian School, which Durant attended as a high school senior.Then, in the fourth quarter, a sponsored weather report on the arena’s scoreboard briefly showed a Photoshopped image of Durant wearing a Wizards jersey, along with a weatherman pleading for Durant to come home. Durant said it was too much.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I appreciate all the support that gets thrown our way,” he said before Tuesday’s game. “But I’m just looking at it as an opposing player. If I was on that team and they came in here and did that, I wouldn’t like it.”On Tuesday, perhaps taking their cue from Durant himself, fans mixed some boos with their cheers. The entire scene was more mellow. The Wizards are already a playoff contender. Verizon Center is no longer synonymous with despair.“No guy wants to go to a team that’s begging,” Webber said. “Think about how desperate that looks to the player.”AdvertisementBefore the game, Durant reminisced about his train rides into the city as a young boy to watch the Wizards.“It’s a great feeling, man, knowing I walked these streets and I grew up here and I can inspire so many kids,” he said, adding: “To be able to walk on the court as an N.B.A. player, it shows the journey I’ve been on.”And the journey continues, even if his destination is unknown.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Mr. Popular in an Opponent’s Town .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »