By WILLIAM GRIMESNOV. 10, 2015
Pat Eddery, one of the greatest jockeys of the postwar era, with three victories in the Epsom Derby and four in the Arc de Triomphe to his credit, as well as two Breeders’ Cup races in the United States, died on Tuesday. He was 63.Teddy Grimthorpe, the European racing manager for Juddmonte Farms, who worked with Eddery for many years, confirmed the death, The Associated Press reported. He did not give a cause or say where Eddery died.Eddery was champion jockey in Britain 11 times, a record that tied him with the great Lester Piggott, and the winner of 14 classics, the select group of five English races that include the Epsom Derby, the 2,000 Guineas and the St. Leger. His 4,632 career wins put him second only to Sir Gordon Richards as Britain’s jockey with the most victories. Richards, who raced from the 1920s to the 1950s, won 4,870 races.In 1985, American racing fans saw him guide the filly Pebbles to victory against male horses in the Breeders’ Cup Turf, giving England its first win in the Breeders’ Cup, a series of rich championship races that cap the racing season in the United States. After Pebbles broke last from an outside post, Eddery wove his way through heavy traffic, overtaking nine horses in the stretch and squeezing through an opening on the rail to score the win.AdvertisementIn 1991, at Churchill Downs, he rode Sheikh Albadou to a decisive victory in the Breeders’ Cup Sprint at odds of 26 to 1.Most racing commentators regarded his victory aboard Dancing Brave in the 1986 Arc as his most impressive. After racing toward the rear of one of the most talented Arc fields ever assembled, Eddery called on Dancing Brave at the last possible moment, then charged down the center of the track to cross the wire first in record-setting time.“He was blooming tough to ride against and cool,” the jockey Bruce Raymond told The Racing Post. “He was ultracompetitive. He would beat you in a photograph and laugh about it afterwards.”AdvertisementPatrick James John Eddery was born in Newbridge, County Kildare, Ireland, on March 18, 1952. His father was a top jockey who won the Irish Derby. He began riding at 8 and at 14 became an apprentice.“It wasn’t like now, where if an apprentice doesn’t like a trainer, he can move,” he told The Independent of London in 2003. “In those days, you were stuck there for five years. And it was tough.” He added: “If you got up to mischief, you got a whack round the ear. And I couldn’t ring my father. There was no phone.”At 15, he rode his first race, at the Curragh in Ireland, aboard True Time. He finished last.Two years later, he won at Epsom. “My first winner was a horse called Alvaro who then won six on the bounce, and I was on him all the time,” he told The Independent. “That put me on the map.”In 1971, he was named apprentice of the year. Three years later he was named champion jockey for the first time, a title he retained for the next three years. He won 100 races or more in 28 seasons, riding the greatest champions of the era — Bosra Sham, Sadler’s Wells and El Gran Senor among them — in a distinctive high-in-the stirrups style, with an up-and-down bounce in the stretch run.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When he got on a horse, he always did the right thing,” the jockey Willie Carson told The Daily Telegraph. “He had green fingers for horses — they all ran for him.”His public face was grim. Sometimes called the Iceman, often described as flinty or steely, he responded to victory with a set jaw and a determined glare.“His demeanor riding into the winner’s enclosure tends to be strongly reminiscent of an undertaker with toothache,” a columnist for The Sporting Life wrote in 1996.In 2003, Eddery retired as a jockey and set up as a trainer. With Simon Double, his racing manager, he formed Pat Eddery Racing to syndicate racehorses. His greatest success as a trainer came in 2009, when Hearts of Fire won the Gran Criterium, a Group 1 race in Italy.Eddery’s survivors include his brothers, Robert and Paul; two daughters, Nichola Eddery and Natasha Eddery Dunsdon; and a son, Harry. His marriage ended in divorce.AdvertisementIn his memoir, “To Be a Champion,” published in 1992, he wrote:“The lasting pleasure is to win the title. To be No. 1 in your field is surely what everybody sets out to achieve in life, and any jockey who tells you the championship means little to him is either a liar or a fool.”A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page A33 of the New York edition with the headline: Pat Eddery, 63, Prolific and Steely Jockey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.