By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 10, 2015
Notre Dame moved into the top four as the College Football Playoff selection committee released the second edition of its rankings this season on Tuesday night.Clemson remained No. 1, with Alabama moving up two spots to No. 2 and Ohio State staying at No. 3. The Fighting Irish, now No. 4, had been fifth.Notre Dame and Alabama are 8-1. Clemson and Ohio State are 9-0.The Crimson Tide took over the spot that had belonged to Louisiana State, which dropped to No. 9 after losing at Alabama, 30-16, on Saturday. Another team that was dealt its first loss on Saturday, Michigan State, dropped to No. 13, from No. 7.The top four teams in the committee’s final rankings, to be released Dec. 6, will make the Playoff. Just outside that group in these rankings were Iowa, which received an eye-catching promotion, to No. 5, and Baylor, the highest-ranked Big 12 team at No. 6.Iowa (9-0) rose four spots, something of a surprise given that it was coming off an 8-point victory at Indiana, which is 0-5 in Big Ten play. Jeff Long, the Playoff committee’s chairman, pointed out, however, that the Hawkeyes had beaten two top 25 teams on the road (Wisconsin and Northwestern) and that Iowa’s strength of schedule was No. 2, behind Clemson’s, among the six remaining unbeaten teams.Advertisement“It’s a recognition by the committee that they were increasingly impressed by Iowa and their body of work,” Long said. “Three teams lost ahead of them, so we felt they needed to move up.”AdvertisementLong had said last week that the committee had concerns about Iowa’s offense. But on Tuesday, he said: “We recognize they are consistent on both sides of the ball. They aren’t flashy, but they are consistent.”Notre Dame’s promotion could have the Big 12 programs rooting for Stanford, a Pacific-12 team that was No. 7 in the committee’s rankings, in the Fighting Irish’s regular-season finale, on Nov. 28. A Notre Dame loss in that game — or in its next two games — could create room in the top four for the Big 12 champion, be it Baylor or another team.The Big 12 teams behind Baylor in the rankings were Oklahoma State (No. 8, up from No. 14), Oklahoma (No. 12, up from No. 15) and Texas Christian (No. 15, down from No. 8 after a loss to Oklahoma State).Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some analysts had thought Oklahoma State would overtake Baylor, and maybe even move into the top four, after its impressive 49-29 win at home over the previously unbeaten Horned Frogs. But the committee still preferred Baylor, even though the Bears have yet to beat a team with a winning record.“That’s the first piece of real strength we’ve seen from them, with that win over T.C.U.,” Long said of Oklahoma State.The Cowboys’ fate is in their own hands: They host Baylor on Nov. 21. And that is just one of the Bears’ tough coming games: Their next three opponents are a combined 25-2.Bill Hancock, the Playoff’s executive director, said the committee would delay announcing one of the New Year’s Six bowls if Navy, ranked No. 20, was still in contention to be the Group of Five representative on Dec. 6. That is because the Midshipmen’s regular season does not end until they face Army on Dec. 12.The committee would hold a teleconference on Dec. 12, after the Army-Navy game, and determine if it was necessary to revise the Dec. 6 rankings relative to Navy.AdvertisementNavy’s only loss is to Notre Dame, and the Midshipmen would remain a factor if they win at Houston and win the American Athletic Conference championship game before finishing against Army.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Among Shifts in the Playoff Rankings, Alabama and Notre Dame Benefit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.