AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzBOCA RATON, Fla. — Commissioner Rob Manfred expressed hope Tuesday that a Major League Baseball team would play exhibition games in Cuba during spring training next year, saying that “it would be a good thing for baseball.”Since President Obama announced his intention to normalize relations with Cuba in December, administration and M.L.B. officials have been involved in talks with Cuban officials on a number of issues. Last month, several baseball officials traveled to Cuba to examine baseball fields and other facilities to determine whether teams could play there in the spring.“There are a variety of issues involved there, not all of which are wholly within baseball’s control,” Manfred said Tuesday at the general managers’ meetings. “Obviously, the federal government has some significant influence on whether that’s going to take place, and there are issues that need to be solved before that can happen. But I’d like to say yes to that.”M.L.B. has surveyed teams to gauge whether they would be interested in traveling to Cuba. The Yankees and the Mets were among those that said they would like to be considered, according to team officials. The Boston Red Sox and the Baltimore Orioles are also considered strong possibilities.“They asked if we were open to going, and we said we were open to going,” said Dave Dombrowski, the Red Sox’ president for baseball operations. “We don’t really know a lot other than that.”The Orioles played the Cuban national team in Havana in March 1999 — the first time since 1959 that a major league team had traveled to the country. None have traveled there since.Before 1959, teams regularly traveled to Cuba to play exhibition games during spring training. Manfred said there was no deadline to arrange a trip.“We’ve got a little time still,” he said. “There isn’t really a firm cutoff. We’re going to proceed internally and get to the point where we’ve sort of identified who would go.” He added, “One club maintaining flexibility with respect to a spring training date is a lot easier than 25 clubs maintaining that flexibility.”Among the other issues Manfred touched on Tuesday: ■ Manfred will rule on Pete Rose’s request for reinstatement by the end of the year. Rose was barred in 1989 for betting on baseball. “The end of the year is my deadline,” Manfred said. ■ Changing the rules on takeout slides at second base — a debate prompted by a slide by the Los Angeles Dodgers’ Chase Utley that left Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada with a broken leg during the playoffs — is scheduled to be discussed by the general managers on Wednesday and again at an owners’ meeting next week in Dallas. There will also be conversations with the players’ union.“We see this as a player safety issue,” Manfred said, “and we want to make sure we’re in the right place without committing to whether there’s going to be a change or not.”■ Manfred said the World Series proved that revenue sharing had been a success because the Kansas City Royals, considered a small-market team, had a larger payroll than the Mets. He called it “my favorite fun fact about the World Series.”■ Installing more protective netting to protect fans from being hit by baseballs would be problematic, Manfred said, because ballparks are not uniform. “It’s going to have to be a little more complicated than that if in fact we move ahead,” he said. Owners will discuss the matter when they meet in Dallas.MOLINA’S EIGHTH GOLD GLOVE St. Louis Cardinals catcher Yadier Molina earned his eighth consecutive Gold Glove Award.The Kansas City Royals, whose defensive prowess helped them win their first World Series in 30 years, led all teams with three awards as catcher Salvador Perez and first baseman Eric Hosmer each won Gold Gloves for the third straight year and Royals shortstop Alcides Escobar garnered his first award.Yoenis Cespedes, who was traded from the Detroit Tigers to the Mets on July 31, played long enough to not only qualify for the A.L. Gold Glove in left field, but also win it over the Royals’ Alex Gordon, who was seeking his fifth consecutive Gold Glove award. (NYT)TOMMY JOHN SURGERY FOR LYNN The Cardinals right-hander Lance Lynn had Tommy John surgery and will be sidelined all of next season.Lynn was 12-11 with a 3.03 E.R.A. last season. He was an All-Star in 2012 and has three straight seasons of 30 or more starts. (AP)Advertisement