AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressTwo days after celebrating their biggest win of the season, the Indianapolis Colts were dealt their biggest loss.Quarterback Andrew Luck is expected to miss two to six weeks with a lacerated kidney and a partly torn abdominal muscle, injuries he sustained late in Sunday’s victory over Denver.“When you take a hit to a franchise quarterback, it is a tough blow,” Coach Chuck Pagano said Tuesday. “We’ve been through a lot in this 2015 season, but I know this will galvanize us even more.”Pagano said he believed Luck was injured in the first minute of the fourth quarter when he tried to scramble for a first down near the Denver goal line. Broncos linebacker Danny Trevathan squared up on Luck from the front while defensive end Vance Walker hit Luck hard on the side of his left shoulder, bending him over awkwardly.The hit immediately drew gasps inside Lucas Oil Stadium. But Luck broke a 17-17 tie on the next play with an 8-yard pass to Ahmad Bradshaw, his second touchdown throw of the game. He never came out and continued to take big hits.Afterward, Pagano said, Luck complained of soreness. When he arrived at the team complex Monday feeling worse, Luck was sent for additional tests that revealed the injuries. Luck is not expected to need surgery.“We’re going to keep listening to the doctors and evaluating his progress on a week-by-week basis,” Pagano said. “We’ve got all the confidence in the world in Matt Hasselbeck,” Pagano added, referring to Luck’s backup, “and we’re not going to put Andrew back out there until he’s healed and ready to go.”The timing could not be worse for Indianapolis (4-5), which was hoping to return from this week’s bye and build momentum with a favorable schedule. Instead, one week after firing the offensive coordinator Pep Hamilton and filling that role with Rob Chudzinski, the Colts are forced into a quarterback change.Hasselbeck, 40, also took over last month when Luck missed two games with an injured right shoulder. Hasselbeck won both.BRONCO MUST SIT OUT The star cornerback Aqib Talib will sit out the Denver Broncos’ game against the Kansas City Chiefs on Sunday after losing his appeal of a one-game suspension for poking Indianapolis tight end Dwayne Allen in the eye. The personal foul helped seal Denver’s 27-24 loss to the Colts.The N.F.L. spokesman Michael Signora said Talib’s punishment was upheld by Derrick Brooks, one of two officers jointly appointed by the league and the players’ union to decide appeals of on-field player discipline.Talib had hoped to convince Brooks his two-fingered poke of Allen’s right eye was not deliberate. RANDLE SUSPENDED The N.F.L. suspended running back Joseph Randle for four games under its personal conduct policy, one week after he was released by the Dallas Cowboys. The suspension begins immediately even though Randle is not on an active roster.Randle left the Cowboys’ complex Oct. 28 after Coach Jason Garrett announced Darren McFadden as the starter. Garrett said Randle’s absence was excused. Randle did not return to the team before he was released almost a week later.BEARS TACKLE BARRED Chicago Bears offensive tackle Tayo Fabuluje was suspended four games for violating the N.F.L.’s policy on performance-enhancing substances.Advertisement