By BILLY WITZNOV. 10, 2015
BOCA RATON, Fla. —  Colorado Rockies shortstop Jose Reyes, who was arrested in Hawaii recently on charges of assaulting his wife, may become the first player to face discipline under Major League Baseball’s new domestic violence policy.Commissioner Rob Manfred said Tuesday that an internal investigation into the case, which was disclosed on Monday by Hawaii News Now, had begun.“This will be the first test, and I think it will withstand the test,” said Manfred, who addressed reporters during the annual postseason meeting of baseball’s general managers.Major League Baseball enacted its domestic violence policy in August after negotiations with the players union. It allows for counseling and psychological evaluation, along with discipline handed down by the commissioner.AdvertisementProfessional sports have been increasingly forced to confront domestic violence in recent years, with the N.F.L. facing by far the most scrutiny because of several high-profile cases involving its players. Those cases have created tremendous public relations problems for the N.F.L., which has struggled to come up with a strong, and consistent, response to the cases.AdvertisementRunning back Ray Rice, whose assault of his fiancée was captured on an elevator video, was initially given a two-game suspension by the N.F.L., a punishment deemed to be so light that it put the league and Commissioner Roger Goodell, who handed down the penalty, in a harsh light.More recently, the Dallas Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones, stirred debate by signing defensive lineman Greg Hardy, who had a domestic violence conviction overturned. Hardy was given a 10-game suspension after he signed with the Cowboys, but it was later reduced to four games. Jones reaffirmed his support for Hardy last week after the website Deadspin published photographs of the injuries sustained by Hardy’s former girlfriend in the case.The N.H.L. has also had to deal with serious cases. It suspended the former Los Angeles Kings defenseman Slava Voynov for most of last season in connection with an alleged assault on his wife but did not have a domestic violence policy in place at the time.Though domestic violence cases have been less common in baseball, Manfred’s statement on Tuesday stood in sharp contrast to a case in 2006 involving Philadelphia Phillies pitcher Brett Myers. He was accused of assaulting his wife outside a bar in Boston, with witnesses saying he knocked her to the ground and then pulled her by her hair.Neither the Phillies nor baseball took immediate action, with the Phillies saying they would wait for the legal case to be resolved. (The charges were eventually dropped at the request of Myers’s wife). Myers was on the mound at Fenway Park a day after the events, which the Phillies apologized for a week later, saying it had sent the wrong message.That was nine years ago. On Tuesday, some of the general managers at the meeting expressed relief that their sport had apparently learned from the trouble the N.F.L. has encountered and had a new policy in place before the Reyes incident occurred.“I don’t think they can claim they were smarter than everyone else, but they didn’t sit around and wait,” the Mets’ assistant general manager, John Ricco, said of Manfred and the players union. “They got together and said, ‘We’re going to have something in place and we’re going to do it now and not wait for something to happen.’ ”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman voiced similar sentiments.“When I saw it,” Cashman said of Reyes’s arrest, “I was thankful and appreciative that Rob Manfred and Tony Clark from the players association have kind of gotten ahead of this situation as they saw what was taking place in the N.F.L. Both men showed great leadership.”AdvertisementMeanwhile, Reyes is free on bail. The police in Maui said Reyes’s wife, Katherine, told offers on Oct. 31 that he grabbed her by the throat and shoved her into a sliding-glass door at a resort. She told the police she had injuries to her thigh, neck and wrist, and was taken to Maui Memorial Medical Center.According to baseball’s new policy, Manfred has the power to determine any penalty, with no minimum or maximum punishment set. Any discipline he chooses to impose is not contingent upon a player’s legal case, although the player does have the option to appeal.“The key from our perspective was being proactive,” Manfred said of the new policy.Of the Reyes case, he said, “Obviously, it’s a concern to us.”Reyes, 32, was a popular four-time All-Star with the Mets, with whom he led the National League in stolen bases three times and won a batting title in 2011. But it was after that season that the Mets, concerned about Reyes’s recurring leg injuries and troubled by financial woes, stemming from the Bernard L. Madoff scandal, allowed him to leave as a free agent.Reyes, in turn, signed a six-year, $106 million contract with the Miami Marlins, who shipped him to Toronto after one season. The Blue Jays traded him to Colorado last July in a package for Troy Tulowitzki. Reyes has two years remaining on his current contract, for a total of $44 million, with a $22 million team option for a third season that can be bought out for $4 million. He hit .274 last season, with 24 stolen bases, which are respectable numbers, but his defense is widely considered to have declined.And he now faces a verdict from Manfred.An article on Wednesday about Major League Baseball’s domestic violence policy in light of the arrest of Colorado Rockies shortstop Jose Reyes on charges of assaulting his wife, misstated, in some copies, the surname of an N.H.L. player who was suspended much of last season over a domestic assault case. He is Slava Voynov, not Yoynov.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: M.L.B. May Penalize Reyes in Assault Case .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.