By ROB HUGHESNOV. 10, 2015
LONDON — Neymar Jr. is wanted by Manchester United. Neymar Sr., his father, is wanted by the tax authorities in Brazil. And both know that as long as Neymar Jr. remains in Barcelona, he is likely to be in the shadow of Lionel Messi.But look at how much Neymar — and Luis Suárez — have grown in the 45 days that Messi has been out with a torn ligament in his left knee.The pair have scored 20 of Barcelona’s 23 goals in that time, and while any team on earth would be less appealing without Messi, it is Neymar who has stepped up and taken the lion’s share of responsibility.Neymar, a Brazilian, scored two goals in each of his last two games, first against BATE Borisov to virtually seal Barcelona’s qualification through the group stage of the Champions League, and then against Villarreal as the club returned to the top of the Spanish league.AdvertisementThe final goal that nailed Villarreal’s 3-0 loss on Sunday was such a masterpiece of timing and instinct and joyousness that it might have been — well — Messi.AdvertisementNeymar linked up with Suárez on the left. The Brazilian sprinted into the penalty area, narrowly evading the offside trap of Villarreal. Suárez fed him with a low pass between two defenders, and Neymar came toward the ball, cushioned it with his torso and flipped it gently over his own head.At that moment, Neymar turned full circle, watched the ball go over his own head and that of the last defender and without letting it drop to the ground, volleyed the shot with his right foot beyond the goalkeeper from 12 yards.The Beautiful Game has been about anything but beauty lately, from the top of soccer down to the basement of track and field.Neymar and Messi and their fathers are being dogged by claims of tax evasion, so much so that a) it is a wonder that they still can express spontaneous play on the field and b) it is possible that either could be hounded out of Catalonia while still at their peak.Let’s be clear: Neymar is not Messi’s replacement, nor is he yet playing at the same level as Cristiano Ronaldo over the last six years at Real Madrid.After a break for international competition, Barcelona’s next game is el Clásico down in Madrid. Barcelona Coach Luis Enrique will not say if Messi has a chance of coming back for that game, but he coyly said that Barça was infinitely stronger when Messi is on the team.And no one at the Camp Nou will publicly entertain the question about selling any of Barcelona’s superstars.AdvertisementBut look at the facts. There is a 250 million euro (about $268 million) release clause in Neymar’s contract. But United might pay what it takes to get a star like Neymar, particularly in his current state, where his age, 23, and attitude toward leadership would make him a global focal point for a club like Manchester.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.United is (if the folks at Barça do not mind their description being used for another team) more than a club. Man U is trying to rebuild its global brand. Neymar is very likely the next truly global superstar, after Messi and Ronaldo.And he embraces, as we have seen the past two months, that responsibility.That special goal on Sunday was straight out of his repertoire. “I thought about the move before I did it,” he told reporters. “And pulled it off. I’m happy with what I’m giving the team, but I can improve.”Sure he’s happy. On the field, he is free, and the apparent burden of filling the shoes of Messi is just his chance to pull it off.Ronaldo also entertains talk of a return one day to Manchester United, or maybe to one of the few other clubs that could pay his ransom, Paris St.-Germain.It is all talk and speculation at the moment, though the problems that caused one president to resign over the deal that brought Neymar from his Brazilian club, Santos, to Barcelona in 2013 are compounded by ongoing reports that the Neymars had assets worth $48 million seized by the Brazilian authorities over claims that they underpaid taxes by $16 million.Nothing, then, is a simple case of living well to play well through the prime years of a sporting career.Think of how Michel Platini and Franz Beckenbauer, great players of a previous generation, are getting drawn down into the quagmire of FIFA corruption allegations.Think of how everyone wants a piece of a Neymar, a Messi, a Ronaldo while they are at the top of the tree.AdvertisementAnd then think back over the last two months and how a second long injury layoff has taken the game away from Messi. How he must ache to simply put on his shoes and mesmerize opponents as only he can.And when he does, the relationship with Neymar will need some tweaking. No matter how much the Brazilian says, and maybe even means, that he intends to slot back into being the second-best player of Barcelona, his genie is out of the bottle now.He has grown as a player and person. He displays remarkable desire for the task at such a big club and in such a frenzied bowl of expectation. He has 203 goals in 332 games for Santos and Barcelona, and 46 goals in 67 games for Brazil, stellar numbers that not even a taxman could dispute.But beyond the statistics is the form of a man who knows he can outwit defenders with the joy of a child on the playground.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.