AdvertisementSupported byHornets 95, Knicks 93By Viv BernsteinCHARLOTTE, N.C. — Nine games into his N.B.A. career, with four double-doubles to his credit and greats like Magic Johnson already hinting at future greatness to come, the 7-foot wonder Kristaps Porzingis is the subject of good-natured ribbing by his Knicks teammates.“His fingers was too long,” Carmelo Anthony said Wednesday night after the Knicks had lost to the Charlotte Hornets, 95-93, at Time Warner Cable Arena.Indeed, it was the length of Porzingis’s fingers that ultimately cost the Knicks. He hit a shot from beyond the arc at the top of the key, but it was disallowed after officials ruled that it had come after the final buzzer.Still, as the Knicks (4-5) acknowledged after the game, the result never should have come down to the last furious seconds and the fingers of Porzingis.The Knicks, who were coming off a victory at Toronto on Tuesday and had a 3-1 road record, led by 12 points in the third quarter and by 10 going into the fourth before allowing the Hornets to come back.Even after Charlotte made its run, led by Nicolas Batum (who finished with 24 points) and Jeremy Lin (17 points off the bench), there was still a chance for the Knicks to put the Hornets away.Anthony could have won it when he had the ball in his hand in the closing seconds, but his shot from deep in the left corner hit the side of the backboard and led to a shot-clock violation with 3.7 seconds left.Cody Zeller took the inbounds pass, drove to the basket and hit an uncontested layup.That left 0.6 of a second on the clock and one chance for the Knicks. Porzingis said he was supposed to set a screen for Anthony and then go to the basket for a possible tip-in. But he read the defense, stayed above the 3-point line and took the shot off the inbounds pass.Although officials initially called the shot good and credited the Knicks with a 96-95 victory, a replay showed the ball was still touching the tips of his fingers as the red light came on, and the final score was changed. He was a tenth of a second late.“It’s tough,” Porzingis said. “It was a big moment for me. That’s a shot I’ve always dreamed of. A game-winner. It’s tough for me. But we have another game soon. Maybe I’ll have another chance like that, and then I can make the shot on time.”Still, it did not diminish a strong overall performance for Porzingis, the fourth overall draft pick this year, who has quickly turned jeers on draft night into cheers by Knicks fans. He had 10 points — all in the first half — and 15 rebounds for the Knicks.Anthony had a game-high 29 points, including 15 in the third quarter.It was also a positive Knicks debut for Arron Afflalo, a shooting guard who signed a two-year, $16 million contract in the off-season. Afflalo, who had missed the first eight games with a hamstring injury, scored 12 points in 28 minutes.“Mentally, you feel like you can go take on the world till you physically get out there and you’re short of oxygen,” Afflalo said. “I thought it was good for a first game just to get out there, get tired and battle with those guys and be in a tough game. But I’m expecting myself to be much better on Friday.”The Knicks face the Cleveland Cavaliers at Madison Square Garden on Friday, enough time for them to evaluate the last two games. They won at Toronto, 111-109, when officials failed to call Anthony for stepping out of bounds late. This time, the call went against them.“It’s funny between this game and yesterday’s game,” center Robin Lopez said. “There have been a lot of up and downs, pretty crazy two days. You think about whether or not Melo stepped out of bounds last night. What if this many seconds had been on the shot clock as opposed to 0.6? That’s how it goes in the N.B.A. One minute, you’ve got a feeling of euphoria, and the next you’re down in the dumps. You have no idea.“I think it’s important tonight — I think it’s kind of important we lost this one,” he continued. “There were a lot of things we can do better.”Advertisement