By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 11, 2015
Bojan Bogdanovic came off the bench to score a season-high 22 points with 9 rebounds to lead the Nets to a 106-98 victory over the Rockets in Houston. It was the Nets’ first victory of the season.“When you get a win it validates all the preaching and all the working that you’re doing,” Coach Lionel Hollins said. “When you do get a victory you can say, ‘Hey, this is what we’re talking about.’ Because in that victory there’s a lot of things that I’ve been preaching and other coaches have been preaching.”The Nets scored six straight points to turn a tie game into a 99-93 lead with three and a half minutes remaining. Thomas Robinson led the way in that stretch, scoring four points highlighted by a dunk after a steal.Marcus Thornton made a 3-pointer for Houston, but Bogdanovic hit one with 1 minute 37 seconds left to stretch the lead to 102-96.Advertisement“It was the first time we didn’t have black holes in our game,” Bogdanovic said. “That’s the biggest reason why we won.”AdvertisementJames Harden led Houston with 23 points, cooling off after scoring 43 and 46 in the last two games.Joe Johnson added 16 points and 10 assists for the Nets. Brook Lopez had 14 points and 12 rebounds.“We responded to their runs,” Lopez said. “We played our most complete game of the season. Obviously it’s good to get that first one. It’s a breakthrough.”The Nets scored nine consecutive points, capped by a 3-pointer by Wayne Ellington, to take a 91-87 lead with six and a half minutes remaining. Dwight Howard missed two layups on consecutive possessions to leave Houston empty-handed. Howard had 10 points, 17 rebounds and 5 blocks.“I’m worried about our team right now,” Rockets Coach Kevin McHale said. “We haven’t caught a rhythm yet. I’ve said it all since we’ve been together. We haven’t been able to put together long runs of just good, solid basketball.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.WARRIORS 100, GRIZZLIES 84 Stephen Curry scored 28 points and Andre Iguodala added 20 as Golden State matched a franchise record for most wins to start a season with a victory at Memphis. Golden State won its ninth straight.Marc Gasol had 26 points as the Grizzlies lost their fourth straight.MAVERICKS 118, CLIPPERS 108 Dirk Nowitzki scored a season-high 31 points and Dallas subdued Los Angeles in DeAndre Jordan’s first visit since backing out on an agreement to sign with the Mavericks in free agency.Jordan was booed throughout before being pulled in the fourth quarter with Dallas using the tactic of fouling him. One of the N.B.A.’s worst free-throw shooters, he finished with 9 points and 11 rebounds.AdvertisementNUGGETS 103, BUCKS 102 Kenneth Faried rebounded Danilo Gallinari’s errant shot in the lane for a putback with five seconds remaining to give host Denver a victory over Milwaukee.Gallinari had 25 points to lead the Nuggets.Before the game the Nuggets announced that forward Wilson Chandler, a key player for Denver over the last five seasons, would undergo season-ending surgery to repair a labral tear in his right hip. He sustained the injury in the preseason.RAPTORS 119, 76ERS 103 Kyle Lowry scored 23 points and Luis Scola had 21 to lead the Toronto Raptors to a victory over the winless 76ers in Philadelphia.One year after starting 0-17, the Sixers have lost their first eight games of the season and 18 straight dating to March 27.Jahlil Okafor led the Sixers with 26 points.HAWKS 106, PELICANS 98 Al Horford scored 26 points and host Atlanta rallied past injury-depleted New Orleans, which led much of the way but could not hang on without its star, Anthony Davis, who missed the game with a bruised hip.Eric Gordon led New Orleans with 26 points.PACERS 102, CELTICS 91 Paul George scored 26 points and grabbed 10 rebounds as visiting Indiana beat Boston for its fifth win in six games.Evan Turner led Boston with 20 points.MAGIC 101, LAKERS 99 Nik Vucevic hit a fall-away 18-footer at the buzzer to lift host Orlando over Los Angeles.Shabazz Napier led Orlando with 22 points.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets Top Rockets for First Win; Curry and Warriors Remain Unbeaten .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.