By BILLY WITZNOV. 11, 2015
BOCA RATON, Fla. —  Whether the slide that wiped out Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada’s season will be outlawed when he returns next season remains uncertain.But Joe Torre, Major League Baseball’s chief baseball officer, said the issue would continue to be discussed next month at the winter meetings, just as it was Wednesday before the general managers’ meeting concluded, giving the impression that the dialogue was about how a new rule for slides into second base would be crafted.A similar rule preventing runners from colliding with catchers at home plate went into effect in 2014, amid much debate about how the rule would be enforced.But Torre said the overarching focus should be on player safety, and that the league did not want its players being carried off the field.Advertisement“Even though we’ve had a lot of criticism on the collision play at the plate, we haven’t had anybody carried off the field in a couple years,” Torre said. “And to me, that’s great.”AdvertisementTorre and Dan Halem, baseball’s chief legal officer, touched on other subjects Wednesday:■ Halem said M.L.B. was reviewing Tuesday’s order by the New York State attorney general for the two biggest daily fantasy sports companies, DraftKings and FanDuel, to stop taking bets from New York residents. M.L.B. is a partner with DraftKings.“We haven’t seen the decision,” Halem said. “We’re going to speak to our lawyers and then we’ll make a decision if we need to take any action.”Commissioner Rob Manfred said recently that he did not believe fantasy sports games constituted gambling.■ Torre indicated there was momentum from managers to change replay rules to prevent a baserunner who slides into a base ahead of a throw from being called out when his body loses contact with the base for an instant.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Before, we accepted the imperfections of the game,” Torre said.■ Another possible change in the replay rules would allow umpires to use it in cases of fan interference to determine where the runners should be allowed to advance. As it stands, the rules are the same as a ground-rule double: two bases.■ The pace of play rules that were instituted last season had an impact, shortening the average length of a game to 2 hours 56 minutes from 3:02, though Torre said the games slowed down near the end of the season.BORAS CHANGES TUNE ON METS Instead of throwing barbs in the Mets’ direction, the agent Scott Boras tossed bouquets their way.Boras was asked what supermarket aisle the Mets were shopping in this off-season, a reference to a dig in 2011 when he compared their free-agent wish list to shopping in the fruits and nuts section. The next season, he said they had moved to the frozen-food department.Advertisement“Well, obviously, the Mets have a pennant at the end of their aisle,” Boras said. “That kind of allows them to go where they want to go. So I’m sure where they’re at and where they’re headed, having core pitching like they do, they have an opportunity to fill many holes and field a very competitive team for a long time.”Boras, who created a stir in early September when he said the Mets were risking Matt Harvey’s future by pitching him more than 180 innings, backtracked on Wednesday. He credited the Mets’ use of Harvey in September for his strong performance in the playoffs.“The funny thing was a lot was said about Matt Harvey not wanting to throw in the playoffs,” Boras said. “Yet the entire design of what we were talking about in August was just that — about how we could pare down his innings in September so that he can throw in the playoffs. Frankly, it allowed him to perform probably at his best levels.”Harvey threw 1891/3 innings in the regular season and 262/3 in the playoffs. The Mets plan to ease along Harvey, with all their young pitchers, in spring training, but Boras said there should be no restrictions on him next season.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: M.L.B. Weighs Adjusting Rules on Slides and Replays.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.