AdvertisementSupported byBy Allan KredaScott Gomez was the first St. Louis Blues player to step on the ice at Madison Square Garden for practice Wednesday. Gomez shook hands with the ice crew and went to work with the Blues, his fifth team since he was traded in 2009 by the Rangers. A 35-year-old forward and two-time Stanley Cup winner, Gomez is part of a core of veterans on a Blues squad near the top of the Western Conference standings at 11-3-1 heading into Thursday’s game against the Metropolitan Division-leading Rangers (11-2-2).Under Coach Ken Hitchcock, the Blues are coming off two straight 50-plus-win seasons that ended with first-round playoff exits. Adding Gomez and the experienced forwards Troy Brouwer and Scottie Upshall to a cast that includes the captain David Backes, Alex Steen and Vladimir Tarasenko, the Blues appear to have the right mix. Having won a job in training camp, Gomez has a goal and six assists in 10 games. He set up the newcomer Martin Havlat for the winner in a 2-0 victory over the Devils on Tuesday. Mostly, Gomez sounds grateful.“It’s like anything in life; you have to put the work in,” said Gomez, who played 58 games for the Devils last season after bouncing from Montreal to San Jose to Florida following the trade by the Rangers. “I’m still writing my own script, and it’s fun coming to the rink.”Gomez was a young star with the Devils, helping them win the Cup in 2000 as a rookie. Surrounded by the likes of Scott Stevens, Scott Niedermayer and Martin Brodeur, Gomez was part of another championship run in 2003. In 2007, he signed a seven-year contract, worth more than $50 million, with the Rangers. Traded to Montreal after only two seasons with the Rangers, Gomez eventually had his contract bought out by the Canadiens. Perhaps humbled by the several seasons in which he struggled, Gomez is eager to share his experience with young members of the Blues.“Growing up in the Devils’ system, you had to earn your job every year,” he said. “Everything in life is learning and getting better at what you do every year. When I’m talking to the young guys now, it’s really the way Stevens and Niedermayer talked to me.”The Blues rookie forward Robby Fabbri agreed.“I’m all ears around Gomer,” said Fabbri, 19, a first-round pick in 2014. “He’s so positive all the time. A guy with so much experience helping us, it means a lot. And he’s got a good sense of humor. He’s always making me laugh.”Backes, who has not been past the second round of the playoffs, also welcomes the jolt of lightheartedness that Gomez brings to the team.“He’s unique in his very positive outlook,” Backes said. “He brings a positive spin that can bring us back up to the light of day when things aren’t going well. He’s been around the block, had success, so he’s good to have around. He challenges everyone. That competition in camp started us off on the right foot for sure.”Defenseman Jay Bouwmeester, 32, who has also never been on a team that went far in the playoffs, said he was grateful that Gomez had joined the Blues.“Gomez has won Cups around Hall of Fame guys,” Bouwmeester said. “He’s a calming influence, for sure. He brings a different perspective. It’s been really good.”Gomez is quick to credit his return last year to the Devils, where he had played for seven seasons. Although the Devils failed to reach the playoffs for a third straight year amid a coaching change, Gomez was glad to reunite with Stevens, who was behind the bench with Adam Oates and Lou Lamoriello.“After the year I had before last year, I felt I wasn’t done,” Gomez said. “At a certain age you have to prove yourself. And as my dad always said, ‘Make them keep you.’ That’s his motto and mine, too.”Hitchcock spoke glowingly after the Blues shut out the Devils at Prudential Center. Gomez skated with Havlat, who also played for the Devils last season, and Fabbri. Hitchcock said he was secure having Gomez and Havlat in the lineup with his team missing the key forwards Paul Stastny and Jaden Schwartz, who are injured.“We got great minutes from the Gomez line,” Hitchcock said. “They have patience with the puck. We’ve effectively got two third lines. That’s a real good thing for us.”Hitchcock emphasized why an addition such as Gomez, with his 149 career playoff games, could prove critical for a Blues squad seeking better results in the spring.“It’s not just how many years he’s played in the N.H.L. but how many years he’s played on teams with all these runs in the Stanley Cup playoffs,” said Hitchcock, who won the Cup with Dallas in 1999 before losing to the Devils and Gomez the next year. “His voice in the locker room is really helpful.”Gomez, who still lives in Manhattan and vowed to enjoy another game at the Garden, is eager for at least one more special season.“As long as I’m contributing, I want to play,” he said. “It’s a business; I’ve learned from it. Even at my lowest moments, I’ve always met great people in hockey. Getting better as a player and as a human being, that’s really important to me.”Advertisement