AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Cullen Jenkins is a 12-year N.F.L. veteran, an anchor on the Giants’ defensive line, and lavish praise for opposing quarterbacks does not often pass through his teeth four days before a big game.But on Wednesday, Jenkins seemed unable to stop himself from evincing his admiration for Sunday’s target.“His knowledge and execution of plays — it’s crisp,” Jenkins said. “He knows exactly where he wants to go with the ball for each different look that a defense gives him.”Jenkins, of course, was speaking about Tom Brady, the all-everything leader of the New England Patriots. The Giants’ blueprint for success against the Patriots in the past — particularly in two franchise-defining wins in the Super Bowl — was always getting to and disrupting Brady with a pass rush. It was nice for the Giants to reminisce about the glory days — NFL Network highlights of Super Bowl XLII, the 2008 game, were being shown in the team cafeteria — but their pass rush has suffered mightily this season. Their nine sacks are their lowest total through nine games since 1963, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. And it has been three weeks since the Giants brought down a quarterback — the first time the team has been held without a sack in back-to-back games since 2010.So if there was ever going to be an opportune time for the pass rush to break out, it would be against the 8-0 Patriots and their quick-trigger quarterback.“He’s the quickest in the league getting rid of the ball; that’s a fact,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said. “But you have to try. Whether you try with four, five, six, whatever. At certain points of the game, you’ve got to try.” Several Giants said they felt the defensive line took steps in the right direction against Tampa Bay on Sunday despite the sizable loss of defensive tackle Jonathan Hankins, who sustained a torn pectoral muscle and was placed on injured reserve. In the fourth quarter, the linemen’s energy seemed to rise, and they managed to put pressure on quarterback Jameis Winston.“The sack numbers aren’t there, but I feel like we’ve done some positive things throughout the season,” Robert Ayers Jr. said. “Last week was kind of how it’s been, getting almost there, almost there. But we’ve done a good job causing turnovers.”Indeed, the Giants lead the N.F.L. with 21 takeaways and a plus-12 turnover differential.One reason for the upswing in energy was the fresh legs of defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul, who played 46 snaps Sunday in his first game of the season and showed his typical burst around the edge.“It takes a lot of pressure off everyone,” Ayers said. “He demands a lot of attention. The more he gets going, the better this team will be.”Pierre-Paul, one of the few Giants remaining from the Super Bowl team of 2011-12, said the identity of that group did not have much in common with the current one’s.“Those were pass rushers,” Pierre-Paul said, citing Justin Tuck and Osi Umenyiora — individuals who could disrupt a game plan but who have both departed.“We have pass rushers now, but we’ve got to work together,” Pierre-Paul said.What he meant is that the line today does not include the same dynamic athletics bursting around the edges of the pocket — well, except for him.“We’re going to get to the quarterback,” Pierre-Paul said. “I know I am.”The question is whether the ball will still be in Brady’s hands when the rush reaches him. “He’ll get the ball off fast, make a lot of throws,” Jenkins said. “And then all of a sudden he’ll hold onto the ball for a little bit. On those few plays, we have to make sure that we’re there and getting pressure on him and forcing him to be uncomfortable in the pocket.”Asked how to prepare for a quarterback who releases the ball so quickly, Jenkins shrugged. Getting your hands up and in the passing lanes is one strategy, he said. Then he repeated his coach: “You’ve got to try.”Running back Shane Vereen, who signed with the Giants after four seasons with the Patriots, had a somewhat different take on the way the team could keep Brady’s offense from scoring.“We’re going to have to get first downs,” Vereen said. “To keep Tom Brady off the field.”Advertisement