

 Ben Shpigel
 

ON PRO FOOTBALL
NOV. 11, 2015
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Once, there was a house.The caretaker loved the house — loved it more than any other area of his property — and he bragged about it, even as it lapsed into disrepair.But after living there for six years, he got transferred and was forced to sell.The next tenants invested a small fortune in remodeling and vowed to make it sparkle again, which it did. The house was the envy of the entire neighborhood — until powerful storms tore up the roof, blew out a few windows and knocked a tree into the kitchen.The Jets’ defense is that house. Rex Ryan once owned it. Now it belongs to Todd Bowles, who has watched the foundation sink and sag for the last three weeks.A loss in New England, where the Jets were overwhelmed by Tom Brady, preceded a debacle in Oakland, which gave way to a victory Sunday against the Jaguars, which might have featured the team’s most disheartening defensive performance of the season.AdvertisementTwice against Jacksonville, the Jets allowed touchdowns toward the end of a half, on quick drives that faced little resistance. The second time, the Jets held a 28-16 lead before Blake Bortles completed passes of 23, 29 and 20 yards. Within 25 seconds, the Jaguars had scored.Even though the Jets won, 28-23, they allowed 11 plays of more than 20 yards. If that seems like a lot, it is. Across the Jets’ first five games, they allowed 13 such plays. In their last three games, they have given up 22, including six of their eight longest passes.Advertisement“The biggest thing is the missed tackles and busted assignments that we can’t have,” Bowles said. “That, we have to shore up.”From the Jets’ perspective, their deficiencies are overblown. Brady shredded them the way he shreds everyone else, they said. And besides, he passed 54 times that day; he was bound to throw for more than 300 yards. In Oakland, the Jets lacked energy from the outset and missed more than 20 tackles, according to their statistics. Against Jacksonville, Bowles said, there were three broken plays.When asked, Bowles said he was not concerned about his defense. But it is troubling how the long gains have come during close games (New England), in the first half (Oakland) and when the Jets were trying to secure a victory (Jacksonville) — not when they were leading by a wide margin and the other team resorted to passing in an attempt to catch up.“As a secondary,” cornerback Marcus Williams said, “it’s not what you want to do.”Williams was a holdover from the Ryan regime, but in free agency, General Manager Mike Maccagnan committed $149 million to luring cornerbacks Antonio Cromartie, Darrelle Revis and Buster Skrine, and safety Marcus Gilchrist.Among that group, Revis and Gilchrist have been the most reliable. Skrine, after a strong start, has struggled when playing pass coverage the past few games. Cromartie gave up a deep touchdown in the Jets’ opener, a moment that presaged his problems against Oakland and Jacksonville.“If we saw him as struggling, then you can always make a change, roll up, help the guy coveragewise,” defensive coordinator Kacy Rodgers said of Cromartie last week. He added: “In our hearts of hearts, we don’t believe he’s struggling.”AdvertisementThe Jets believe they fixed their problem with missed tackles, but the mental mistakes endure. One of the most notable was safety Dion Bailey’s error on the Patriots’ critical 3rd-and-17 conversion in the fourth quarter that facilitated their go-ahead touchdown.Of course, Bailey will not be playing against Buffalo on Thursday night. He has a high ankle sprain, the same injury that has sidelined Calvin Pryor the last two games and will again this week, compromising the Jets’ depth at safety.At cornerback, Dee Milliner returns from injured reserve, but Cromartie is officially listed as doubtful with a deep thigh bruise. That further dilutes the secondary of a defense that has given up more than 1,000 passing yards in the last three games. The Jets have allowed three consecutive 300-yard passing games for the first time since 1986, according to Pro-Football-Reference.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The culprits 29 years ago were a future Hall of Famer and two young quarterbacks, same as this season. Instead of Dan Marino, Jack Trudeau and David Archer, the Jets were burned by Brady, Derek Carr and Bortles.“Every game can’t be a perfect game,” Skrine said. “The past two games, we haven’t played the way we wanted to play, but we don’t plan on that happening again this season.”A few strong passing teams loom — New England, the Giants and Dallas, if Tony Romo has returned by then — but the Bills are not one of them. Led by LeSean McCoy and Karlos Williams, who each ran for more than 100 yards in last week’s victory against Miami, Buffalo ranks third in the N.F.L. in rushing. But the Jets are wary of Tyrod Taylor’s ability to throw deep balls, and Sammy Watkins’s ability to catch them.Unlike Ryan, who always knew (and cared about) where the Jets ranked defensively, Bowles said last month that statistics did not matter. When asked what he valued, though, he mentioned red-zone defense, in which the Jets rank second; third-down conversion percentage (12th), takeaways (third) and run defense (first).In all those categories, the Jets are superior to Buffalo, whose coach holds the defense of his former team in high esteem.“It looks pretty darn good,” Ryan said.Of course it does. He used to live there. Now he hopes to add to the wreckage.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Foundation of Jets’ Defense Is Sagging.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »