By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 11, 2015
Outside linebacker Shane Ray made a surprise appearance on the practice field Wednesday, offering hope to the Denver Broncos’ depleted defense as it prepared to face the Kansas City Chiefs without the Pro Bowl pass rusher DeMarcus Ware or the star cornerback Aqib Talib.“I felt really good today,” Ray, the Broncos’ first-round draft pick this year, said after practicing for the first time since injuring his right knee in Denver’s overtime win at Cleveland on Oct. 18. “I didn’t feel any pain. I felt fast. I felt actually a little fresher because I’ve been down for four weeks.”Ray sprained his right medial collateral ligament when his teammate Derek Wolfe shoved Browns tackle Mitchell Schwartz into the back of Ray’s legs.Coach Gary Kubiak said Ray had a good workout Wednesday and would be a “full go” Thursday for the full-pads practice.AdvertisementThe Broncos, who have the N.F.L.’s top-ranked defense, will be without Ware, who leads the team with six and a half sacks but wrenched his back at Indianapolis on Sunday, and Talib, who was suspended for a game for poking a player in the eye.AdvertisementJETS LOSE A TOP LINEMAN In an unexpected move, the Jets placed right guard Willie Colon on injured reserve. Colon, one of the Jets’ best run blockers and most respected leaders, has been troubled by knee problems all season, including a ligament sprain in Week 3, but neither he nor the Jets gave any indication that his injury was serious enough to end his season. He will be replaced by Brian Winters, who has started two games at right guard this season. Claiming Colon’s roster spot was the third-year cornerback Dee Milliner (wrist surgery), who was activated from short-term injured reserve. BEN SHPIGEL Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.PITTA’S YEAR IS OVER The Baltimore Ravens announced that tight end Dennis Pitta would be placed on injured reserve, a decision that came after his personal physicians and team doctors deemed it unsafe for him to return from right hip surgery.“Obviously, I really want to play,” Pitta said. “This is what I feel like I want to do and should do. It’s difficult for me, accepting the fact that I won’t be out there this season.”Pitta caught a touchdown pass in the Super Bowl after an outstanding 2012 regular season. He fractured and dislocated his hip on the first day of training camp the following July and played in only the last four games of that season.Pitta got off to a good start in 2014 before again dislocating his hip in Week 3. He finally returned to the practice field three weeks ago. (AP)BRIDGEWATER IMPROVING Mike Zimmer, the Minnesota Vikings’ coach, said quarterback Teddy Bridgewater was “progressing nicely” through the N.F.L. concussion protocol. Zimmer has said he believes Bridgewater, who was hurt Sunday against St. Louis, will be ready to start against Oakland this weekend. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Top Pick Practices, Giving a Lift to Short-Handed Denver.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.