AdvertisementSupported byBy Billy WitzBOCA RATON, Fla. — When the Yankees were in Minnesota in late July, Twins center fielder Aaron Hicks ranged far into the spacious gaps to run down deep drives by Jacoby Ellsbury and Brian McCann. The next night, he belted a long home run off C. C. Sabathia in the first inning.Those moments of brilliance caught the Yankees’ attention. On Wednesday, they consummated their weekslong pursuit of Hicks, a former first-round pick, by trading the backup catcher John Ryan Murphy to Minnesota.The trade, along with a minor deal that sent the utility player Jose Pirela to San Diego for the pitching prospect Ronald Herrera, created a busy day for Brian Cashman before he and his fellow general managers began heading home from their annual November meeting. And Cashman may not be done.The Hicks trade could be a precursor to another one for the Yankees, who could now send their lone marketable outfielder, Brett Gardner, elsewhere in return for more starting pitching.“At the very least, he’ll be taking Chris Young’s spot,” Cashman said of Hicks. “We’ll see how the rest of the winter transpires.”Young was the Yankees’ fourth outfielder in 2015 and an effective hitter against left-handed pitching, but he is now a free agent.The Yankees hope that Hicks, 26, follows a development curve similar to that of Didi Gregorius, whom they acquired last December. By the end of the season Gregorius had blossomed into a significantly improved hitter and one of the best defensive shortstops in the American League.Hicks, who is 6 feet 2 inches and weighs 210 pounds, was selected by the Twins with the 14th pick of the 2008 draft and made his major league debut five years later.A switch hitter, Hicks has struggled to perform at the plate, batting .192 in 2013 and .215 in 2014, and he spent parts of each season in the minors. But he took a significant jump forward last season. Despite a late-season slump, Hicks batted .256 with 11 home runs and 33 R.B.I., stole 13 bases in 16 attempts, and posted a .721 on-base-plus-slugging percentage. He batted .307 against left-handers.“We believe he’s figured some things out in the last couple years,” Cashman said, citing the influence of Torii Hunter, who recently announced his retirement after returning to the Twins for his final season. “It was a little bit like how Didi came into our environment and had some veteran players put their arms around him a little bit and let him grow underneath that veteran presence.”The acquisition of Hicks follows a pattern that has emerged over the last year: Having saddled himself with big contracts for older players who are virtually untradeable, Cashman has worked around the margins to acquire younger, cheaper and more athletic talent for a team that had the oldest starting lineup in baseball last season. Besides Gregorius and Hicks, Cashman has obtained pitcher Nathan Eovaldi, the utility player Dustin Ackley and reliever Justin Wilson.“I wasn’t going to trade John Ryan Murphy for an old guy,” Cashman said.The Yankees could continue to get younger if they can trade Gardner for starting pitching — an area of depth for Seattle, according to Jerry Dipoto, the Mariners’ newly hired general manager. Earlier this week, Dipoto said he was looking for an athletic center fielder who could help at the top of the batting order. That profile fits Gardner.The trade of Murphy made this the second consecutive off-season that the Yankees traded their backup catcher. Francisco Cervelli was sent to Pittsburgh in exchange for Wilson. Both players were productive last season, although Cervelli emerged as a player worthy of All-Star consideration.Murphy gives the Twins a promising, young, athletic catcher who has made great strides defensively since picking up the position as a senior in high school. He batted .277 with three homers and 14 R.B.I. in 2015 while backing up McCann and, like Hicks, he flashed his potential in front of his future employers: Murphy belted a three-run, game-winning homer off Twins closer Glen Perkins in July.But Murphy was expendable with the emergence of the team’s top catching prospect, Gary Sanchez, who was the most valuable player of the Arizona Fall League’s Fall Stars Game on Saturday after making his major league debut with the Yankees in September. Sanchez hit 18 home runs in the minor leagues last season.Cashman said it would be determined in spring training if Sanchez spends next season as McCann’s backup or in the minor leagues, so he could play more frequently. Cashman also said that a young catcher could learn a lot at the major league level even if the playing time was less frequent.“There’s a lot of learning and growth that takes place even if you’re not playing in those games on an everyday basis,” Cashman said. “I believe that benefited John Ryan a great deal. It’s kind of like a backup quarterback, Aaron Rodgers to Brett Favre. It benefited Rodgers for a period of time and then, boom, he was ready to go.”The trade with the Padres, Cashman said, was simply a matter of clearing space on the 40-man roster, which must be set by Nov. 20. The Yankees have 38 players on the roster. Herrera, a 20-year-old right-handed starting pitcher, will start the season at either Class A Tampa or Class AA Trenton.Advertisement