By BRETT MICHAEL DYKES and BEN SHPIGELNOV. 11, 2015
8:25 p.m. Eastern, NFL NetworkLine: Jets by 2½If you thought Rex Ryan was not going to make some noise this week — when his new team, the Buffalo Bills, plays the team that fired him in the off-season, the Jets, in a prime-time matchup with playoff implications — you probably should not play the lottery or bet on any horses any time soon.If ever Rex was gonna Rex, this was the week he was going to do it. And he did not disappoint, naming linebacker Ikemefuna Enemkpali, who was cut by the Jets in training camp after he broke the jaw of quarterback Geno Smith with a sucker punch, a team captain for this matchup.That Ryan and the Bills signed Enemkpali in the first place after the incident raised eyebrows, but making him a captain for Thursday’s game has drawn an avalanche of criticism. Ryan, for his part, does not understand what the big deal is, saying he traditionally names players as captains when they face their former team.“Guys, it’s not a slap in anybody’s face,” Ryan told reporters Tuesday. “It is not a sign of disrespect. It’s just what we do. And I’ve done it, you guys know, I’ve done it that way ever since I came into the league.”AdvertisementIn matters concerning the actual game on the field, Ryan Fitzpatrick will start at quarterback for the Jets despite reports that he will have surgery to repair his injured left thumb on Friday. Fitzpatrick threw for 272 yards with two touchdowns and no interceptions wearing a molded brace on his left hand last week in a victory over the Jacksonville Jaguars.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fitzpatrick was not immune to Ryan’s barbs this week. Ryan took shots at the quarterback’s patented beard, saying Fitzpatrick is “not a real handsome kid.” When told of what Ryan said, Fitzpatrick laughed it off, telling ESPN, “I got five kids, so something’s working for me.”AdvertisementPick: JetsBRETT MICHAEL DYKESMATCHUP TO WATCHJets offensive line vs. Buffalo defensive front. The Jets cannot continue averaging 2.46 yards per carry, as they have over the last three games, and expect to win. Their offense is predicated on a strong running attack, and though Chris Ivory has sputtered, the onus also falls on an offensive line that regains center Nick Mangold but not right guard Willie Colon (knee), who was put on injured reserve Wednesday. How well the Jets can neutralize the likes of Marcell Dareus, Jerry Hughes and Mario Williams will play a significant role in deciding the outcome.NUMBER TO WATCH 75. That is the Jets’ touchdown percentage in the red zone, the best in the N.F.L. A year ago, the Jets struggled in that area, scoring touchdowns on a league-low 36.2 percent (17 of 47) of their visits. To improve, they traded for Brandon Marshall, whose presence draws coverage away from Eric Decker. Of the 11 touchdowns Marshall and Decker have scored, only one has come from outside the red zone.QUOTATION OF THE WEEK“Oh my goodness. I am not going to talk about that one.”Bills Coach Rex Ryan, when asked if the Jets had benefited from the punch by Ikemefuna Enemkpali that broke Geno Smith’s jaw and allowed Ryan Fitzpatrick to start at quarterback. BEN SHPIGELA version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Bills at Jets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.