AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartN.F.L. wide receivers are some of the most athletic people on the planet. Speed, leaping ability and the ability to change directions quickly are hallmarks of the position.The knock on receivers has always been that they are only as good as the quarterback throwing them the ball. Case in point: Antonio Brown.Brown, of the Pittsburgh Steelers, has been one of the league’s best players over the last two and a half seasons. But this year, his statistics dropped significantly when the backup quarterback Michael Vick replaced Ben Roethlisberger. After three consecutive games with at least 100 yards, Brown’s yardage declined to 42, 45 and 24 in Vick’s three starts.In Week 9, with Roethlisberger in his second game back from an injury — he sustained another late in the game — Brown set a franchise record with 284 receiving yards.Brown has averaged 10.7 yards per target this year on passes from Roethlisberger but 4.5 yards on passes from Vick. Brown caught fewer passes per target and averaged fewer yards per completion on targets from Vick, and he has also been targeted less frequently when Vick is in the game. Brown has done better with another Steelers backup, Landry Jones. On 16 targets from Jones, Brown has averaged 14.0 yards per pass, with a 57-yarder against Oakland that set up the winning field goal.He is not the only star wide receiver whose numbers have been affected by poor quarterback play.In his career, Dez Bryant has averaged 9.2 yards per pass attempt on 546 passes from Tony Romo (who was injured in Week 1) and 7.0 on 92 passes from all other Dallas Cowboys quarterbacks.DeAndre Hopkins of the Houston Texans, who is averaging 8.5 yards per target with Brian Hoyer at quarterback this season, averaged 6.7 on passes thrown by Ryan Mallett, who was released after Week 7. Reggie Wayne had 1,355 receiving yards in 2010, Peyton Manning’s last season with the Indianapolis Colts, and he had the same yardage in Andrew Luck’s first season in 2012. Those figures were sandwiched around a 960-yard season with Curtis Painter, Dan Orlovsky and Kerry Collins.But the relationship between star receivers and quarterbacks runs both ways. Along with Brown, the only player last year with 1,500 receiving yards and 12 receiving touchdowns was the Green Bay Packers star Jordy Nelson.Nelson was part of the reason Aaron Rodgers led the league in 2014 with a sparkling average of 8.65 adjusted net yards per attempt on the way to winning a Most Valuable Player Award. This season, Nelson was placed on injured reserve after tearing the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee in the preseason. As a result, Rodgers’s efficiency numbers have declined: He is averaging 7.55 adjusted net yards per attempt this season, the fifth-best mark in the league.Nelson’s absence was most apparent in the Packers’ last two games — their only losses this season — as Rodgers struggled for long stretches against Carolina and for the entire game against Denver.But perhaps the best example of the value an elite pass catcher can add to a quarterback does not involve a wide receiver but a tight end. Since Rob Gronkowski entered the N.F.L. in 2010, Tom Brady has thrown 520 passes his way. On those passes, Brady has thrown for an incredible 5,008 yards, with 60 touchdowns and nine interceptions, for an average of 9.6 yards per attempt and a 129.2 passer rating. On his 2,758 other passes, Brady has thrown for 20,113 yards, with 130 touchdowns and 37 interceptions, for a less impressive average of 7.3 yards per attempt and a 95.6 rating.Advertisement