AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherWith the release of the season’s second college football playoff rankings, the pecking order at the top continues to clarify. If No. 1 Clemson wins the Atlantic Coast Conference, No. 2 Alabama the Southeastern Conference and No. 3 Ohio State the Big Ten, and if No. 4 Notre Dame wins the rest of its independent schedule, they are likely to be the four teams in the playoff.That would leave the Big 12 out. Again.The top Big 12 team in the ranking, undefeated Baylor, is No. 6. Another undefeated team from the conference, Oklahoma State, is eighth, while one-loss Oklahoma and T.C.U. are languishing in 12th and 15th.With four playoff spots and five power conferences, at least one is going to be left out each year. Last year the Big 12 was that conference: Baylor ranked fifth and T.C.U. sixth in the final ranking. T.C.U. went on to beat Mississippi, 42-3, in the Peach Bowl, while Baylor lost the Cotton Bowl to Michigan State by a point.T.C.U. finished the season 12-1 with just a 3-point loss at Baylor. Its average margin of victory was 27 points. But there was no route to the national championship for the Horned Frogs. After the season, Jeff Sagarin’s venerable computer rankings rated T.C.U. the second best team in the country behind national champion Ohio State, and his “predictor” ranking, which emphasizes point differential, rated it No. 1.The Big 12 could face a similar situation this year, even if one of the current top four falters. Iowa would probably grab Ohio State’s place with a Big Ten championship, and Stanford could jump in the mix by winning the Pac-12.Yet there is no consensus that the Big 12 is the weakest of the power conferences. Indeed, Sagarin rates it as the best conference in the country and has three Big 12 members in his top six.In the college football playoff rankings, many analysts focus on the teams. That’s the wrong way to think about the playoff picture.The league is full of offensive powerhouses; Baylor is averaging 57 points a game. Oklahoma State’s victory over unbeaten T.C.U. was extremely impressive. Oklahoma has blown out team after team.One black mark for the Big 12 is out-of-conference schedule strength. Each Big 12 team plays three nonconference games and many of them have chosen, well, unadventurous opponents. Baylor, for example, played S.M.U., Lamar and Rice. Oklahoma State put Central Michigan, Central Arkansas and Texas, San Antonio, to the sword. Oklahoma at least played a decent Tennessee team — and needed two overtimes to win.Oklahoma State hosts Baylor on Nov. 21. For a shot at the playoffs, whichever team wins that game will probably need to finish the season unbeaten. But that will not be easy. Both teams still must play Oklahoma, and Baylor must also play at T.C.U.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.Oklahoma could possibly be the team that foils its own conference’s playoff hopes. The Sooners’ run through the weaker Big 12 teams this year has been impressive: Their last four games include two 36-point wins and two 55-point wins.But their final three games will be brutal: at Baylor, home to T.C.U. and at Oklahoma State. Though their playoff ranking is low, do not count the Sooners out. This weekend they are only 2½-point underdogs at Baylor.Indeed, oddsmakers and many computer rankers love Oklahoma. Sagarin’s predictor rating already has Oklahoma No. 1 in the country because of all those romps.But Oklahoma has a loss, by 7 points to rival Texas, and is only 12th in the playoff ranking. It is hard to see it landing in the top four even with a string of good wins.If Oklahoma does run the table, it might well be the best team in the nation. And it, along with the rest of the Big 12, could be on the outside looking in again.Advertisement