By TYLER KEPNERNOV. 12, 2015
As a Yankees executive last off-season, Billy Eppler assisted in the acquisition of a smooth-fielding shortstop who grew up in Curaçao. As the new general manager of the Los Angeles Angels, he has done it again.In his first major move with his new team, Eppler acquired Andrelton Simmons, a defensive maestro for the Atlanta Braves the last four seasons, in exchange for the veteran shortstop Erick Aybar and two top pitching prospects. Simmons, 26, is five months older than the Yankees’ Didi Gregorius and played on youth teams with him.“Everything he does now, he did when he was young,” Gregorius said this summer of Simmons. “Since we were 6 years old, all the guys always said if you hit a ground ball to short, it’s an automatic out. Right now, guys are saying the same thing. He hasn’t changed.”Simmons is a two-time Rawlings Gold Glove winner, and on Wednesday Wilson named him as the majors’ defensive player of the year. He hit .265 last season, though he had only four home runs, well below his career high of 17 in 2013. After that season, the Braves gave Simmons a seven-year, $58 million contract, presumably making him a core player for their future, with a new ballpark opening in 2017.AdvertisementBut the Braves have fallen hard since then, making several deals to replenish a barren farm system, and last year’s 95-loss season was their worst since 1990.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.John Coppolella, the Braves’ general manager, said the talent in the Angels’ package was too good to pass up. “We love Simmons,” he said, “but we need to improve our talent level.”AdvertisementThe Braves — who also sent a Class A catcher to the Angels — got two Class AA pitchers: the right-hander Chris Ellis and the left-hander Sean Newcomb, a first-round draft choice in 2014 who was considered the Angels’ top prospect. Newcomb, 22, was 9-3 with a 2.38 E.R.A. this season, with 168 strikeouts and 76 walks in 136 innings.“Every trade has a lot of pain to it,” Eppler said. “When you are including a young, left-handed starter with a great body, great delivery and great arm action that can throw 98 miles an hour and strike a lot of hitters out, that’s really difficult to do. It gives you a lot of pause. It makes your stomach hurt a little bit; a lot, actually.“But if you don’t have a feeling of hurt or of pain, it’s probably too good to be true. You have to give up something to get something, and we’re very excited to have Andrelton here.”The Angels, who were 85-77 last season, have several other holes to fill around the star center fielder Mike Trout. But Eppler said the importance of shortstop, and the scarcity of elite, available players in their prime at the position, made him aggressive on Simmons.“I didn’t expect it, but in the back of my mind, I had an idea there’s a chance,” Simmons said. “I’m happy to be part of an organization that’s trying to win right now.”The Mets have been seeking an upgrade at shortstop, too, but talks with the Braves — a rival in the National League East — did not advance very far. The Mets want to keep their young rotation intact after it carried them to the World Series, and they probably could not have matched the talent in the Angels’ package without dipping into that depth.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline:  Angels’ New General Manager Makes a Big Pickup at Short.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.