AdvertisementSupported byRangers 6, Blues 3By Dave CaldwellSeconds after Ryan McDonagh’s power-play goal, Brian Elliott, the second goaltender of the game for the St. Louis Blues, angrily whacked his stick against a post. At the other end of the ice, Henrik Lundqvist perched his arms on his knees, calmly awaiting another onslaught.Lundqvist gave up three goals for only the second time this season, but that hardly meant he played poorly. After surrendering three goals on the Rangers’ first five shots, the Blues swarmed Lundqvist, who stood out again in a 6-3 victory Thursday at Madison Square Garden.“It’s big for us to beat this team,” Lundqvist said of the Blues, who had won six of their previous seven games. “We talked about it this morning, to go in here and find a way. And we did.”Lundqvist made 31 saves against the Blues (11-4-1), the best of which was a lunging stick save in the first six minutes to help the Rangers win their seventh straight game and push their record to 12-2-2. The 12 victories are the most in franchise history after 16 games.The win improved Lundqvist to 9-2-2, equaling the best start of his career (he also won nine of his first 13 games in 2008-9. His goals against average and save percentage each took a hit, but he will swap statistics for victories, even now.“I think about some of the playoff games he’s had,” said McDonagh, the team’s captain. “Now he seems to be in playoff mode — he’s so focused.”The line centered by Derick Brassard scored the Rangers’ first two goals, and Kevin Hayes, J. T. Miller, McDonagh and Dan Girardi added goals to lift the Rangers to their eighth victory in 10 games at home. They have won their last seven home games.They are also 9-1-1 in games in which they score first. The Rangers scored goals Thursday on their first two shots of the game: the first by Brassard after he won a face-off in the St. Louis zone, the second on a slick, swerving maneuver by the ever-popular Mats Zuccarello.Less than 50 seconds after Brassard scored, Lundqvist made a superb save. A deflected puck danced through the Rangers’ zone to Blues forward Alexander Steen. He tried to steer the puck to the wide side of the net, but Lundqvist knocked it aside with his stick. “It propels us, and the momentum goes the other way,” Girardi said.The Rangers also scored on their second shot. Zuccarello notched his eighth goal of the season — and his first since he had a hat trick Oct. 30 against Toronto — after taking a crisp pass from Brassard, who had received a pass from Nash.Much to the delight of the fans, Zuccarello swerved around defenseman Jay Bouwmeester with the puck, collected it and popped a shot over the starting goalie Jake Allen into the top of the net at 7 minutes 12 seconds. The Rangers have outscored their opponents in the first period this season, 20-8.“Preparation,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said of the team’s fast starts. “It’s all about individual preparation.”After the game, Rangers center Derek Stepan said of Zuccarello: “I think he’s my favorite player in the N.H.L. right now. He’s playing at such a high level. It starts with his compete level — he just competes so hard.”After Zuccarello’s goal, Lundqvist turned aside five straight shots, including an attempt from point-blank range by Backes, who had taken a pass from forward Martin Havlat. Kevin Hayes then padded the lead by scoring his fifth goal of the season at 14:38 on a semi-breakaway.The rookie forward Oscar Lindberg set up Hayes by slipping the puck to Viktor Stalberg as the Rangers shoved the Blues backward again. Stalberg threw the puck to Hayes, who cruised in on Allen, faked a shot, then swept a forehand try into the net.Although the rest of the team had done little to bail out Allen, St. Louis Coach Ken Hitchcock had seen enough. Brian Elliott hopped over the boards to replace Allen, who had shut out his last two opponents, including the Devils on Tuesday.The opportunistic Blues fired 16 first-period shots at Lundqvist and finally scored to make it 3-1. They closed to 3-2 and 4-3 later, and St. Louis Coach Ken Hitchcock said, “I thought when it was 4-3, we were going to win for sure.”But the Rangers helped Lundqvist by limiting neutral-zone turnovers and controlling play in the third period, with McDonagh scoring his second goal of the season early in the period and Girardi flipping the puck into an empty net with less than two minutes left for a hard-earned victory.“From Hanky to the forwards, we have four lines scoring goals,” Zuccarello said. “We have all the defensemen doing everything — scoring goals and blocking shots. I think we are a deep team. When we play like this and score on chances, we are a very good team.”Advertisement