By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 12, 2015
Stephen Curry scored 46 points, 21 in the first quarter, and the Golden State Warriors improved to 10-0 on the season with a 129-116 victory over the Timberwolves in Minnesota on Thursday night.Curry, the N.B.A.’s reigning most valuable player, hit 15 of 25 shots from the field, including 8 of 13 from 3-point range. He made 8 of 8 free throws, and surpassed the 40-point mark for the third time this season.Draymond Green had 23 points, 12 assists and 8 rebounds for the Warriors, who became the fourth defending league champion to start the season with at least 10 straight wins.Karl-Anthony Towns had 17 points and 11 rebounds, and Andrew Wiggins had 19 points and 5 assists for the Timberwolves (4-4), who have lost all four home games this season.AdvertisementPoint guard Ricky Rubio missed his second straight game with a strained left hamstring.The Warriors went 18 for 38 from 3-point range while Minnesota was just 3 for 9.AdvertisementHEAT 92, JAZZ 91 Chris Bosh scored 25 points, the reserve Tyler Johnson added 17, and Miami held off visiting Utah.Goran Dragic finished with 14 points, including a free throw that provided the deciding margin. Hassan Whiteside grabbed 14 rebounds for Miami, which has won three straight games to open a seven-game homestand.Derrick Favors led Utah with 25 points and 12 rebounds. Gordon Hayward had 24 points and 11 rebounds, and Alec Burks added 24 points for the Jazz, including a 3-pointer as time expired.Miami played without Dwyane Wade, who was excused for a family emergency. One of his sons needed hospitalization for undisclosed reasons, with the team only saying that the child was doing well and would be fine.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Heat were also missing Wade’s backup at shooting guard, with Gerald Green serving the last game of a two-game suspension for conduct detrimental to the team after an episode at his apartment building last week.Utah played without the starting center Rudy Gobert (ankle).CLIPPERS GUARDS OUT The Los Angeles Clippers were without their starting backcourt against the Phoenix Suns on Thursday night.Chris Paul had a strained groin, and J. J. Redick has lower back spasms. Both were hurt in the team’s loss at Dallas on Wednesday night.The two have combined to average 30.5 points this season.Coach Doc Rivers said he expected Redick to miss a couple of games. Paul’s nonparticipation was a game-time decision.AdvertisementPACERS ROOKIE INJURED The Indiana Pacers expect the rookie center Myles Turner to miss at least four weeks with a chip fracture in his left thumb.Turner, 19, was injured in a victory at Boston on Wednesday. Team officials said Turner was consulting with the medical staff about what to do next.The No. 11 overall selection in June’s draft, Turner has averaged 6.1 points, 2.9 rebounds and 15.9 minutes in eight games.Indiana has won four of five games since starting 0-3.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Curry Scores 46 to Lift Warriors to 10-0 .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.