By DAVID COXNOV. 12, 2015
When Russia faces the Czech Republic in the Fed Cup final in front of a hostile Prague crowd this weekend, no one in the stadium will be more nervous than Anastasia Myskina.Myskina, the captain of the Russian team, acknowledged that she was a poor spectator.“It’s not easy watching as a friend and a coach,” she said in a phone interview. “It’s been a long time now for me, but I still remember all the emotions and thoughts you have as a player in these different moments. And so you live the match with them. Watching is tougher than being out there running.”As a player, Myskina was an unlikely trendsetter for tennis in her country. A quieter, more enigmatic character than some of her compatriots, she peaked at No. 2 in the rankings after becoming the first Russian woman to win a Grand Slam at the French Open in 2004. Later that year, Maria Sharapova and Svetlana Kuznetsova emulated her at Wimbledon and the United States Open.While Sharapova and Kuznetsova are still competing, Myskina took a break from the game in 2007 at age 26. She never returned.Advertisement“I was in chronic pain in my right shoulder,” she said. “It had been bothering me for a long time. I could still run and hit forehands and backhands, but I became tired of trying to compete without a serve. Even in women’s tennis, it’s impossible. The girls are strong, they step in and close you down.”AdvertisementAt the time, she said, she was not thinking of stopping for good. Taking a position as a commentator for Russian television, Myskina had time to reflect on the comforts of her new existence. She thought of the prematch nerves, 6 a.m. runs and relentless drills, and did not miss them. Her first child arrived in 2008; two more followed within the next three years.“Having children really changes your perspective,” she said. “You become entirely preoccupied with all these questions — what to do if they’re sick, if anything goes wrong. My career as an athlete felt like somewhere else, a very long time ago. And it hit me how much changes with time. While you take a few years out, the sport accelerates away from you. The training is harder than ever, and the girls are now much younger than you. I realized I couldn’t go back.”But Myskina, now 34, missed competition and the team environment. She still thinks about a 2004 Olympic semifinal match that she lost to Justine Henin despite leading, 5-1, in the third set.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I perhaps wish I could have played for a bit longer, but I don’t call this a regret,” Myskina said. “It happened, and there’s nothing I can do about that. But if there’s one thing which really makes me sad, it’s Athens. I should have won that match. If it happened in a Grand Slam, it would have been easier to forgive myself. Grand Slams come around every couple of months, but the Olympics is something else, it’s once in four years.”Seeking a way to return to the sport, she asked the Russian Tennis Federation for a role in 2013 and was appointed Fed Cup captain, a competition she helped Russia win in 2004 and 2005. Russia has not won the event since 2008.“I’m really a team person,” Myskina said. “As a player, the Fed Cup was really important for me. I won some big matches in front of huge crowds. Back at that time, Russian players were winning a lot, and we felt the whole country supporting us.”During the past 10 years, though, the Fed Cup has often not been a priority for top players on the women’s tour. In 2013, Russia could not persuade any of its top 11 players to compete in the final against Italy, which was scheduled opposite a WTA Tour event.AdvertisementBut the Czech Republic has not had such participation issues. Led by the sixth-ranked Petra Kvitova and the ninth-ranked Lucie Safarova, the Czechs have won three of the past four Fed Cup titles.Myskina’s enthusiasm for the competition and contacts with many of the players — she coaches Kuznetsova and Ekaterina Makarova — appears to have made a difference for Russia.Most notably, the fourth-ranked Sharapova, who missed the 2008 and 2011 Fed Cup finals because of injuries, is competing in the event for the first time since 2012.As a player, Myskina once threatened to quit the Russian team if Sharapova was selected because of the courtside antics of Sharapova’s father, Yuri, but such controversies appear to be buried in the past.“Ten years ago, there were some players saying that Maria wasn’t really Russian, complaining that she lives in the U.S., but they were in the minority,” Myskina said. “We all knew that she has a Russian passport, she speaks Russian, and she loves to compete for her country. It feels like she’s having fun with us, and she’s really comfortable with the team.“I don’t think we’re favorites this weekend because the Czechs are strong, but having Maria is definitely an extra bonus. Anytime she steps on the court, there’s a lot of pressure for whoever she’s playing against.”A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Former Player Thriving as Russia’s Fed Cup Captain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.