
Sports of The Times By                     
 WILLIAM C. RHODEN
 
NOV. 12, 2015
Just when you think you’ve seen Rex Ryan at his most acute state of tone-deafness, he outdoes himself.Last week, Ryan, the Buffalo Bills’ first-year coach, trotted out Richie Incognito as one of his team’s captains when the Bills played the Dolphins in Buffalo. The gesture was clearly intended as a slap in the face to the Dolphins, who suspended Incognito in 2013 for his part in a locker-room bullying scandal that led to an N.F.L. investigation and put a stain on the league’s reputation.This week, the slap in the face was delivered to the Jets, after Ryan sent out the former Jet Ikemefuna Enemkpali as one of his three captains when the Jets hosted the Bills on Thursday.Enemkpali was cut by the Jets this summer after he broke quarterback Geno Smith’s jaw in a locker-room fight.AdvertisementDon’t look for Ryan to change. The Bills routed the Dolphins, 33-17, and on Thursday they beat the Jets, 22-17. Each of these Ryan-orchestrated episodes is the latest illustration that his words and actions sometimes get ahead of his brain. That straight-talking attitude was one of the reasons the Jets hired him in 2009, even if it sometimes led to embarrassing incidents and public apologies. It’s also why Buffalo quickly picked him up after he was fired.AdvertisementBut allowing him to taunt other teams is a different issue, and one more reason the N.F.L.’s reputation continues to erode even as the league rakes in money by the billions.Some Jets players said they felt disrespected by Ryan’s decision to let Enemkpali serve as a captain. Smith was not among them. Speaking to reporters after practice earlier this week, he said: “I don’t know why you guys are surprised. I really don’t. I don’t think you are surprised. No one should be surprised.”Exactly.During a conference call this week, Ryan wondered what the fuss was about. He explained — or, rather, reiterated — that he has always allowed his players to serve as game captains when facing teams that had cut or traded them.“It’s not a slap in anybody’s face, it’s not a sign of disrespect,” he said. “It’s just what we do, and I’ve done it, and you guys know, I’ve done it that way ever since” Ryan came into the league.But Incognito? And Enemkpali?After Thursday’s victory, an otherwise elated Ryan became agitated when pressed about the prudence of selecting Enemkpali.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“You know what, he’s not a bad kid,” Ryan said. “You think that’s the first fight that’s happened in an N.F.L. locker room? Every single team has had fights in their locker room. The young man made a mistake. You don’t think he thinks about that every single day? But he’s on our football team and I’m proud of him.”Look, I get Rex Ryan. I egged him on when he first got to New York with the charge to change the losing culture and give the Jets a swashbuckling imprimatur.AdvertisementAnd as much as I like and respect the straight-ahead sincerity and depth of the Jets’ new coach, Todd Bowles, Ryan was more fun. Ryan was colorful. He was outrageous. Defiant. Undisciplined. Irreverent.But he also had the personnel to back up his talk when he took the job. For two seasons, he pushed the right buttons. The Jets made the playoffs twice, and Ryan got a pass on any errors in judgment. But he never again posted a winning record in New York, and after he finished 4-12 last season, the Jets fired him.The Bills snapped up Ryan and charged him with doing the same, remaking Buffalo as he had done with the Jets. Part of that consists on his doing the outrageous — like sending Incognito and Enemkpali out as honorary captains for the coin toss.Ryan, in a conference call this week, had little patience with questions about his time in New York, or about accountability.“That thing’s in my rear-view mirror,” he said. “That thing’s behind us. People are always going to question the guy going out.”Football is a rough-and-tumble game of skill and physicality. But I believe that you can play a rough-and-tumble game without necessarily being a rough-and-tumble person. Bowles believes that as well. He also realizes that he is not going to be judged by how entertaining he is, but instead by how many games he wins and by how his teams perform in big moments — like Thursday night’s game against Buffalo.Ultimately, my issue is not with Ryan. He’s merely one of the N.F.L.’s carnival barker. My problem is with the carnival owners.What do N.F.L. owners think? Do Incognito and Enemkpali have a right to take center stage as captains? Just to satisfy Rex Ryan’s passion for gamesmanship? Does a player like Greg Hardy really have the right to represent the league?Who allows this to happen?And to think, for the last few days we have been discussing high-minded ideals and citizenship, and the idea that talented athletes and powerful coaches were using their visibility to help bring about positive change.AdvertisementI guess we can thank Rex Ryan for bringing us back to reality.Email: wcr@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Slap Meant for Opponents Hits the League .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »