AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikFred McNeill, a hard-hitting linebacker who appeared in two Super Bowls with the Minnesota Vikings before becoming a lawyer and a spokesman for former players who suffer from early onset dementia and other cognitive problems, as he did, died on Nov. 3 at his home in Los Angeles. He was 63.His wife, Tia McNeill, said the cause was cardiopulmonary arrest caused by end-stage amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease.McNeill, who at 6-foot-2 and 229 pounds was a swift and punishing tackler, played his entire professional career, from 1974 to 1985, with the Vikings.He was drafted 17th in the first round in 1974 out of U.C.L.A. during the time of Alan Page and Carl Eller, who were part of the dominant Vikings defensive line known as the Purple People Eaters.McNeill played in 167 regular-season games and 13 playoff games, reaching the Super Bowl in 1975, when the Vikings lost to the Pittsburgh Steelers, and in 1977, when they lost to the Oakland Raiders. He blocked a punt in the 1977 game.He graduated from law school in 1987 and joined a Minnesota firm, but “as his disease took hold, it became more and more difficult for him to function as a lawyer,” Barry Reed, one of his law partners, told The Minneapolis Star-Tribune this year.McNeill sustained a number of concussions from football that affected the rest of his life, he said. He struggled with headaches, cognitive issues, memory loss and depression.One concussion left him dizzy for two or three weeks, he told Dr. Sanjay Gupta on the CNN program “American Morning” in 2010. He said he had considered suicide.The next year, he told Viking Update, a local Vikings media outlet, “If I knew then not to use my helmet as a tool to tackle people, I think I could have been in a position to avoid the impact that I’m experiencing now.”Dr. Bennet Omalu, a forensic pathologist and co-director of the Brain Injury Research Institute in Moon Township, Pa., told CNN in 2010 that McNeill had chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a kind of brain damage that affects many former players.McNeill stopped practicing law in 2011 because of health problems, including dementia, his wife said. He joined thousands of other former players in a lawsuit against the N.F.L. seeking medical damages and other compensation. The league settled with them in 2013 for $765 million, but the agreement is still being disputed by some players,  and the amount could reach  $1 billion or more.Frederick Arnold McNeill was born on May 6, 1952, in Durham, N.C. His family later moved to Los Angeles, where he excelled at football, track and basketball at Baldwin Park High School. He led U.C.L.A. with 89 tackles in 1972, was selected as a first-team all-American after the 1973 season and was inducted into the U.C.L.A. athletics hall of fame in 2012.McNeill enrolled at the William Mitchell College of Law in St. Paul near the end of his N.F.L. career. He was admitted to the California bar around 2000, his wife said in a phone interview.In addition to his wife, the former Tia Bordenave, whom he married in 1983, McNeill is survived by two sons, Gavin and Frederick Jr.; five sisters; three brothers, including Rod, who played professional football for New Orleans and Tampa Bay; and a granddaughter.Advertisement