By BILL PENNINGTONNOV. 12, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  Will Beatty, the Giants’ starting left tackle who tore a pectoral muscle lifting weights in May but was expected to give the team a late-season lift when he returned to uniform this month, will be sidelined the remainder of the year with a different injury: a torn rotator cuff in his shoulder. Beatty sustained the new injury while rehabilitating his pectoral muscle.With his pectoral muscle tear healed, Beatty had returned to practice in recent weeks and was trying to see if he could play through the shoulder discomfort. But Giants Coach Tom Coughlin announced Thursday that Beatty would need surgery for the shoulder injury and that his season was over.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He was trying to see what he could do with it — he wore a strap and so on and so forth, but it just wasn’t enough,” Coughlin said of Beatty, who had started every Giants game but one from 2012 to 2104. “It’s just not going to be something that will allow him to be the player that he can be.”Beatty’s future with the team could be in jeopardy since he is one of the team’s higher paid players. He has two years left on a five-year, $37.5 million contract he signed before the 2013 season. But Beatty has already been paid all of the contract’s guaranteed money so releasing him would yield a salary cap savings. The team could also convince Beatty to renegotiate his contract at a lower salary.The Giants’ first-round draft pick this season, Ereck Flowers, has been playing left tackle in Beatty’s absence, and while Flowers has made several rookie mistakes, he has shown plenty of promise and appears to be the team’s left tackle of the future.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.