By CHRIS MUSELERNOV. 12, 2015
The last place the British sailor Alex Thomson expected to be last week was lying on the ceiling of his new racing yacht in the North Atlantic.With the Vendée Globe, the premier solo round-the-world race, starting in a year, Thomson was testing a new generation of innovative hydrofoils in the 5,400-mile Transat Jacques Vabre from Le Havre, France, to Itajaí, Brazil.The double-handed race, which started Oct. 25, featured several first-of-their-kind 60-foot yachts, known as Imoca 60s, designed by Guillaume Verdier and VPLP Design.Four days after the start of the race, Thomson and his Hugo Boss crewmate, Guillermo Altadill, had to be rescued off the tip of Galicia, Spain, with their boat dismasted and sinking. A wave rolled the yacht 180 degrees after Thomson and Altadill had repaired breaks in the hull’s structure.AdvertisementThe Transat race may prove that the new yacht technology has been pushed too soon into the ocean racing world. Five of the new VPLP-Verdier designs started the 20-boat race, but only one finished, an attrition rate that has shocked even the most cynical of observers. That boat, Armel Le Cléac’h’s Banque Populaire VIII, was unable to pass a previous-generation VPLP-Verdier model, PRB, which won the Imoca 60 class Wednesday. Banque Populaire finished second, more than eight hours later.AdvertisementThe VPLP-Verdier boats, considered the most complex monohull sailboats ever built, are expected to be a quantum leap in yacht design. If successful, the concept will not only break the Vendée Globe record of 78 days, but could also change the recreational sailing world, making boats faster and more comfortable.The boats have innovative L-shape daggerboards that stick out both sides of the hull to help lift the 60-footers nearly clear out of the water. These carbon appendages are referred to as Dalí foils because the thin blades turn up to a point like the mustache of the artist Salvador Dalí when the boat is viewed head-on.“We see design as mountains and valleys,” Verdier said last week. “The mountain peak is so narrow. We are looking for a wide and flat peak.”The hydrofoil concept used in these boats was developed by Verdier and Emirates Team New Zealand for the 2013 America’s Cup. The breakthroughs launched 72-foot catamarans out of the water onto their foils at speeds nearing 50 miles per hour.Transferring this technology to monohulls has proved tricky and dangerous.Some of the VPLP-Verdier boats, including Thomson’s, suffered breakages in the ribs used for the new, complex arrangement of longitudinal carbon stringers that serve to stiffen the ever lighter hulls. The construction and gluing of these pieces must be precise or they will fail, Verdier said.“From our perspective, this was a learning race,” said Stewart Hosford, the managing director for the Hugo Boss team. “We had assumed there would be problems like this in the race, like the broken ribs. The problem is, once the structure starts to go, pretty quickly more pieces go and, boom, you have a boat that’s breaking itself apart.”Hosford said the designers and shore team were still analyzing the causes of the breakages on the boat. He added that the dismasting and some other damage that had occurred after the boat was rolled were unrelated to the design advances and construction techniques.AdvertisementThe rules of Imoca 60 design allow designers to experiment within certain parameters. Other racing yachts designed to break transoceanic records have considered the Dalí foils but have stopped short.“There is no way this wasn’t going to come with some serious training wheels,” said Ken Read, an America’s Cup commentator and skipper of Comanche, a 100-footer designed by VPLP-Verdier to break fully crewed distance sailing records. “This is what’s cool about sailing. Right now there are so many new boundaries. If it didn’t break, we’d all say it was too heavy and too slow.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There have been 17 retirements from the 42 starters across four classes in the Transat Jacques Vabre, which Read called extreme. But he was optimistic about the future of the technology.“No one is disappointed about the breakages,” Read said. “They’re relieved. They would rather break it now.”Referring to Verdier, Read added: “If you don’t think he’s going to fix it and fly higher next year, you’re wrong.”There are complications designing a boat with unknown potential, Verdier said. The most challenging, he said, is predicting the dynamic loads the hull must withstand not only as it runs into waves and debris at higher speeds, but also as it lands after being lifted into the air by the Dalí foils.“Before, we were designing the strength of the carbon hull for between 15 to 20 tons per square meter,” said Verdier, who designed the first- and second-place boats in the last Vendée Globe, in 2012-13. “Now the boats are capable of going 24 knots and more. We have designed them for 25 tons per square meter.”Whether or not breakages on the new boats had been caused by faults in design or construction, Verdier said his mind and eyes were wide open. “But,” he said, “we absolutely have to get that done before the Vendée Globe.”The start of that race in November 2016 is an immovable deadline for Verdier, Thomson and other Imoca 60 racers. Breakages steal time away from training and testing. Thomson, a 41-year-old Welshman, is one of the world’s best solo sailors, but he has finished the Vendée only once in three tries, placing third in 2013. If he wins with this breakthrough boat, he will be the first non-French sailor to stand atop the podium since the race began in 1989.AdvertisementHosford said he was worried this setback would be too much for Thomson.“Someone told me that Churchill quote the other day,” Hosford said, referring to the quotation about success consisting of going from failure to failure without loss of enthusiasm. He added: “I don’t want to have another failure. But the first thing I said to Alex was, ‘You must be terrified,’ and he said, ‘Yes.’ Then I asked him if he will be doing this again, and he said: ‘I’m ready. I want my boat back.’ ”A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Significant Yachting Innovation Largely Fails First Test .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.