AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunThe first call came for Barry Rohrssen while Kentucky’s charter jet sat on the tarmac in Cleveland in the wee hours of March 29. The Wildcats had just outlasted Notre Dame to advance to the Final Four in men’s basketball. Text messages poured into his phone like rain pelting a sidewalk. More than 120 still sit there today, unread, tiny red tokens reminding Rohrssen, a Kentucky assistant coach, of the feeling of being on top of the college basketball world.But this call — this call — was not one he could ignore. Rohrssen answered immediately.“You got time to talk?” Chris Mullin said.The plane was about to take off. Mullin, a man of few words, and fewer requests, was three days from being introduced as the new coach at St. John’s, his alma mater, and what he needed to hear from Rohrssen, a lifelong friend, was not a pledge of any allegiance. He needed to hear that Rohrssen did not think he was nuts.Foremost, he needed to hear that Rohrssen would at least consider joining his staff in Queens. And so Slice, as Rohrssen is known, was Mullin’s first call. From there, the wheels could be set into motion.To begin restocking an empty roster, rebranding an uninspiring image and restoring St. John’s to the glory days he helped create, Mullin knew he first had to assemble a stalwart crew of assistant coaches to surround him. Mullin, a member of the 1992 Olympic team, had his own dream team in mind.“We’ve got all bases covered,” Mullin said last month. “It’s a tremendous staff.”This was effusive praise from Mullin, who is not one to lavish it on people, including himself. He earned his Hall of Fame basketball career on hard work and a stiff upper lip, and in his first season with St. John’s, which begins Friday against Wagner, he is bracing for growing pains. The top six scorers from last season’s N.C.A.A. tournament team departed, and nine roster spots had to be filled this summer.That was why Mullin’s choices for assistants were especially vital. He has no coaching, recruiting, administrative or N.C.A.A.-rule navigating experience, so he needed four people who did. Each of his assistants has strengths and assignments. What is noteworthy is that all of them were at points in their careers where coming to St. John’s, a program that has struggled to maintain consistent success since Mullin left in the mid-1980s, might be considered a step backward.There is Matt Abdelmassih, a young, fast-talking Brooklyn native and St. John’s alumnus who had spent the last five years with another first-time coach, Fred Hoiberg, at Iowa State. There is Greg St. Jean, a rising professional coaching talent whose father, Garry, coached Mullin with the Golden State Warriors in the early 1990s. There is Mitch Richmond, also a Hall of Famer and Mullin’s running mate with those frenetic Warriors teams when they joined Tim Hardaway as an offensive force that became known as Run T.M.C.And, of course, there is Slice, the itinerant former Manhattan coach whose recruiting ties to New York are considered unparalleled. Rohrssen’s look and persona represent the boroughs outside Manhattan so well that he has been cast as a detective in two films, including “Glengarry Glen Ross.”Rohrssen prides himself on knowing the name of the maître d’hôtel at every reputable Italian restaurant from Arthur Avenue to Tottenville. On one recent night he slid into a corner table at Elio’s, on the Upper East Side, shaking three sets of hands on the way in and four more on the way out. After an order of baked clams, he began the story of why he was back.“What it really comes down to,” he said, “is that when Mully says he needs me, I’m there.”Mullin and Rohrssen got to know each other as schoolboys playing pickup games in Flatbush, but the fact that they remained close friends, despite Mullin’s rise to stardom and Rohrssen’s winding coaching path, is a testament to the bond of Brooklyn, he said.They have always had Brooklyn. Mullin, who is three years younger, was the best player on the playground, then became the best in New York City, the best in St. John’s history and one of the best in the N.B.A. Rohrssen became a coach. He roomed with John Calipari as a counselor at his first Five-Star camp in Pittsburgh, then joined the staff at St. Francis (N.Y.) in 1993.St. John’s is his seventh coaching stop, and to come here, where success and fan interest have been fleeting, he needed to leave the empyrean basketball environment in Lexington, Ky., which was no easy decision. He asked Calipari for his blessing. (He gave it.) He asked his fiancée for her opinion. (She gave it.) And so he returned to the apartment he had always kept in Riverdale, just in case. And he went to work for his best friend.Paired with Abdelmassih, they hit the streets hunting for commitments. Both agreed that it was the craziest three months of recruiting they have done or expect to do. St. John’s had the barest roster imaginable, and they were tasked with filling it.“There are some schools that don’t get nine commitments in years,” Abdelmassih said. “We got nine commitments in 90 days.”Mullin had two others in mind to coach the X’s and O’s. He first texted St. Jean, who was finishing his first season as a player development assistant for the Sacramento Kings. While in middle school, St. Jean lived down the block from Mullin, and the retired N.B.A. star loved that the kid had soaked up so much basketball knowledge from his father.St. Jean said he had only ever envisioned himself as an N.B.A. coach, and his path was headed in that direction. But when Mullin asked St. Jean to join him in Queens, he redirected his focus.“He’s a young guy, but he’s got a lot of experience,” Mullin said. “He’s good with player development, game planning and practice plans.”The final piece to the puzzle was Richmond, who had never had much interest in the college game, especially a college he did not attend. After Richmond’s N.B.A. career ended in 2002, after more than 20,000 career points, he retired to a 13,000-square-foot estate in Los Angeles and plotted his future. He created a line of headphones and opened a foundation with his wife, Juli, aimed at stopping bullying. Occasionally, he played pickup games with his old teammate Mullin.They would often complain about how individualized the N.B.A. had become. When the Warriors won the title last season, led by the Splash Brothers, Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson, Richmond bristled at the suggestion that they had revolutionized the sport.“Nellie was doing this 25, 30 years ago,” Richmond said, referring to the coach Don Nelson, “with us.”Richmond and Mullin had always had a kinship derived from seeing the sport the same way. So it was not totally a shock when Mullin, purposely coy, called Richmond to ask him what he thought of the St. John’s offer.“I think it’s a great opportunity for you,” Richmond recalled saying in response.“No,” Mullin said, “what do you think about coming along, too?”Richmond answered him on the spot:. “I said, ‘Hey man, if you want me, I’m here.’ ”He had a job as a scout for Sacramento, and his wife and 16-year-old son were in Los Angeles, but Richmond soon found himself renting an apartment on East 61st Street and York Avenue and adjusting to Manhattan life. He may be the only Hall of Famer who takes the train to work in Queens, where he is technically the low man on the St. John’s coaching totem pole — a so-called special assistant with limitations on how much he can actually say or do.Before a split-squad scrimmage on the last Saturday in October, a photographer wanted to gather the coaching staff together for a shot. The scrimmage was more than an hour off, but getting them all together and organized was still difficult.Rohrssen was wandering about, checking in with recruits. Abdelmassih had bleary eyes after a late night celebrating the Mets’ win in Game 3 of the World Series. Richmond looked unsure of where he was, and Mullin appeared uninterested in the idea of a coaching team photo.The photographer wanted the men to sit in the stands and seem as if they like one another, but nobody was listening. They sat rigid as statues, staring at the camera. Steve Dombroski, St. John’s director of basketball communications, smiled and shook his head.“It’s like herding cats,” he said.True to form, as soon as the shot was over, they dispersed like children rushing out the doors on the first day of summer. This was to be the first time the team would be unveiled to the public, and recruits were on hand. For the split-squad scrimmage, St. Jean coached the red team and Rohrssen led the white. Mullin hopped between sides, peering in on the huddles, and studying, for the first time, how to coach.“This is a whole new ballgame,” he said. “My staff guides me.”Advertisement