By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 5, 2015
Drew Brees hit C. J. Spiller with a short pass that the running back turned into an 80-yard touchdown — the 400th of the Saints quarterback’s career — on the second play of overtime, and host New Orleans won in N.F.L. Week 4, 26-20, against the Dallas Cowboys on Sunday night.Brees, who missed New Orleans’s previous game because of a bruised rotator cuff in his right (throwing) shoulder, completed 32 of 39 passes for 279 yards in his return.Mark Ingram gained 126 yards from scrimmage on a combination of runs and short passes, and Khiry Robinson had a 1-yard touchdown run for New Orleans (1-3).Joseph Randle scored the lone touchdown for Dallas (2-2) on a 1-yard run in the first half. The winning score enlivened a Superdome crowd stunned by Saints kicker Zach Hocker’s 30-yard miss on a field-goal attempt in the final seconds of regulation.AdvertisementRAMS 24, CARDINALS 22 Todd Gurley rushed for all but two of his 146 yards in the second half, and visiting St. Louis (2-2) held on to hand Arizona its first loss of the season.AdvertisementGurley, the Rams’ first-round draft pick, saw his most extensive action as a pro, and his 52-yard run set up what proved to be the game-winning touchdown.Nick Foles threw for three touchdowns, two after turnovers by Arizona (3-1), and St. Louis’s defense held the Cardinals to field goals on four of five trips inside the red zone.Arizona had a third-and-2 at the Rams’ 43-yard line in the final minutes, but Carson Palmer overthrew receivers on consecutive plays to turn the ball over on downs.The Rams are 2-0 against the N.F.C. West.PACKERS 17, 49ERS 3 Aaron Rodgers threw for 224 yards and a touchdown and ran 17 yards to set up a key second-half score, and the Green Bay Packers knocked off San Francisco in Santa Clara, Calif., for its first 4-0 start in four years.Richard Rodgers caught a 9-yard touchdown pass for the Packers on the game’s opening drive before Aaron Rodgers got his team going in the second half after a slow start to halt a four-game losing streak to the 49ers (1-3), which included two playoff losses.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Clay Matthews added his own flair to the game. When he sacked Colin Kaepernick in the third quarter, he kissed his right biceps — Kaepernick style — to punctuate the play, one of Green Bay’s six sacks.BRONCOS 23, VIKINGS 20 Brandon McManus kicked a 39-yard field goal with 1 minute 51 seconds left, and Denver’s defense had seven sacks, as the host Broncos (4-0) edged Minnesota (2-2).AdvertisementVon Miller smothered the loose ball after T. J. Ward’s strip sack of Teddy Bridgewater in the closing seconds, sealing the win for Denver, which got a 72-yard touchdown run from Ronnie Hillman.Peyton Manning has led his teams to a 4-0 start seven times, the most in N.F.L. history. Next up at four is Fran Tarkenton. Manning also joined Brett Favre as the only quarterbacks to win 100 home starts in the league.It was not a great day for Manning, who was picked off twice by the Vikings.Adrian Peterson ran for a 48-yard touchdown to pull Minnesota to 20-17 and cap a 97-yard drive with 10 minutes left.REDSKINS 23, EAGLES 20 Kirk Cousins threw a 4-yard touchdown pass to Pierre Garcon with 26 seconds left to rally host Washington (2-2) to a win over Philadelphia (1-3).Starting at their own 10 with a little more than six minutes remaining, Washington drove 90 yards on 15 plays to take the lead for good in a back-and-forth game.Cousins finished 31 for 46 for 290 yards, the touchdown and, most important, no turnovers. He did fumble a snap in the first half at Philadelphia’s 1 but recovered it himself and plunged forward for a touchdown, with the help of a big push from the rookie running back Matt Jones.Sam Bradford threw three second-half touchdown passes for the Eagles, but their new kicker, Caleb Sturgis, missed an extra-point attempt and a 33-yard field-goal attempt.PANTHERS 37, BUCCANEERS 23 Cam Newton tossed a pair of touchdown passes to Ted Ginn Jr. to key a victory that kept visiting Carolina unbeaten in a win over Tampa Bay (1-3).AdvertisementNewton threw touchdown passes of 6 and 12 yards to Ginn. He had a modest day, statistically, with 124 yards passing and 51 rushing, but Newton, a fifth-year pro, did not throw any interceptions and had just one turnover for the Panthers (4-0) on a day when play was affected, at times, by heavy rain.BEARS 22, RAIDERS 20 Coach John Fox earned his first win for Chicago.Oakland (2-2) grabbed the lead on a field goal by Sebastian Janikowski with a little more than two minutes remaining that was set up by an interception by Charles Woodson deep in Raiders territory.The host Bears (1-3) then drove from their own 20-yard line to the Raiders’ 32 before Robbie Gould nailed the game winner in the closing seconds.BENGALS 36, CHIEFS 21 Andy Dalton added to his streak of impressive games and big plays, keeping the Bengals unbeaten with a win in Cincinnati.Dalton threw a 55-yard touchdown pass on the run — the type of throw he has rarely made in the past — and the Bengals defeated Kansas City (1-3).Cincinnati (4-0) matched its third-best start in franchise history, two wins short of the team record.Dalton completed 17 of 24 passes for 321 yards, with the long touchdown pass to Brandon Tate during a scramble.COLTS 16, JAGUARS 13 Adam Vinatieri celebrated his own throwback game in Indianapolis.Vinatieri kicked three field goals for the Colts (2-2), including a 27-yard game winner in overtime, to beat Jacksonville (1-3). Vinatieri broke Mike Vanderjagt’s team scoring record and became the first player in league history to top 1,000 points with two different teams.AdvertisementJaguars kicker Jason Myers could have won it in regulation with a 53-yarder, but he pushed it wide right. He had another chance to win it in overtime, but that one went wide left from 48 yards.CHARGERS 30, BROWNS 27 Given a second chance because of a penalty, the rookie Josh Lambo kicked a 34-yard field goal as time expired, propelling San Diego (2-2) past visiting Cleveland (1-3) and ending a two-game skid.Lambo was wide right on a 39-yard attempt with two seconds left, but the Browns’ Tramon Williams was offside. Lambo then hit his third field goal of the game.The Browns had tied it at 27 on Josh McCown’s 1-yard pass to Gary Barnidge with 2:09 to play that was followed by a 2-point conversion pass to Taylor Gabriel.Philip Rivers was 23 of 38 for 358 yards and three touchdowns for the Chargers. McCown was 32 of 41 for 356 yards and two scores for the Browns.A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Brees Shines in Return as Saints Outlast the Cowboys.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.