AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichFantasy football analysis for Thursday night’s game between the Buffalo Bills and the Jets. Check back Friday for analysis on Sunday’s games and Monday’s matchup between the Houston Texans and the Cincinnati Bengals. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy.Buffalo Bills (4-4) at Jets (5-3)8:25 p.m. Line: Jets by 3 Quarterback  Ryan Fitzpatrick (NYJ) — The Bills have held opposing quarterbacks to 13 or fewer points in three of their last four games, and their secondary just received a boost with the return of cornerback Leodis McKelvin last week. This unattractive matchup makes Fitzpatrick more of a mid-to-low-end QB2 play.Tyrod Taylor (BUF) — This once imposing secondary has lost its edge of late, allowing an average of 356 passing yards and an 8-to-2 TD-to-INT ratio to quarterbacks Tom Brady, David Carr and Blake Bortles over the last three weeks. The banged-up cornerback Antonio Cromartie (thigh bruise) may not suit up, either.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.Running Back Chris Ivory (NYJ) — The Bills have the sixth best run defense in the N.F.L., but have allowed double-digit fantasy points to the position in five straight games, including a 26-point outing to the Dolphins’ Lamar Miller last week and 18 points to the Jaguars’ T.J. Yeldon in Week 7. Use Ivory as the RB1 he has been most of this season.LeSean McCoy/Karlos Williams (BUF) — The Jets still have the top-ranked run defense despite allowing Yeldon and Oakland’s Latavius Murray to score at least 10 fantasy points over the last two weeks. McCoy is expected to be active, but could give way to the red-hot Williams at any moment considering his recent fragility. The uncertain workload and the unfavorable matchup has McCoy looking like a safer RB2 option this week.Wide Receiver/Tight End Brandon Marshall/Eric Decker (NYJ) — Cornerback Leodis McKelvin made his season debut last week alongside the standout rookie cornerback Ronald Darby, and the two helped the Buffalo secondary limit Miami to 197 scoreless receiving yards. Decker and Marshall are weekly plays, regardless, but this matchup is tougher than it looks (Bills, 24th ranked pass defense).Sammy Watkins (BUF) — Watkins’s nagging ankle injury and a trip to Revis Island are reasons to be concerned about his value this week. But the Jets have surrendered 14 or more fantasy points to an opposing receiver in three straight weeks. Charles Clay (BUF) — Take away Rob Gronkowski’s 16-point day and TE1s are averaging just 3.8 fantasy points against the Jets this season. Clay could be in line for more targets if Watkins is limited, but is hard to trust as anything more than a low-end TE2.The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. Follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy.Advertisement