AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherAndre Drummond pulled down 17 rebounds on Wednesday night, the eighth-highest total by any N.B.A. player this season. Yet his rebounding average for the year dropped.Drummond, always a great rebounder, is off to a historically great start on the boards for the Detroit Pistons this season. His numbers are striking.■ After establishing himself at 13 to 14 rebounds a game during the past two seasons, Drummond has increased that to 19.3 this season. That would be the highest average since Wilt Chamberlain averaged 21.1 in 1968-69.■ Drummond has 57 offensive rebounds. The next highest total is 30, by the Knicks rookie Kristaps Porzingis. Drummond is on a pace to have the most offensive rebounds since Moses Malone in 1978-79.■ He has 97 defensive rebounds, on a pace for the most since Dennis Rodman in 1991-92.■ He has three of this season’s four 20-rebound games. (Dwight Howard has the other.)■ Against Indiana on Nov. 3, he had 29 rebounds, the third-highest total of the century. (Kevin Love had 31 in 2010, and Andrew Bynum totaled 30 in 2012.)Drummond’s huge start to his fourth year in the league has not exclusively been on the boards.■ He is scoring nearly 19 points a game, 5 points better than his previous career high.■ He is playing 37 minutes a game, a career high by almost five minutes.■ He has 15 steals and 13 blocks this season, leading the team in both categories. Along with John Wall, he is the only player with a dozen or more of both.■ Those steals and blocks contribute to Drummond’s being a defensive force. Although he has never made an all-defensive team, Drummond ranks third in Dean Oliver’s “defensive rating,” which estimates a player’s ability to make stops on defense.Drummond has not shown improvement at the free-throw line. Last season, he shot only .389, the worst figure in the league, even worse than the notoriously bad free-throw shooter (and excellent rebounder) DeAndre Jordan (. 397). This season, Drummond is about the same, .393. Other star big men have struggled at the line in their careers, but Chamberlain had only one season under .400 and Shaquille O’Neal never had one.After a year at Connecticut, the 6-foot-11 Drummond was selected ninth over all by the Pistons in 2012. He came off the bench as a rookie, then became a starter for Detroit and has emerged as the star of his class, along with Anthony Davis and Damian Lillard.Despite his improvement this season, Drummond will not be recognized as a superstar until the Pistons get better. The Drummond era includes 29-, 29- and 32-win seasons so far.One key could be Stan Van Gundy, who is entering his second season as Detroit’s coach.Van Gundy became coach of the Orlando Magic in Howard’s fourth season, his breakout year. Van Gundy built a system with an athletic center on both ends of the court, and Howard went from good to great.Van Gundy has rebuilt the Pistons in a similar image, acquiring the scoring point guard Reggie Jackson to play the pick-and-roll with Drummond and letting center Greg Monroe go to the Bucks as a free agent, opening up many more rebounding opportunities.The retooled Pistons are 5-3, with wins over the Hawks and the Bulls. In the weaker Eastern Conference, the playoffs could be a realistic goal. Jackson is scoring, Kentavious Caldwell-Pope continues to develop and Marcus Morris looks like a good acquisition. But Drummond and his hunger for rebounds will be the key.Benjamin Hoffman contributed reporting.Advertisement