AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Huw RichardsLONDON — James Haskell knows all about rugby’s “Pools of Death.”“I hope this one goes better than the last one I was in,” said Haskell, whose English club, Wasps, will face Toulon, Leinster and Bath in what looks like the toughest group of this season’s European Rugby Champions Cup. “The last one” he referred to was Pool A at the Rugby World Cup, where Haskell’s team, England, was put in a brutal draw that also included Australia and Wales. Despite being the host, England was unable to advance, a failure that cost Coach Stuart Lancaster his job on Wednesday.While players based in the Southern Hemisphere started their off-season after the World Cup, their European counterparts went back to their clubs. The Champions Cup — rugby’s equivalent of soccer’s Champions League — starts Friday when the two-time former champion Leicester hosts the Paris club Stade Français. Wasps kick off Sunday against Leinster in Dublin.“It’s not easy for players. So much emotion goes into big tournaments,” said Wasps Coach Dai Young, who played in two Rugby World Cups for Wales (plus another in rugby league) and has spent 13 years as head coach of the Cardiff Blues and Wasps after retiring as a player in 2002. “They shouldn’t be in a bad place physically — national teams really do look after players nowadays — but adjusting mentally is always a bit of a challenge,” Young said.“You have to address players as individuals and not as a group,” he added. “There are different mind-sets, while some players may have played a lot and others not very much.”Haskell, a 30-year-old flanker who is club co-captain and has been described by Young as “a natural leader who people respect and follow,” has found the readjustment easy.“It is part of modern sport to be able to compartmentalize,” he said. “Given the pressures of social media and 24-hour news, if you can’t do that and can’t switch off, it could be very difficult.”Experience helps. “I’ve been part of the England setup since 2007 and have 62 caps now, more than anyone else in the World Cup squad. And there have been plenty of ups and downs and disappointments in that time, which helps create a sense of perspective,” he said.He also returned to his club eager to see playing time after getting on the field for only 60 minutes during the tournament. “We’d been in training for 13 weeks, and I was certainly ready to play. Young said it was easier to “come back into bigger games,” and games don’t get much bigger this early in the season than what Wasps faces over the next two weekends, against clubs that have the last five European club championships and six of the last seven. The trip to Leinster, winners in 2009, 2011 and 2012, will be followed by a match at home against Toulon, which has won the last three championships. Wasps, who relocated to Coventry, England, last year, won twice, in 2004 and 2007, but they have been less successful in recent years. Last season marked their first appearance in the tournament in five years, and they finished second to Leinster in their pool and lost, 32-18, to Toulon in the quarterfinals.Some may see a pool pairing with Leinster, Toulon and Bath — another former champion that Haskell describes as “pretty awesome at times in last year’s English Premiership” — as tough luck, but neither Haskell nor Young sees it that way.Haskell was clearly looking forward to a challenging trip to Ireland. “Leinster have most of the Irish team and we can expect a very physical contest. The speed and intensity may be slightly down on an international match, but there’s very little in it.”Toulon added more firepower in its bid for a fourth consecutive title, adding the flamboyant Australian playmaker Quade Cooper, the South African No.8 Duane Vermeulen and the veteran New Zealand center Ma’a Nonu, whose spectacular solo try was among the highlights of the World Cup final.“They’ll be a huge challenge, and the important thing is to take the game to them. If you let them play, they don’t give you much chance,” said Haskell.“We want to develop as quickly as we can, so the more big games we can play the better,” said Young. “If we want to be successful and to be back among Europe’s best clubs, we have to play against the best. Win, lose or draw we’ll be the better for it.”Advertisement