By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 14, 2015
ANAHEIM, Calif. —  Frans Nielsen scored twice in the third period, the backup goalie Thomas Greiss stopped 24 shots, and the Islanders beat the Anaheim Ducks, 4-1, on Friday night.Brock Nelson and Cal Clutterbuck also had goals for the Islanders, who won two of three on a California trip.Nelson, who had the Islanders’ only goal in a 2-1 loss to the Kings in Los Angeles on Thursday night, has scored in consecutive games for the first time since early last December.Corey Perry scored for the Ducks, who were coming off consecutive overtime losses at home against the Phoenix Coyotes and the Edmonton Oilers. Anton Khudobin finished with 25 saves.AdvertisementNelson opened the scoring at 6 minutes 36 seconds of the first period. He used defenseman Josh Manson as a screen and beat Khudobin low to the glove side with a 30-foot wrist shot from the slot.AdvertisementThe Islanders found themselves with a two-man advantage after Ryan Getzlaf was sent off for crosschecking Casey Cizikas at 9:14 of the first period and Kevin Bieksa was called for high-sticking Kyle Okposo seven seconds later. But Khudobin turned aside all seven shots he faced during that short-handed stretch. The Islanders misfired on five others, and two more were blocked by Ducks defenders.Clutterbuck made the score 2-0 at 9:35 of the second period, beating Khudobin from short range with a shot that deflected off Khudobin’s glove after Johnny Boychuk took a shot from the right point that struck Clutterbuck as he tried to jump out of the way.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Anaheim got on the board at 11:23 of the second during a two-man advantage, after Mikhail Grabovski and Boychuk were penalized for tripping and holding 41 seconds apart.Perry recorded his 301st career goal during a scramble in the goal mouth with 32 seconds left on Grabovski’s penalty, overtaking Paul Kariya for second place on the Ducks’ franchise list behind Teemu Selanne’s 457.Nielsen added an insurance goal for the Islanders at 2:47 of the third period off a perfect feed in front by Josh Bailey. Greiss got a huge break when Ryan Kesler’s wrist shot from the right circle hit the left post with about 5:35 to play, and Neilsen scored again with 3:32 remaining.Getzlaf’s season-opening goal drought reached 13 games, the longest from the start of a campaign during the Anaheim captain’s 11-year career. His teammate Jakob Silfverberg’s season-opening goal drought reached a career-worst 17 games, one more than last year.A moment of silence was observed for the victims of Friday’s terrorist attacks in Paris.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.