AdvertisementSupported byCavaliers 90, Knicks 84By Andrew KehSeconds remained in the first half when Carmelo Anthony started sizing up Tristan Thompson along the right sideline, near the Knicks’ bench. Hunched over, Anthony braided low, hypnotizing dribbles between his legs, back and forth across his body. Then, midstep, he rose and slung a parabolic 3-pointer that splashed through the net.Anthony’s shot roused the crowd and gave the Knicks a 7-point halftime lead over the Cleveland Cavaliers. Yet the Knicks knew it did not mean much. Last week, when the teams played in Cleveland, the Cavaliers stormed back to win after being behind by as many as 15 points in the first half.With memories of that loss still fresh in their minds, the Knicks were victimized again. After carrying their lead into the fourth quarter, they let it slip from their grasp, as the Cavaliers came back once again to win, 90-84, on Friday at Madison Square Garden. Cleveland improved to 8-1, while the Knicks dropped to 4-6.Derek Fisher, the coach of the Knicks, was asked on Friday what lesson he and the players needed to learn after the teams’ first meeting. He said they needed to consider every possession, at every point of the game, equally significant, no matter the score or context. There were no insurmountable leads, Fisher said.“We have to develop the ability to play for 48 minutes — not necessarily perfectly — but just with this mind-set that every possession does matter,” Fisher said.The Knicks failed to do that on Friday. The crisp offensive movement that allowed them to build their lead crumbled, and as the game took on a frantic pace in its waning minutes, LeBron James (31 points, 6 assists) came to life.James, who scored 12 in the final quarter, finished a driving layup with two minutes left to tie the score, 82-82. After Jose Calderon turned the ball over on the other end, James came right back into the lane and, with Anthony smothering him, sank a fadeaway jumper to give the Cavaliers their first lead, 84-82, since the first half.On it went in the tense arena. Arron Afflalo (14 points) made a turnaround jumper on the baseline to tie it with 59.4 seconds remaining. Eighteen seconds later, Mo Williams (20 points) made one of his own to put Cleveland up again. Afflalo took the initiative again for the Knicks, spinning in the lane to get free for a close-range shot with about 22 seconds left, but it clanged out, effectively clinching Cleveland’s comeback win.“I think the offense got a little out of sync down the stretch,” Afflalo said of the Knicks, who scored just 12 points in the final quarter.The Cavaliers arrived at the Garden on a roll, having won their last seven games (though, it should be noted, two of those victories were against the Philadelphia 76ers, a team only mildly interested in winning games). Depleted as they are, managing long-term injuries to Kyrie Irving and Iman Shumpert, they are still the standard bearers in the Eastern Conference.The Knicks, on the other hand, looked more like a work in progress, one that at least appears to be on a positive course. In a noticeable departure from last season, they have been competitive in most games.Anthony said that it felt as though his teammates were deferring to him too much down the stretch and that such hesitation was clogging up the offense. After scoring 22 points in the first half, Anthony did not make a basket in the third quarter. He went 1-for-6 in the fourth quarter, many of them harried shots, and finished with 26 points in all.Fisher said it was his fault that the team faltered down the stretch. “I have to do a better job putting guys in position to be successful out there,” he said. “They’re doing what we’re asking them to do.”But for all the focus on the late-game meltdown, Fisher was just as displeased with how the Knicks started the game, allowing Cleveland to jump out to a 13-5 lead.James had the fans buzzing halfway through the first when he made a slashing run along the right baseline, rose to catch a long alley-oop pass from Williams, who had been ranging to his left beyond the 3-point arc, and slammed it through the rim with both hands. James jumped so high that he banged his right elbow on the bottom of the backboard on the dunk, and he was rubbing it upon landing back on his feet.Midway through the second, Anthony produced his own stirring sequence of moves. First, he streaked along the baseline and beneath the basket to block Anderson Varejao’s layup attempt. As the Knicks broke toward the other end, Anthony peeled off alone down the left sideline, caught a pass from Afflalo in transition and nailed a 3-pointer to give the Knicks a 36-35 lead.“It’s always been a joy and a pleasure, something we’ll talk about long after we’re done playing,” James said of his matchups against Anthony.At the end of the night, all the joy and pleasure belonged to James.Advertisement