AdvertisementSupported byPhillies 7, Mets 5By Tim RohanPHILADELPHIA — During the third inning of a lazy game Wednesday, an 89-mile-per-hour fastball drifted high and tight toward Yoenis Cespedes and struck him on his left hand, pinching his middle finger between the ball and the bat.Cespedes let go of the bat immediately and fell to his knees, holding his hand gingerly. A Mets trainer and Manager Terry Collins raced out of the dugout to check on him. After about a minute, Cespedes bit his upper lip and followed the trainer off the field, his head hung.Mets fans gasped. The team’s first playoff game was nine days away. The fans would exhale a few innings later, when the Mets announced that the X-rays were negative and that Cespedes had merely bruised his middle and ring fingers. This constituted good news on a day when the Mets also removed Wilmer Flores from the game, a 7-5 loss to the Philadelphia Phillies, with back stiffness and scratched Steven Matz from his next start because of his own bout of back stiffness. The Mets could have ended the day with more injuries had they let their tempers get the better of them. After Cespedes was hit, the Phillies hit Kirk Nieuwenhuis, and the Mets retaliated by hitting Odubel Herrera. The teams had nearly come to blows in August when the Phillies took offense to Hansel Robles’s throwing a pitch when their batter was not ready. In the sixth inning Wednesday, Robles was at the center of another spat. He threw a pitch up and in to the Phillies’ Cameron Rupp, and after he fell to the ground, Rupp hopped up angry. Both benches cleared, and Cespedes glared out from the dugout, but no fight broke out. Robles and Manager Terry Collins were ejected, and the game resumed. And once the Phillies had won, the Mets could turn their attention back to Cespedes.After the game, Cespedes told Collins he felt well enough to play Thursday, but Collins wanted to give him at least one day off as a precaution. An interpreter was not available for Cespedes, but a team spokesman talked to him briefly and relayed a statement, saying, “He was relieved when the X-rays came back negative.”Earlier that afternoon, Collins had sat at his desk at Citizens Bank Park shaking his head, mindlessly playing with a highlighter. He looked around at the roomful of reporters and said, “Thought it was going to be easy when we clinched, didn’t you?”Collins had just revealed the news about Matz, who had been scheduled to start Thursday. After waking up feeling stiff Tuesday, Matz had arrived at the ballpark feeling the same on Wednesday. The Mets had strongly considered using Matz as their fourth starter in the postseason, but this had given them some pause.Matz’s condition improved as he was treated throughout the day, though, and Collins indicated that he planned to have Matz pitch a few innings over the weekend. If that goes well, the Mets could also use him in a simulated game next week, just to keep him fresh for Game 4 of their division series, which is still about two weeks away.The Mets have until Oct. 9, the first day of the series, to make a determination on Matz. But the call will not be easy. If they decide to include him on the N.L.D.S. roster and his back tightens up during the series, the Mets could replace him with another pitcher. But Matz would be ineligible to play in the next round if the Mets were to advance. In that case, he would be eligible to return for the World Series, if the Mets made it. If the Mets wait and let Matz heal, they could add him to the championship series roster, but that would require them to advance without Matz, who might be the only lefty in the rotation.Matz has been electric in his first six major league starts this season, posting a 2.27 E.R.A. But he missed about two months dealing with a muscle tear in his back. The Mets are being careful with his latest injury and are opposed to using Matz out of the bullpen, a foreign role for him.Matz compared what he felt to a crick in the neck, only he felt it in his back.“I’m not very concerned,” Matz said. “I know it’s going to go away. It’s just a matter of when.”Advertisement