By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 13, 2015
ST. LOUIS —  Jozy Altidore scored twice as the United States men’s soccer team bounced back from an early deficit on Friday night and routed tiny St. Vincent and the Grenadines, 6-1, in the Americans’ opening qualifier for the 2018 World Cup.St. Vincent’s Oalex Anderson, a 20-year-old who plays for Seattle Sounders 2 in the United States’ third division, took advantage of defensive confusion by Gyasi Zardes and DeAndre Yedlin to put his team, which is No. 129 in FIFA’s rankings, ahead in the fifth minute.But Bobby Wood tied the score in the 11th minute, Fabian Johnson put the United States ahead in the 29th minute, and Altidore scored two minutes later, becoming the fifth American player to reach 30 international goals.Geoff Cameron and Zardes improved the lead to 5-1 early in the second half, and Altidore added his second goal in the 74th minute.Advertisement“We responded really well, and we neutralized them,” Altidore said after increasing his total to 31 international goals and moving ahead of Brian McBride into fourth place on the career scoring list.AdvertisementThe Americans, who are ranked No. 33, are unbeaten in 10 straight World Cup qualifying openers. They extended their home unbeaten streak in qualifying to 28 games (26-0-2) since 2001.Portland midfielder Darlington Nagbe and Red Bulls defender Matt Miazga made their national team debuts midway through the second half. Nagbe, 25, was born in Liberia and became a citizen of the United States in September. Miazga, 20, also was eligible to play for Poland before Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I always knew I was going hopefully one day play for the U.S.,” Miazga said. “It was a great moment. A little bit of nerves, but that’s normal.”There was a moment of silence for the victims of Friday’s terrorist attacks in Paris. The game drew a crowd of 43,433 to Busch Stadium, nearly a sellout, for the men’s national team’s first game in St. Louis since 1997.The United States entered the match having lost three straight home games for the first time since 1997, prompting questions about the leadership and tactics of Coach Jurgen Klinsmann. The Americans face a bigger test Tuesday when they are to play a qualifier at Trinidad and Tobago.The top two teams in this semifinal group, which also includes Guatemala, advance to the six-nation regional final round.Goalkeeper Brad Guzan was rarely tested by St. Vincent. Klinsmann said Tim Howard was likely to start against the Soca Warriors.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Easily Escapes Early Hole to Dominate First World Cup Qualifier.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.