By TYLER KEPNERNOV. 13, 2015
The revival of the San Diego Padres was a flop last season, and the Boston Red Sox are the latest team to poach one of their talented players. In their first major move under baseball operations president Dave Dombrowski, the Red Sox traded four prospects Friday for Craig Kimbrel, a four-time All-Star who is only 27 years old.“We look at Craig as a premier closer,” Dombrowski said on a conference call, adding later, “He’s healthy, he’s been consistent through his career, he’s at the prime time, and we look for him to be the guy back there for years to come.”Crucial to the Red Sox’ equation, Dombrowski said, were the years of control on Kimbrel’s contract: two guaranteed, with a club option for 2018. He said Koji Uehara, who closed out Boston’s last championship, in 2013, had told Manager John Farrell he would move to an eighth-inning role to accommodate Kimbrel.Kimbrel, who starred for the Atlanta Braves before his trade to San Diego in April, has a career average of 14.55 strikeouts per nine innings — the best figure in major league history for pitchers with at least 350 appearances. He has 225 saves in his career, successfully converting more than 90 percent of his opportunities.Advertisement“Moving to the American League, I’m excited,” Kimbrel said. “It’s the league of big bats, and as a pitcher you want to have that opportunity to face those big bats. It’s a challenge in itself, and I’m looking forward to it.”AdvertisementThe Red Sox could have solidified the closer’s spot in 2014 but traded Andrew Miller in July and then lost to the Yankees in an effort to re-sign him in free agency. They followed the same path with starter Jon Lester, trading him in July and losing to the Chicago Cubs when they pursued him as a free agent.Boston’s rotation desperately needs an ace, and Dombrowski acknowledged he was more likely now to fill other holes through free agency. The market is loaded with top starters, including David Price, Zack Greinke, Johnny Cueto and Jordan Zimmermann.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is probably our major acquisition for the wintertime, as far as the trade market is concerned,” Dombrowksi said. “That’s what my instincts tell me.”The Padres finished 74-88 last season after a series of splashy moves by General Manager A. J. Preller. The team is now expected to lose outfielder Justin Upton in free agency and traded another late-inning reliever, Joaquin Benoit, to Seattle for prospects on Thursday.In this deal, Preller landed outfielder Manuel Margot; shortstop Javier Guerra; second baseman Carlos Asuaje; and the left-hander Logan Allen. None played above Class AA last season, but MLB.com ranked Margot as the team’s No. 3 prospect and Guerra as No. 6.Preller said quality and quantity were important in moving Kimbrel, who attracted interest from about 10 teams and was also a Boston target in trade talks last summer.“The Red Sox kept coming back as a pretty likely fit,” Preller said. “They had the need in the back end of the bullpen, and they had a farm system that had a lot of the depth and quality we wanted to tap into.”A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Red Sox Acquire Kimbrel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.