AdvertisementSupported bySt. John’s 66, Wagner 57By Zach SchonbrunWhen it was over, and Chris Mullin’s first win as a coach was in the books, he made his way toward the southeast corner of the stands, to kiss the left hand of the man who brought him to St. John’s. Lou Carnesecca, the former St. John’s coach and Mullin’s North Star since he was 10, sat in Section 7, Row FF, Seat 8. When Mullin began climbing the stairs toward him, the 90-year-old Carnesecca broke into a grin.“He said I looked all neat and sharp, but that’s not going to last,” Mullin said. “Soon my shirt will be hanging out and my tie will be undone.”It was Carnesecca’s droll way of acknowledging that Mullin’s inaugural year at the helm of the program could be long and taxing. Although Mullin and others around the team have not been shy about calling this Year 1 of a long-term process, the biggest takeaway from St. John’s 66-57 win over Wagner at Carnesecca Arena on Friday was this: The on-court action was a long way from 1985.After the game, Mullin referred to the team as a home being built from the ground up, brick by brick.“We laid one brick today,” guard Durand Johnson said.Indeed, it was a positive step after a rocky preseason. The Red Storm lost by 32 points in their first exhibition game to St. Thomas Aquinas, a Division II team. Then they received word from the N.C.A.A. that, despite an exhaustive appeals process, the talented freshman point guard Marcus LoVett had been declared academically ineligible to play this season.Felix Balamou was suspended indefinitely for an N.C.A.A. violation before Friday’s game. A third player, the freshman Kassoum Yakwe, is still awaiting his eligibility ruling.As a result, St. John’s had only nine scholarship players in uniform after losing 96 percent of the team’s scoring from a season ago. Speaking to reporters on Thursday, the players tried to assure that the exhibition blowout had not been a sign of things to come but rather a source of motivation.“It was like a slap in the face,” the senior forward Ron Mvouika said. “Now we know exactly what not to do.”On Friday, Mullin prowled the sideline with his hands clasped behind his back. He said his pregame jitters surprised him.“Before I left the house, I told my wife, ‘Can you believe I’m nervous to coach this game?’ ” Mullin said. “She was like, ‘You dragged us into this, so I don’t want to hear it.’ ”“But,” he added, “yeah, it was pretty cool being nervous.”Wagner, picked sixth in the preseason Northeast Conference coaches’ poll, looked comfortable battling back and forth on the road. The Seahawks outrebounded the Red Storm, 42-38, outscored them in the paint, and prevented them from scoring even a single fast-break point. But St. John’s hit nine 3-pointers and played tight defense down the stretch. Mullin said the team’s offense was struggling to find a rhythm.“The thing that’s going to help us win games right now is defense and rebounding,” he said.The Red Storm clung to a 3-point lead with two minutes remaining when the freshman Federico Mussini, who scored a game-high 18 points, hit a 3 from the corner as the shot clock ticked down. The Red Storm forced a turnover on the other end, and Wagner could not close the gap.Mullin said the hardest part of coaching for him was the lack of control.“The refs told me several times to get off the court,” Mullin said. “I said I want to play. If I could play, I’d feel a lot better.”REBOUNDSBefore the game, St. John’s showed a highlight video of Chris Mullin’s playing career. Advertisement