AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelFor some fans, the N.F.L. Week 10 game on Thursday night did not become unwatchable when the Jets committed two turnovers in a two-minute span or bungled a late comeback attempt. Or even when the Buffalo Bills punter muffed a snap.The televised action started harassing E. J. Arnold’s eyes far earlier. As in, at the opening kickoff.“It was just a shock to my system,” he said.Arnold is among that subset of the population with red-green colorblindness, and the all-green uniforms worn by the Jets and the all-red ones of the Bills turned the viewing experience into headache-inducing misery.The Jets’ green looked green to Arnold. But so did the Bills’ red. To him, everyone looked like a Jet, even though they were never penalized for having too many men on the field.On punts, he did not know who was blocking whom. When a pass was caught, he did not know if it was a reception or an interception.“I’d watch for three, four minutes and then I’d just say, ‘I can’t figure it out’ and change the channel,” said Arnold, the special teams coordinator at Division II Northwood University in Midland, Mich. “If the graphics from the NFL Network weren’t on the bottom of the screen, I couldn’t tell if the Jets or the Bills had the ball.”It was not what he had expected when he turned on the television after putting his three children to bed. He said he asked his wife, Mandy, to watch “to make sure I wasn’t going crazy.”Watching football is a Thursday night ritual for Arnold, but he had not heard about the league’s new Thursday night ritual: a Color Rush promotion with Nike that had its debut with the Jets and the Bills, who normally wear blue or white jerseys. The four-game campaign is the latest instance of professional sports leagues trying to emulate the fashion world: to never be seen in the same outfit twice.But red-green colorblind viewers saw virtually the same outfit on everyone.Adam Roylance, who works in digital marketing in Chicago, wrote in a Twitter message: “Generally when teams wear red/green uniforms, there’s some way to distinguish a difference, such as white shorts, etc., but last night it was impossible for me to tell the difference! Completely ruined the game.”According to the National Eye Institute, about 8 percent of men (and 0.5 percent of women) of Northern European ancestry are red-green colorblind. Much of the colorblind population in this country does not face red-green problems in a normal day, said Dr. Jay Neitz, a neuroscientist who is also a professor of ophthalmology at the University of Washington and an expert in colorblindness, because red tends to appear darker and green tends to appear lighter.“Here, they’re both solid colors,” said Neitz, who had not seen the uniforms until a reporter contacted him Friday. “It’s probably the worst possible scenario.”That situation produced an uproar among the colorblind on social media channels Thursday night — the former N.F.L. kicker Lawrence Tynes joined the masses on Twitter — and a response from the N.F.L. on Friday.“We did test the jerseys this summer on field and on television,” the league said in a statement. “The standard television test did not account for colorblindness for fans at home that became apparent last night. We will enhance our testing to include a colorblindness analysis to better address this issue in the future.”This oversight aside, most instances of egregious uniform clashes in the sporting realm occur by mistake. Adhering to the N.B.A.’s mandate that home teams wear light colors and away teams wear dark, the Knicks (orange) and Atlanta Hawks (blood red) produced a California sunset every time they streaked upcourt at Madison Square Garden in November 2013.Beginning next week when the Titans (light blue) travel to Jacksonville (gold), the remaining three installments of Color Rush may assault the eyes, but they are not expected to impair the colorblind’s enjoyment.Then again, enjoyment might not be the most precise word. Arnold said he almost wished this problem had occurred the previous Thursday, when the Cincinnati Bengals thrashed the Cleveland Browns by three touchdowns.“That was easy to turn off,” Arnold said. Referring to the Bills’ 22-17 victory, he added, “This is something I actually wanted to see.”By the time Thursday’s game turned exciting, when some on-field mix-ups and questionable coaching decisions scuttled the Jets’ comeback from a 22-3 deficit, Roylance had given up. Sort of.“Being honest, I gave up after five minutes,” Roylance said. “Made more sense to listen on the radio.”Advertisement