AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe Jets have signed Lawrence Okoye, a former discus thrower who holds the British record in that sport and who competed in the 2012 London Olympics, to the practice squad as an offensive lineman.The 6-foot-6, 304-pound Okoye put his discus career aside in 2013 to pursue an N.F.L. career despite never having played football in high school or college. He was signed as a defensive lineman by the 49ers that year.Okoye spent his rookie season on injured reserve and last year on San Francisco’s practice squad. He was cut after training camp this summer and signed to Arizona’s practice squad in September — also as a defensive lineman. He was cut Oct. 21.BROWNS QUIET ON QUARTERBACK Cleveland Coach Mike Pettine is keeping his starting quarterback for Sunday’s game at Pittsburgh a secret — even from the quarterbacks.With Josh McCown still limited by injured ribs, Johnny Manziel took the majority of snaps with Cleveland’s starting offense this week in practice. Manziel also started in place of McCown last week and passed for 168 yards and a touchdown in a 31-10 loss to Cincinnati.McCown, who returned to practice on Wednesday, has improved each day. Pettine said that McCown would start if he was healthy enough to play.ROETHLISBERGER MAY PLAY Pittsburgh has not ruled out the possibility that quarterback Ben Roethlisberger will play this weekend.The Steelers listed him as questionable for Sunday’s home game against the Browns.Roethlisberger left with a sprained left foot in the fourth quarter of last week’s win over the Raiders. He was a limited participant in practice for as a second straight day Friday after sitting out Wednesday.The Steelers are 2-2 this season without Roethlisberger.BRIDGEWATER LIKELY TO PLAY Minnesota Vikings quarterback Teddy Bridgewater has not yet completed the N.F.L. protocol for returning from a concussion, but Coach Mike Zimmer expects him to start Sunday.Bridgewater practiced Friday and Zimmer said he had “no doubt” that he would be ready to play at Oakland. His status is listed as questionable on the final injury report of the week.HELP FOR RAIDERS’ SECONDARY Coach Jack Del Rio said that Oakland planned to activate safety Nate Allen from the injured reserve list and add him to the 53-man roster for the game against Minnesota.Allen, who signed a four-year, $23 million contract in the off-season after five seasons in Philadelphia, has not played since injuring his right knee during the Raiders’ season opener on Sept. 13. Allen’s return could provide some relief to the secondary, as Oakland ranks 32nd in pass defense, giving up nearly 315 yards per game.LION’S STATUS QUESTIONABLE Detroit receiver Calvin Johnson’s status is questionable for Sunday’s game at Green Bay because of an ankle injury.Johnson, 30, did not practice Friday after being limited earlier in the week. He has not missed a game this season and has 48 catches for 659 yards and three touchdowns.Advertisement