AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael S. SchmidtIf a major league baseball team plays a spring training game in Cuba next year, it will be the Tampa Bay Rays.Commissioner Rob Manfred chose the Rays by picking a ball out of a bin at Major League Baseball’s offices on Park Avenue in Manhattan on Friday afternoon. There were so many teams, including the Mets, the Yankees and the Los Angeles Dodgers, eager to play in Cuba because of the extra visibility it would give their clubs that Manfred decided to hold a lottery.The game would represent another significant moment in the continuing efforts by the United States and Cuba to normalize relations. But it is not a foregone conclusion that the game will be played. Major League Baseball still needs to negotiate the terms of the contest with the Cuban government, although in all likelihood, the Rays would play the Cuban national team and the game would be played in Havana.In October, Major League Baseball sent several officials to Cuba to examine the main stadium in Havana to determine whether it could host a major league game. The officials reported back to the commissioner’s office that the field was not in great condition and that it would need some work before a game could be played on it.When the Baltimore Orioles played the Cuban national team in 1999, Sandy Alderson, the baseball official in charge of the game, had to have special equipment shipped to Cuba to get the field into shape.Taking his cue from the Obama administration, Manfred has made strengthening baseball’s bonds with Cuba a top priority. His top lawyer, Dan Halem, has been working with the administration and the Cuban government to come up with ways for Cuban players to join major league teams in an orderly fashion, rather than by fleeing Cuba in sometimes dangerous boat journeys or by defecting during international tournaments. And if Cuban players were eventually able to sign with teams under a system supervised by Major League Baseball, the hope would be that the players and their families would be given visas so they could travel between the countries. Obama administration and baseball officials have said they have been given some indications from Cuban authorities of a willingness to send their best players to the major leagues. Some experts on Cuba remain skeptical, however, that the Cuban policy will change in the foreseeable future.The fact that it was Tampa Bay that won Manfred’s impromptu lottery is intriguing. It was to Florida, particularly Miami, that many Cubans fled after Fidel Castro took control of the island in 1959. Decades later, sentiment against the Cuban government remains a factor in that city.Tampa, too, has a significant Cuban imprint, but it predates Castro, and as a result there is not the same bitterness toward the Cuban government long associated with Miami. Indeed, Tampa now sees itself as playing a key role in establishing stronger ties with the island, and the Rays’ participation in a spring training game would reinforce that notion, though the team plays its home games next door in St. Petersburg. The only major league team to play in Cuba since Castro took power was the Orioles, who, a short while later in 1999, played the Cuban national team in a second game, in Baltimore. Advertisement