By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 4, 2015
MINNEAPOLIS —  A trend has developed over the last five years in the W.N.B.A. playoffs: No one beats the Minnesota Lynx at home.Except the Indiana Fever.Briann January had 19 points and 6 assists, and the Fever stole home-court advantage in the W.N.B.A. finals with a 75-69 victory over the Minnesota Lynx in Game 1 on Sunday.Marissa Coleman added 16 points, and the Fever hit all 16 of their free throws in a rematch of the 2012 finals. Indiana won Game 1 of that series as well on their way to the franchise’s only championship.“We just believe in one another,” Fever Coach Stephanie White said. “We trust one another and we understand that no matter what happens through the course of a game, if we come together, we’re going to put ourselves in a position to win.”AdvertisementMaya Moore had 27 points and 12 rebounds, and Sylvia Fowles added 21 points and 11 rebounds for the Lynx. But Minnesota missed 8 of 23 free throws and turned the ball over 15 times to drop the opener.“How do we lose that game?” Lynx Coach Cheryl Reeve said after they held Indiana to 36 percent shooting. “We just didn’t do the little things at key times.”Game 2 in the best-of-five series is Tuesday night in Minneapolis.Tamika Catchings had 12 points, 6 rebounds and 4 assists for the Fever, who were never rattled by Minnesota’s boisterous home crowd. They outscored Minnesota, 22-12, in second-chance points.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Lynx were 19-2 at Target Center in their playoff history, the best winning percentage in the W.N.B.A. The last time they had lost at home in the playoffs was against the Fever in 2012.This one followed a similar script, with the determined and gritty Fever absorbing several challenges from the Lynx and pushing back each time.AdvertisementJanuary — the tough-as-nails daughter of a karate instructor who has a black belt herself — led the way. She knocked down two tough jumpers late in the third quarter, when the Lynx had pulled to within 4 points, and was right there in the end to ice it.After the Lynx charged back to take a 62-61 lead with 4 minutes 28 seconds to play, Coleman hit a 3-pointer and scored on a backdoor cut off an inbounds pass. Then January crossed over Anna Cruz, Minnesota’s best perimeter defender, for a layup and a 68-63 lead.January added another pull-up jumper before fouling out with 1:12 to play, and the Fever closed out another gutsy road victory.“We heard the fans going, everything was loud,” January said. “They were going on a run, but we just came together and stayed united in those moments.”A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Fever Win in Opener, Dealing the Lynx a Rare Home Loss .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.