By MARC TRACYNOV. 13, 2015
Saying that he has cancer and wants to focus on his family and his treatment, the head coach of the University of Missouri football team, Gary Pinkel, announced his resignation Friday. The move shocked the college football world after racial protests had put it in the national spotlight and Pinkel had backed his players’ threat to boycott a game.“I still feel good physically, but I decided that I want to focus on enjoying my remaining years with my family and friends, and also have proper time to battle the disease and give full attention to that,” Pinkel said, revealing that he had found out several months ago that he has non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and that he had decided late last month that this would be his final season coaching.Afterward, on Twitter, he wrote: “Family and health first. Thx for thinking of me.”Pinkel, 63, will stay on until Dec. 31, or until the university hires a replacement. The Tigers play Brigham Young on Saturday.Pinkel made no mention of the discord on campus or his role in taking a stand on it. He surprised some and earned the affection of his players Sunday when he backed what had become a boycott by the whole team intended to force the removal of Timothy M. Wolfe as president of the University of Missouri system. Wolfe resigned Monday.AdvertisementThe protest began with a graduate student’s hunger strike several days earlier but gained national momentum when a few dozen black players announced their boycott Saturday night on Twitter. It was bolstered when Pinkel joined Sunday, in defiance of his own administration.AdvertisementAlthough the Tigers are 4-5 this season and 1-5 in the Southeastern Conference, Pinkel’s record at Missouri is 117-71 in 14-plus seasons there, making him the coach with the most wins in the history of the program, a point Gov. Jay Nixon made in a statement saluting him after the resignation was announced.“Through his leadership and commitment, Gary has made a positive and lasting impact on the lives of thousands of students and the university as a whole,” Nixon said. “Gary inspires respect and admiration for all the right reasons — not only for being the winningest coach in Mizzou history, but also for his dedication to the well-being of his players, both on and off the field.”On Monday, Pinkel and Athletic Director Mack Rhoades said that they had not sought for anybody, such as Wolfe, to be fired. Rather, Pinkel said, his players told him that they were worried about the health of the student on the hunger strike, and he decided to back them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I didn’t look at consequences,” he said. “It wasn’t about that at the time. It was about helping my players and supporting my players when they needed me.”He added: “I did the right thing, and I would do it again.”A couple of years ago, Pinkel became known beyond the world of sports as the coach of Michael Sam, the standout defensive end who came out as gay in 2014, shortly after his final season. Pinkel and much of the team had known throughout the season that Sam was gay.On Friday, Sam thanked Pinkel on Twitter, writing: “thank you for everything you have done for me. You gave me a family that I so desperately needed and for that I am grateful.”Pinkel is one of the most respected and longest-tenured coaches in the Football Bowl Subdivision, having taken over at Missouri before the 2001 season. He guided the Tigers to a 38-7 win over Arkansas in the Cotton Bowl after the 2007 season, ending with a final Associated Press ranking of No. 4. He led the Tigers amid realignment as they switched from the Big 12 to the SEC, and he guided them to the top of the SEC East in each of the past two seasons.Greg Sankey, the SEC commissioner, said of Pinkel in a statement: “He is a leader who coaches character with the same intensity he coaches football. Gary was an instrumental figure in transitioning Missouri into the Southeastern Conference, and I thank him for his work, his dedication to student-athletes and his service to the SEC.”As a head coach, Pinkel is 190-108-3, including his tenure at Missouri and 10 seasons before that at Toledo.AdvertisementPinkel’s resignation adds to the unusual number of head-coaching vacancies at top football programs, even before the regular season is over. He is the 11th coach to have been fired or to have announced his resignation since August, joining prominent figures such as Virginia Tech’s Frank Beamer and South Carolina’s Steve Spurrier. In addition to those teams, there are openings atop other well-regarded programs such as Southern California, Miami and Minnesota.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Saying He Is Sick, Coach at Missouri Will Step Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.