AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerDaniel Murphy, the slugging star of the Mets’ charmed sprint through the National League playoffs last month, declined the team’s qualifying offer on Friday and will test the open market in free agency.The Mets could still re-sign Murphy, the most valuable player of the Championship Series, who set a postseason record for consecutive games with a home run, with six. But Murphy’s defensive flaws at second base were exposed in the World Series, and he would seem to have more value to an American League team that could use him at least partly as a designated hitter.Free agents had until Friday at 5 p.m. to accept or reject the qualifying offer, which is worth $15.8 million for 2016 under the terms of the collective bargaining agreement negotiated after the 2011 season.Murphy, 30, hit .281 with 14 home runs and 73 R.B.I. during the regular season. He hit .328 with seven homers in the postseason, but almost all of his damage was done before the World Series, in which he went 3 for 20 in the Mets’ five-game loss to Kansas City.If Murphy leaves, the Mets could turn to Dilson Herrera, 21, to replace him. The team would receive a draft choice in the first or second round if Murphy signs elsewhere before next June.This is the fourth off-season under this system, but the first time any players have accepted. Baltimore catcher Matt Wieters, Houston outfielder Colby Rasmus and the Los Angeles Dodgers left-hander Brett Anderson took the deal.Sixteen others, including Murphy, rejected it.Toronto starter Marco Estrada, 32, also rejected the offer but signed a two-year, $26 million contract extension instead.Free agents who were traded during the previous season, like the Mets’ Yoenis Cespedes and Toronto’s David Price, are not eligible to receive qualifying offers. For players who do receive one, it can act as an anchor on their value, because most teams must sacrifice a first-round draft pick to sign a player who has rejected a qualifying offer. Only teams that choose among the top 10 picks can sign such players without losing the first-round draft choice.Wieters’s decision ensures that the Orioles will retain at least one of their free agents, a group that includes starter Wei-Yin Chen, the All-Star reliever Darren O’Day and the slugging first baseman Chris Davis, whose 47 homers led the majors.Wieters, 29, a three-time All-Star with two Gold Gloves, will try to re-establish himself as a premier catcher after missing part of last season recovering from Tommy John surgery.Anderson, 27, has been injured for much of his career but was healthy last season, making 31 starts with a 3.69 E.R.A. Another solid season could put him in a strong position in next year’s free agent class, which has fewer appealing rotation options than this one.Rasmus, 29, will nearly double his salary after hitting 25 home runs, and four more in six playoff games. He said he was not aware that no players had accepted qualifying offers before now, and he did not seem to care.“I hadn’t really put too much thought into that, and I didn’t think about it going into the process,” Rasmus said. “I guess that’s a pretty cool thing. It was in my heart and my wife’s heart to go to Houston.”Advertisement