AdvertisementSupported byColumbia 107, Kean 626 PhotosView Slide Show ›Todd Heisler/The New York TimesBy Seth BerkmanMany of the teams expected to be a part of the N.C.A.A. tournament field opened the men’s basketball season Friday night in front of capacity crowds. At Duke, students began lining up Thursday night for the team’s home opener against Siena, scheduled for 7 p.m. Friday.Columbia, in the rare position of being a favorite to capture the Ivy League title this season, and its automatic N.C.A.A. tournament bid, tipped off Friday at 11 a.m. because the women’s volleyball team had booked the gym for Friday night.The thought of Coach Mike Krzyzewski’s Blue Devils being pushed out of Cameron Indoor Stadium for any event is preposterous. But on the Morningside Heights campus, the arrival of an elite team has not led to pampering, only heightened expectations. The Lions have only one Ivy League title to their credit, in 1968, the year of their last N.C.A.A. tournament appearance and a year before the team’s current coach, Kyle Smith, was born.Despite the lack of visible signs of a basketball renaissance emerging at Columbia, the senior combination of guard Maodo Lo and forward Alex Rosenberg is attracting new fans and has the small core of devoted followers brimming with hope.Smith recently received an email from a supporter who had not had season tickets since 1968, but intended on attending games this season. Students whom Rosenberg had never met have been approaching him, declaring their excitement over the team, which was voted second in the Ivy League preseason poll for just the second time since the poll began before the 1985-86 season (Yale was first). Columbia and Princeton each received six first-place votes, the most in the league. In the poll’s 30-year history, Columbia has never been voted first.“There’s definitely higher expectations, but we like that,” Rosenberg said. “We want to be in the spotlight.”Columbia’s chance to gain recognition on the national stage will have to wait until Monday, when the Lions travel to play Kansas State. In recent years, the Lions have gone on the road to defeat Villanova and played closely contested games at Michigan State and Kentucky.Friday’s unusual start time against Division III Kean of Union, N.J., was mostly a warm-up. Most home games will not be played under such unorthodox circumstances. The Lions regularly draw near-capacity crowds in 2,500-seat Levien Gymnasium. A college representative said ticket sales before the season outpaced last season’s numbers.With only about half the gym full Friday morning, much of the buzz was a result of high-pitched indecipherable chatter. Much of the crowd was made up of public school students who were less enthralled by the return of Rosenberg, a 2013-14 first-team all-Ivy forward, than by the Lions’ mascot. There was no pep band. The smattering of undergraduates who attended mostly arrived casually late, with heavy eyes and clutching breakfast sandwiches or coffee cups.Despite the opponent and environment, the Lions displayed ample evidence for their preseason prognostications, as they dispatched the Cougars, 107-62. Kean kept the game close for the first five minutes, and were tied, 9-9, but with determined yet effortless-looking drives, Rosenberg helped the Lions pull away.He had 10 points and 10 rebounds in his first game in more than a year. He missed last season with a fractured foot. Because of rules in the Ivy League, where eligibility is intended to expire after four years, Rosenberg withdrew from college to remain eligible for one more season.The Lions’ recent hype manifested itself somewhat before Rosenberg’s injury. The Lions were coming off a 21-13 campaign entering last season, and Rosenberg was a candidate to be the conference’s player of the year. But the Lions also lost guard Grant Mullins to an injury and stumbled to a 13-15 record.Lo’s emergence has also helped fuel the Lions’ rise. An all-Ivy League selection in 2014-15, he led the conference in scoring at 18.4 points a game in Rosenberg’s absence.In recent summers, Lo, born to a Senegalese father and German mother, refined his skills with German national teams under the tutelage of Atlanta Hawks guard Dennis Schroder and Dallas Mavericks forward Dirk Nowitzki.“He’s one of the best point guards in the country,” Rosenberg said.The Lions’ top competition should come from Yale, which returns last season’s Ivy League player of the year, Justin Sears; Princeton; and Harvard. Yale and Harvard shared the Ivy League title last season, but Harvard advanced by beating Yale in a playoff for the league’s N.C.A.A. tournament berth.Columbia’s players said they were not oblivious to the unfamiliar faces watching them practice or the predictions of possibly being an underdog darling in March. Though it is not necessarily a label they have embraced — players often reiterate that the Ivy League is no longer home to an unathletic, lower quality brand of basketball and repeat the motto “respect everyone, fear no one” — the Lions have the back stories and talent to become a postseason fan favorite.Aside from Rosenberg’s season of redemption and Lo’s arrival as a fringe pro prospect, there is Mullins, whose long dirty-blond hair and rosy cheeks belie his aggression and grit on the court, said Smith, who compared him to Cleveland Cavaliers guard Matthew Dellavedova, whom he coached as an assistant at St. Mary’s.Smith continually holds hard-working players like Dellavedova in high regard. His picture adorns Smith’s office wall, as does a tabloid back page of Jeremy Lin, a former Harvard guard who scored 38 points against Kobe Bryant and the Los Angeles Lakers while playing for the Knicks in 2012. Smith has also kept a trinket that was left behind in his office from a previous tenant — a framed magazine cover from an alumni publication, Columbia College Today, that featured a piece on the tumultuous year of 1968.Forty-seven years ago, amid campus unrest, Columbia reached the N.C.A.A. East region semifinals. Fans like Bohdan Vitvitsky, who saw his first Columbia game in 1971, and Jeremy Feinberg, who has attended games for 40 years, are hoping for a similar journey later this season.“It would be an unreal experience, that kind of thing to happen again,” Feinberg said. “A once-in-a-lifetime experience.”The Lions understand the 11 a.m. games and Division III opponents come with their standing in college basketball’s hierarchy as a program with a history short on success. At Columbia, small increments are more feasible than becoming a team playing on national television every game. On Friday, patrons were greeted with glossy yearbook programs, a new addition provided by the athletic department this season, and the postgame news media sessions were moved from the squash courts to a refurbished conference room.The aspirations have also matured.“We want to be a team that people from all around the city come to watch,” Rosenberg said. “We don’t want to just be a local Morningside Heights team. We feel like when we’re able to play at the highest level we’re capable of playing, we could be the best team in the city.”Advertisement