
Sports of The Times By                     
 JULIET MACUR
 
OCT. 4, 2015
RICHMOND, Va. — Imagine Derek Bouchard-Hall walking into U.S.A. Cycling in June, on his first day in charge, all pumped up to salvage an organization that had been muddied by Lance Armstrong and one of the biggest, ugliest doping scandals in sports history.As the new president and chief executive, he swings open the front doors of the headquarters in Colorado Springs and takes an initial stroll. The décor makes him cringe.Some of the photos on the wall are of past champions, including Levi Leipheimer, an Armstrong teammate who admitted doping, and Bobby Julich, another Armstrong teammate who admitted doping. There’s even at least one photo of Armstrong, who in 2012 was barred from Olympic sports for life, for doping.Bouchard-Hall knew those photos had to go.“Those are symbols of an appalling past and appalling behavior, and even though I can understand it and sympathize with it, those pictures don’t inspire me,” he said. “In fact, it’s the opposite.”AdvertisementSo, weeks later, down those pictures came. And into the hall closet they went. (You know a sport has a doping problem when that closet was already called the Hall of Shame, home to a photo collection of past dopers.)AdvertisementBouchard-Hall, 45, said some of his friends and colleagues warned him that removing the photos from the walls might look as if he were trying to bury cycling’s dirty past. But from my perspective, there’s no chance of that, as Bouchard-Hall appears to be the exact opposite of his predecessor, Steve Johnson, who finally retired from U.S.A. Cycling after nearly a decade as the leader of the sport in the United States.Johnson didn’t like to talk about doping. Blinders on, he pushed forward past the scandals year after year, never speaking out — as a good leader should have — against the drug use that was corroding his sport, damaging his organization and embarrassing clean athletes who were often lumped in with the dopers.For a sport trying to win back the public, it should be a relief that Johnson is gone. Good riddance: His final official duty for U.S.A. Cycling was working at last month’s World Road Cycling Championships here.It was there I met Bouchard-Hall. Tall and wispy and dressed in a spiffy suit, he looked so businesslike that he could have just walked off Wall Street and into the hotel lobby where we spoke for nearly two hours.Bouchard-Hall gave up a top job at the British sports retailer Wiggle, taking a sizable pay cut, so he could help U.S.A. Cycling turn around and win back sponsors. That includes changing the public perception of cycling in the United States, which, because of Armstrong and his teammates, took a nose dive to the pavement and has yet to climb back onto its feet.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bouchard-Hall is passionate about his mission, so much so that he left his wife and two daughters in London, where he had been working and where they will stay until the girls finish this school year.I asked him, Why do this to yourself? Why leave a lucrative position at Wiggle to take over a sport constantly dinged by doping cases, including a recent one involving Tom Danielson, a top American rider who testified in the Armstrong doping investigation? In August, before the Tour of Utah, Danielson’s initial urine sample tested positive for a steroid.AdvertisementBouchard-Hall answered, “I love the sport that much.”He added that he couldn’t bear to watch cycling flounder, post-Armstrong.After our chat, I realized that the U.S.A. Cycling board chairman, Bob Stapleton, might have been right when he told me that this new president would usher “a watershed change” to the organization.“We’re looking to go back to our roots and to be transparent, and this new person will make that happen for us,” he said before Bouchard-Hall was announced as president.So who is this man who was brave enough to take on the challenge? To say that he’s an overachiever would be an understatement.After graduating from Princeton and earning a master’s degree in engineering from Stanford, Bouchard-Hall competed at the 2000 Olympics in track cycling and also competed on top American professional teams, and he briefly raced in Europe. He is also a former national criterium champion. In 2002, he retired as a racer and went to Harvard Business School. He then found his way to McKinsey & Company, a global management consulting firm based in London.No question that he has the right credentials to resurrect U.S.A. Cycling. (Or, for that matter, any corporation.) He is competitive and intense, and he enjoys fixing things, like racing bikes and companies. During our conversation, I saw that he has the mind-set and the will to fix the American arm of his broken sport.The best part, though, is that he doesn’t appear to have ties to Armstrong, unlike so many other U.S.A. Cycling executives of years past. For that, everyone in the sport should let out a cheer.Bouchard-Hall also knows enough about the truth of cycling to be a credible voice for his sport. When he was a top cyclist, he said, he had a hunch that other riders were doping, but he never saw it firsthand and was never offered any drugs because, he said, “I wasn’t somebody that looked corruptible.”Stapleton — the former team owner of HTC-Highroad — wanted to make sure that was true even before considering Bouchard-Hall for the job. From his perspective, any new leader of U.S.A. Cycling had to “take the sport forward in an uncompromised way and promote the ideas of clean and fair sport.”AdvertisementSo Stapleton asked both a headhunting group and the United States Anti-Doping Agency to vet Bouchard-Hall. Stapleton even personally contacted Bouchard-Hall’s former team managers and teammates to investigate him.“His peer group was unambiguous and knew right where he stood, and he stood in the right place,” Stapleton said, when it came to Bouchard-Hall’s stance against doping. “I think he was always outspoken about it, but never in position to do much about it.”Until now.Before taking the job, Bouchard-Hall reached out to Travis Tygart, the chief executive of the United States Anti-Doping Agency, to see how they could work together to battle doping in cycling. He had corresponded with Tygart before.In 2012, he sent an email to Tygart asking him to open an investigation into Kirk O’Bee, a rider who had beaten him at the 2001 national criterium championship and whose coach later admitted doping O’Bee during that time. Bouchard-Hall suggested that Usada strip O’Bee of that medal, so he could have it.“It’s not about my winning something that is no longer relevant to my life — it’s about justice,” Bouchard-Hall wrote. “It’s about providing an overdue victory to we clean athletes that suffered so much at the hands of those who chose not to play by the rules.”Now Bouchard-Hall has to deal with those cheaters firsthand. Even before the first doping case popped up under his watch — he has had three already — he devised a statement from U.S.A. Cycling that basically said the organization would not tolerate dopers.He and the board are considering an effort to bar masters cyclists for life upon their first doping offense, though I’m not sure that idea would fly because it goes against the rules of the World Anti-Doping Code. But it shows that he means business.Advertisement“I’ll do whatever I can do to get us back on track,” Bouchard-Hall said, adding that cycling is complex to navigate because of its doping past — and sometimes doping present — because there are so many past dopers in the sport. “We have to make it clear to sponsors that we’re doing whatever we can to make things better.”After so many years of U.S.A. Cycling’s silence on the doping issue, it’s refreshing to see a leader who tells it as it is and is proactive in trying to change things.So, with Bouchard-Hall, it’s so far, so good.But — sigh — there’s such a long road ahead.“Doping will always be part of sports,” Bouchard-Hall said. “It’s like alcoholism. You don’t just kick it; you just keep fighting it and fighting it.”Email: juliet@nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Cycling Leader Vows to Press the Fight Against Doping.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »