AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor Mather and Christopher ClareyIn an unprecedented move, Russia was provisionally suspended from track and field on Friday by the sport’s world governing body in the wake of sweeping doping allegations against the country’s athletes, coaches, trainers, doctors and officials.The ban, which will keep Russian athletes out of all sanctioned international track and field events worldwide, and could disrupt preparations for next summer’s Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, will remain in place while the case is considered more fully. The ruling also stripped Russia of the right to host next year’s world race walking team championships in Cheboksary and the world junior championships in Kazan.The council for the International Association of Athletics Federations, which is led by a new president, Sebastian Coe, met via teleconference Friday and voted 22 to 1 to suspend Russia. Mikhail Butov, a council member from Russia, was allowed to state the case against a ban, but not to vote.“We discussed and agreed that the whole system has failed the athletes, not just in Russia, but around the world,” Mr. Coe said in a statement. “This has been a shameful wake-up call, and we are clear that cheating at any level will not be tolerated.”Jenny Simpson, a former world 1500-meter champion  from the United States agreed. “At the highest level they’ve failed me personally and they’ve failed every athlete in the sport, and I’m glad to hear they feel that way because I feel at least admitting it is the first step to cleaning it up,” she said by telephone on Friday.The World Anti-Doping Agency released a 323-page report Monday that laid out an extensive state-sponsored doping program in Russia. The report recommended that Russia be suspended from the 2016 Olympics if it did not impose radical improvements to its antidoping efforts. It also recommended that five athletes, including the gold medal winner Mariya Savinova, and five officials be barred for life.Lamine Diack of Senegal, the president of the I.A.A.F. for 16 years before choosing not to stand for re-election in August, is under criminal investigation in France over accusations he demanded bribes to cover up Russian doping casesHere is a look at the officials and athletes named in the World Anti-Doping Association’s report on Russian doping.National federations have been suspended from international bodies over governance issues, but the move to suspend a national federation because of doping was without precedent in track and field.“This is a very new and uncomfortable space for sport: the family disciplining its own,” Richard Ings, a former chief executive of the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority, said in an email. “Those cozy international sport cocktail parties will be a little icier. They aren’t used to turning on family.”Still, it is far from certain that Russian track and field athletes will be banned from the Summer Games in August 2016. Russia will have to show compliance with WADA doping regulations to return to competition. Track and Olympics officials have said they believe Russia could meet these conditions in time to compete in the 2016 Summer Games.Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s sports minister who has ruled out a Russian boycott of the Rio Games, expressed confidence after the vote. “Our reaction is calm; we didn’t expect anything else,” he said in remarks reported by Reuters. “This suspension is temporary. A special commission still has to get to the bottom of everything. I’m sure that everything can still be fixed.”But Coe, speaking to reporters in London after the vote, took a hard line. “We will get the change that we want and only then will Russian athletes be able to return to international competitions,” he said. “It is entirely up to the Russian federation and Russia to enact those changes. Our verification team will be tough.”Russia has disputed much of the WADA report, but on Friday it promised to take steps to improve its doping controls. Russia had far more drug violations than any other country in 2013 — 225, or 12 percent of all violations globally, according to data from WADA. About a fifth involved track and field athletes.Before Friday’s vote, Yelena Isinbayeva, the world-record holder in the women’s pole vault and a two-time Olympic champion, asked that not all Russian track and field athletes be banned, in an open letter posted on the All-Russia Athletic Federation website.“All my victories are honest, ‘clean’ and deserved,” she wrote. “I have always followed and am following all the anti-doping rules precisely. The situation the Russian National team is in now is very sad but I ask you not to treat all the athletes in the same negative way. To ban innocent and not connected to that doping scandal athletes from competing in international events and Olympic Games in Rio is not fair.”The report described a pervasive doping culture among Russia’s sports programs and implicated athletes, coaches, trainers, doctors and various Russian institutions.Simpson, who has frequently competed against Russian runners, expressed support for the blanket ban but sympathy for athletes who might have been compelled to cheat.“The greater evil here is the institutionalized corruption,” Simpson said. “There will always be a new wave of young, fresh athletes. There’s constantly going to be turnover, and there will always be a feeder system for that.“But the people in power and the people setting up the rules and the people who create the culture of the sport, that’s a greater evil when those have manipulated their position for their own good to the detriment of the sport.”The suspension represented an about-face for Coe, the former British middle-distance star. He made an official visit to Russia before WADA’s report was released to monitor changes already underway and had repeatedly expressed his support for engagement with Russia instead of suspension. But the WADA report was a clear tipping point.“From council’s perspective, in light of the evidence, the suspension was the only proper course of action,” Stephanie Hightower, an I.A.A.F. council member and the president of USA Track and Field, said in a statement. “Although this is a difficult time, in the long term, the sport ultimately will be stronger for it.”This is hardly the sport’s first major doping scandal. Ben Johnson was barred in 1988 after winning the men’s 100 meters at the Olympics, and Marion Jones, the American who was the sport’s biggest star, was later stripped of her five Olympic medals from the 2000 Games. But Simpson expressed guarded optimism that this scandal might generate lasting improvement.Simpson said that “my cynical side says this will happen again and that people will always cheat” but that “the magnitude of the decision gives me hope.” “It’s not some big federation talking to one athlete that maybe has an entourage and a lot of money,” she said. “It’s at the highest level the people in charge are saying to one of the biggest federations in the world that we have to clean this up. And I think when the sport and the fans can look at themselves in the mirror and say the sport is dirty, and we have cleaning up to do, that’s what gives me hope. We’re being honest with ourselves, and we’re finally facing the fact that a slap on the wrist isn’t going to do it.”An extended ban would mean that Russian track athletes would be ineligible not only for the Olympics but for global events like the world indoor championships in Portland, Ore., in March 2016. An international ban would also include major invitational meets like those in the top-tier Diamond League, which includes meets in cities like Zurich; Eugene, Ore.; and New York.Rebecca R. Ruiz contributed reporting.Advertisement