AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichFantasy football analysis for N.F.L. Week 10 games and Monday’s matchup between the Houston Texans and the Cincinnati Bengals. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy and see their complete Week 10 player rankings.1 p.m. Eastern. Line: Packers by 12Quarterback Aaron Rodgers (GB) — Rodgers overcame a dreadful fantasy matchup last week against Carolina, but shook off a lackluster first quarter to finish with 369 yards and four touchdowns. A date with a struggling Lions secondary that allowed 27 fantasy points to the Chiefs’ Alex Smith in Week 8 and 20 to the Vikings’ Teddy Bridgewater in Week 7 is up next.Matthew Stafford (DET) — We gave Stafford the benefit of the doubt in Week 8 against the lowly Kansas City defense and he delivered just 9 fantasy points. We won’t be fooled again until his offensive line figures out how to block (six sacks versus Kansas City). Stafford managed only 246 scoreless passing yards and two interceptions the last time he faced the Packers at Lambeau Field (Week 3, 2014).Running Back James Starks/Eddie Lacy (GB) — Starks is now an RB2 play out of this backfield, as he will get the start this week over the stumbling Lacy. The Lions are the third best running back matchup in fantasy, and have yielded 11 or more fantasy points to an opposing back in four straight weeks.Joique Bell/Theo Riddick (DET) — The Packers rank 28th against the run, allowing 125.1 yards per game, but they did limit a rolling Jonathan Stewart to 66 yards on 20 carries last week. Bell operated as the lead back in the Lions’ last game before the bye, and is a top-end standard league RB3 play. Riddick has P.P.R. flex-appeal and could see plenty of targets if this one gets out of hand early.Wide Receiver/Tight End Randall Cobb/James Jones/Davante Adams (GB) — An opposing receiver has managed 13 or more fantasy points against the Lions’ 18th ranked pass defense in five of seven games played this year. The Packers’ big three are all start-worthy this weekend.Calvin Johnson/Golden Tate (DET) — The Packers secondary has been burned for 28 F.P.P.G. by the position over the last three games. Johnson has missed practice this week, so you’ll have to monitor his progress before locking him into your lineup. Tate remains a low-end WR3, having yet to clear 80 yards this season. Richard Rodgers (GB) — Rodgers’s two touchdowns last week signify his quarterback’s growing preference for his services near the goal line. He is in play as a high-end TE2 streamer against the Lions, who have allowed 9 F.P.P.G. and six touchdowns to opposing tight ends this year.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.1 p.m. Line: Panthers by 5Marcus Mariota (TEN) — The Panthers secondary is coming off its first poor performance of 2015, although playing Aaron Rodgers can have that effect on any defense. Mariota was the latest quarterback to victimize the hapless Saints secondary for 371 yards and four touchdowns. Mariota is a midrange QB2 against the eighth toughest fantasy matchup for quarterbacks (15.3 F.P.P.G.).Cam Newton (CAR) — A banged-up Titans secondary is fresh off a thrashing from Drew Brees (389 yards, 4 TDs). Fantasy’s fourth best quarterback heading into Week 10 has at least nine rushing attempts in five of eight games played this year and is a top-end option this weekend.Running Back Antonio Andrews (TEN) — He rushed 19 times for 88 yards under new Coach Mike Mularkey, who declared Andrews his workhorse before the Saints game. Starks and the Eagles’ Ryan Mathews have both managed 18 fantasy points against this run defense over the last three weeks. The return of David Cobb could hurt his value, which leaves Andrews as a low-end RB2 play.Jonathan Stewart (CAR) — The Titans’ shaky run defense has played reasonably well over the last couple of weeks, limiting Alfred Blue to 7 points in Week 8 and Mark Ingram to 9 in Week 9. Stewart is averaging just 3.9 yards per carry, but his healthy workload will keep him in the high-end RB2 picture. Wide Receiver/Tight End Ted Ginn Jr. (CAR) — The Titans have yielded 10 or more fantasy points to a receiver in seven consecutive weeks, but Ginn’s lack of efficiency makes him a low-end WR3 bet at best.Delanie Walker (TEN) — The Panthers have permitted 10 or more fantasy points to the position in three of their last four games. Walker will be one of the better TE1 plays after his monster game last week against New Orleans (7/95/2 TDs).1 p.m. Line: Rams by 7Quarterback Jay Cutler (CHI) — The Rams are fantasy’s second toughest quarterback matchup, allowing 12.9 F.P.P.G. They have yielded just five touchdown passes all season, which is the fewest in football. This is a tough week to put your trust in the erratic Cutler. Running Back Matt Forte/Jeremy Langford (CHI) — Forte got in a limited practice Wednesday, which provides some hope that he will play this week. St. Louis ranks 13th against the run, allowing 103 rushing yards per game. Langford would be a high-end RB2 start if Forte is scratched. Todd Gurley (STL) — The Bears are 24th against the run, and have permitted at least 10 fantasy points to a running back in five of eight games. Gurley is an elite RB play this weekend.Wide Receiver Alshon Jeffery (CHI) — The Rams have yielded just two double-digit fantasy performances to an opposing receiver this year.Tavon Austin (STL) — Austin has consistently led this offense in targets for the last several weeks, and his use in the running game adds some nice value to his game. The Bears rank fourth against the pass, but have allowed the 16th most fantasy points to the position. We like him as a high-end WR3 start.Martellus Bennett (CHI) — The Rams enter Week 10 as the seventh worst matchup for the position, and have given up just one touchdown to tight ends. Bennett is on the lower end of the TE1 spectrum this weekend.1 p.m. Line: Eagles by 6.5Quarterback Ryan Tannehill (MIA) — Despite giving up three touchdowns to the Cowboys’ Matt Cassel last week, the revamped Eagles secondary has been mostly sound (16 F.P.P.G.). Tannehill has just one game of 18 or more fantasy points over his last six starts and is best viewed as a QB2.Sam Bradford (PHI) — Miami’s mediocre secondary has allowed the 11th most fantasy points to the position, making Bradford a decent QB2 streamer this week. Although it is worth noting that he has just one game of 18 or more fantasy points to his name this season.Running Back Lamar Miller (MIA) — Philadelphia is the third toughest fantasy matchup for backs, but has permitted consecutive 100-yard games to Jonathan Stewart and Darren McFadden the last two weeks. Jay Ajayi could be stealing some work from Miller, but he should still be viewed as a solid RB2 play.DeMarco Murray/Ryan Mathews (PHI) — Miami has the second worst run defense in the league (142.1 Y.P.G.) and has allowed the fourth most fantasy points to the position. Start Murray with confidence, and get Mathews into your flex spot.Wide Receiver Jarvis Landry/Rishard Matthews (MIA) — The Eagles are fantasy’s third best receiver matchup, having allowed a receiver to reach 10 or more fantasy points in every game played this season. They have allowed a pair of opposing wideouts to reach 80 or more yards three times this season, the latest being the Cowboys’ Cole Beasley (112/2 TDs) and Dez Bryant (104/1 TD).Jordan Matthews (PHI) — An opposing receiver has managed to eclipse 20 fantasy points against the Dolphins in three straight weeks. Matthews is coming off one of his better performances of 2015 and should be considered a solid WR2 play.1 p.m. Line: Steelers by 4.5 Quarterback Josh McCown (CLE) — The Steelers rank 26th against the pass and were just torched by Derek Carr for 301 yards and four touchdowns. McCown is worth a spot start in this favorable matchup, as long as he can suit up.Ben Roethlisberger/Landry Jones (PIT) — Roethlisberger is hoping to play, but if Landry Jones gets the start, he is a low-end QB2 option despite the Browns’ struggles defending the pass (fifth best QB matchup).Running Back DeAngelo Williams (PIT) — Williams is hurting, but he is still expected to start against the league’s worst ranked run defense. He will be a must-start, top five fantasy option as long as he plays.Duke Johnson (CLE) — Pittsburgh is the sixth worst fantasy matchup for running backs and has allowed just three double-digit fantasy performances, as well as just two rushing scores. Johnson is the only Browns back worth considering as a low-end RB3 option.Wide Receiver/Tight End Antonio Brown/Martavis Bryant (PIT) — Brown produced 124 yards on six catches in Landry’s start against the Chiefs, and Bryant managed to reach the end zone, so they remain must-starts in this favorable matchup should Roethlisberger sit.Travis Benjamin (CLE) — After a great start to the season, Benjamin has been missing in action over the last three weeks, but this could be the matchup that gets him back in owners’ good graces. The Steelers have allowed an opposing receiver to reach double-digit fantasy points in eight of nine contests this year.Gary Barnidge (CLE) — Pittsburgh is the sixth best matchup for guys like Barnidge, yielding 10 F.P.P.G. to the position. He should get back to being the TE1 nobody thought he was as long as McCown suits up.1 p.m. Line: Buccaneers by 1 Quarterback  Jameis Winston (TB) — The Cowboys have allowed just 11 F.P.P.G. to quarterbacks over the last three weeks, and over all are considered the seventh worst matchup for fantasy quarterbacks. Winston is averaging 19 points over his last three games, but against weaker defensive competition like Washington, Atlanta and the Giants. We’ll treat him as a midrange QB2 option.Running Back Doug Martin (TB) — The Cowboys allow 24 F.P.P.G. to the position (tied for second most). Martin’s lackluster play over the last two weeks (102 yards, 34 carries, 0 TDs) and the increased role of Charles Sims is cause for concern despite the favorable matchup.Darren McFadden (DAL) — He has been a solid play the last couple of weeks despite some stiff competition in Seattle and Philadelphia. He should find the sledding a bit easier against Tampa Bay. He is an RB1 option in Week 10.Wide Receiver Dez Bryant (DAL) — The Bucs have permitted 10 or more fantasy points to an opposing receiver in every game played this season and are the fourth best receiver matchup over all.Mike Evans (TB) — Evans should see another trove of targets with Vincent Jackson on the sideline once again. The Cowboys have allowed big performances this season to the WR1s Jordan Matthews (19 FPs,) Julian Edelman (18 FPs) and Julio Jones (28 fantasy points). He is an elite P.P.R. option, and a solid WR2 in standard leagues.1 p.m. Line: Saints by 1QuarterbackKirk Cousins (WAS) — The erratic Cousins gets a crack at fantasy’s best matchup for the position, which makes him worth a look for quarterback-needy owners. They have been hit up by quarterbacks for an average of 31 F.P.P.G. over the last three games and rank 30th in the league against the pass.Drew Brees (NO) — The red-hot Brees heads to Washington, a team that has allowed 19 F.P.P.G. to quarterbacks over the last three weeks.Running Back Mark Ingram (NO) — The last four games have seen running backs exploit the Redskins’ run defense for an average of 21.3 F.P.P.G.Wide Receiver DeSean Jackson/Pierre Garcon (WAS) — Jackson was a letdown last week, but perhaps he and his quarterback can get a little chemistry going against the Saints’ horrific secondary, which is permitting the fifth most fantasy points to receivers.Willie Snead/Brandin Cooks (NO) — Both receivers need to be locked into lineups as they take on fantasy’s eighth best matchup for the position. The Redskins’ secondary is slowly getting healthy, but is likely to be missing DeAngelo Hall, and Bashaud Breeland is nursing a hamstring injury.Jordan Reed (WAS) — The Saints just gave up 95 yards and two touchdowns to Delanie Walker last weekend and over all are the second best matchup for tight ends. He’s a solid TE1 option.Benjamin Watson (NO) — A tough matchup awaits the surprise fantasy asset, as the Redskins held Rob Gronkowski to just 47 yards on four receptions last week and have yet to allow a tight end to top 10 fantasy points this season.1 p.m. Line: Ravens by 5.5QuarterbackBlake Bortles (JAC) — Coming off a season-high 381 passing yards, Bortles is easily a top 10 fantasy quarterback option against the Ravens, who are giving up the second most fantasy points to quarterbacks (21.9 F.P.P.G.).Joe Flacco (BAL) — Without his top receiving option, Steve Smith, it’s difficult to get too excited about Flacco. He’s a midrange QB2 despite the favorable matchup (18 F.P.P.G., eighth most).Running BackJustin Forsett (BAL) — The Jaguars have the seventh best run defense at 94.2 Y.P.G., but have also allowed eight touchdowns and 21.7 F.P.P.G. to the position (eighth most).T.J. Yeldon (JAC) — He has been quietly consistent of late, topping 10 fantasy points in each of his last four games played. Baltimore has the N.F.L.’s 10th best run defense and has yielded only three rushing touchdowns, but Yeldon can be considered an RB2 this week given his expected volume.Wide Receiver/Tight EndKamar Aiken (BAL) — He is Flacco’s top target with Smith out, but that does not guarantee fantasy success. With Smith absent in Week 5 against the Browns, he hauled in four of nine targets for 78 yards and no touchdowns. He will still see enough targets to warrant consideration in P.P.R. leagues.Allen Robinson/Allen Hurns (JAC) — You should feel good starting both of these guys against a Ravens defense that allows 31.4 F.P.P.G. to the position (second most).Julius Thomas (JAC) — As bad as the Ravens are at stopping wide receivers, they are as good at stopping tight ends (4.9 F.P.P.G., third fewest). Thomas turned eight targets into three catches for 14 yards last week against the Jets. Look elsewhere.4:25 p.m. Line: Raiders by 3QuarterbackDerek Carr (OAK) — With 11 touchdowns in his last three games, he is a legit QB1 going forward. The Vikings are one of the tougher fantasy matchups for quarterbacks at 14.8 F.P.P.G., but they’ve also only faced one top 20 fantasy quarterback this season (Rivers in Week 3).Running BackLatavius Murray (OAK) — The Vikings have allowed only one rushing touchdown over their last five games and over all are allowing 15.7 F.P.P.G. (ninth fewest). Murray’s status is up in the air because of a concussion suffered in Week 9.Adrian Peterson (MIN) — The Raiders had been considered a very tough matchup for running backs before the Steelers’ Williams went off for 170 yards and two touchdowns, the first touchdowns given up to a back since Week 2. Keep expectations in check, but he is a top five back regardless.Wide ReceiverAmari Cooper/Michael Crabtree (OAK) — If you’re assuming Carr will break the mold and perform well against the Vikings, then you can feel good starting both. While only two receivers have topped 15 fantasy points in a game all season against the Vikings, both receivers are heavily targeted and safe WR2 plays this week.Stefon Diggs (MIN) — While he’s no Antonio Brown, who incredibly caught 17 passes for 284 yards against the Raiders in Week 9, the Raiders have given up at least 10 fantasy points to a receiver in six of eight games played. As long as Teddy Bridgewater can play (concussion), Diggs is a solid WR2 this week.4:25 p.m. Line: Broncos by 6QuarterbackPeyton Manning (DEN) — His better play of late has kept him in the QB1 conversation. The Chiefs have not allowed more than 10 fantasy points to a quarterback over the last three games, but the competition has been weak, and Manning had his best fantasy performance against them in Week 2 (256 yards, 3 TDs).Running BackCharcandrick West (KC) — The last back to top 100 yards rushing against the Broncos was a Chiefs player, but not West (Jamaal Charles). Denver allowed the fewest Y.P.C. as well (3.3). While West has a touchdown in each of his last two games, he is a low-end RB2 this week.Ronnie Hillman/C.J. Anderson (DEN) — After evenly sharing the load last week, it’s time to stop trying to figure this one out. Look elsewhere against the eighth toughest fantasy matchup for backs (15.5 F.P.P.G.).Wide Receiver/Tight EndJeremy Maclin (KC) — A receiver has topped 10 fantasy points just twice against the Broncos this season. He is an WR3 this week just because he will get his targets.Demaryius Thomas/Emmanuel Sanders (DEN) — In Week 2, both had eight receptions on 14 targets, with Thomas totaling 116 yards and Sanders getting two touchdowns. The Chiefs allow the most fantasy points to the position (31.7 F.P.P.G.).4:25 p.m. Line: Patriots by 7QuarterbackTom Brady (NE) — His 299 yards and two touchdowns against Washington last week made for a “down” week for fantasy’s top quarterback. He should “bounce back” against the sixth best team for fantasy quarterbacks to play (18.9 F.P.P.G.).Eli Manning (NYG) — He followed his six-touchdown performance against the Saints in Week 8 with a bit of a letdown against the Buccaneers (213/2/2 INT). Based on his unpredictability, he is a QB1 that you cannot feel great about.Running BackLeGarrette Blount (NE) — With his teammate Dion Lewis out for the season, Blount should dominate this backfield’s touches going forward. He had a career-high 29 carries last week. He is a low-end RB1 against a beatable Giants run defense.Wide ReceiverOdell Beckham Jr. (NYG) — He is always capable of putting up a monster game, but the only receiver to come close was Antonio Brown in Week 1 (19.3 fantasy points). No other receiver has topped 14 this season.Julian Edelman (NE) — With five touchdowns over his last five games, fantasy’s seventh best receiver should continue to shine.8:30 p.m. Line: Seahawks by 3QuarterbackRussell Wilson (SEA) — The Cardinals are the sixth toughest team for fantasy quarterbacks to play (15 F.P.P.G.) and Wilson has not thrown more than one touchdown since Week 2. He runs a bit, which is nice, but he is not in any QB1 conversations we’re having.Carson Palmer (ARI) — While the Seahawks have allowed the third fewest fantasy points to quarterbacks, they have yielded decent outings to the likes of Aaron Rodgers, Andy Dalton and Cam Newton. Palmer has the weapons and talent to still be considered a QB1 play.Running BackMarshawn Lynch (SEA) — Only two backs have crossed the goal line against the Cardinals (fourth best run defense in N.F.L.), and only one has topped 100 yards (Gurley, 146 in Week 4). Lynch is still an RB1, but keep expectations in check.Chris Johnson/Andre Ellington (ARI) — The Seahawks’ run defense, while giving up a few more yards per game than that of the Cardinals, is tougher from a fantasy perspective (12.5 F.P.P.G.). Johnson is the lead back here, and, despite his recent success, is nothing more than a low-end RB2.Tight EndJimmy Graham (SEA) — Graham’s last touchdown came in Week 3, and the Cardinals have allowed only one touchdown to a tight end this season (4.6 F.P.P.G.).8:30 p.m. (Monday) Line: Bengals by 10.5QuarterbackAndy Dalton (CIN) — He had either two touchdowns or 300 yards in every game this season except one. Fantasy’s fifth best quarterback (21.2 F.P.P.G.) has a favorable matchup at home against the Texans, who allowed nine passing touchdowns in three straight games before being let off the hook against the Titans’ Zach Mettenberger in Week 8.Running BackGiovani Bernard/Jeremy Hill (CIN) — A situation worth avoiding, with both expecting to split carries. Taking a chance on Bernard as a P.P.R.-flex could pay off, though.Wide Receiver/Tight EndDeAndre Hopkins (HOU) — With 14 targets per game, and 15.6 F.P.P.G. (second most), there’s no point in mentioning what defense he is up against.A.J. Green/Marvin Jones (CIN) — Green has been boom or bust for much of the season. But a matchup at home against a Texans secondary more than capable of allowing a big game (see Jarvis Landry, Allen Robinson and Andre Johnson in recent weeks) is one we’re comfortable with.Tyler Eifert (CIN) — His three touchdowns last Thursday gave him nine on the season, more than Gronkowski or any other tight end. Only two tight ends have found the end zone against the Texans, but that’s not enough to keep us from expecting big things Monday night.The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. Follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy.Advertisement