AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Brazilian Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonImagine if in a sport like tennis, skiing or pole-vaulting all available suppliers refused to provide a world champion athlete with a racket, skis or a pole. Without the necessary equipment, the athlete would probably have to consider withdrawing from the sport. Imagine that this refusal comes because the suppliers worry that if they provide the equipment to the world champion the other athletes with whom they have contracts would be beaten by the superior athlete.Is such an improbable scenario impossible? Not in Formula One, at least, a sport in which real life frequently spins weirder tales than a work of fiction.In fact, throughout the second half of the current season — in which the penultimate race is running this weekend in Brazil —the Red Bull team has been involved in just such a long-running soap opera. The team, which dominated from 2010 to 2013, has had to contemplate pulling out of the series because none of the engine manufacturers would provide it with an engine for its car next season.“The factory teams fear and know that we would be faster than them,” said Dietrich Mateschitz, the billionaire founder and director of the Red Bull energy drink company in Austria that owns the team. Thanks to their superior design, the Red Bull cars have excelled this season whenever engine power was less import than aerodynamics and the chassis. On a wet track during the first part of the U.S. Grand Prix last month, for example, the Red Bulls led the race. At the Mexican Grand Prix on Nov. 1, in high-altitude conditions that weakened engine power, the Red Bulls again emerged stronger.The other teams fear that with a better engine, the Red Bull aerodynamics guru, Adrian Newey, who has been responsible for designing many of the championship-winning cars of the last two decades — at Red Bull and previously at Williams and McLaren — would trump them again.The ongoing saga began to unfold in July, when Red Bull, dissatisfied with its Renault engine’s inferior power in the new downsized, hybrid, turbo formula, said it would drop its Renault engine a year before the end of their contract.The French manufacturer had powered Red Bull to all of its championships successes. But it had long felt that it had not received enough credit for those victories, and so when it was jilted by Red Bull, it was loath to help Red Bull find a replacement engine. At the same time, Renault had moved on to a new project that involved possibly buying the Lotus team and returning to the series as a full-fledged car and engine manufacturer.Red Bull, meanwhile, had announced that it was dropping the Renault engine after it had entered into what it considered was an agreement to use the best engine of the new era, made by Mercedes. But Mercedes later said that there was no agreement. Mercedes had indeed spoken to Red Bull directors, the German manufacturer claimed, but any possibility of a deal fell apart because the directors had overlooked some important negotiating points. One of those points involved the eventuality that with a Mercedes engine Red Bull might beat the Mercedes team and therefore Mercedes could benefit, rather than suffer, from the situation through marketing. “We wanted to know from Red Bull about shared ideas and marketing campaigns we could develop for a common future,” said Toto Wolff, the Mercedes motorsport director. “But nothing came out of it. And so the issue was taken care of from our side.” Finding itself with no Renault or Mercedes engine, the Red Bull team turned to Ferrari. But Red Bull wanted to have exactly the same engine that the Ferrari team uses. After starting poorly last season, the Italian manufacturer’s engine has improved this year to the point of being the second-best in the series.After discussions, the Italian team rejected the idea of supplying Red Bull, although it did accept to supply Toro Rosso, Red Bull’s second team. Ferrari, which is scraping its way back from its worst period in more than a decade, did not want to give the same engine that its cars use to a team that could well beat it. And that is what Red Bull wanted. “The possibility of cooperating with Red Bull regarding the development of a power unit remains an option,” said Sergio Marchionne, the president of Fiat and Ferrari. “But not in the context of Ferrari equipping Red Bull with an engine equivalent to what Ferrari races.”That left just one more engine on the market: Honda. But Honda, having returned to Formula One this year after half a decade away, has had a disastrous season with McLaren, the team with which it dominated the series at the end of the 1990s. It is currently second to last in the standings, even though McLaren is the second most successful team in the history of the series. Although the Japanese manufacturer has said that it is clearly open to providing an engine to Red Bull, the company has a contract with McLaren that allows the team to reject such a deal. So McLaren, which this season has blamed Honda as openly and virulently as Red Bull had been blaming Renault, decided that it would have nothing to do with supplying Red Bull next year.“We are not a charity foundation,” Eric Boullier, the McLaren sporting director, said at the Mexican Grand Prix. “So we are not here to help.”Locked out of every possible engine deal by competitors, Red Bull said for several weeks that it might be forced to withdraw from the series.But it has now returned to talks with Renault, and has apologetically admitted that it had unfairly criticized the company for the past two seasons. In recent days, a solution may have been found: Renault is apparently ready to continue with Red Bull, but the new relationship would likely involve Red Bull giving the engine a name other than Renault. It is now up to Mateschitz to accept the deal or not.The situation highlights a fundamental problem in the series, which has gradually swung away from being a team constructors’ series to one effectively controlled by the road car manufacturers. Bernie Ecclestone, the series promoter, and Max Mosley, the previous president of the International Automobile Federation, or F.I.A., the sport’s governing body, had battled the car manufacturers in the early 1980s, eventually turning the series into a giant global sporting series controlled by the constructor teams and Ecclestone.But with the introduction of the current engine formula, the car manufacturers, who have a stranglehold on the creation of these complex hybrid units, now wield considerable power again.In Mexico, Jean Todt, the current F.I.A. president, said that the rules as they now stand are flawed because there is nothing that requires an engine manufacturer to supply an engine to a team that doesn’t have one.“The way it is written, you cannot supply more than a certain number, which is three,” he said, referring to three teams, “but it isn’t written a minimum figure of teams you have to supply.”Resolving the issue is likely to occupy the teams, the promoter and the F.I.A. through the winter break, which begins after the season’s final race, in Abu Dhabi on Nov. 29, possibly providing an off-season final episode to the soap opera.Advertisement