AdvertisementSupported bySpecial Report: Brazilian Grand PrixBy Brad SpurgeonWhatever may have happened over his 14 seasons in Formula One, the 34-year-old Brazilian driver Felipe Massa is returning to his home Grand Prix this weekend in possibly the best mind-set of his career. He is doing so in a car that, while it is a long shot, has an outside chance of taking him to his third victory in his home race, where he triumphed while driving for the Ferrari team in 2006 and 2008. That made Massa the first Brazilian driver to win Brazil’s Grand Prix since Ayrton Senna, in 1993. It also made him a perennial favorite of the home crowd.“It’s really an amazing feeling, to race at home and to use all of this energy from the people,” he said. “It works. You see it in football or whatever — that playing at home is always better.”Although he is the third-oldest driver in the series, behind the former world champions Kimi Raikkonen, 36, and Jenson Button, 35, he is only a few months older than the double world champion Fernando Alonso, who is also 34. He started racing in Formula One a year or two after those drivers, and although he was only 20 at the time, he might be defined as a late developer.During his first season, at Sauber in 2002, he was wild, with frequent accidents and spins. So the following season he was sent off to be the Ferrari team’s test driver, in order to gain experience and maturity, as he was under a long-term contract with the Italian team. In 2004, he returned to Sauber. His results at Sauber were patchy, but in 2005 he finished 2 points ahead of his teammate, Jacques Villeneuve, a former world champion.In 2006 he joined Ferrari as a full-time driver, becoming the teammate of another world champion, Michael Schumacher, who had seven drivers’ titles. Massa had two race victories that first year and he was a perfect second driver under Schumacher’s lead. But Massa was then suddenly thrown into the role of team leader when Schumacher announced his retirement for the following year. In 2007, the team hired Raikkonen, who promptly won the title in his first year with Ferrari — by a single point over Lewis Hamilton in the final race of the season, in Brazil. Just when it looked as if Massa was again going to have to play the second role, he had his finest year in the series in 2008. It was also the most emotional. Arriving at the Brazilian Grand Prix, the last race of the season, he had a chance to win the title — if he won the race and Hamilton finished no better than sixth. Massa fulfilled his side of the contract, taking his second victory in Brazil. At that moment, Hamilton was in sixth place. But at the last corner, in wet, slippery conditions, Hamilton passed the Toyota of Timo Glock to finish fifth, winning the drivers’ title by a single point over Massa. The Brazilian had been the virtual world champion for about 17 seconds.The celebration in Hamilton’s McLaren garage matched the previous celebration in Massa’s. The deflation was almost too much for the emotional Brazilian, who appeared crushed on the victory podium.Luca di Montezemolo, the Ferrari team director at the time, complimented Massa, noting how he had come into his own as a Grand Prix driver, “proving he is worthy indeed of the world title, but also for his maturity and sportsmanship off the track.” “He’s a great champion and a great man,” he added.The following season almost brought tragedy. At the Hungarian Grand Prix in August, Massa was struck in the head by a spring from the car of his fellow Brazilian Rubens Barrichello. Massa was lucky to have survived. Doctors placed a titanium plate in his skull to ensure that no future shock would lead to severe brain damage, and he sat out the rest of the season.He returned in 2010, however, to score second place at the Bahrain Grand Prix, in the first race. It looked at as if he was back to his winning ways. But it was his new Ferrari teammate, Alonso, who won that race, and over the next three seasons, opinions began to change again. Massa was overshadowed by Alonso, around whom Ferrari decided to build its hopes for a world champion.When his contract expired at the end of 2013, it looked as if Massa might be at the end of his career. He signed with what was then a weak Williams team, a move that did nothing to counter that view. But in 2014, with new rules for hybrid engines and with an entirely rebuilt management team, Williams was suddenly a contender again, and Massa found a second wind. In the past two seasons, he has finished on the podium several times, and scored pole position at the Austrian Grand Prix last year, his first since 2008. Most important, Massa has held his own against the young and highly rated Valtteri Bottas of Finland, who was rumored to be moving to Ferrari. Massa is currently sixth in the series, to Bottas’s fourth, but they are only 9 points apart.Perhaps having matured late, Massa has lasted longer. What is clear is that he has lost none of his love for racing. “The most important thing is competition, competing against the others, driving the car, adrenaline, the speed, competing against yourself,” he said. “This is where the passion is. This is why I race, this is what I love. And especially when you are successful by doing that, this is your gift. So I never lost that.”“This is what makes me happy to keep racing, to keep motivated, and to keep working hard — physically — this is what motivates me to carry on,” he added. Massa said he would continue racing until one of those aspects faded. His contract with Williams lasts for one more season, so next season will be key to determining his future. “I think I will stay in Formula One as long as I have a team that I am really happy to work with, like Williams,” he said. “When you love to work, and you feel important, it gives me more motivation to carry on,” he added. He may be the third-oldest driver in the series, but he clearly doesn’t sound like it. “The problem is that you stop in Formula One very young,” Massa said. “So I don’t think really that you lose your value as a racer. So maybe I will keep racing.”Advertisement