By THE NEW YORK TIMESNOV. 15, 2015
WENDELL SMALLWOOD The West Virginia junior running back gained 165 yards to lead the Mountaineers to a 38-20 win over visiting Texas.Smallwood’s 24 carries were a season high.“I thought I got the ball just enough,” Smallwood said. “I was getting a little winded. When I was winded, we passed the ball, and it was touchdowns both times.”NICK MULLENS The Southern Mississippi junior tied a single-game program record before the first half was over with five touchdown passes, and the Golden Eagles crushed host Rice, 65-10.Mullens finished 23 of 31 passing for 386 yards, with those five touchdowns and no interceptions. He gave way to the backup quarterback Tyler Matthews late in the third quarter.AdvertisementCHRISTIAN KIRK The Texas A&M freshman had 122 yards receiving in a 41-17 home win over Western Carolina. Kirk scored a touchdown to put the Aggies up late in the third quarter, then added another in the fourth.AdvertisementTEDDY VEAL The Tulane sophomore wide receiver finished with 123 receiving yards and a touchdown as the Green Wave notched their first road win by edging Army, 34-31.PATRICK MAHOMES The Texas Tech sophomore threw for 384 yards and three touchdowns as the host Red Raiders beat Kansas State, 59-44.Mahomes completed 33 of 42 passes and rushed for a touchdown.BRENT STOCKSTILL The Middle Tennessee freshman threw for 301 yards and two touchdowns as the Blue Raiders defeated host Florida Atlantic, 24-17.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.News and NotesORANGE HONOR FORMER STARS Syracuse University unveiled statues of the team greats Jim Brown, Ernie Davis and Floyd Little on Saturday.The statues are at the university’s new Plaza 44, named for the three players, who wore No. 44.A statue of the former coach Ben Schwartzwalder was also unveiled, next to the Ensley Athletic Center, the university’s new indoor training facility for football and lacrosse.LOUISIANA-MONROE COACH FIRED After a 59-21 home loss to Arkansas State, Louisiana-Monroe announced the firing of Coach Todd Berry, who had led the Warhawks since the 2010 season.The defensive line coach John Mumford will serve as the interim head coach for the rest of the season.Louisiana-Monroe is 1-9 over all and 0-6 in the Sun Belt Conference.Information from The Associated PressA version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page SP4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Day’s Best.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.