By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 14, 2015
Cory Schneider made 21 saves for his first shutout of the season, and Mike Cammalleri had a goal and two assists to lead the Devils to a 4-0 home victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins on Saturday night.“We’re starting to expect to play this way every game,” Schneider said. “This was an important game for everyone. It’s great when everyone gets involved. It’s a lot of fun.”David Schlemko, Bobby Farnham and Lee Stempniak also scored for the Devils, who have won four of five. Adam Henrique added two assists.The Devils (10-6-1) did not earn their 10th win last season until Dec. 4, when they beat Toronto to improve to 10-12-4. They look like a different team under the first-year coach John Hynes, and the players seem to be buying in to his system.Advertisement“We talk about our competitive level all the time,” Cammalleri said. “I think the results we’ve had yield a level of confidence. When we’re hustling like this, we’re able to accomplish a lot.”AdvertisementPittsburgh (10-7-0) lost for the second straight night after winning seven of its previous eight games. The Penguins held a team meeting after the loss.“We needed it to address why we played a game like that,” center Sidney Crosby said. “That’s really what you’re trying to get out of it. That’s pretty much the bottom line.”Schneider was tested only a handful of times while earning his 17th career shutout. He had a nice save with his blocking pad on a shot from Crosby, who has only two goals in 17 games.“I have to be patient with these guys,” Schneider said. “Making a save like that is a little more rewarding. I only had to make a handful of difficult ones, but that was one of them.”Schlemko scored 15 minutes 28 seconds into the first off a scramble, a play that was reviewed in Toronto. The Devils opened a 2-0 lead in the second when Cammalleri scored on a power play.Farnham, claimed off waivers by the Devils from Pittsburgh on Oct. 26, came out of the penalty box and was able to score right away in the opening stages of the third.“It’s always in your head when you’re coming out of the box that you want to make a play,” Farnham said. “You have to think defense first, but when you sense the play can give you the chance to take a risk, you do it.”AdvertisementJeff Zatkoff, making his third start of the season, had 33 saves for Pittsburgh.“He had to make save after save,” Crosby said. “That’s not the way we play. Tonight was a matter of work ethic. We didn’t deserve to win.”Stempniak closed the scoring late in the third period with his fourth goal. He also had an assist.BLACKHAWKS 4, BLUES 2 Patrick Kane scored a tiebreaking goal late in the second period to extend his points streak to 12 games and lead Chicago to a victory at St. Louis.Andrew Shaw, Trevor van Riemsdyk and Artem Anisimov also scored for Chicago, and Corey Crawford stopped 29 shots.STARS 3, WILD 2 John Klingberg scored 3:18 into overtime, and Dallas beat visiting Minnesota. Klingberg and Jamie Benn each had a goal and two assists for the Stars, who had all six shots on goal in overtime.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BRUINS 3, RED WINGS 1 Patrice Bergeron scored the first of three second-period goals that lifted Boston to a home win over Detroit.David Krejci and Torey Krug also scored for the Bruins, who posted just their second home win of the season.SHARKS 2, SABRES 1 Patrick Marleau scored off a rebound 2:59 into overtime, and San Jose won at Buffalo to end an eight-game skid against the Sabres. Ryan O’Reilly scored for Buffalo.PANTHERS 5, LIGHTNING 4 Brandon Pirri scored the lone goal of a shootout and had a goal on a penalty shot as visiting Florida beat Tampa Bay.The Panthers also got goals in regulation from Jussi Jokinen, Nick Bjugstad and Aaron Ekblad, who tied the score late in the third period.AdvertisementPREDATORS 7, JETS 0 Calle Jarnkrok scored twice, and Pekka Rinne made 20 saves to lead Nashville to a home win over Winnipeg.Craig Smith, Seth Jones, Mike Ribeiro, James Neal and Mattias Ekholm also scored. Rinne recorded his second shutout of the season.FLYERS 3, HURRICANES 2 Jakub Voracek scored 37 seconds into overtime, and Philadelphia rallied to win at Carolina. Luke Schenn and Wayne Simmonds also scored for the Flyers.MAPLE LEAFS 4, CANUCKS 2 James Reimer made 43 saves, and Toronto beat visiting Vancouver for its third straight victory.James van Riemsdyk, Pierre-Alexandre Parenteau, Shawn Matthias and Joffrey Lupul scored to help Toronto improve to 5-8-4. The Maple Leafs last won three straight last season, during a six-game streak in December.BLUE JACKETS 5, COYOTES 2 William Karlsson scored his first two goals of the season, and Columbus beat Arizona in a testy game.Boone Jenner had a goal and two assists, Ryan Johansen had a goal and an assist, and Brandon Saad also scored for the Blue Jackets, who earned their first home win of the season.AVALANCHE 6, CANADIENS 1 Nathan MacKinnon scored goals 13 seconds apart in Colorado’s three-goal first period as the Avalanche jumped on Mike Condon to win at Montreal. After Condon gave up four goals on 11 shots, Dustin Tokarski took over for the third period and stopped 11 of 13 shots.Mikhail Grigorenko had a goal and set up both of MacKinnon’s scores.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page SP6 of the New York edition with the headline: Boyle Lifts Rangers to Eighth Straight Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.