AdvertisementSupported byMissouri 20, B.Y.U. 16By Austin HugueletKANSAS CITY, Mo. — After a week of social turbulence and word of high-profile departures, University of Missouri football fans were happy to return to their weekend routine on Saturday afternoon.They packed the parking lot outside Arrowhead Stadium, about two hours from campus. They wore black and gold, hauled out their charcoal grills and flew their Southeastern Conference flags high. A week earlier, 30 black University of Missouri football players had said they would not play again unless the university system president, Timothy F. Wolfe, resigned or was removed from his position, bringing national notice to student protests against systemic racism on campus.Last Sunday, Coach Gary Pinkel posted a photo on Twitter of nearly all the team’s players standing together, with the caption “The Mizzou Family stands as one.” Wolfe and the university’s chancellor, R. Bowen Loftin, announced the next day that they were stepping down.On Friday, Pinkel, who has the most victories of any football coach in the program’s history, announced he had non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and would be retiring at the end of the season.But the team had ended its strike Monday afternoon, and despite campus turmoil and an ailing coach, Missouri had a game to play Saturday night.Jeff Zumsteg, a 53-year-old Missouri graduate, said he was proud that the team had come together in its strike but acknowledged that not all Missouri fans felt the same. Saturday’s game against Brigham Young offered an opportunity for Missouri fans to unite.“Today is a day for everyone to get back together, show we all still love Mizzou and show that we’re still here,” Zumsteg said before the Tigers earned a 20-16 victory.Davis Keleher and Jedeari Wilderness, 23-year-old Missouri fans from Moberly Area Community College, about 40 miles north of the Missouri campus in Columbia, said they had talked about the hunger strike by the Missouri graduate student Jonathan Butler and the changes it had forced on campus.“We had a long conversation in the car on the way over here about whether Wolfe should have left and the protests,” said Wilderness, who is black. “But here, it’s just like any other game, any other Saturday.”Josh Wagner, a 23-year-old Missouri student, said: “You’re back with your friends, you’re drinking, and you’re going to the football game. We’re back to good times.”Some fans mourned the impending departure of a respected coach in Pinkel, who guided a team that won four games in 2001 to a No. 1 ranking by 2007 and led the Tigers to two titles in the SEC’s Eastern Division, home to powers like Florida and Georgia.“It shocked me,” Zumsteg said. “It was terrible to hear he was sick. He’s been with us for so long and put us on the national stage.”Chad Fix, 44, seemed equally concerned with how Pinkel’s announcement would affect the Tigers on the field. He said he hoped the revelation would lend focus to a team bedeviled by a sputtering offense long before it was buffeted by campus events.“Midweek, I wasn’t sure how they were going to be able to get focused and play tonight,” he said. “But now, I would think the guys would want to come up big for Coach. If it was me, I would be trying to win out and get him to a bowl game in his last season.”With the victory, the Tigers moved to 5-5, needing a win to secure bowl eligibility.“We all had a sense that there’s been something wrong with this team this season,” said Richard Demarest, a season-ticket holder. “This has had to have been weighing on them.”The Tigers stayed in character through three quarters Saturday night, mustering 6 points on two field goals by Andrew Baggett, who has become the program’s career leading scorer in a season that has included a monthlong touchdown drought.But with 13 minutes left in the fourth quarter, J’Mon Moore caught a 4-yard touchdown pass from the freshman quarterback Drew Lock. A 4-point deficit became a 13-10 lead.Then linebacker Michael Scherer scooped up a fumble by B.Y.U. quarterback Tanner Mangum at the Cougars’ 16-yard line. A 23-yard-run by Lock set up a dive into the end zone for tailback Tyler Hunt. The Cougars clawed back with a touchdown of their own but missed the extra-point attempt. Each team had a quick possession, leaving Missouri with the ball with about four minutes left and the score at 20-16. The Tigers then ran out the clock.“It’s one of the great games I’ve been a part of,” Pinkel said.For George Penton, the father of the sophomore cornerback Aarion Penton, who is black, Pinkel has already provided a great last act.“What the players did, standing up for what they believe in, was incredible,” Penton said. “But what Coach did was history making. I’ve never seen a coach come out and stand behind his players on something this big. I was really proud of that.”Advertisement