AdvertisementSupported byRangers 2, Senators 1By The Associated PressOTTAWA, Ontario — Back home in Ottawa, Rangers defenseman Dan Boyle scored a shootout winner Saturday afternoon as the Rangers defeated the Senators, 2-1, extending their winning streak to eight games.“We’ve used Dan a couple of times before, and he’s always had some pretty good moves,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “Shootouts — who knows, eh? You throw guys over the boards, and it worked out for us tonight.”Eight of Ottawa’s 17 games have gone to overtime. The Senators are 3-3 in shootouts and 1-1 in games decided in the three-on-three overtime.“We hung with them for 65 minutes, and when it comes down to the skills competition, it’s tough to let a point get away,” Senators forward Bobby Ryan said.Chris Kreider scored the lone goal in regulation for the Rangers (13-2-2), who have earned a point in 12 straight games.Henrik Lundqvist stopped 22 shots to earn his 10th win of the season.Erik Karlsson, Ottawa’s captain, scored the only goal in support of goalie Craig Anderson, who made 33 saves.In overtime, Ottawa’s Mike Hoffman hit the post twice, and the Rangers’ Rick Nash hit the post as well.“Both teams weren’t afraid of losing, and both teams wanted to win,” Karlsson said. “There were quality scoring chances and two good goaltenders and a couple of posts, and we go to a shootout.”The Rangers outshot the Senators by 10-7 in the second period and nearly took the lead in its final seconds, but Anderson stopped a Mats Zuccarello shot to preserve a 1-1 tie.Kreider took exception to Zack Smith’s hit on Derek Stepan late in the period. Stepan was forced to go to the quiet room because he was struck in the head, but he returned and said after the game that he was fine. Stepan also said, however, that he was hoping the N.H.L. would review the hit.“I’m just happy I’m healthy,” he said. “I never saw him coming.”The teams exchanged power-play goals in the first period. Kreider opened the scoring by tipping a Kevin Hayes shot past Anderson at 2 minutes 31 seconds.Ottawa (8-5-4) tied the game four minutes later when Karlsson finished off a nice passing series to beat Lundqvist.“I thought it was a real good game, fast game,” Senators Coach Dave Cameron said. “We had a pretty good idea how they were going to play, and it was our challenge to match, and I felt we did a pretty good job.”Karlsson now has three goals in his last three games after going the first 14 without a goal.Advertisement