NOV. 14, 2015
Origin of the ‘Slippery Rock Mystique’ Dates to the 1930sTo the Sports Editor:Re “Slippery Rock’s Tie to Michigan Is in Name Only, Always Cheered,” Nov. 8: Marc Tracy reports that many Division I universities announce Division II Slippery Rock scores during their football games because that university has “an interesting name.”However, he appears to overlook a more intriguing angle to the story: the so-called “Slippery Rock mystique,” which was born in the 1930s when a sportswriter proclaimed tiny Slippery Rock to be the 1936 national champion — because it defeated Westminster, which beat West Virginia Wesleyan, which beat Duquesne, which beat Pitt, which beat Notre Dame, which beat Northwestern, which ultimately beat Minnesota. This coincided with a controversy regarding the selection of Minnesota as No. 1 in the final poll versus several other teams with one loss, including Northwestern.During my days at the University of Delaware, the Slippery Rock scores were always announced, although there was no conference connection or rivalry between the universities.EDWIN L. MONGAN III, HoustonAge Is Just a NumberTo the Sports Editor:Re “While Time Marches On, a Referee Jogs, Sprints or Dashes,” Nov. 8: According to aging-studies specialists, to age in place means that where your comfort level is and what promotes a sustainable existence is where the heart is. Joe Gaeta, an 88-year-old Police Athletic League referee from Queens, proves that age is just a number when the motivation is there. Nonetheless, he knows that staying active among young people as a mentoring arbiter inspires those he works for and with.AdvertisementI’m a 60-something baseball umpire who has served the Michigan High School Athletic Association for 28 years. After reading this piece about Mr. Gaeta, I’ll probably never again catch myself saying it’s time to quit. He is another example of what brings community, identity and stability to a region.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MARK A. SLEBODA, Redford Township, Mich.No Respect for ‘Leader’To the Sports Editor:Re “Hardy’s Charges Erased; Photos of Ex-Girlfriend’s Bruises Surface,” Nov. 7: Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, has called Greg Hardy a leader. People designated as such should be the ones to tell those who are behind them to “do as I do.” This should include being respectful of others, playing hard but fair, making your parents proud and myriad other positive actions. However, one more thing should be added if you play for the Cowboys: Hit women so hard that they bruise.AdvertisementHardy should not be in the N.F.L. Whatever settlement he reached with Nicole Holder should have two zeros added to it. Furthermore, Jones should be fined the maximum amount allowed by the league. The charge would be being a party to abusive behavior. It would also be wonderful if women boycotted every company that sponsors the team.PHILIP BARNETT, Scottsdale, Ariz.Wear PurpleTo the Sports Editor:Re “Domestic Violence a Recurring Quandary,” Nov. 11: October was Domestic Violence Awareness month. It would be welcome if N.F.L. teams would wear the color purple to acknowledge domestic violence as they have worn pink for breast cancer. What better way for young men and women to be told that beating up one’s partners is cowardly and unacceptable? One might be reminded that the day with the largest number of domestic violence attacks in the United States is Super Bowl Sunday.JOEL OHLGREN, Santa Barbara, Calif.A version of this letter appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page SP9 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Slippery Rock Mystique’ Dates to the 1930s.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.