AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — At the Faneuil Hall Marketplace in downtown Boston, outside Fenway Park and even on Martha’s Vineyard, seven miles off Cape Cod, stores for years routinely sold T-shirts that read, “I Hate Eli Manning.”On social media and fan-generated blogs devoted to the New England Patriots, any ranking of the most disliked Patriots opponents habitually lists Manning in the top three spots. Not surprisingly, the hundreds who eagerly comment on the rankings happily break down the depths of New England fans’ contempt for Manning. (They do not think much of his brother Peyton, either.)It all originates, obviously, with the Giants’ two upset victories over the Patriots in Super Bowl games after the 2007 and the 2011 regular seasons, when Eli Manning made pivotal passes to produce game-winning drives in the final minutes. From the perspective of many Patriots fans, only Manning and bad luck have stood in the way of six New England Super Bowl titles, instead of the four the Patriots have won.Or as one Patriots blog poster lamented, “Why did Archie and Olivia Manning have to have a third son?”Peyton and Eli have an older brother, Cooper.For the past several days, as the undefeated Patriots prepared to visit the 5-4 Giants in N.F.L. Week 10 at MetLife Stadium, this charged subject matter has been revisited anew, either as an opportunity to fete Manning’s peculiar mastery of a dynastic team or to pick at a raw nerve.It is not a topic of inconsequence to either side. The significance and value of Manning’s Super Bowl performances have hardly been lost on the Giants, who are clearly conscious of how the franchise’s legacy has been embellished by its two most recent Super Bowl victories. They are some of the most memorable games of the modern Super Bowl era, and without them, the Giants’ last Super Bowl victory would have come 25 years ago.On a vast wall directly outside the locker room at the Giants’ New Jersey training complex, there is a floor-to-ceiling, mural-like montage of photographs depicting moments of Giants glory. In the collection of pictures, almost half of them — about five — show Giants playing in one of the two Super Bowl games against New England.The biggest photo displayed by far is a now well-recognized image of Manning struggling to free himself as his jersey is being stretched and tugged from behind by a Patriots defender. It is the moment just before Manning breaks free and lofts the football to Dave Tyree.No play underscores the Manning-Patriots enmity like Tyree’s “helmet catch” in the Giants’ Super Bowl XLII victory. And no sequence may be more cherished by 21st-century Giants fans.Manning walks by the mural with his likeness dozens of times every week — on the way to practice, to the cafeteria or to team meeting rooms — but last week, he refused to acknowledge his place at the center of Patriots fans’ angst or Giants fans’ merriment.He has done this for years. Once asked if he visited any of New England’s many vacation spots, Manning replied, “Not going there.”It was not clear whether he meant he was not going to New England or not going to answer a question about vacationing in New England. But that is Manning’s way as well.The best answer Manning gave to reporters last week came after he was told that since the Patriots’ loss in Super Bowl XLII, they have defeated every N.F.L. team except one: the Giants.Manning shrugged and said, “We see them every four years and just kind of caught them on the right nights, I guess.”He added, “Hopefully, we can play well and catch them on a good night again.”Interestingly, Manning has played well but not spectacularly in his four career matchups against the Patriots. He has completed 62.8 percent of his 145 passes for 1,052 yards, nine touchdowns and three interceptions. The Giants lost the first of those four games, at home to the Patriots at the end of the 2007 season, 38-35. The Giants’ winning streak is three games since, including a 24-20 victory in the 2011 regular season, when Manning capped a late rally with a touchdown pass in the final 15 seconds.On Wednesday, Manning was asked for his secret against the Patriots. Why did he seem to have an advantage? The response was again classic Manning — a reply that may have contained an ambiguous hint of truth but not enough opinion to be controversial.“We’ve played some close games,” he said. “So we’ve had the opportunity to get the ball back with just enough time to go get a score. We just found a way to pull them out.”Left unsaid was Manning’s precision in the most pressure-filled moments of the only two Super Bowl games in which he has played.A play-by-play examination of what separates those legacy-making drives from other Manning performances does not reveal much. He avoids sacks and throws to his tight ends often. There is one abnormality: Manning has gotten free for the occasional productive scramble.Otherwise, a pattern is hard to discern. Also, keep in mind that game-winning drives in the fourth quarter are not rare for Manning. He has led roughly 35 in his career.As for the Patriots’ comeback wizard, the larger-than-life Tom Brady, in the past week he was doing his best Eli Manning impersonation — without the quizzical facial expressions. Brady, who has completed 64.4 percent of his passes for 1,240 yards, seven touchdowns and three interceptions in the past four games against the Giants, would not flinch when the subject was his heartbreaking Super Bowl losses to the Giants.At one point, Brady was asked if “the sight of the New York Giants disgusts you because of the history.”Brady answered, “They’re a good team.”He continued: “We’ve always had very, very close games against them, even when we’ve won. We just haven’t won as many of them as I would have liked to have won.”Perhaps every Super Bowl most valuable player has an advanced degree in talking without saying anything.There was one player inside the Giants’ locker room who understood what it was like to have a foot in each world of the latest Giants-Patriots matchup. Zak DeOssie, the veteran long snapper, grew up in Massachusetts and was a Patriots ball boy in high school because his father, Steve, a former Giant, finished his N.F.L. career as a Patriot.DeOssie, in his ninth year with the Giants, returns to Massachusetts frequently, where he is surrounded by Patriots fans. DeOssie said he went out of his way to acknowledge the Patriots’ championships. But do the two Super Bowls won this century by his Giants come up?“It’s the team that we will not speak of when I go home,” DeOssie said of his encounters with Patriots fans. “It’s sort of that type of mentality.”Advertisement