AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanDuring spring training in 2013, when a Rawlings representative delivered two new gloves to Kansas City Royals first baseman Eric Hosmer, he tried on one of them and immediately smiled, feeling his fingers against the leather. “This one’s a pearl,” Hosmer said.Hosmer is particular about his gloves. He likes them really, really broken in — so that even if he flinches, the glove snaps shut. When he gets a new glove, he continually punches the sole to soften the leather. When he stands in the field, it can look as if he were angry at the glove. Still, it took a while for the pearl that Hosmer found — a Prodct model, to be exact — to meet his lofty standards. After half a season, Hosmer had it broken in just right, and now he has used the glove for the last two and a half years. He had a trainer re-string it about six times a season so it would not fall apart. The glove’s blue color faded so much that during the 2015 World Series, it almost matched the Royals’ powder blue uniforms.“Anything else I put my hand in doesn’t feel the same,” Hosmer said Friday before accepting the third consecutive Rawlings Gold Glove award he has won wearing that glove.No other individual award may capture the spirit of the Royals’ ascent as much as that one. The Royals won the 2014 American League pennant and the 2015 World Series in five games over the Mets thanks to superior pitching, timely hitting and consistently solid defense.This is the third consecutive year that three Royals won Gold Gloves. This year’s recipients are Hosmer, catcher Salvador Perez and shortstop Alcides Escobar. When Escobar found out that he had won his first Gold Glove, he told his teammates, “I’m so happy, I can die tomorrow!”Perez, who like Hosmer won for a third consecutive year, said: “When you win a Gold Glove, you’re like, O.K., I’m doing my job. I take it personally. I want to be one of these guys who wins 10, 12, 13 — whatever God sends me. You’ve just got to play hard.”The World Series offered the Royals a stage to show the rest of baseball the importance of defense, although it helped that the Mets offered a stark contrast. A miscommunication by two Mets outfielders led to an inside-the-park home run on the Mets’ first pitch of the Series. An error by Daniel Murphy keyed the Royals’ comeback in Game 4 and destroyed the Mets’ confidence. The defining play of the Series, in the Game 5 clincher, came on two defensive mistakes by the Mets.Hosmer took a daring chance and broke for home on a groundout to third base. He scored because David Wright made a slow, looping throw to first base and Lucas Duda made a wild throw home. The Royals revealed after the game that their scouting reports had informed Hosmer that Wright and Duda were suspect defenders.On Friday Perez — who also won the Series’ Most Valuable Player Award, in part for his defense — had his hair slicked up and was wearing a suit a few hours before the Gold Glove awards ceremony at the Plaza Hotel. He was accompanied by his catching coach, Pedro Grifol. The two were looking forward to an elegant dinner and performances by George Lopez, the Roots and Don Henley. To make the night even more special, Perez would be surrounded by Hall of Famers.At his first Gold Glove ceremony, Perez met Johnny Bench, one of his heroes. They shook hands, and Bench remarked that he had finally met someone whose hand fit his. They talked about how, during his playing career, Bench could hold seven baseballs in one hand. “Seven balls — that’s crazy!” Perez said. “I can only do five.”Walking around New York now, two years later, strangers recognized Perez on the streets. Mets fans congratulated him and Hosmer for their victory and told them how much they respected the way the Royals played. Wherever Hosmer goes, people ask about his dash home, the scouting report, and his thought process in that moment.“Everything’s changed,” Perez said. “I’ve got a lot more followers on my Instagram, more followers on my Twitter. I went on Jimmy Fallon’s TV show. It’s amazing.”For all the accolades the Royals have received, the three Royals at the ceremony spoke about the Gold Glove as if it were the most important award they had ever won. Perez planned to put his in a safe place in his trophy room. (“Nobody touches nothing in there,” he said. “Nobody.”) Escobar looked thrilled when a Rawlings representative promised to make a replica award for his infant son. Hosmer said he would display his award in his home bar, in his “man cave.”His glove may soon join his memorabilia collection there, too. “It’s been resewn multiple times by the trainers,” Hosmer said, sounding a bit disappointed. “The leather is actually just ripping apart on it, so this will be the last year. If it’s not good for game action, it’s going to go in the Hosmer Hall of Fame after this one.”Advertisement