AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott CacciolaKevin Love went nearly four months without shooting a basketball after he dislocated his left shoulder in a playoff game against the Boston Celtics last April. He spent much of his rehabilitation at altitude in Utah, where he focused on his conditioning. By early September, he was ready to return to the court.So for 10 days leading into training camp with the Cleveland Cavaliers, Love worked one-on-one with Rob McClanaghan, one of his longtime trainers, at a private gymnasium in Los Angeles. Each session lasted about 90 minutes, during which Love was capable of hoisting about 500 shots.The key, though, was fatigue. Love aimed for what McClanaghan described as “high-intensity game reps.”“He really wanted to go as hard as we could,” McClanaghan said in a telephone interview, “so that every time he shot, he was tired.”McClanaghan added: “It wasn’t like spot shooting. It was all designed to help him regain his timing, his rhythm and his conditioning.”Love has since waded into his second season with the Cavaliers, and it is an experiment that continues to captivate the N.B.A. A three-time All-Star in his former life with the Minnesota Timberwolves, Love is now a member of the supporting cast in the daily drama that stars LeBron James. Love said he was at peace with his circumstances. After all, he chose to be here.“Everyone’s a lot more comfortable, from the coaching staff all the way down to every player,” Love said Friday before the Cavaliers’ 90-84 victory over the Knicks. “We know what we want to get done. We’ve done a very good job of sticking to our game plan.”With their win, the Cavaliers improved to 8-1. Love had a quiet night: 7 points, 11 rebounds, 2 assists. He took 10 shots to James’s 21. Entering the Cavaliers’ game Saturday night against the Milwaukee Bucks, Love was shooting just 39.1 percent for the season. But coming off an injury, he probably knew he would need to exercise patience.“I’ve said it since training camp,” Love said. “It’s going to take me a little while, whether that’s another six games, 12 games — whatever it is — to find my rhythm.”It has been a long process for Love, who struggled to adapt to his new environs last season. He averaged 16.4 points, 9.7 rebounds and 2.2 assists — decent numbers, to be sure, but far less impressive than those he had produced in Minnesota, where he averaged 26.1 points, 12.5 rebounds and 4.4 assists in his final season there. Then again, the Timberwolves did not win many games.In Cleveland, Love was no longer the focal point of the offense. In fact, he was often the third option behind James and Kyrie Irving. His relationship with James, who had actively recruited Love, seemed to sour. At one point, James took to social media to post semicryptic messages about the importance of fitting in. Love, it appeared, was not.His play gradually improved over the second half of the season. Through the first three games of the Cavaliers’ first-round playoff series with the Celtics, Love averaged 18.3 points and nine rebounds. But in Game 4, he dislocated his shoulder when he was aggressively fouled by Kelly Olynyk, whom the N.B.A. later suspended for a game. Love’s season was finished.Due for free agency after he watched from the bench as the Cavaliers fell to the Golden State Warriors in the finals, Love quickly (and perhaps surprisingly) re-signed with Cleveland for five years and about $110 million not long after meeting with James in Los Angeles. In a brief post on The Players’ Tribune, Love wrote: “We’re all on the same page and we’re all in. We have unfinished business and now it’s time to get back to work.”McClanaghan, his trainer, said Love had approached his off-season with great energy.“He’s always dialed in,” McClanaghan said, “but he took it to another level this summer.”Some of the results were clear: Love appeared slimmer. He arrived for training camp in the best shape of his career, Coach David Blatt said.“He came back with a great sense of purpose and a great passion about what he’s doing,” Blatt said, “and a really good feeling for who he is inside this team. And I think LeBron picks up on that and gives it back to him as a result.”In October, James told reporters that Love would be the team’s “main focus” this season and that he would be used “however he wants to be used.” James seems to operate as the team’s resident lay psychologist, and Blatt acknowledged that James wanted to build Love’s confidence — by praising him, sure, but mostly by giving him more responsibilities.“LeBron understands that this is a long season,” Blatt said, “and the more he empowers those around him, the better it’s going to be down the line.”James had to play without the injured Love and Irving in the late stages of last season’s playoffs, and the entire season took an enormous physical toll on him. He does not seem to want to take on that sort of project again this season. It behooves him to let others share the burden.In theory, then, it makes a lot of sense for James to make sure that Love is as involved as possible, especially as Irving continues to recover from his knee injury. Sure enough, entering Saturday’s game, Love was taking more shots per game (14.8) than he did last season (12.7). In practice, though, it does not always work out that way. In the fourth quarter against the Knicks, Love reverted to a more familiar role as he watched James take over. James sank shot after shot in a tightly contested game. What mattered, Love said, was that the Cavaliers won.“He’s done that his whole career,” Love said.Advertisement