By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYNOV. 14, 2015
Jim Courier, a former No. 1, said a tennis player never forgets a first ranking point.“That’s like getting your first car,” he added.Though generally true, that rule turns out to have exceptions. Ask the eight players who have qualified for this week’s ATP World Tour Finals in London where their climb up the computer rankings began, and all but one — Tomas Berdych — can immediately cite the time and place.“I had to look it up, because my memory was not really clear about it,” Berdych said. “But, yes, it was a Futures tournament in Czech Republic, where I beat a Czech player, Radovan Svetlik.”That was in November 2001, indoors in Plzen, when Berdych was only 16. Although he lost in the next round to Martin Stepanek, he still earned a precious ranking point, which today remains the reward for winning the first round in an event on the Futures circuit, the bottom rung in the professional game.AdvertisementSixteen is a telltale age for world-class tennis talent. Novak Djokovic, Roger Federer, Andy Murray, Kei Nishikori and Stan Wawrinka, who have all qualified for London, won their first point at 16.AdvertisementRafael Nadal, the most precocious player of this remarkable generation, did it at 15. Nadal’s Spanish compatriot David Ferrer, a comparative late bloomer, won his first point at 18.Nishikori is the only man among the elite eight who secured his first point with a defeat. After getting a wild card into a Challenger event in Kyoto, Japan, in March 2006, he was pounded, 6-1, 6-2, by the Australian Robert Smeets, then ranked 267th. But in that era, just playing in the first round of a Challenger — the next tier up from Futures — guaranteed you a point. That loophole was eliminated the following year.”A very big point,” Nishikori said.It was big for the same reason it is today: Even a single point all but guarantees a player a spot in the qualifying tournament at any Futures event, which provides the certainty that you will not travel halfway around the world without getting a match. Two weeks after Kyoto, Nishikori reached the semifinals of a Futures event in Cancún, Mexico, before — in an unfortunate foreshadowing of Nishikori’s injury-filled career — having to retire in the middle of the match.It also seems fitting, in view of Djokovic’s current domination of the circuit, that he is the only one of the top eight who secured his first point in a tournament that he went on to win.It came in July 2003 at a Futures event in Belgrade, Serbia. En route, he beat, in order, Darko Madjarovski, Daniel Sebescen, Goran Tosic, Jaroslav Pospisil and Cesar Ferrer-Victoria, none of whom were then, or later, a household name. Not that Djokovic minded.“Making the first point from the same tournament which was my first title in the professional tour was quite incredible,” Djokovic said. “And winning in front of my entire family in my town was very special. It was a good start of a nice professional career.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Later that month, Murray, just one week older than Djokovic, secured his first points at a Challenger tournament on grass in Manchester, England.Advertisement“That week, I didn’t have a coach with me,” Murray said. “Just my dad, who was feeding me balls before the match from a plastic shopping bag, because I didn’t know any of the other players. And I was too shy to ask them to practice with me or warm up with me.”They would soon find out more about Murray. In the first round, he upset Wesley Moodie of South Africa, 6-4, 6-1, a coup given that Moodie was ranked 117th and was a fine grass-court player. Murray then beat another South African veteran, Neville Godwin, in the second round. Godwin now coaches the 12th-ranked Kevin Anderson.“During the match, he was talking to me at the change of ends and saying stuff to me across the net, trying to get in my head,” Murray said of Godwin. ”So that was a good learning experience for me to go through that at a young age.”Murray then lost in the quarterfinals to Luke Bourgeois, an Australian who paid a price for the victory.“On the match point, he served, and I missed the return, and he injured his knee,” Murray said. “He had to withdraw the next day.”Federer and Wawrinka won their first points in Switzerland at Satellite events, which were like circuits unto themselves, with three preliminary tournaments leading to a final tournament. The points were awarded only when the whole circuit was done.Federer ended up with 12 points — losing to his good friend Yves Allegro in the quarterfinals of the final event of the Satellite, and making his rankings debut on Sept. 22, 1997.“It’s like a milestone,” Federer said. “Like top 100, top 10, No. 1 in the world. It’s one of those big things you look forward to.”AdvertisementNadal appeared on the computer four years and two days after Federer, winning his first points in Seville, Spain, in September 2001. They came in a Challenger, where, like Nishikori, he had a wild card and was guaranteed a point, win or lose. He won, beating his fellow Spaniard Israel Matos Gil, 6-4, 6-4, before losing to Stefano Galvini of Italy.Nadal remembers it well, but the more vivid memory is what happened a week earlier, when he played his first pro tournament and lost to another Spaniard, the 731st-ranked Guillermo Platel, in three sets in the first round of a Futures in Madrid.“I lost, I think, with three match points, and that was very tough,” he said. “But what made it a particularly tragic day came after, when just in the moment I left the court after losing my first point, there was the news about the twin towers. It was a day that was impossible to forget for humanity in general.”A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page SP7 of the New York edition with the headline: One Small Rankings Point Feels Like a Giant Leap, When It Is the First .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.