By CHRISTOPHER CLAREYNOV. 14, 2015
BIRMINGHAM, Ala. —  The crowd was tiny, but the emotions were quite the contrary. As Korey Lovett finished off his comeback victory in the first round of the Player’s Choice Open here this month, one of his coaches at the University of Alabama, Ryler DeHeart, rushed to congratulate Lovett’s father.“First point!” DeHeart said.The eight singles players in London for the ATP World Tour Finals, which begin Sunday, have thousands of rankings points: more than 15,000 in the particularly acquisitive case of No. 1 Novak Djokovic.But down on the desert floor of men’s professional tennis, players worldwide are scrapping for just 1 point.The chase takes place far from the Grand Slam hubbub in modest places like Birmingham’s Highland Park Racquet Club, a public tennis site with 10 courts, holes in some of its windscreens and a few missing bricks in its stadium court’s walls.AdvertisementThe bricks were not all that was missing at the tournament. So were the fans, even if this $10,000 event — part of the Futures circuit, the lowest level that awards ATP ranking points — is the only men’s professional tennis tournament staged annually in Alabama.Advertisement“You have to understand what you are looking at, and unless you are a tennis purist and actually recognize what you are seeing as very high level, you don’t think it’s worth going to watch,” said Jack Standifer, the tournament director. “It would also help to have your city behind the event. We don’t get much help from the city of Birmingham.”Watching the early rounds was like watching a dress rehearsal. All the elements were there — the talent, the intensity, the cries of exultation and frustration — except for the public, save a few college coaches, officials and family members. In general, the loudest noise was the rumble of the club generator.“When you come out here, it’s like you’re all alone on an island, and no one cares if you win or lose,” said Jean-Yves Aubone, a 27-year-old American veteran of the Futures circuit. “It’s just a running joke that no one cares about us. We’re used to it, and we’ll laugh about it.”The silence is all the more jarring for the level of skill.“We’re a long way from London, and there are so many levels in tennis, but these guys can play,” said DeHeart, a 31-year-old who got a brief taste of the big time when he qualified for the 2008 United States Open and lost in the first round to Rafael Nadal.The 32 men in the Player’s Choice Open included Bastian Trinker, an Austrian ranked 287th, and eight players with no ATP singles ranking at all.Those eight all had the opportunity to play for a point: the reward for winning the first round in one of the hundreds of Futures events staged worldwide and sanctioned by the International Tennis Federation.For many, that point is the symbol that they are genuine touring professionals. The week of Birmingham, there were 2,252 players with ATP rankings; 497 of them had only 1 point.Advertisement“For a lot of guys, it’s a milestone,” said David Littlefield, the tournament supervisor in Birmingham, who has long worked at the Futures level. “Sometimes I’m aware of it, and I’ll congratulate them, and there’s a big smile on their face like, ‘The monkey is finally off my back.’ Sometimes they continue on week after week, and they never get a point. After a while they will finally disappear and maybe go get a teaching job at a nice club, and if they’ve got a college degree, maybe fall back on their college degree. But eventually they give it up.”John Valenti, a well-known American figure on the circuit nicknamed Johnny Blaze who traveled in a converted school bus and strung rackets to supplement his income, chased a point for many years and never got one in singles.“I had a friend who traveled to Egypt right after the civil war thing, which is very dangerous for a guy to do, and he was just trying to get a point,” said Patrick Daciek, a 25-year-old American ranked 1,196th. “He went to Africa, Asia, all over the place. He didn’t get it, and he ran out of money.”That is a frequent lament at this level, even if one does not opt for long-haul travel. First-round losers in Birmingham earned $104; second-round losers, $172.Evan King, a former University of Michigan star who eventually won the tournament, earned just $1,440. Contrast that with this year’s U.S. Open, where first-round losers got $39,500 and second-round losers $68,600.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Nobody is playing Futures for money; you could win every Future and have a loss,” said Daciek, who is relying on his savings and the largess of his father, who is paying for his gas.Daciek tries to stay with host families to save on hotel bills. Even so, he has spent nights sleeping in his car.“That was not the best,” he said. “I’ve known a lot of really good college players who had the potential to maybe make that top 100-level who didn’t even give it a chance because they were like: ‘You know what? Even if I do everything right and play great, I’m at least two years in Futures. I’m losing 50 grand.’ And that’s a modest estimate.”AdvertisementPrize money is set to rise at the Futures level after years of stagnation, but Daciek doubts the modest increases will make a major difference.The financial pressures have raised concerns about match fixing. Several players at the Futures level, largely based in Europe, have been sanctioned by the Tennis Integrity Unit.Aubone said he had never been approached and had no evidence of anyone else being approached.“I have no proof that anything is going on, but I just think there is way too much talk about it,” he said. “I’ve received hate messages, which I imagine were from bettors, because I have no idea who they are, and they are pretty upset I lost a match.”Aubone said he could understand low-level players’ temptation.“I mean I’ve thought about: What if I was in that position? What if I was approached?” he said. “Someone said: ‘Here’s 100 grand. One match or not even one match. One set. You can still win the match.’ My year is set; two years if I want to continue traveling this way. You’d be an idiot to not at least think about it. But you’d be more of an idiot to take that route.”A former Florida State player, Aubone said he gave up a nascent finance career at Morgan Stanley in 2012 to return to the pro tour. He is now ranked 570th. He spends an estimated $35,000 a year on tennis and travel expenses.“My bosses thought I was crazy,” he said. “Obviously I love tennis, but for me it’s just for the possibility of playing in the U.S. Open again. In 2008, I got a wild card from the U.S.T.A. and was fortunate to win a round in men’s qualifying, and that feeling, that atmosphere, being around everybody there was priceless, uplifting, just energy.”Of the eight men playing for a first point in Birmingham, only two succeeded: Lovett, a sophomore at Alabama with a bolo whip of a forehand and a self-critical streak; and Ryan Lipman, a former Vanderbilt star who is coming back after two hip operations and wears long compression tights on court to help avoid further injuries.For Lovett, 19, it was the first point of his career after he failed in two previous attempts.“The point was the ultimate goal,” he said. “A couple years back here, I was up a break in the third set, kind of similar to today, and didn’t pull it through.”AdvertisementFor Lipman, 25, it was the second time he had won a point.“The first time I got one was three summers ago in Illinois at a Futures, but then I went back to college and the point went off the computer after a year,” said Lipman, stretching his legs in the twilight. “This point means a lot more because I’ve been hurt for the last year and a half. I didn’t know if I’d get back to this level again.”It was no coincidence that the only two unranked men who won a round in Birmingham received wild cards. Others had to endure the grind of qualifying, which meant surviving a 128-man tournament. Just to reach the main draw required a player to win four rounds. Qualifying in Birmingham was played without chair umpires, so players called their own lines and updated their own scoreboards courtside, flipping the numbers on changeovers.Even in the early rounds of the main draw, the tournament made do with no linespeople because the clay-court surface made it possible to check marks. Players picked up their own balls and kept their towels clear of the gritty clay by sticking them through the holes in the chain-link fences.In some cases, they used their own towels. To use a club towel, the tournament required a player to leave a photo ID.“I learned long ago, bring your own,” said Aubone, a blue towel around his neck. “I played and showered with this one. They are counting pennies, too. Everyone is trying to squeeze every dollar here, and sometimes it comes at the expense of the players.”Above all, in surprisingly tranquil spots like the Highland Park Racquet Club, players are trying to squeeze every point out of the experience.Sometimes just one will do.“It’s good to be in the system, yes, sir,” Lovett said of the ATP rankings shortly before losing in the second round.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Players on Fringes of Tennis Chase a Status Symbol to Cherish .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.