AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressROME — The Italian swimmer Gregorio Paltrinieri won’t be surprised again by China’s Sun Yang.Paltrinieri recovered from his initial shock over his Chinese rival’s last-minute no-show to win the longest race in the pool at this year’s world championships.For next year’s Rio de Janeiro Olympics, Paltrinieri is already considering the possibility that Sun won’t enter the 1,500-meter freestyle at all.“It would be great if for once I could really race him stroke for stroke,” Paltrinieri said recently. “I’m not afraid of a showdown with him. In fact, I would relish that.“But I’ve also got to realize that he might not enter. I’ve got to keep the option open in my mind that if he doesn’t race, I’m going to be the favorite in an Olympic final and all eyes are going to be on me just like everyone was watching Sun Yang before.”At the worlds in Kazan, Russia, in August, Sun created chaos in the ready room when he failed to show up for the final of an event that he had dominated for five years.Sun attributed the no-show to a heart problem, but he also got into an altercation with a Brazilian swimmer in the warm-up pool on the day of the final.There were already questions over Sun’s form since had he served a three-month doping suspension last year for a banned stimulant. And he didn’t dominate as usual in the 800 freestyle, coming from behind over the last two laps to narrowly edge Paltrinieri for gold.“It could have been that he was ill,” Paltrinieri said, referring to Sun. “I’m not doubting that. But he was definitely tense and nervous.“I had finished this close to him in the 800,” he added, holding his hands less than a yard apart. “And in the 1,500 heats, I had beat him by a lot.”Since neither Sun nor the Chinese team told organizers that he wasn’t racing, his lane remained empty for the final.“I still don’t understand what happened and I don’t think we ever will,” said Stefano Morini, Paltrinieri’s coach. Paltrinieri, 21, is one of Italy’s biggest medal hopefuls for Rio.Since the 800 is not an Olympic event for men, the 1,500 will be Paltrinieri’s only race in Rio. It will be his second Olympics; he finished fifth in the 1,500 at the 2012 London Games.Paltrinieri’s grueling workout regimen consists of nine to 11 miles of swimming per day. His training group includes another medal hopeful, Gabriele Detti, who missed the worlds with an infection.It’s easy to spot Paltrinieri, though, because he’s the one with the frenetic stroke style.In an Olympic-size 50-meter pool, Paltrinieri often requires more than 40 strokes per lap. To an untrained eye, that might appear like a big waste of energy compared with Sun’s more fluid and long strokes, which usually total less than 30 per lap.But the much smaller Paltrinieri is able to produce speed by rapidly rotating the trunk of his body, much the way the American standout Katie Ledecky has come to dominate the women’s events in freestyle.“It’s like a surfer who’s always on top of the wave,” Paltrinieri said.Another comparison could be made to the way the Tour de France winner Chris Froome pedals more rapidly up mountains than traditional climbers.“Everyone has their own style,” Paltrinieri said. “Mine is an extreme one and so is Froome’s. But they’re effective.“The more you swim above the water, the faster you go. It’s like when you’re on a motorboat bouncing up and down.”Still, Morini is working on lengthening Paltrinieri’s strokes, and they have plenty of time to discuss their plans, since both coach and athlete sleep at the Italian federation’s training facility in Ostia, the Roman seaside, from Monday to Friday.On the weekends, Paltrinieri usually goes home to Carpi, also the hometown of Dorando Pietri, who was denied victory in the marathon at the 1908 London Games because officials helped him up when he collapsed just before the finish.A century later, a statue of Pietri was erected in Carpi.Depending on how things go for Paltrinieri in Rio, another statue might be in order — whether or not Sun races.Advertisement