AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy Michael PowellCOLUMBIA, Mo. — Coaching at the high altitude of Division I college football is only partly about football. It requires a deep hike into regions controlled by state politicians and high-rolling boosters and alumni, not to mention an occasional grapple with society’s most intractable problems.In this world, the University of Missouri’s football coach, Gary Pinkel, has taken on the appearance of an accidental revolutionary.After a prolonged student campaign to force the resignation of the president of the university system, Mr. Pinkel’s football players made it happen in a matter of hours by threatening to boycott their next game. Mr. Pinkel’s Twitter account sent out a photo showing his team, black and white, arms locked, with these words: “The Mizzou Family stands as one. We are united. We are behind our players.”It landed like a notice of dismissal for the president, Timothy M. Wolfe. The Board of Curators ousted Mr. Wolfe and the chancellor the next day.When you look at Mr. Pinkel, with that perpetually furrowed brow, and listen to his news conferences, which are exercises in the deeply taciturn, the temptation is to turn him into a Clint Eastwood reverie in mid-Missouri: a plain-spoken coach from Akron, Ohio, talking common sense to the stuffed shirts.Football at this level rarely is so straightforward.This is the same coach, remember, who handled the disclosure from one of his star players a couple of years ago that he was gay. That player, Michael Sam, would become the first publicly gay N.F.L. player. Mr. Pinkel successfully navigated that, too.“He told me, ‘I believe in Michael and I support him,’ ” recalled Struby Struble, former coordinator of the LGBTQ Resource Center here. “He was honest and genuine and respected our activist knowledge and didn’t pretend he was other than a football coach.”Mr. Pinkel announced Friday that he had non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, a cancer of the blood, and would resign after the season. More than 20 of his former Missouri players are in the N.F.L., and some speak of him as almost a father figure. “He’s backed us in all situations,” said Shane Ray, a linebacker now with the Denver Broncos.He also is the highest-paid public employee in Missouri; a shrewd negotiator, he receives an annual salary of more than $4 million. He helped orchestrate the university’s entry in 2012 into the Southeastern Conference, the most powerful and wealthiest college football conference in the nation.Refusing to stand by his players would have been unwise.“He didn’t have any choice,” said Lorenzo Williams, a former defensive tackle and team captain and a great admirer of Mr. Pinkel’s. “If black players aren’t comfortable here, he’s basically standing against them. How many black recruits is he going to attract?”Mr. Pinkel’s seeming endorsement of the protests played less well with some alumni and supporters. Had the Tigers canceled their game Saturday night in Kansas City, Mo., the university would have had to pay $1 million to its opponent, Brigham Young.By early evening Friday, a couple of hours after the coach announced his coming resignation, Vice Chancellor Thomas S. Hiles sent out an email in hopes of mollifying alumni.“We have heard from many of you, across the spectrum of viewpoints,” he said. “We want to acknowledge your concerns, expressions of support and anger.”There is the never incidental question of the team’s won-loss record. After a string of successful seasons, and 10 bowl games in 14 years, the Tigers were 4-5 entering the Brigham Young game.Mr. Pinkel did not help himself last week by conveying a visible discomfort with his king-toppling of the university president. On a sports-radio show last week, he backpedaled.Why did he send out the tweet on Sunday expressing solidarity not just with the players but with the protesting student group?That, he replied, was a mistake.“I have somebody who tweets for me a lot to get info out, and that person should not have put that hashtag on,” he said.What’s your view on the resignation of the president and chancellor?“That is something the university systems did,” he said. “That was secondary to me supporting my players.”Did these administrators become collateral damage?“You can describe it any way you want to do it.”Suddenly, it was difficult to discern if Mr. Pinkel was a coach with a progressive social conscience, or simply a coach happy that the game was back on.Mr. Pinkel enrolled at Kent State the year after the National Guard shot and killed four antiwar protesters. The scar was primal.“I was always a G.I. Joe, Mr. U.S.A. guy,” Mr. Pinkel told The St. Louis Post-Dispatch in 2010. “But I was less naïve after the Vietnam War about trusting your government about everything.”He played tight end on a Kent State team that included linebacker Jack Lambert, who became a star with the Pittsburgh Steelers, and safety Nick Saban, now the University of Alabama coach. Mr. Pinkel later coached at the University of Toledo.Mike Alden was the athletic director at Missouri in 2001, in the process of building the program into a $100 million behemoth, when he went looking for a smart, analytic coach who understood that for a key part of the university’s constituency, “Missouri always would be Missour-ah.”“You get what you see in Pinkel,” Mr. Alden told me. “He’s all about his kids.”The Mr. Pinkel who arrived in Columbia, a city of 116,000 about midway between St. Louis and Kansas City, was an old-fashioned Lords of Discipline coach. He was stoic, tight-lipped and sometimes condescending.One of his players, Aaron O’Neal, fell to the ground during a summer practice in 2005. He had sickle cell anemia, and the assistants who ran the practice were tough-guy classics. Faint? Tell the kid to get to his feet. Mr. O’Neal died.The university settled in 2009 with his family, paying out $2 million and acknowledging no guilt. Mr. Pinkel, by many accounts, had already become a different man. For years, he wore a bracelet celebrating Mr. O’Neal. He began to talk to his players and invite them to his home to watch games.Mr. Williams, the former defensive tackle, was on that team.“When I got to Missouri, he was a dictator,” Williams said of Mr. Pinkel. “You’d walk by him in the hall, and he wouldn’t say a thing.”Then he changed.“We went from doing what he said because we had no choice to doing it because we didn’t want to let him down,” Mr. Williams said.Mr. Pinkel is hardly a New Age fellow. One of his assistants, Dave Steckel, now the head coach at Missouri State, told me about the tunnel vision of the coaching obsessives. Once, while he and Mr. Pinkel reviewed plays, they overheard people talking about the shutdown of the federal government. The coaches turned around and asked: What are you guys talking about?This said, Mr. Pinkel has, throughout his tenure, managed to turn his face to the world. In 1957, Norris Stevenson became the first black scholarship football player at Missouri. The university marching band played “Dixie” and a fraternity waved a Confederate flag after every touchdown. Mr. Stevenson’s daughter said that her father’s wounds never entirely healed.In 2001, Mr. Pinkel asked him to talk to the players of his experiences.“They wanted to start bridging the gap with the African-American community, and it meant a lot to Dad,” his daughter, Janet M. Stevenson, told me. “There were a lot of black athletes who were disgruntled with Mizzou.”Athletes live campus lives apart. They take classes in the morning, and spend their afternoons and early evenings in practice and study sessions. They regularly have to put in 18-hour days, and they play through Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year’s Day.All of that has worked against athletes’ involvement in social issues on campus. That might be changing now. As it does, a sensible coach listens carefully. He and the players have an umbilical tie.“A lot of people missed the point this week,” Mr. Williams said. “President, faculty, none of them go to a parent’s house and sit on their couch and say, ‘I will take care of your son.’ ”Email: powellm@nytimes.com Advertisement