By ZACH SCHONBRUNNOV. 15, 2015
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  As Stephen Gostkowski’s kick sailed through the uprights, New England Patriots players, including Patrick Chung, LeGarrette Blount and Rob Gronkowski, poured onto the field, helmets held aloft. Jonathan Freeny danced.Giants Coach Tom Coughlin threw his gum.The referee Ed Hochuli had to yell into his microphone, twice, “The game is not over!” Sure, there was one second remaining and a lateral-filled kick return still to be stifled. But that did not stop the Patriots from an enthusiastic celebration over what proved to be a come-from-behind 27-26 victory over the Giants on Sunday at MetLife Stadium.New England maintained its perfect season, at 9-0, against a team with a history of bursting its bubble.“That definitely built some character, that game,” Gronkowski said. “Being down, being up, being down with two minutes left. We just showed some resiliency out there.”AdvertisementThe victory was the Patriots’ closest this season, and for a team that had hammered its previous opponents by an average of 16.6 points, it felt like a necessary test.AdvertisementAfter trailing by 10 points late in the third quarter, going ahead early in the fourth and then falling behind again with 1 minute 47 seconds left, the Patriots had to resist that familiar feeling — that the Giants were again stealing a win from their grasp — and take advantage of their opportunities.“This was all about finish,” cornerback Malcolm Butler said. “It’s not how you start; it’s how you finish.”The result was quarterback Tom Brady’s 49th career comeback, after a 12-play, 44-yard drive that he considered to be just “O.K.” Despite not sounding pleased about the offense’s overall execution, or the interception he threw on the 1-yard line with 6:10 to go, Brady could not critique his team’s spirit.“It always comes down to the end with them,” Brady said. “We talked about it before the game — play hard for 60 minutes. It took every last second.”After the Giants were stopped in the red zone by New England’s defense following the two-minute warning, Brady entered the huddle and said simply, “All right, let’s go.”It hardly mattered that the Patriots had no timeouts left; were starting on their own 20; were without their leading pass-catcher, Julian Edelman; and had not exactly been dominating the Giants’ defense. New England seemed confident it could put the ball into Gostkowski’s range.“We do that two-minute drill every day,” receiver Danny Amendola said. “We’re really comfortable in that situation.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On a fourth-and-10, and with the crowd at its loudest, Brady found Amendola over the middle for just enough yardage to convert.Advertisement“I was just trying to find anybody that had a little space,” Brady said. “Gronk was trying to run free, but Danny sprung free, and I got him the ball.”Amendola made another catch later in the drive when the Giants blitzed and he spun away from linebacker Jonathan Casillas. He picked up enough yardage for Gostkowski’s winning kick.“We practice it so much,” receiver Brandon LaFell said of the team’s two-minute drill. “We knew when the defense got that field goal; we knew. We said, ‘Let’s do what we do best.’ ”Many expected the Patriots’ N.F.L.-leading offense to light up the scoreboard against the Giants, which had the worst defense in the league statistically entering the game. After a methodical, 80-yard opening drive, which culminated with a 1-yard touchdown pass, those prognostications looked sound.But the Giants’ defense rallied to put together an admirable effort — at least for three quarters. The Patriots were without Edelman, who left the game after the first quarter with a foot injury, and multiple linemen. The Giants, as usual against New England, had success rushing Brady, sacking him three times, hurrying him five times and tripping him up on several throws.New England continued to pressure the Giants through the air, though, throwing to Amendola and Gronkowski, whom the Giants had been guarding with multiple safeties throughout the game. Gronkowski was quiet until early in the fourth quarter when he beat Brandon Merriweather up the left seam and, after Brady delivered a perfect ball, made a safety over the top miss and trip up Merriweather.Gronkowski had nobody in his path for a 76-yard score, the longest touchdown of his career.“I’ve never really had that before,” Gronkowski said of how much freedom he had to run.That score, which put the Patriots ahead, seemed as if it might open things up for New England, but that never happened. Unlike most of the team’s games this season, it was a nail-biter to the finish.But the Patriots’ record remains unblemished. Asked if the team’s 12th consecutive win, dating to last season, had anybody thinking about perfection already, linebacker Rob Ninkovich smiled.Advertisement“I really don’t even think about it,” he said. “I’m just thinking we’ve got nine; now we’ve got to keep moving.”A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Patriots’ Plan to Play Hard for 60 Minutes Pays Off in Final Ones .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.