By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 15, 2015
Mats Zuccarello scored with 53.8 seconds left to give the Rangers their ninth straight win, a 4-3 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.Zuccarello also had two assists as the Rangers moved to 14-2-2, the best 18-game start in team history in wins and in points (30). The Rangers’ winning streak is their third-longest over all and their longest since they won 10 straight in the 1972-73 season.“He’s on top of his game,” Coach Alain Vigneault said of Zuccarello. “He’s been playing real well, and his enthusiasm is contagious. There’s no doubt that he is well liked and well respected by his teammates, and I think everyone is happy that he’s playing so well right now.”Ryan McDonagh, Derek Stepan and Derick Brassard also scored for the Rangers, and Antti Raanta made 23 saves.AdvertisementPeter Holland, Joffrey Lupul and Dion Phaneuf scored for Toronto, which had won three straight. Jonathan Bernier stopped 26 shots.AdvertisementBernier was shaky throughout the game, surrendering rebounds, which proved costly on Zuccarello’s winner. McDonagh fired a shot from the left point that Bernier could not control, and Zuccarello poked the puck into the net to decide a wild, back-and-forth contest.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Holland opened the scoring with 2 minutes 3 seconds left in the first period with a backhander from in close. The goal was his third of the season and his second in four games.The lead lasted all of 2:47. McDonagh tied the score 44 seconds into the second period with his third goal of the season off a cross-ice feed from Zuccarello.The Rangers took a 2-1 lead with 6:05 left in the second as Bernier misplayed a Stepan shot from center ice and the puck rolled under Bernier’s pads. Bernier had allowed a similar score, by Arizona’s Oliver Ekman-Larsson, on Jan. 30.“It’s my job to be ready,” Bernier said. “I cost us 2 points. I let them down tonight.”Lupul’s goal, with 2:22 left in the period, tied the score again.Brassard scored 3:37 into the third period to put the Rangers ahead, 3-2. The goal, his sixth of the season, came off a pass from Zuccarello from behind the net. Phaneuf tied the score again 1:38 later with his second goal of the season.BLACKHAWKS 4, FLAMES 1 Patrick Kane scored and had an assist in a three-goal outburst for host Chicago that took 1:55 in the second period. The rookie Artemi Panarin and Marian Hossa also scored during the Blackhawks’ blitz.Kane, who took over the N.H.L. lead in goals (13) and points (28), has a goal in seven straight games and a point in 13 straight.An Associated Press report in the N.H.L. roundup in some editions on Monday about the Rangers’ 4-3 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs misstated the amount of time left in the game when Mats Zuccarello scored the winning goal. It was 53.8 seconds, not 58.3 seconds. The error was repeated in an accompanying picture caption.A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Late Goal Sends Rangers to Ninth Straight Victory.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.