By ANDREW DASNOV. 15, 2015
The Argentine striker Gastón Cellerino scored three goals to lead the Cosmos to a 3-2 victory over the Ottawa Fury in the North American Soccer League championship game on Sunday, stealing the thunder of two more famous teammates but delivering the title they craved in their final competitive game.The championship, the Cosmos’ second in three years and their seventh over all, came in the final game for the former Spain stars Raúl and Marcos Senna. Both had announced last month that they would retire after the season.“It is impossible to compare this championship with winning the World Cup, La Liga titles and the Champions League,” said the 38-year-old Raúl, who won only the latter two. “But that is not to say that this one is not satisfying. This team has a big history, and this one win was amazing.”At the final whistle, Cosmos players lifted Raúl and Senna onto their shoulders to cheers from the crowd, announced at 10,166, at Shuart Stadium in Hempstead, N.Y.Advertisement“To win next to Raúl was an ideal situation,” said Senna, a 39-year-old midfielder. “I’m thankful for him being here throughout the year as he made the difference many times and scored many goals. In addition, today, he didn’t get the goal, but he got the assist. He’s a player that is a game-changer.”AdvertisementStaked to a 1-0 lead by a Cellerino goal in the eighth minute, the Cosmos seemed assured of victory when Ottawa’s Mason Trafford drew a red card for an ugly, two-footed stomp on a fallen player in the 68th minute. But Ottawa striker Tom Heinemann tied the score at 1-1 moments later, and suddenly, the visitors had a lifeline.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Just as quickly, however, Cellerino restored the lead for the Cosmos in the 72nd minute, sending the ball over the line after an inch-perfect cross from Walter Restrepo glided just over the fingertips of Ottawa’s French goalkeeper, Romuald Peiser. Cellerino sealed the victory on a breakaway in the 85th minute, rendering meaningless a second goal by Heinemann in added time.Cellerino, 29, joined the Cosmos in August after a career spent mostly in South America. Asked if he could have imagined scoring three times in the final, he shook his head. But he said, “I did dream last night of scoring goals.”HUNGARY ENDS LONG WAIT Hungary secured a spot at next year’s European Championships by beating Norway, 2-1, in Budapest, reaching its first major competition since the 1986 World Cup with a 3-1 aggregate victory. Tamas Priskin scored early for Hungary, and Norway’s Ole Selnes netted an own goal in the 84th minute. (AP)WORLD CUP QUALIFYING The teenage striker Farouk Miya scored two goals as Uganda beat Togo, 3-0, to advance to the third round of World Cup qualifying in Africa. Morocco, Uganda, Zambia and Guinea also advanced based on second-leg results. (NYT)A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Cosmos Win Title in Final Game for Two of Their Stars.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.