AdvertisementSupported byOn College FootballBy Marc TracyAfter a day in which four of the top 10 teams in the College Football Playoff selection committee’s rankings lost, it is fair to ask how anyone can know which teams are good enough to qualify for the Playoff.So much punditry involves picking apart teams’ weak schedules, close home wins and mitigating circumstances that it makes one suspect that the answer might be none of them. To begin with, the Pacific-12 Conference probably ended its run this season as the home of a Playoff contender. Last year, it had a one-loss champion, Oregon, that reached the title game. This year, a far lesser Ducks team (7-3, 5-2) determined that if it was not going to make the four-team bracket, then neither would any of its conference colleagues.On Saturday night, Oregon beat the strongest remaining contender, Stanford (8-2, 7-1), which had been ranked seventh (to cite the Playoff selection committee’s rankings, used throughout this column), after stopping a 2-point attempt that would have tied the score with 10 seconds left. And No. 10 Utah, which might have gained from Stanford’s loss, instead fell to 8-2 over all and 5-2 in the conference with a 37-30, double-overtime loss at Arizona (6-5, 3-5).Don’t expect others from the conference to pick up the slack. The one other ranked Pac-12 team, No. 19 U.C.L.A. (7-3, 4-3), lost to Washington State. Southern California (7-3, 5-2) barely beat lowly Colorado — yet will probably be ranked on Tuesday. A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.The other conference that has made a mess of itself is the Big 12. Entering the season, the innumerate 10 teams knew they had little margin for error: The conference’s co-champions last season, Baylor and Texas Christian, were the first two teams left out of the Playoff by virtue of not playing a championship game. It was widely assumed that to make the Playoff, the Big 12 champion would need to be undefeated.But a week after No. 15 Texas Christian (9-1, 6-1) fell to No. 8 Oklahoma State, another unbeaten bit the dust Saturday night as No. 12 Oklahoma (9-1, 6-1) went into Waco, Tex., and upset No. 6 Baylor (8-1, 5-1) on the strength of quarterback Baker Mayfield’s four total touchdowns.That leaves Oklahoma State (10-0, 7-0) as the Big 12’s only unblemished team. Yet even if the Cowboys go 12-0, the committee could be forgiven for replying, So? That record would involve home wins over T.C.U., which beat miserable Kansas by just 6 points on Saturday; Baylor, which is playing with a backup quarterback; and Oklahoma, which last month lost to Texas (4-6, 3-4).Now the only unbeaten in Texas is No. 24 Houston (10-0, 6-0 American Athletic Conference), which scored three unanswered touchdowns in the fourth quarter to beat No. 21 Memphis (8-2, 4-2). The Cougars are now the clear front-runner for the Group of 5 berth in the Fiesta Bowl or the Peach Bowl and, by maintaining their undefeated status, kept hope alive for a 13-0 run and a Playoff spot. If you think the committee will admit a Group of 5 team, though, you are less cynical than many.No. 23 North Carolina (9-1, 6-0 Atlantic Coast Conference) smashed Miami at home, 59-21, and locked up a matchup with No. 1 Clemson in the A.C.C. title game. But the Tar Heels have been underrated by the committee — probably because they play in the weakest division in the Big 5, the A.C.C. Coastal, and because they lost in Week 1 to South Carolina, which is now 3-7.The Big Ten’s outsiders appear barely better. No. 14 Michigan (8-2, 5-1) has two losses — that opening-day defeat to Utah looks worse each week — and on Saturday it required two overtimes to beat Indiana, 48-41, even though the Hoosiers have yet to win a conference game. No. 13 Michigan State (9-1, 5-1) bears the burden of its barely-a-win at Michigan last month, its loss last weekend at Nebraska and a potential shoulder injury to quarterback Connor Cook in the course of Saturday’s 24-7 win over Maryland.“I just landed on it funny,” Cook said. Sparty hopes so.No. 3 Ohio State (10-0, 6-0) still must play both the Spartans and the Wolverines, starting Saturday, when it hosts Michigan State in Columbus. But even if the Buckeyes, the defending champions, go 13-0, the committee must be convinced that their spotless record is really worth something given that the two Michigan teams — along with, most likely, the Buckeyes’ opponent in the conference championship game — will have been the only ranked teams on their schedule.Speaking of which: No. 5 Iowa (10-0, 6-0) required an awful lot of effort to hold off Minnesota (4-6, 1-5) at home, 40-35, on Saturday. While nobody could have foreseen before the season how impressive wins over No. 18 Northwestern and No. 25 Wisconsin would be, it may be asking a lot for the committee to recognize the Hawkeyes.“They’re not a flashy team, but they are consistent,” the Playoff committee’s chairman, Jeff Long, said last week in the faintest of praise. Long did note that of the Football Bowl Subdivision’s undefeated teams — at the time, six; now, five — Iowa had the second-best strength-of-schedule. The best belonged to Clemson (10-0, 7-0 A.C.C.), which on Saturday beat Syracuse (3-7, 1-5) by all of 10 points. Tigers advocates might point out that the game was played at Syracuse; realists might add that a season-high 36,736 fans does not a home-field advantage make.No. 9 Louisiana State (7-2, 4-2 Southeastern Conference) lost — again — at home, to Arkansas (6-4, 4-2). Which actually says a lot about No. 11 Florida (9-1, 7-1), whose only loss, after all, came at L.S.U. and which has beaten up on teams with losing records, such as East Carolina, South Carolina, Kentucky and Vanderbilt.At last, there is No. 2 Alabama (9-1, 6-1). For once, a good team. A week after the Crimson Tide’s defense held L.S.U.’s Leonard Fournette to 31 rushing yards, Alabama sacked Mississippi State’s Dak Prescott — the closest thing college football has to a pro quarterback — nine times as part of a 31-6 beat-down. The Tide’s early loss to Ole Miss looks like a fluke (with the weirdest play coming, appropriately enough, on what should have been a sack). The team has the seventh-best scoring defense in the F.B.S., allowing 15.3 points per game amid a tough SEC West schedule, and a Heisman Trophy contender in running back Derrick Henry, with 1,458 yards on the ground (second, to Fournette) and 19 touchdowns (first).As of this moment, the Tide belong in the Playoff. Hopefully the committee can come up with three more teams deserving of a shot at them. Advertisement