By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 15, 2015
Top-ranked Novak Djokovic put on an impressive display against Kei Nishikori at the ATP World Tour Finals on Sunday, stretching his winning streak to 15 matches at the season-ending event with a 6-1, 6-1 victory at O2 Arena in London.“I think I was at my best,” said Djokovic, who has won the last three titles at the ATP Finals and four over all. “Undoubtedly it’s been an incredible performance that I was hoping I can have coming into the match.”Djokovic lost only nine points on his serve and never faced a break point. With Nishikori serving, Djokovic won 30 of the 53 points.In the late match, Roger Federer beat Tomas Berdych, 6-4, 6-2.Federer, a six-time champion who is playing at the ATP Finals for the 14th straight year, got off to slow start, winning one of the first nine points in falling behind by 2-0. But he quickly turned things around and ended up with two breaks in each set.Advertisement“Was one of the worst starts I’ve had in years,” Federer said. “No first serves, two double faults, nothing coming from the baseline. So it was rough.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Federer faces Djokovic on Tuesday, and Berdych plays Nishikori.CZECHS TAKE FED CUP The Czech Republic, the defending champion, clinched its fourth Fed Cup title in five years as Karolina Pliskova and Barbora Strycova topped the Russian pair of Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova and Elena Vesnina in the decisive match.AdvertisementThe Czechs rallied to a 4-6, 6-3, 6-2 victory to take the best-of-five series, 3-2, on an indoor hard court at Prague’s O2 Arena.Earlier Sunday, Maria Sharapova came from a set down to beat Petra Kvitova, 3-6, 6-4, 6-2, in the first reverse singles to give Russia a 2-1 lead. Pliskova kept the Czechs in the final by defeating Pavlyuchenkova, 6-3, 6-4.In the doubles match, the Czechs broke the Russians in the opening game of the final set and again for 5-2 before Strycova served the match out.A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic and Federer Win at ATP Finals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.