By JONAH BROMWICHNOV. 15, 2015
Every week, The New York Times will choose one essential game to watch, highlighting hot teams, winning and losing streaks and statistical intrigue in the N.B.A.Golden State at Los Angeles Clippers, Thursday, 10:30 p.m. Eastern, TNT The Golden State Warriors are 11-0, but they have faced their share of challenges this season. The Detroit Pistons tested them until the fourth quarter in a game last Monday. Two days later, the Memphis Grizzlies were giving the Warriors nearly all they could handle in the third quarter until Stephen Curry made two circus shots. And shockingly, the woeful Nets were able to take the Warriors to overtime on Saturday night before succumbing.The Los Angeles Clippers have played the Warriors the closest, losing by only 4 points in their game Nov. 4 at Oracle Arena. This Thursday, the Warriors visit the Clippers.Golden State’s streak may well be broken by the Toronto Raptors on Tuesday. But if it is not, the Clippers have a better chance than most teams at delivering a first loss to the Warriors, the N.B.A.’s defending champions.AdvertisementCurry, the league’s reigning most valuable player, is already making a firm case for this season’s trophy. He is averaging over 33 points a game, along with 5.6 assists and 5.1 rebounds, and leads the league in efficiency rating. Yet the primary reason Golden State looks ripe for defeat is that Curry has been slightly less superb in his last five games than he was in his first six. He has gone from shooting 56.9 percent from the field, and 51.4 from 3-point range, to 47.4 percent from the field and 40.3 from 3-point range. In only one of his last five games has Curry made over half his shots.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Luckily for the Warriors, the roster has been deep enough to pick up what little slack its superstar leaves hanging. Festus Ezeli, who has started almost every game in place of Andrew Bogut, has shown himself to be a competent center. But Bogut’s move to the bench has been the real benefit. He has become the second-most efficient player on the Warriors’ roster and is still able to put together big games, as he showed with 10 points, 18 rebounds, 4 assists, 3 blocks and 2 steals against the Nets.AdvertisementThe player who really saved the Warriors on Saturday was Andre Iguodala, who has found himself in that role several times in Golden State’s more recent games. Iguodala sent the game into overtime with a 3-pointer and scored 7 of his 15 points in the fourth quarter and in overtime. He also acted as a safety net against the Grizzlies, with four 3-pointers and 20 points, and the Pistons, with 13 points and 5 rebounds. In fact, the only tough opponent against whom Iguodala has struggled is the Clippers.There is no love lost between the teams, who are Pacific Division rivals. Comments during the off-season by Doc Rivers, the Clippers’ coach, about the Warriors’ luck with playoff matchups may have contributed to the chip on Golden State’s shoulder in the early part of this season. That would certainly help explain why Curry was staring daggers at his opponents as he went 7 for 11 from behind the 3-point line on Nov. 4.The Clippers are 6-4 but, for the most part, look better than their record. They have beaten decent teams convincingly and played good teams close. In two of their last three losses, they have been missing Chris Paul, who injured his groin at the end of the Warriors game, and J. J. Redick, who has been dealing with back spasms, has not suited up for the last two games.The team’s new acquisitions, Josh Smith and Wesley Johnson, have not had much of an impact. Each is averaging fewer than 5 points a game, and neither has really been incorporated into the offense. Both are being asked simply to hit open shots, something Johnson is doing better than Smith.The Clippers’ engines are still Paul, Blake Griffin and the re-signed DeAndre Jordan, who has played slightly worse than he did last season, averaging fewer points and rebounds and looking less secure in his role. (Chandler Parsons — whose team, the Dallas Mavericks, Jordan spurned during the off-season — said: “He’s not a priority to us. And by the looks of their team, he’s not to them, either.”)The Clippers will have some time to rest before Thursday’s game. Given Paul’s competitive spirit, it would be surprising if he was not ready to go against the Warriors. (It would also suggest that his groin injury was worse than has been reported.) If Paul is back, he and the rest of the Clippers should be able to take the Warriors to the limit once again and to test whether the shard of kryptonite that seems to be affecting Curry can be sharpened to a point.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.