AdvertisementSupported byPatriots 27, Giants 269 PhotosView Slide Show ›Jason Szenes for The New York TimesBy Bill PenningtonEAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — In the Giants’ locker room minutes after Sunday’s 27-26 loss to the New England Patriots, the players and the coach could not stop replaying all the ways the game could have ended differently.What if the rookie Landon Collins had held on to the interception he appeared to have grabbed, at least initially, on the first play of the Patriots’ game-winning drive?What if the late reception in the end zone by Odell Beckham Jr. — ruled a touchdown on the field — had remained a score that put the Giants up by 5 points with roughly two minutes left to play?What if the Giants had run the football near the goal line in the closing minutes, taking more time off the game clock and limiting the Patriots’ flexibility during their final drive?What if the Giants had scored a touchdown in the second half instead of kicking three field goals?“I mean, just get the game over with,” a red-faced and exasperated Coach Tom Coughlin said of all the ways his Giants had squandered opportunities to put the game away. “I don’t know how to explain it.”But this year’s Giants (5-5) have turned fourth-quarter collapses into an art form. Sunday was just another new way to lose.This time, it was the undefeated Patriots, and the quarterback leading the final drive, in a fitting bit of payback, was Tom Brady. So in the end, the Giants knew exactly what had happened and precisely why they had lost.“You can look back and see how one play here or there could have changed things, but the other team had the football last and got in position to win,” said Giants quarterback Eli Manning, who knows a thing or two about breaking the hearts of opponents with last-minute drives. “You’ve got to give Tom Brady and their offense credit. They were up against it there.”Indeed, nothing about the beginning of New England’s final drive, which set up Stephen Gostkowski’s game-winning, 54-yard field goal with one second remaining, went well for the Patriots.The Giants had just taken a 26-24 lead on Josh Brown’s 29-yard field goal. There were 107 seconds left in the fourth quarter when Brady took the first-down snap at the New England 20-yard line. Brady took a deep drop, but his pass over the middle floated and fluttered, and as it came down, there was Collins — and only Collins — positioned to catch it.Collins reached high for the ball, pulled it toward him and cradled it in one hand. But when he hit the turf with his head and shoulders first, the ball sprang free. Incomplete pass.“I had it, but when I hit my head, I got dazed, and that’s all I remember,” Collins said later.A Giants home crowd that was on its feet celebrating in anticipation of a Collins interception was crestfallen — though not for long, as Brady made two poor throws that also fell incomplete. The Patriots faced a fourth-and-10 and had no timeouts.Extending the drive, Brady found wide receiver Danny Amendola over the middle for 12 yards. The Patriots were still about 30 yards from reasonable field-goal range. But the fourth-down reprieve seemed to have rejuvenated Brady, who quickly completed three of his next four passes. When Brady connected with Amendola for 9 more yards, the Giants were in trouble. Gostkowski, who was in range, rarely misses.On the Giants’ sideline, Beckham was already blaming himself for the loss.“This one is on me,” he said later. “I’ve got to catch that ball.”Beckham, who caught an 87-yard touchdown pass on the Giants’ second play from scrimmage, was referring to what was initially ruled a 5-yard touchdown pass just before the two-minute warning in the fourth quarter, when the Giants trailed the Patriots, 24-23.Beckham caught the ball with two hands and put two feet in bounds in the end zone. Patriots cornerback Malcolm Butler then knocked the ball from Beckham’s grasp. The officials signaled touchdown. The Giants were preparing for a 2-point conversion.After a video review, the call was changed to an incomplete pass. The Giants never seriously threatened to get in the end zone again and settled for the go-ahead field goal.“I thought since I caught the ball and had two feet down, it was a touchdown,” Beckham said. “I didn’t think you had to do anything other than that. So that’s my fault. I’ve got to hold on. We could have won right there.”The Patriots could still have driven for a touchdown instead of a field goal. But that would have been a much more arduous undertaking — and they were missing the slot receiver Julian Edelman, who left the game in the first half with a foot injury.It is also true that the Giants could have run the football on first down, to score or to force the Patriots to use their last timeout. In fact, Manning said that the first-down play called in from the sideline was a running play but that when he went to the line of scrimmage, he saw that the Patriots had their goal-line defense on the field — a defense geared to stop the run. The response in that situation, as part of the read-and-react nature of the playbook, is to change the play to a pass. Beckham had single coverage with Butler.But the net result was a field goal and not a touchdown — and more time for Brady’s come-from-behind drive.“We didn’t run enough clock off there,” Manning lamented later. “We didn’t score enough touchdowns instead of kicking field goals.”As disappointing as the final stages of the game became, they did not entirely overshadow an entertaining, stirring game, especially since the Giants had entered as significant underdogs and had not been expected to give the Patriots a close game. In many respects, particularly on defense, the Giants’ play improved from past performances this season.The Giants went toe-to-toe with one of the N.F.L.’s elite teams, and the Patriots proved their superiority in the closing seconds. But as the Giants make what could be a playoff push, Sunday’s game may become a rallying point or even a confidence booster.The game was primarily a compelling back-and-forth with multiple lead changes. An 82-yard punt return by Amendola led to one Patriots touchdown, and a 76-yard pass from Brady, who completed 26 of 42 passes for 334 yards, gave the Patriots a late 24-23 lead. But the Giants hung in, even as they squandered scoring opportunities. On their last possession, Manning, who completed 24 of 44 passes for 361 yards, led the Giants to the 5-yard line in 11 plays. It proved to be the Giants’ high-water mark of the afternoon.The Giants have a bye in their schedule next weekend, and Coughlin was already looking forward to how Sunday’s last-second defeat might linger.“They will hurt tonight, tomorrow and probably well into the bye week,” Coughlin said of his players. “But maybe that’s a good thing.”Advertisement