By BENJAMIN HOFFMANOCT. 4, 2015
Things have gotten bad enough for the San Francisco 49ers that even a heroic defensive effort against the Green Bay Packers was not nearly enough for a victory. In N.F.L. Week 4, the Packers brought their unbeaten record and a few thousand Green Bay faithful to San Francisco and left on top, 17-3.The crowd of Levi’s Stadium appeared to thin out dramatically in the second half as memories of a surprising victory in Week 1 against Minnesota continued to fade.Losers of three consecutive games, the 49ers can place much of the blame the last two weeks on quarterback Colin Kaepernick. Last week Kaepernick threw four interceptions, two of which were returned for touchdowns, and this week he failed to get anything going, passing for just 160 yards and an interception. It was the third time in four games that he failed to break 200 yards passing, and he was sacked six times.Piling on to Kaepernick’s misfortune, television cameras picked up Packers linebacker Clay Matthews taunting his rival, saying “You ain’t Russell Wilson, bro” in reference to the Seattle Seahawks’ Super Bowl-winning quarterback.
            Scores, highlights and analysis from this week’s games.        
A downbeat Kaepernick took responsibility for the loss after the game, saying the team will improve.“The only way I know how to fix things is to go back to work,” Kaepernick told reporters after the disappointing performance. “We have to find our rhythm.”AdvertisementThere had been hope among 49ers fans that a game against the Packers could revitalize the young passer. In three previous games, all wins, Kaepernick had dominated Green Bay, rushing for more than 100 yards twice and throwing for more than 400 yards once. This time Dom Capers, Green Bay’s defensive coordinator, finally figured out a way to stop him.AdvertisementThe loss will only add to the speculation of whether the team might begin looking for a different answer at quarterback. With a contract that would allow the team to part ways with him after the season with minimal repercussions, and a statistical profile in severe decline, it is reasonable for people to wonder if Tomsula would consider benching the player who took the team all the way to the Super Bowl in his first season as a starter.
            What happened to Kaepernick? He can't even make simple throws anymore. Guy came within like 5 yards of winning the Super Bowl. Bizarre.        The tight-lipped Tomsula has not given any indication that change is imminent, telling reporters this week “Colin is our quarterback.”At his post-game news conference, Tomsula defended Kaepernick, saying he “won’t even go into the discussion. That’s not even on my mind.”Kaepernick’s anemic offense wasted a great effort by the team’s reworked defense. In the offseason, the 49ers lost Justin Smith, Patrick Willis and Chris Borland to retirement, and parted ways with Ray McDonald and Aldon Smith because of off-field issues.Burned for more than 40 points in each of the previous two games, the defense held its own against Aaron Rodgers and the Packers.The Packers had scored 96 points in three games coming into the contest and Rodgers had 10 touchdowns and 0 interceptions. The 49ers held him to 224 passing yards and 1 touchdown, with Aaron Lynch, a second-year linebacker sacking him twice.Tomsula insisted after the game that his team was not giving up.“You don’t go around these things,” Tomsula told reporters. “You go through them. So lock your jaw and keep going.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.