AdvertisementSupported bySports of The TimesBy William C. RhodenMore than a week after the president and the chancellor of the University of Missouri were forced to resign, the activism of the football players who helped bring about those changes is being celebrated as an example of what can be achieved when athletes lend their celebrity to a cause. What many found extraordinary about the affair is that athletes stepped out of the sports cocoon.“I thought it was a way for them to get together as a group and support a student issue on campus,” said Warde Manuel, the athletic director at the University of Connecticut. “To me, that’s a great thing to see. It showed me that those kids at Missouri were immersed enough in the issues that they wanted to make a statement to support what they felt was an issue for them and the students on that campus. I don’t see anything wrong with that.”A more nuanced look at the Missouri episode illustrates that black athletes at mostly white universities, especially those who play in high-profile football and basketball programs, have starkly different experiences from their black student counterparts.Manuel experienced this firsthand as a student-athlete at the University of Michigan.I first met Manuel in the fall of 1989 while reporting a series on student-athletes on campus. Manuel was reeling from the news that he would have to stop playing football because of a degenerative nerve condition.He was understandably crushed. “One of the hardest things I’ve ever done is knowing that the dream I had to play professionally was not going to come to fruition,” said Manuel, now 47.Then, as he headed to practice one day out of force of habit, Manuel realized that he did not have to do that anymore. Manuel was still stung by the loss of football — he would have given anything to have still been on the team — but he recalled that in that instant, he saw Michigan in a way that he had never seen it when he was playing football. The university opened up to him. “Athletics takes away some of your ambition for academics,” he said at the time. “More now, I feel like a student, because I don’t have to go to the football building; I don’t have to go to practice.“I never really realized that education could be as fun, that it could be as demanding,” he added. “Now I see why people talk about athletics being a challenge in college, because it’s so much easier now for me to focus. I’m not as tired, mentally or physically.”Today, Manuel oversees a program encompassing hundreds of students who are also athletes. He raises money to fund ever-expanding capital improvements, but he said that his most cherished mission was preaching to UConn athletes to get as much out of their unique experience as possible.This is as difficult a task in 2015 as it was 25 years ago.“I think it’s still true,” he said. “What we went through in athletics back then is what we go through in athletics now.”The time demands on college athletes are as great as ever. There have been more structural changes over the years that, in theory, allow athletes to satisfy the demands of the classroom and their sport while allowing time to enjoy the college experience.I covered N.C.A.A. conventions when presidents and academics were trying mightily to integrate athletes into “civilian life” on campus.There are rules that limit practice times. There are more programs to assist student-athletes, and help from experts on time management. Greater attention is paid to how athletes balance their lives and meet expectations from coaches and instructors. There is greater focus on the mental aspects of being a student and an athlete on campus. More time and attention are spent on determining how athletes deal with academic and athletic demands. This is all well and good, but construction of lavish athletic fortresses has pushed athletes deeper into their cocoons and made those cocoons more self-contained.“If you look at the facilities that have been built in the last 25 years, you can probably argue that that there’s more isolation,” Manuel said. “There are more specialized facilities on the campus that are specifically for a particular team.”Manuel said he and his staff had worked feverishly to make the sports community more united. He has monthly meetings with the Student-Athlete Advisory Committee.The athletic department hosted a picnic for student-athletes at the beginning of the year, and there is an annual scholarship dinner for athletes.When it comes to interacting with the larger student body, that is a matter of choice for athletes, who often spend downtime with one another, not attending lectures or becoming involved with heated issues.One of the things that came through in the Missouri protest is how black athletes can have completely different experiences from those of other black students. From living arrangements and meals to academic help, travel and celebrity, the experience is unique.The Missouri protests underlined the challenges faced by young black athletes where they are a significant presence — if not a majority — on football and basketball teams but decidedly in the minority when they step into the general student population.How do they reconcile celebrity with concerns expressed by fellow black students? In Missouri, they joined the fight; this has not been the norm.When Manuel was at Michigan, there were racial tensions on campus. Some black students there were critical of the ambivalence among high-profile black football and basketball players.One Michigan student at the time complained: “A lot of times, I feel that they are part of the football team, or the basketball team, but they aren’t part of our team. They’re indoctrinated as soon as they come here to be on a team, and it’s not our team, it’s not the black team.”Manuel said at the time: “Everybody wants you to play a role, and you’re trying to fit. The students want you to do this, then you have to do these things, then society says, Don’t get involved in this. You try for a perfect balance, but where is that perfect balance?”Asked if he thought black athletes were still trying to find that balance in 2015, Manuel said, “I think so.” “There is a lot on athletes,” he added. “The identity of being an athlete on campus; an identity of just wanting to be a student. Balancing coaches’ expectations, the administration’s expectations. Being yourself, representing their family, being seen as part of the team. It’s a lot.”Manuel’s message to athletes on his campus is to enjoy this unique experience, realize that it could be over in the blink of an eye, and cherish the moment.“The one thing I say to our student-athletes is, have fun,” he said. Good advice. But in an atmosphere of racial tension and political turmoil on campus, students — perhaps taking their cue from Missouri — may insist that black athletes in particular come out of their cocoons, choose sides or, at the very least, take a stand.Unmitigated fun, without social responsibility, may become less and less of an option.Email: wcr@nytimes.com Advertisement