AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellNEWARK — As usual, the crowd at Prudential Center directed an obscene chant at Pittsburgh center Sidney Crosby, the Penguins’ captain. But this time was different: When the jeers began in the middle of the third period on Saturday night, the Penguins were three goals behind.Crosby was that invisible. After the Devils added a goal to seal the 4-0 victory, Crosby skated silently off the ice, minus-2 on the night, with no goals on three shots. He was a meager 6 for 15 on face-offs. The Penguins closed the locker-room doors for a team meeting. When Crosby faced reporters, he said, almost in a whisper: “We didn’t compete. We didn’t deserve to win.”The Penguins are 10-7-0, and it is still early in the season, but they seem to be trending in the wrong direction. With Saturday’s result, the resourceful and surprising Devils passed them and took over third place in the Metropolitan Division of the Eastern Conference. Including a 2-1 home loss to Columbus on Friday, Pittsburgh has lost two in a row.The loss to the Blue Jackets, Crosby said, was more a matter of a lack of execution. But Crosby added: “That being said, I don’t think we’ve put a full game together here for a while. You’re flirting with danger when you start doing that.”Always so dangerous in the past, the Penguins cannot score. They ended Saturday ranked 27th in the 30-team N.H.L. with 36 goals. They were 29th on the power play. Pittsburgh Coach Mike Johnston split up Crosby and Evgeni Malkin on the power play on Saturday except for one short stretch in the third period. The Penguins went 0 for 3.Crosby, 28, seems to be a shadow of himself. He has two goals and seven assists. Through 17 games a year ago, he had eight goals and 18 assists. Crosby, who had a career plus-minus rating of plus-129 before this season and has not finished on the minus side since his rookie year (2005-6), is minus-8. Devils Coach John Hynes, a former coach in the Pittsburgh system, threw everything he had at Crosby: the top centers Adam Henrique and Travis Zajac but also Jacob Josefson and Brian O’Neill. Crosby was on the ice for three Devils goals.“Those guys are such excellent players, and they’re always going to be able to get breaks against top teams, so it’s going to be difficult to defend them,” Hynes said of Crosby and Malkin. “If you’re playing them, you’d like to have the puck so they don’t have it. Against players like that, our team did a good job of possessing the puck. But when we didn’t have it, there was a strong commitment to be able to play defense, and throughout the lineup, we had that.”The N.H.L. has become a go-go-go league. The Rangers are its hottest team largely because they are fast and aggressive. Although Hynes does not have the skill on call that Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault does, the Devils’ attack is similar.The Penguins appear a step behind. The Washington Capitals, another Metropolitan Division team, are much improved, and the Islanders, although sluggish lately, are young and built for the long haul. Saturday’s loss sounded an alarm for the Penguins.When asked what was wrong with the team, Malkin, who has no goals in his past seven games, grumbled: “Everything. We’re not playing right. We’re not playing hard. I know it’s hard right now, but we’re mad with each other. We need to stop, look in the mirror and start working.”The Penguins opened the season with three losses but then won nine of 10. They gave much of the credit, though, to goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury, who posted two shutouts. The team won six of the nine by one goal.“We’ve just been up and down,” said Jeff Zatkoff, the backup goaltender. “Inconsistency has been the theme of our year.”Zatkoff was in goal Saturday, stopping 33 of 37 shots as the Devils laid siege to the crease. “The position we put him in was awful,” Crosby said. “He had to make save after save. That’s not the way we play.”Johnston, Pittsburgh’s second-year coach, pointed out Saturday that he could not bench too many of his players because the Penguins were carrying only two reserves. He can juggle his line combinations, and he had Crosby playing with two sets of wings.“When something happens in a game,” Johnston said, “if it’s a goal or a turning point in a game, you need momentum changers.”Johnston has at his disposal one of the best momentum changers in the history of the game in Crosby, and it is only November. But for some teams, including the Penguins, it seems to be getting late.“We’ve got to regroup, address why and make sure we’re better the next game,” Crosby said. “It should be a pretty easy one to forget. There’s not much good to take out of it.”Advertisement