By SCOTT CACCIOLANOV. 15, 2015
Frustrated with his limited role on the Knicks, Kevin Seraphin recently went to Coach Derek Fisher’s office and asked what he could do to earn more playing time. It was a long and frank conversation, Seraphin said, and Fisher essentially told him to focus on his defense and rebounding. Fisher also preached patience: Seraphin’s time would come.Seraphin, a 6-foot-10 power forward who signed with the Knicks last summer, left the meeting and continued to watch film with the team’s assistant coaches. He ran on a treadmill, hoping to improve his fitness and shed a few pounds. He tried to stay prepared as best he could.On Sunday, as he coped with lingering emotions two days after terror attacks roiled Paris, where he has a home, Seraphin finally found an opportunity at Madison Square Garden. He came off the bench in the second half to hit jump shots and pass to cutting teammates, a performance that helped lift the Knicks to a 95-87 victory against the New Orleans Pelicans.“It’s frustrating when you don’t play, for sure,” said Seraphin, who collected 12 points and 3 rebounds while shooting 6 of 8 from the field, all in the second half. “You want to help the team, be on the court with them, and that definitely was not happening.”AdvertisementHe added, “They called my name tonight, and I was ready.”Carmelo Anthony finished with 29 points and 13 rebounds for the Knicks (5-6), who had been hindered by their inability to close out tightly contested games — a source of mounting concern for a young team. The Knicks entered Sunday having blown fourth-quarter leads in losses to the Charlotte Hornets and the Cleveland Cavaliers, and Fisher shouldered the blame, saying he needed to do a better job of putting his players in position to be successful.Against the Pelicans (1-9), Fisher was willing to experiment. In the second quarter, he matched the Pelicans’ smaller lineup by sliding Anthony to power forward while keeping Robin Lopez on the bench. By the middle of the third quarter, Fisher had used all 13 players available to him. His rotations were fluid.“We continue to build trust in each other, and that really is what it takes,” said Fisher, whose team started last season 5-36. “There will be nights where we come up short a little, but we’re still learning from these experiences. We figured it out today.”The Knicks overcame a huge effort by Anthony Davis, who had missed the Pelicans’ two previous games with a right hip contusion. Against the Knicks, Davis finished with 36 points and 11 rebounds. He also blocked three shots by the Knicks’ Kristaps Porzingis, offering a bit of an education. Porzingis struggled, scoring 10 points while shooting 4 of 15.“It’s going to be fun battling him,” Davis said.When the Pelicans made a push in the third quarter, Fisher called on Seraphin for the first time. Seraphin drove for a dunk, connected on a 12-foot hook shot and later drained a long jumper with the shot clock set to expire. In the fourth, his layup gave the Knicks a 10-point lead that proved insurmountable.Advertisement“We felt like he was active enough and energetic enough to give us a punch,” Fisher said.On Sunday morning, Seraphin invited his barber to his home with a specific assignment: shave the word “Paris” and images of the Eiffel Tower into the back of his close-cropped haircut.“I just wanted to do something creative, something different,” he said. “I had no time to make a tattoo or anything.”Before the game, officials at the Garden honored the victims of last week’s violence in Paris by playing the French national anthem. Seraphin, who grew up in French Guiana, has played for France’s national team. His parents live in Paris. During the anthem, he said, he sang the words and was nearly overcome with emotion.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I had goose bumps and I wanted to cry,” Seraphin said, “but the camera was right there, so I was like, I can’t do that.”Seraphin, whose friends and family were unharmed in the attacks, said it had been an unsettling couple of days.“It’s just hard because it can happen anywhere, and you just don’t know,” said Seraphin, who tried to compartmentalize his feelings during the game. “I play for the Knicks. I have to be professional. Basically, they are paying me for something, so I have to keep working.”Slowed by a knee injury coming out of training camp, Seraphin had played a total of 37 minutes and scored 10 points this season entering Sunday’s game. Anthony said Seraphin was deserving of the game ball, if teams still did that sort of thing.“There’s been games where he probably felt like he should have been playing more,” Anthony said. “He showed what he can do.”REBOUNDSAfter some early-season struggles coming off knee surgery, Carmelo Anthony had another solid effort, shooting 11 of 21 from the field. “It’s still a process of just staying with it every day and doing the proper work that I need to do to get those legs back,” he said, “but they’re feeling better and better each day.”A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Finally Given Chance, Knick Makes Most of It Before Team Holds On .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.