By BRAD SPURGEONNOV. 15, 2015
São Paulo, Brazil — At the penultimate race of the season, the Brazilian Grand Prix in São Paulo on Sunday, there was no mistaking who the most motivated drivers in the race were.The Mercedes team and Lewis Hamilton had already secured the constructors’ and drivers’ titles several races before the end of the season. But on Sunday, Hamilton and his teammate Nico Rosberg engaged in a ferocious battle from beginning to end, with neither driver wanting to cede any available chance for victory.Continuing his late season revival, Rosberg showed again that he is determined not to collapse under the pressure of losing the drivers’ title to his boyhood friend two seasons in a row. He led the race from start to finish to take his fifth victory of the year, his second in a row, the 13th of his career and to clinch second place in the series ahead of Sebastian Vettel, who finished third for Ferrari.“It was just about controlling the pace, never overdoing it, not making a mistake,” said Rosberg. “I just wanted to focus on driving and get it all done. I’m pushing now, and was also pushing at the beginning of the season, I don’t have an explanation for why it’s working now.”AdvertisementFar from wanting to lower his game after winning his third title, Hamilton had spent the weekend talking about how one of his biggest dreams remained to win the race in Brazil, which still eludes him after nine seasons in the series. He had spoken of how his childhood hero, Ayrton Senna, had taken eight seasons to win his home race, and how he aimed to emulate the Brazilian.Advertisement“I had the pace, just you can’t overtake here,” said Hamilton. “I was behind Nico for some time and it just killed my tires. It’s a shame, it is such a great track but you just can’t get close enough for the race.”Rosberg has been on a roll in scoring the last five pole positions and winning the Mexican Grand Prix two weeks ago, one race after Hamilton had won the U.S. Grand Prix — and the drivers’ title — because of an error by Rosberg in the final laps of that race.“Now at the moment, Nico is better,” said Niki Lauda, one of the Mercedes team directors, and a three-time world champion.Rosberg got off to an aggressive start, holding off a charging Hamilton in the first corner. Hamilton held position closely behind him for the first 13 laps, until Rosberg made his first pit stop. Hamilton tried to use this as an opportunity to overtake after his own pit stop on the following lap, but the Mercedes team uncharacteristically made a slightly slower pit stop, of 3.8 seconds, and he was unable to pass.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Toto Wolff, the Mercedes team director, had said on Saturday that trying to ensure that Rosberg finish second in the series was the final objective of the season for the team.Rosberg made his second pit stop after Lap 33, and Hamilton again tried to use the pit stop to pass his teammate. Hamilton stopped on the next lap, in 2.4 seconds. But he was again too far behind his teammate.Rosberg made his final pit stop after Lap 48, with Hamilton again stopping a lap later, and again he failed.AdvertisementBut by Lap 57, with Hamilton less than two seconds behind, Rosberg showed tension as he asked his engineer to not talk to him anymore, not wanting to be distracted.But within a few laps, Hamilton gave up the chase and by the end of the race, he finished 7.7 seconds behind his teammate. It was the 11th 1-2 finish for the Mercedes team this season, which equals a record the team set last year.Last season, the relationship between the two drivers became tense and aggressive as the two fought for the title. This year, although Hamilton dominated from the beginning, and has won a total 10 races to five for Rosberg, most of the friction came after Hamilton won the title.Since the race in Austin, Texas, last month, the two have exchanged cutting comments and questioned team orders considering their teammates. But Rosberg has suddenly appeared liberated.“I have been working hard, and at the moment it’s going really well,” Rosberg said. “Next race in Abu Dhabi I want to go for the win again.”The Mercedes team remains so dominant that Ferrari’s hopes to challenge for race victories and even the title next season look compromised, although Vettel, who finished just six seconds behind Hamilton, tried to remain optimistic.“Overall, I have to admit they were just a bit quicker,” he said. “But overall we were probably closer here than in many other races. It felt like a good race, but not very exciting, I was in a bit of a no man’s land and had nobody to fight with.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.