By TIM ROHANOCT. 4, 2015
After the final game of the season on Sunday, a 1-0 victory over the Washington Nationals, the Mets gathered in center field at Citi Field, waving and tipping their caps to fans holding signs and banners celebrating the team’s division title. Ricky Bones, the bullpen coach, tossed baseballs into the crowd.Ever since the Mets clinched the National League East eight days earlier, they had looked a bit distracted, caught in an awkward spot, trying to rest their veterans and clinch home-field advantage simultaneously. They were swept by the lowly Philadelphia Phillies in three games, struck out 17 times Saturday as Max Scherzer threw a no-hitter and had lost five consecutive games before Sunday’s win.Basking in the crowd’s cheers, the Mets looked relieved. Jeurys Familia had recorded his 43rd save this season, tying the franchise record set by Armando Benitez in 2001. Jacob deGrom had ended the season with 205 strikeouts, becoming the 11th Mets pitcher to reach 200 strikeouts in a year. The Mets had finished the season 90-72, their first 90-plus-win season since 2006. Now they could focus on playing the Dodgers in a National League division series set to start Friday in Los Angeles.“Let’s go beat L.A.,” David Wright said with a microphone, addressing the crowd.This game was meant to be a tuneup for the Mets, and at times it felt like a lackadaisical practice. The Mets’ offense had scored one run in 42 innings, until Curtis Granderson homered in the eighth inning. DeGrom pitched four innings and was followed by six relievers who needed to get extra work in. The Nationals looked so uninterested at times that the Mets carried a combined no-hitter into the seventh inning.AdvertisementEven though it was a short start, deGrom was dominant. He held the Nationals hitless on 72 pitches and struck out seven of the 14 batters he faced, all while working on his mechanics, trying to keep the ball down in the zone and fine-tuning his pitches for the postseason.AdvertisementThe Mets wanted deGrom to rest up for the division series. Earlier, the Mets had announced their starting rotation. DeGrom and Noah Syndergaard will start Games 1 and 2, and Matt Harvey will start Game 3 at home. Harvey can pitch only one game in the series because of restrictions related to his recovery from Tommy John surgery. If the series extends beyond three games, the Mets could bring back deGrom to pitch Game 4 on three days’ rest and Syndergaard to pitch Game 5 with normal rest.When Manager Terry Collins revealed that the Mets were considering this possibility, he stressed that a final decision had not been made. He said that the team had been careful with deGrom, Syndergaard and Harvey all year — monitoring their workloads, using a six-man rotation to provide extra days off — so it could line them up for this moment and “turn them loose.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Though deGrom has never pitched on three days’ rest, he seemed open to the idea. “Anything to help us win,” he said. But the decision will still hinge largely on how deGrom pitches in Game 1, and the Mets’ standing in the series after three games.“This is why I hate to tell you guys stuff,” Collins said, addressing a roomful of reporters. “Because if we do it, we’re wrong. And if we don’t do it, we’re wrong. It’s just a thought. ‘Hey, look, there could be an opportunity.’ We don’t know how he’s going to do Friday, you know? If he has a good game Friday, throws 120 pitches, he probably won’t come back in Game 4.”Collins added: “The issue is going to be: How is he feeling? Where are we at?”The Mets were in this position because Steven Matz’s status was still unclear. After an awkward night’s sleep last week, he felt stiffness in his upper back. Matz exercised his back Sunday and was expected to throw long toss on Monday, throw a bullpen session Tuesday and possibly throw 90 to 95 pitches in an instructional league game Thursday.The Mets hope that by then they will be able to decide whether to use him as a starter, as a reliever or not at all. If they decided to include him on the division series roster and later replaced him because his injury flared up, they would not be able to use him in the next round of the postseason, should they advance. They have until Friday, the day the series starts, to submit their roster.But for one more time, at least, the Mets wanted to pause and celebrate what they had done so far. General Manager Sandy Alderson had set a goal of 90 wins during spring training in 2014. At the time, the Mets were still in rebuilding mode, and Alderson was roundly mocked for the number.Advertisement“Sandy just misspoke,” Wright said, grinning. “He meant 2015. He just didn’t make that very clear.”The Mets could joke about it now. Collins called it a “huge step” for the organization. To toast the accomplishment, he brought a cup of white wine and ice to his postgame news conference.“Cheers!” he said, raising his cup.A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Mets Win a Finale That Feels Like a Practice.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.