AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — There is a sound, and also sad, reason why attacks that wrought carnage in Paris on Friday night did not get past the gates of Stade de France in the northern suburb of St.-Denis.It is the same reason why Germany’s national team chose to stay inside the stadium after playing France, rather than risk being driven through the heart of Paris to their hotel.In a word, it is security. Soccer — in fact, all sports — have been forced down the years to adopt safety measures designed to prevent disasters like the stampedes at Heysel Stadium in Belgium and Hillsborough Stadium in England in the ’80s, or the terrorist attack against the Israeli team at the 1972 Munich Olympics.Two suicide attackers apparently tried to enter the stadium Friday night before they detonated their bombs near the gates. They never made it past the guards.That is of paramount importance, because France is set to host soccer’s European Championship next June and July. U.E.F.A. has extended the Euro 2016 tournament to a record 24 teams — three times the size the event used to be — and it will be spread over more stadiums than ever before.The competition will stretch over 51 games, and be played in 10 different stadiums throughout France. A meeting to review security had been scheduled, well before the attacks, for Monday. It now takes on even greater resonance and urgency.Soccer cannot be complacent. But outside of France, it did go on through Saturday and Sunday, with major contests in South America, where Argentina and Brazil tied, 1-1, in a 2018 World Cup qualifier. In Stockholm, Sweden eked out a narrow 2-1 win over Denmark, with the return match set for Tuesday in Copenhagen to decide which of the Scandinavian neighbors will get to play in France seven months from now.Sports can seem near the point of insignificance after this weekend — or it can be regarded as being essential to defying those who are bent on destroying the harmonious interactions of people around the world.Once the world-champion German team returned safely to Frankfurt early Saturday morning, its national soccer federation put out a statement: “We came to Paris to do what connects us all — to play football together, against one another and in friendship. We all looked forward to playing in the Stade de France, to have a great night of sport, which turned into a nightmare.“It was a dull bang which will remain in our heads for a long time. We spent the night asking ourselves how is such inhumanity even possible? We lost a game of football on Friday, but nothing is as irrelevant as that right now.”Some hours after Germany’s homecoming, a huge match to benefit the children’s charity, Unicef, went ahead at Manchester United’s Old Trafford Stadium on Saturday. It rained and it poured, but every seat in the huge Manchester stadium was filled to watch a team of British and Irish players led by David Beckham on one side. The man who intended to be captain of the other team, a “Rest of the World” lineup, could not bring himself to attend.Zinedine Zidane said that he could not play this weekend, not even for a cause he believed wholeheartedly in. Zidane, now 43, was probably the most adored player in France’s history when he was in his prime. How could he play games while his nation is in mourning? How could he take part when a French national team player he knows well, the defender Lassana Diarra, was dealing with the death of a close cousin, Asta Diakite, who was among those killed in the terrorist attacks?Zidane honed his skills in street games in Marseille, in the south of France, and he was held in particularly high esteem by the thousands of French-Algerian immigrants who live in the poor streets around St.-Denis.More than 17 years ago, I visited one of the dozen or so Algerian cafes and restaurants near the Stade de France before a World Cup quarterfinal between France and Italy.“All of us are like Zidane — before he had money,” said Khedidja, a young, struggling mother working at one of the cafes. Not one customer, nor anyone in the neighborhood, had a ticket for the game. Yet on the side of a building in the shadow of that gleaming new stadium, Adidas had superimposed a gigantic picture of Zidane on a blue background.“From here,” Khedidja had said, “we can hear the crowd. We watch only on TV, but when Zizou is playing, I feel more French than the French.”Her parents, and Zidane’s parents, came from the Berber-speaking part of northern Algeria. Zidane was their player, a Muslim of similar stock, and the folks in St.-Denis would explain the flashes of temper when Zidane was insulted by a Saudi player and was red carded during a subsequent World Cup final, in 2006, for butting the Italian Marco Materazzi who abused his family.France, better than any other nation at the 1998 World Cup, embraced all colors and creeds as it beat the world and won the title. Is it any wonder that Zizou felt unable to play, on this of all weekends?Advertisement