AdvertisementSupported byOrioles 9, Yankees 4By Billy WitzBALTIMORE — After Brett Gardner hit a dribbler in front of the plate, he sprinted down the first-base line as always, legs churning and dirt flying, until he ran through the bag.Arriving just after the ball landed in the glove of first baseman Chris Davis, Gardner grabbed his helmet with both hands, removed it from his clean-shaven head and slammed it to the ground.It was one of several overt signs of frustration the Yankees have displayed in recent days, their excitement over reaching the playoffs for the first time since 2012 tempered by their inability to claim the one victory this weekend that would have cemented a home game for Tuesday’s wild-card playoff.In the end, the Yankees got what they needed despite continuing their own foibles with a 9-4 loss to the Baltimore Orioles, their sixth loss in seven games, only because the Houston Astros lost to the Arizona Diamondbacks.That ensured that the Astros, who avoided a playoff for the second wild-card spot because the Los Angeles Angels lost to the Texas Rangers, would travel to Yankee Stadium for Tuesday’s game. If the Astros had won, the Yankees would have been forced to travel.The winner of Tuesday’s playoff will travel to Kansas City for a best-of-five series that begins Thursday.“It’s not how we drew it up, but in the end it doesn’t matter,” third baseman Chase Headley said. “We’ve been somewhat of a streaky team all year, so hopefully we can get a streak going the right way.”It was clear as the Yankees packed up their belongings and prepared to return to New York for a workout Monday that they were relishing the chance for a fresh start. Their power hitters have been absent lately — Brian McCann, who ended an 0-for-21 skid with a seventh-inning single, is batting .174 with three extra-base hits since Sept. 1, and Alex Rodriguez, who has a team-leading 33 home runs, has hit one in his last 60 plate appearances.“I feel fine,” Rodriguez said. “The thing for me is you want to swing at strikes. If they’re not throwing strikes, you want to pass the baton and take your walks. But this time of year, statistics don’t matter. You want productive at-bats. The only stat that matters is wins.”The Yankees’ hitting in the clutch has suffered in the last week — they are 11 for 66 with runners in scoring position — and the bullpen’s circle of trust looks more like a triangle, with little else beyond Andrew Miller, Dellin Betances and Justin Wilson. Caleb Cotham and Bryan Mitchell surrendered home runs to Davis, his league-leading 46th and 47th, and Chris Capuano did little to inspire confidence that he could fill the left-handed specialist role left open by Chasen Shreve’s struggles.Still, it could be worse for the Yankees. They will send out their best pitcher, Masahiro Tanaka, against the Astros left-hander Dallas Keuchel, a Cy Young Award contender who will be pitching on three days’ rest but has thrown 16 shutout innings against the Yankees, including seven at Yankee Stadium in late August.At home, Keuchel is 15-0 with a 1.46 earned run average. On the road, he is human: 5-8, 3.77.“He’s one of the best,” Rodriguez said.“But at this time of year, whether it’s Keuchel or Greinke or Kershaw or Price — they’re all brand names,” Rodriguez said referring to the Los Angeles Dodgers’ Zack Greinke and Clayton Kershaw, and the Toronto Blue Jays’ David Price. “You have to beat them all, one by one.”Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said, “Hopefully the third time is the charm.”The Yankees were charmed on Sunday.They set out trying to wrap up home-field advantage, but not at all costs. Girardi was not going to use Betances, who had pitched three of the last four days, and wanted to give Wilson and Miller only some brief work.“Obviously, we’re going to do everything we can to win,” Girardi said before the game. “Now, saying that, I have to be smart about it. I can’t burn guys out in the bullpen in that sense to where if I needed two innings out of them on Tuesday, I couldn’t use them.”They were hoping Michael Pineda, wildly inconsistent this season, could deliver a command performance. Instead, like Luis Severino and Ivan Nova on Saturday, Pineda fell behind immediately.Pineda, who is 6 feet 7 inches, is generally a jovial giant, who even on days when he pitches — a time when many pitchers are quiet and contemplative — walks around the clubhouse listening to music on his headphones and singing to himself.On the mound, Pineda, who wears his cap off kilter, remains in his own world. He talks to himself in his native Spanish, gesticulates with his arms and paces around the mound frequently.On Sunday, he had two occasions to express himself. One was after Matt Wieters ripped a two-run single in the first inning, Pineda angrily slapping his glove on his knee when the hit eluded the glove of the leaping first baseman Greg Bird. In the fourth, with the Yankees trailing by 2-1, Pineda threw his arms up in anguish after J. J. Hardy’s grounder up the middle barely eluded the diving second baseman Dustin Ackley. That scored Wieters to make it 3-1.When Pineda got the ball back, he rifled it into the turf toward the Yankees’ dugout, then asked the home-plate umpire for a new one.“Right now, I don’t feel pretty good,” Pineda said later. “I feel a little mad, a little angry.”The Yankees, after the Orioles feasted on their relievers, soon trailed, 7-1. They closed to within 7-3 on Bird’s run-scoring single in the seventh — their only hit in 12 at-bats with runners in scoring position. But Ackley, batting with the bases loaded, grounded into a forceout, and Didi Gregorius popped out. From there, the Yankees kept an eye on the right-field scoreboard and had people in the dugout keeping an ear tuned to what was happening with the Astros. When Girardi came out to remove Miller, with Davis at the plate, in the eighth inning, it was a clue.“That’s when I knew it was over,” Headley said.Now, Girardi and his coaches will begin settling their roster for Tuesday’s playoff. It will have fewer pitchers, and probably more pinch-runners or other specialists available. But preparing for every contingency may be a smaller task than the Yankees’ forgetting the past week and finding the form they will need to advance. A handful of players — Carlos Beltran, Justin Wilson and McCann — have played in the wild-card playoff before.It runs anathema to the even-keeled, we’ll-bounce-back-the-next-day approach that is a requirement for a 162-game season composed of series.“There’s emotions for sure,” Beltran said. “The difference is, in the wild card, there is no tomorrow.”Advertisement