AdvertisementSupported byBy Benjamin HoffmanThe Philadelphia Eagles finally allowed a rushing touchdown, but it came as a surprise to everyone, including the Washington Redskins. Quarterback Kirk Cousins fumbled a snap at the two-yard line, picked up the ball and scored the first rushing touchdown of his career. Later in the game, Cousins used his arm to drive the team 90 yards for a game-winning score.Not much has gone well for the Eagles this season, but the team had largely locked down their opponents’ running games, allowing just 3.1 yards a carry and no touchdowns through three games. Today was a different story as the Redskins ran the ball 32 times for 127 yards and the unlikely score.Cousins, who had just 55 career rushing yards in four seasons coming into the game, managed to capitalize on his own mistake in the second quarter, sneaking under the pile at the goal line to complete a 69-yard drive. Prior to the run, Cousins had driven the team down the field, with a pair of nice passes to Ryan Grant and a long pass interference call providing much of the yardage.lol.cousins fumbles, recovers, crosses the plane, touchdownso ridiculousbut ill take it #redskinsIt was on the team’s final drive, however, that Cousins truly shined. Behind 20-16, Cousins and the offense reeled off 15 plays that chewed up 5 minutes and 39 seconds, and Cousins connected with Pierre Garcon for a four-yard touchdown pass that won the game.“I wasn’t capable of doing that when I came in the league as a rookie,” Cousins said of the long drive. “It takes time. It takes failure. It takes learning from experiences.”Time of possession proved vital for Washington. The Redskins controlled the ball for 41 of the game’s 60 minutes, giving the Eagles little chance to score.Considering the chaos created by Tony Romo’s injury and the Giants’ inconsistency, the Redskins are unexpectedly contenders for a division title despite a 2-2 record. The enthusiasm could be short-lived, however, as the team travels to Atlanta next week to face the red-hot Falcons.Including today’s win, Cousins has just a 4-9 career record as a starter, but the team has stuck by him, leaving Robert Griffin III, who was medically cleared to play, inactive this week. The choice proved wise.Advertisement