By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 17, 2015
Islanders Coach Jack Capuano knows how Eastern teams can struggle when they return home from a Western road trip, so he was glad his team did not show any rust or jet lag in its first game back in Brooklyn on Monday night.John Tavares had two goals and an assist to lead the Islanders to a 5-2 victory over the Arizona Coyotes.“I thought our guys were resilient tonight,” Capuano said. “We played a good hockey team, and I thought we battled through it and had some legs under us.”Frans Nielsen, Brock Nelson and Steve Bernier also scored, and Kyle Okposo had three assists, increasing his team-leading total to 12, as the Islanders won for the third time in four games. Jaroslav Halak stopped 31 shots to help the Islanders improve to 6-3-2 at home.AdvertisementMartin Hanzal and Mikkel Boedker scored in the third period for Arizona, and Anders Lindback finished with 27 saves. Hanzal’s goal was just his third of the season, but it lifted his team-leading point total to 17.AdvertisementArizona fell to 0-2 on its four-game trip and on Thursday night in Montreal will look to avoid its first three-game losing streak of the season.“We’re making mistakes, plain and simple,” Coyotes Coach Dave Tippett said. “We’re making mistakes that cost us early in the game. We have to wipe those mistakes.”The Islanders won two of three on a California trip last week, winning at San Jose last Tuesday and at Anaheim in the finale on Friday. After returning home Saturday morning, they did not have long to get back on Eastern time before returning to the ice on Monday.“Coming back from the West Coast wasn’t easy,” Tavares said. “I think if you ask most guys, they probably didn’t feel their best. But we battled through it and were strong mentally.”The Islanders took control early, generating the game’s first seven shots, with Lindback stopping the first six. They took the lead on the seventh when, 25 seconds after Antoine Vermette was sent off for hooking, Tavares won a face-off and took a pass from Okposo across the blue line.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tavares carried the puck on his off wing and flung a backhand cross-ice pass for Nielsen, who buried the puck in the vacant cage, making the score 1-0.“Just an incredible pass by Johnny,” Nielsen said, referring to Tavares. “Nothing else really to say about it.”AdvertisementArizona responded after the goal, posting nine of the game’s next 12 shots, but Halak stopped them all. He got some help from Nelson in the second period. After Halak stopped Connor Murphy’s sharp-angle shot, the puck squirted to Coyotes forward Tobias Rieder, but Nelson blocked his chance with his right leg, keeping the Isles ahead.The Islanders broke it open with three goals in the first 12 minutes of the third period, including scores from Nelson and Tavares 4 minutes 15 seconds apart.“We battled hard for two periods,” Lindback said, “and they got one early, which kind of set the tone for the third period.”Nelson took a pass at the top of the crease from Casey Cizikas and buried it in a vacant net, stretching the Islanders’ lead to two goals 1:23 into the third. It was Nelson’s fifth point, and his third goal, in the last five games since he was moved to the team’s top line with Tavares and Okposo.“That line has been playing well,” Capuano said. “That line has definitely, over the last week, helped our hockey club.”Nelson and Okposo later set up Tavares’s goal at 5:38. Bernier then redirected Johnny Boychuk’s blast for his first goal with the Islanders to make it 4-0 with 8:10 remaining.“Bernie just gets into those hard areas,” Tavares said. “He gets to the front of the net, and it was good to see him get rewarded today.”Hanzal and Boedker scored 2:08 apart to pull Arizona to 4-2 behind with just over two minutes remaining.“Jaro was great all night,” Tavares said of Halak. “It’s unfortunate we couldn’t keep the zero for him. He was great, especially in the last 10 minutes, when they kind of just started throwing everything at the net, and a couple seemed to find its way.”AdvertisementHowever, Tavares sealed the win with an empty-netter with 40 seconds to go.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefing | Hockey; Islanders Defeat Coyotes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.