By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 17, 2015
T. J. Yates took over after Brian Hoyer sustained a concussion on Monday night and rallied the visiting Houston Texans to a 10-6 victory over Cincinnati, handing the Bengals their first loss.Cincinnati (8-1) was trying to give the N.F.L. its first threesome of 9-0 teams by joining New England and Carolina. Yates, a backup quarterback with a history of beating the Bengals, did it again.It was appropriate that the Bengals’ first loss came against the Texans (4-5), who made Andy Dalton look very bad during first-round playoff victories over Cincinnati in the 2011 and 2012 seasons. Yates was behind that first one.Yates, who returned to the Texans on Oct. 28, took over in the third quarter and threw a 22-yard touchdown pass to DeAndre Hopkins.AdvertisementDalton had another tough time against a Texans defense. Cincinnati’s final chance slipped away when A. J. Green fumbled after a catch with 40 seconds left.AdvertisementHoyer headed to the locker room to be examined for a concussion late in the third quarter, with the Bengals leading, 6-3. He completed 12 of 22 passes for 123 yards with an interception.Yates, who had not thrown a pass this season, was 5 of 11 for 69 yards with no interceptions.SAINTS FIRE RYAN Saints Coach Sean Payton promised changes were coming to his sagging defense. He started by firing the defensive coordinator Rob Ryan, whose duties will be assumed by the senior defensive assistant Dennis Allen.The move, announced on Payton’s weekly radio show on WWL-AM, came a day after the Saints allowed 526 yards in a 47-14 loss to the Washington Redskins. The Saints rank last in the N.F.L. in yards allowed per game, with 424.7; yards allowed per play, with 6.7; and points allowed per game, with 31.5.“I’m disappointed for Rob it didn’t work out,” Payton said. “He’s a fantastic staff guy. He’s a guy that was respected greatly, not only in the locker room but by his peers.”Nevertheless, Payton added: “The direction we were going wasn’t good. We really struggled with substitutions, getting lined up, getting our guys the defensive call and being able to function.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Injuries have hampered the unit lately, but New Orleans has ranked consistently low defensively for a season and a half, having finished last year ranked 31st.Ryan, the twin brother of Bills Coach Rex Ryan, was hired in 2013, and his unit ranked fourth that season but has struggled since.AdvertisementAllen, a former N.F.L. defensive coordinator and head coach, was hired this past off-season by New Orleans, where he had been a Payton assistant from 2006 to 2010. He was the secondary coach for Payton’s 2009 Saints squad that won the Super Bowl.Allen left New Orleans in 2011 to become Denver’s defensive coordinator for a season before taking over as Oakland’s head coach in 2012. The Raiders fired Allen during the 2014 season. His return to New Orleans was unconventional in that he was not initially hired to replace Ryan, but to work alongside him while shoring up the secondary. (AP)OFFICIATING MISTAKE CITED The Baltimore Ravens have been losing close games all season. Their latest defeat was the cruelest yet — in part because it involved an officiating error.The N.F.L. acknowledged that Jacksonville should have been penalized on the play that preceded its winning field goal against Baltimore on Sunday. Although the Jaguars were not set before hurriedly snapping the ball with one second on the clock, the officials allowed the play to be run.Baltimore linebacker Elvis Dumervil subsequently grabbed the face mask of quarterback Blake Bortles while making a tackle, a penalty that gave Jacksonville one more play with the clock at 0:00. Jason Myers then kicked a 53-yard field goal to deal the Ravens (2-7) a stunning 22-20 loss.“The correct call in this case would have been to penalize the offense for a false start because all 11 players were not set and whistle to stop the play,” the N.F.L. spokesman Michael Signora said. “The ensuing 10-second runoff should have ended the game.” (AP)ROMO MAY RETURN Tony Romo is eligible to play again for Dallas.The Cowboys, the defending N.F.C. East champions, have lost all seven games Romo has missed with a broken left collarbone, jeopardizing their playoff hopes heading into Sunday’s visit to Miami.Coach Jason Garrett stopped short of saying Romo would play against the Dolphins, and Garrett would not declare that the broken bone had fully healed.Romo, 35 and in his 10th season as the starter, has had two broken collarbones. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Texans and Backup Send Bengals to First Loss of Season .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.