AdvertisementSupported byBy Tyler KepnerThe Houston Astros and the Chicago Cubs combined for 197 losses in 2011. No National League teams were worse, and by December of that year, both teams would have new people running their baseball operations. Jeff Luhnow started fresh in Houston, like Theo Epstein in Chicago, both with the necessities for a methodical rebuild: high draft picks and patience.In the 2012 draft, Luhnow chose first and took shortstop Carlos Correa. In the 2013 draft, Epstein chose second and took third baseman Kris Bryant. This season, with the Astros now in the American League, Correa and Bryant helped lead their teams to the playoffs. On Monday, they were named rookies of the year.Correa won a tight race with Cleveland shortstop Francisco Lindor, collecting 17 first-place votes to Lindor’s 13 in balloting by the Baseball Writers’ Association of America. Miguel Sano, Minnesota’s designated hitter, finished third.Bryant won unanimously in the National League, getting all 30 first-place votes — just as another Chicago slugger, Jose Abreu of the White Sox, did in the A.L. last season. San Francisco third baseman Matt Duffy was the runner-up, followed by Pittsburgh infielder Jung-Ho Kang. Mets starter Noah Syndergaard was fourth.There were 21 rookies last season with 400 plate appearances, and Bryant (.858) and Correa (.857) had the best on-base plus slugging percentages. Correa, who turned 21 in September, hit .279 with 22 home runs and 68 runs batted in. Bryant, 23, hit .275 with 26 homers and 99 R.B.I. Neither spent the full schedule in the majors, and both still have six seasons left before free agency. Correa, who was 17 when drafted from the Puerto Rico Baseball Academy, had never played above Class A before this season. The Astros signed a veteran shortstop, Jed Lowrie, to a three-year deal last December and did not count on a major impact from Correa in 2015. But he stormed through the minors and forced his promotion in June.“It was so quick, the light bulb went off, realizing this kid was meant to be at the highest level,” Luhnow said in late July. “And if there’s a higher level than this, he’s probably meant to be there, because he rises to the occasion of the competition around him, and usually beyond it. It’s really impressive.”The Astros beat the Yankees in the A.L. wild-card game before losing to Kansas City in a five-game division series. Correa went 4 for 4 with two homers in Game 4, when the Astros nearly advanced before the Royals rallied.“It was a season I only thought would happen in a dream,” Correa said Monday. “If you had told me before the year started all that was going to happen, I would not believe it.”The Astros had a chance to take Bryant with the first pick in 2013, but chose starter Mark Appel instead. Appel split last season in Class AA and AAA, going 10-3 with a 4.37 earned run average in 25 starts.The Cubs, who have emphasized position players with their high draft picks, were thrilled to get Bryant, who played at the University of San Diego. Bryant — who is listed at 6 feet 5 and whose father, Mike, played in the minors for Boston — spent an hour and a half with Cubs executives after a tournament game, impressing them with his nuanced understanding of mechanics.“The more we’ve learned about him, he’s a baseball rat,” said Cubs General Manager Jed Hoyer, Epstein’s top lieutenant. “He really thinks about his at-bats.”Bryant is something of a postmodern hitter. While Kansas City won the World Series with a lineup that emphasizes contact, major league hitters set another record for strikeouts in 2015. In an interview in May, Bryant said his goal was to put the ball in the air four times each game, and he was willing to accept strikeouts as a trade-off for damage.“To me, a strikeout’s just another out, really,” said Bryant, who led the N.L. with 199. “I think where the game’s going nowadays, there’s going to be way more strikeouts, not just from power hitters, but from guys that usually don’t strike out as much. It’s just the nature of the beast. Every pitcher out there is an ace.”Bryant, whose father raised him on the hitting theories of Ted Williams, learned immediately to stay disciplined. Pitchers treated him cautiously from the start, and he was willing to take his walks. Bryant did not hit a homer in his first 20 games, but maintained a .411 on-base percentage in that time.When the power did show up, it never left. Bryant batted only .176 in the postseason, but in his final at-bat of the N.L. Championship Series, he pulled a long homer into the Wrigley Field bleachers. The Mets finished their sweep the next inning, but for Bryant, it was a fitting end to a breakout season.Bryant said Monday that he would like to make more contact next season, use the whole field more and improve defensively. He would also like to go further in October.“I think there is a way to top this year,” Bryant said, “and that’s to win a World Series.”Advertisement