AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben RothenbergIn response to a lawsuit filed a month ago by Eugenie Bouchard seeking damages for a head injury sustained from a fall during the United States Open, the United States Tennis Association contends that the player did not follow protocol and refused offers of medical attention.Bouchard sued the tennis association and the U.S.T.A. Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in October in United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York. The U.S.T.A. filed a 16-page rebuttal Friday. Bouchard was forced to withdraw from the tournament after the fall on Sept. 4, citing a concussion, and has subsequently withdrawn from four tournaments this fall. At the China Open in Beijing in October, Bouchard tried to play but retired mid-match in the first round because of dizziness.The U.S.T.A. dismissed Bouchard’s claims of lost earnings resulting from her fall as “entirely speculative and uncertain.” The U.S.T.A.’s response said Bouchard refused offers of medical attention on the night of her fall, and cited her recent social media activity as inconsistent with her claims of continuing impairment from the fall.In the initial complaint, Bouchard claimed her fall was caused by “a slippery, foreign and dangerous substance on the floor.” The U.S.T.A. did not dispute the presence of any such substance, but said that with the room partly lit when Bouchard entered, “the conditions alleged by Plaintiff to have caused or contributed to her injuries or damages were open and obvious.” The U.S.T.A. contended that Bouchard was violating an established protocol by being in the physiotherapy room where she says her fall occurred, saying that she lacked “the express consent of, or accompaniment of, authorized personnel.” The U.S.T.A. denied that it had a duty to provide any warning to Bouchard and said that she “knowingly and voluntarily assumed all risks of injury inherent in and associated with the actions involved.”Benedict Morelli, a lawyer representing Bouchard, mocked the notion of his client’s having assumed any risk by entering a room through an open door, calling it victim-blaming. “Assumption of the risk applies to skiing down a mountain, which is an inherently dangerous thing to do,” he said. “Or jumping out of an airplane. Is that this? Of course not. You assume the risk walking into a room?”The U.S.T.A. and its lawyers declined to make any additional comment outside of its remarks in the court filing. Advertisement