AdvertisementSupported byGiants 24, Bills 10By Bill PenningtonORCHARD PARK, N.Y. — Near the midpoint of the fourth quarter Sunday, the Giants were living a recurring nightmare.Despite being underdogs against the Buffalo Bills, they had surprisingly dominated the early play. But in the fourth quarter, they were struggling to protect the lead they had built, something they had also done in each of their previous three games this season. One of those contests had nonetheless ended in victory; two had not.On Sunday, it was the Bills who found new energy late in the game, pulling 6 points behind the Giants before a roaring, reinvigorated home crowd. As the Giants waited to run a play from their own 49-yard line, eyes darted around the formation, tense expressions conveying a collective thought: This cannot be happening again.Giants quarterback Eli Manning went to the line of scrimmage, surveyed the defense and turned his gaze toward running back Rashad Jennings.“We talk in practice all the time — if we both see this from the defense, then I’ll do this, and he’ll do that,” Jennings later said.The Bills blitzed, Jennings sprinted into the flat as had been arranged, and Manning hurried a short throw there. The rest was football instinct. After catching the ball, Jennings deked one defender, then two more, dashing down the sideline for the 51-yard touchdown reception that sealed the Giants’ 24-10 victory.In a flash, the Giants’ season had been rejuvenated. Once 0-2, and contemplating a 1-3 start with a quarter of the schedule completed, the Giants are instead 2-2.At an early juncture in the season, it was more than one victory.“If we’re 1-3, everyone is wondering how or if we’re going to get out of the hole,” tackle Justin Pugh said. “At 2-2, we know for sure we’re in the mix now.”Running back Andre Williams said: “Being 2-2 means the Giants are relevant, and that’s important to us. To be able to relieve the pressure we felt is big.”Jennings’s touchdown was the score that finally buried the Bills, but for most of the game the Giants played with the resolve of a team accustomed to winning in difficult settings rather than one that had endured consecutive losing seasons.The team’s defense held the Bills, who came into the game leading the N.F.L. in rushing, to just 55 yards on the ground, with an average of 2.3 yards per run. Buffalo, which had been averaging 33.3 points per game, converted just 19 percent of its third-down plays and had only two first downs in the first half.Before Sunday, the Giants had given up considerable passing yardage and rarely pressured the quarterback, but Buffalo quarterback Tyrod Taylor threw for 274 yards, which is not a substantial total in the modern N.F.L. And the Giants’ defensive coordinator, Steve Spagnuolo, did a good job keeping Taylor out of a rhythm with multiple blitzes and changing coverage schemes.But the defense’s shining moment came at the most unexpected time of all — in the fourth quarter, when the Giants made a goal-line stand. It was a stop that stalled a building Bills rally and allowed Jennings’s touchdown to have far more significance later.The Giants led by 16-3 at the half, and after a scoreless third quarter, the Bills moved to the Giants’ 5-yard line early in the fourth. On a second down, Taylor threw to the fleet wide receiver Robert Woods, who caught the ball in the flat at the 7 and appeared to have ample space to at least get close to the goal line. But the rookie safety Landon Collins, whose responsibilities on the play did not include covering Woods, dashed over and tackled Woods at the 5. On the next play, Taylor tried to sprint around the right end. Giants defensive end Kerry Wynn, who is 264 pounds, chased down Taylor, knocking him out of bounds at the 1. Buffalo Coach Rex Ryan went for it on fourth down, with Taylor throwing a swing pass to running back Karlos Williams, who was stopped short of the goal line by cornerback Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie and linebacker J. T. Thomas.“Incredible plays by those guys,” Giants Coach Tom Coughlin said of the goal-line stand. “That shows grit, because there was plenty of time still left.”In the third quarter, with the Bills at the Giants’ 10, the defense had also come up big, with Wynn slicing past two Buffalo linemen to corral Karlos Williams in the backfield for a 7-yard loss.Eventually, the Bills lined up for a 30-yard field-goal attempt that kicker Dan Carpenter missed. That kept the Giants ahead, 16-3.The Giants built that lead on a productive mix of running and passing plays in the first half. Although the Bills came into the game leading the league in rushing defense, the Giants attacked the middle of the defensive front with punishing running plays. The Giants gained 64 yards on the ground in the first half, with Andre Williams running for 31 yards on seven carries.The persistent running game drew the Buffalo linebackers and safeties closer to the line of scrimmage, which paid off when Manning looked for receivers running slants to the middle of the field. Manning, who completed 20 of 35 passes for 212 yards and three touchdowns, threw a 21-yard touchdown pass to Dwayne Harris in the first quarter and an 11-yard scoring pass to Rueben Randle in the second.Throughout the game, the Giants also benefited from a glut of Buffalo penalties that extended Giants drives and hindered Bills possessions. Buffalo committed 17 penalties for 135 yards. None of the Bills’ biggest stars had breakout games, with Taylor completing 28 of 42 passes, although there were dropped passes. Karlos Williams had 40 yards on 18 rushes. No Bills wide receiver had more than five catches. At the game’s end, the home fans booed the Bills off the field.Beneath the stands, in their cramped locker room, the Giants were ebullient.“It’s exciting because we’re back in it,” Manning said. “If you’re 1-3, you know you’re fighting uphill. We’ve won two in a row, and with everything that is going on in the division, we’re right there. After our start, that’s a good feeling.”Advertisement