
On Soccer By                     
 SAM BORDEN
 
NOV. 16, 2015
LONDON — Sitting at a small table in the news conference room at Wembley Stadium on Monday afternoon, Hugo Lloris, the goalkeeper and captain of France’s national soccer team, listened to the question and frowned. Then he hesitated. Then he shrugged. It was clear he wanted to give the right answer, the supportive answer, the answer the French soccer federation would want him to give. But Lloris wanted to be truthful, too.The query had been simple: Were the players on the French team unanimous in wanting to go ahead with Tuesday’s scheduled match against England so soon after the Paris terrorist attacks? But Lloris’s reaction quickly made it apparent that the answer was more complex.“We had some concerns about the game,” Lloris, who has played three years for London’s Tottenham Hotspur, said. “But at the end, the president confirmed that we had to play this game, and I think, like all my teammates, we respect this decision, and it will be a good opportunity to represent the French nation.”He added, “I think maybe the French nation is more important than the French football tomorrow.”It was, in many ways, the perfect answer. There are surely many arguments to be made both for and against playing Tuesday’s match, and Lloris’s coda could theoretically be used as support for any of them.France and England paid a moving tribute to the victims of the Paris attacks before a friendly match between the countries’ national teams.Lloris, though, seemed genuine in his understanding of the larger purpose of the game. There are so many tropes these days about sports as the great unifier (of people, of cultures) and sports as the great escape (from tragedy, from pain), but the truest homily that often appears in situations like this is the notion that sports is, and should be, a way to showcase the unbreakable rhythm of life.AdvertisementPut another way: The French team should play on Tuesday because, well, that is what the French team is supposed to do.Advertisement“We know it’s going to be an occasion so full of emotion,” France’s manager, Didier Deschamps, said. “But we have to work. We have a duty to perform.”It will not be easy. Of course it won’t. There were several French players who were disappointed that they were not consulted by the president of the French federation, Noël Le Graët, before Le Graët decided on Saturday morning that the match would go on. Their feelings are easy to understand.Two players, in particular, were directly affected by the terrorist attacks: Antoine Griezmann, a midfielder, was relieved to learn that his sister, who had been at the concert hall where terrorists killed 89 people, had survived. Lassana Diarra was shaken to learn that his cousin, who had also been in central Paris, was among those killed.“We shared this grief together,” Deschamps said.Deschamps and Lloris both spoke at length about the importance of being together as a team — a family — over the three days since the attacks, but it was also clear that some alternatives might have been welcomed, too. The French team remained at the Stade de France until 3 a.m. Saturday (in part to support the German team, its opponent on Friday, as its officials tried to figure out a safe way to return home) before returning to its training base at Clairefontaine, about an hour south of Paris.Deschamps said that he tried to eat something and go to sleep then, but that “it was difficult to do either of those things.” His mind and his heart were racing just like everyone else’s.Yet instead of allowing the players to go home to their families, the French federation kept the team together at the complex, holding training on Saturday and Sunday before the team flew to England on Monday. That decision, much like the one made by Deschamps and Germany’s coach, Joachim Löw, at halftime on Friday night to keep the news about the unfolding attacks in Paris from their teams, is one that will be debated for a while. Lloris, again seeming to speak diplomatically, said the decision to keep the team at Clairefontaine “was taken quickly” but “handled very well.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the end, playing — simply showing up for work — may be the closest thing the French players can do to connect with their compatriots. The relationship between athletes and their fans is different in Europe than in the United States, in part because of how little interaction players have with the news media — thus limiting the nonplaying exposure they have — and in part because of the culture.AdvertisementLloris and his teammates did not have the chance to visit shelters for victims or their families, did not have the opportunity to even spend the day with their own wives or children or friends. Right or wrong, they went back to work almost immediately. And, on Tuesday, they will show up and do their jobs.England’s team, it should be said, will stand with them. England Manager Roy Hodgson spoke about how the night would be “special,” and his captain, Wayne Rooney, said England has to “be as respectful as we can.”Wembley Way is already lighted in the blue, white and red of France’s flag, and one British newspaper printed the words to “La Marseillaise,” the French national anthem, on its front page on Monday.Whatever one thinks about playing versus postponing, Lloris said the moment when the anthem begins will provide a moment of clarity.“It will be about solidarity,” he said. “It’s important for us that we sing it together. And it’s amazing, too, that the English fans will sing along as well.”A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Amid Many Emotions, No Choice but to Play .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »