By KEN BELSONNOV. 16, 2015
The Denver Broncos and their quarterback Peyton Manning received another reminder on Sunday that Manning’s illustrious career might be nearing an end.In the first quarter of Sunday’s 29-13 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs, Manning overtook Brett Favre to become the N.F.L.’s career passing leader when he completed a pass to running back Ronnie Hillman.That turned out to be the highlight of the day for Manning and the Broncos (7-2). Two quarters later, he was benched in favor of Brock Osweiler. Manning’s line was dreadful: five completions on 20 attempts for 35 yards, no touchdowns and four interceptions.After the game, Manning said that he had played with a sore foot, injured ribs and a painful right shoulder.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“By going out there and trying to help the team, I ended up hurting the team,” he told reporters.AdvertisementOn Monday, ESPN, citing people in the league, reported that Manning had a tear of the plantar fascia ligament in his left foot.AdvertisementCoach Gary Kubiak told reporters that he should have kept Manning out.“To be honest, I was protecting him because I was worried about him,” Kubiak said. “I am disappointed in myself. This is on me. I should have probably made the decision not to play him.”He has also said that Osweiler will start on Sunday against the Chicago Bears.For Manning, at 39, any injury prompts speculation about retirement. Kubiak and his players, though, are standing by Manning.“All the attention is toward getting Manning healthy,” Kubiak said.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Broncos Face Painful Choices With an Ailing Manning.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.