By ANDREW DASNOV. 16, 2015
Tuesday’s showcase friendly between France and England (3 p.m. Eastern time, Fox Sports 1) has surely morphed into something else by now, part somber memorial service and defiant celebration and group therapy session. The French journalist Philippe Auclair suggested Saturday that English fans join their guests at Wembley in singing the French national anthem, “La Marseillaise,” in solidarity when it is played before kickoff. (England Coach Roy Hodgson has endorsed the idea.) If you want to join in from wherever you are, the lyrics are here. The French probably won’t mind if you fumble a word or two.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As for the rest of the week’s viewing:The United States, fresh off a 6-1 thumping of St. Vincent to open its 2018 campaign, plays at Trinidad and Tobago on Tuesday (6:30 p.m., beIN) in Port of Spain. This second test will be a tougher one than Friday’s for the Americans; Trinidad won at Guatemala, 2-1, in its opener. In fact, there are more than three dozen World Cup qualifiers on Tuesday — 2018 will be here before you know it — stretching from Asia to Africa to South and Central America and the Caribbean. Argentina at Colombia, at 3:30 p.m. on beIN’s Spanish network, is among the sexiest matchups. Burkina Faso against Benin (no TV) would be, uh, less so.Ireland will try to claim its place in France next summer when it hosts Bosnia and Herzegovina on Monday in Dublin (2:45 p.m., Fox Sports 1). The Irish are buoyant after a vital Robbie Brady away goal gave them a leg up, but they would be in better shape if they hadn’t allowed Edin Dzeko to salvage a 1-1 tie for Bosnia in the first leg. On Tuesday, Sweden will try to close out Denmark (2:45 p.m., ESPN2) after winning the first leg, 2-1, and Ukraine will take a 2-0 advantage from the first leg to Slovenia (2:45 p.m., Fox Sports 2). Once the field is set, the teams will gather in Paris on Dec. 12 for the draw to create the groups for next summer’s tournament.The only must-see club match this weekend — other than Cambuur’s visit to mighty Ajax on Saturday, of course — is the season’s first Clásico: Barcelona at Real Madrid on Saturday (12:15 p.m., beIN). And the only story to pay attention to related to that is Lionel Messi’s health; Messi has been out for months with a knee injury, but he trained with Barcelona’s B team over the weekend — reportedly looking sharp — and may make his return in Madrid. That would surely spice up things a bit.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.