AdvertisementSupported byAnalysisBy Chase StuartThe modern N.F.L. is defined by the short-passing game. And on Sunday, the short-passing game helped set a record for long plays. It might seem counterintuitive, but some of the longest pass plays of the season came from some of the shortest passes of the day:■ On a 2nd-and-11 play in the first quarter from the Chicago 13-yard line, the backup Bears tight end Zach Miller ran a curl to the left flat. Quarterback Jay Cutler dumped the ball off to Miller, who caught the ball at the 15 yard line, before rumbling 85 yards through poor Rams tackling for a touchdown.■ In the second quarter, Chicago had the ball at its own 17-yard line. The Bears called a screen pass, with Cutler throwing the ball to backup running back Jeremy Langford. Filling in for an injured Matt Forte, Langford caught the ball at the 12-yard line — five yards behind the line of scrimmage — and ran 88 yards, untouched, for a score.■ In Washington, running back Matt Jones caught a 78-yard touchdown against the Saints. But this was no deep pass: the play began with a fake handoff to Jones, before quarterback Kirk Cousins threw the ball to Jones once several Saints had bit for the fake. Jones caught the ball at the 20 — two yards behind the line of scrimmage — and rumbled past the rest of the New Orleans defense 80 yards for the score.■ Like Jones, Charcandrick West began the season as his team’s backup running back. But with Jamaal Charles injured, West has taken over the starting rolefor Kansas City. On Sunday, he caught an 80-yard touchdown pass, but it was more the result of a defensive miscue than a great play. West lined up in the backfield, and ran a simple route down the field. Alex Smith lobbed a pass 15 yards past the line of scrimmage to West, who caught the ball at the 35-yard line and ran 65 yards against the Broncos for an easy score.■ The Patriots and Giants staged another classic, and produced two long touchdowns in the process. Odell Beckham Jr. caught an 87-yard touchdown pass, thanks in part to safety Devin McCourty taking a bad angle on the play. Beckham caught the ball at the Giants 36-yard line, and then ran 64 yards across open field for the score. Later, Patriots star Rob Gronkowski scored on a 76-yard touchdown (with 45 yards coming after the catch) after Giants safety Craig Dahl took a poor angle, allowing an easy touchdown for New England.Overall, there were six touchdown passes of 75 yards or longer yesterday. That set a new record, breaking the mark of five, set in week 1 of 1963 season and tied in week 8 of 1984. And while a pair of superstars helped the cause, four of the touchdowns came from players who began the season as backups. And all six touchdowns were the result of at least one, if not several, defensive miscues.Advertisement