AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellNEWARK — Sporting five o’clock shadows and mustaches — forbidden during the regular season by the former general manager Lou Lamoriello — the Devils have won 10 of their last 13 games, including two victories over the Chicago Blackhawks, the Stanley Cup champions.When surveyed, the Devils laughed and said their rugged look had little to do with their surprising start under their first-year coach, John Hynes. The facial hair, though, is a sign that times have changed around this once stodgy, tradition-bound franchise.“There are lots of changes; that’s just one of them,” said center Adam Henrique, who has a mustache and who, in 17 games, has scored eight goals, half his total from last season.Henrique added: “You can kind of tell around here that everybody’s a little bit refreshed. The new staff, with all the changes from Day 1, have done a good job getting everybody on the same page and really bringing this team together.”Like the franchise’s teams of old, these Devils are winning with an elite goaltender — Cory Schneider, instead of the retired Martin Brodeur — and by squeezing the most out of their scoring chances.Hynes, 40, the youngest coach in the N.H.L., has instilled confidence but also realism. The team passes around a black hard hat with red flames, given after a victory to the hardest-working player.“We know we need everybody in this room in order to win every single night,” Henrique said. “If we have a number of passengers, we’re not going to come out with a win. “Everybody’s buying into that, and it’s a big reason why we’ve got some wins on the board.”On Thursday, six days after beating Chicago at home, the Devils upended the Blackhawks on a Sergey Kalinin goal with less than three minutes left. They ran their record to 10-6-1 by flattening the Penguins, 4-0, on Saturday.Kalinin, a 24-year-old forward who signed as a free agent after playing for five seasons in the Kontinental Hockey League, was one of six new players on the Devils’ roster for their season opener on Oct. 9. Those six have 16 of the team’s 44 goals.But the most critical addition has been Hynes, hired June 2 by General Manager Ray Shero, who a month earlier had taken  over the job held by Lamoriello for 27 seasons. Previously, Hynes coached the Pittsburgh Penguins’ top farm team in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., while Shero was the Penguins’ general manager.Hynes has a shaved head and is structured and intense, a firm believer in moving the puck as quickly as possible. But Kyle Palmieri, who was acquired from Anaheim and has six goals, said last week, “It’s the confidence he instills in us.”Palmieri added: “One of the things we’ve been stressing is that there’s a way to win every game. There’s not going to be a time this season where we’ll go into a game and say, This one might be out of our hands. When you have the confidence coming down from the coaching staff to our leadership and into the guys to play different roles on the team, we know that every night it could be a different guy who makes the difference.”The Devils lost their first four games of the season but beat the Rangers at Madison Square Garden on Oct. 18 after Palmieri picked a fight with Kevin Klein (and lost) and after the veteran forward Lee Stempniak, who made the team after a tryout, scored an overtime goal.Hynes said he could see the team surge. The 3-2 victory Thursday over the Blackhawks was the Devils’ seventh one-goal victory. They have lost only two games by a goal. And they have succeeded without the veteran forward Patrik Elias, sidelined indefinitely with a knee injury.“It’s self-driven, as you see within the room,” Hynes said. “But part of becoming a good team, a team with an identity, is understanding, and not just from the coaches, what do we have to do with this particular team to give ourselves a chance to have success every night. That’s one of those components that we, as a group, have to have.”With a new coach, a new general manager and so many new players, these Devils were not expected to contend. This was to be a rebuilding season, especially after the team did not sign or trade for a top scorer. (Palmieri has never scored more than 14 goals in a season.)But Hynes has apparently found a way to fit his players into his system. Center Travis Zajac, who scored only once in his final 19 games last season, already has six goals in 15 games. Mike Cammalleri has 17 points in 17 games. He had 42 points in 68 games last season.“I think our work ethic has been there, and it’s been nice to be rewarded in some ways,” Zajac said. “That’s been a positive for us. Because of that work ethic, we’re in games, and we’re winning games.”Late last month, the Devils acquired forward Bobby Farnham, who had been waived by Pittsburgh. Farnham, who played for Hynes with Wilkes-Barre, had scored only one goal in 11 N.H.L. games. In his first game with the Devils, he had a goal and an assist. He scored again Saturday against Pittsburgh.“System-wise, and what he’s trying to do here with the culture, is very similar to what we were doing in Wilkes-Barre,” Farnham said. “He wants to play a very detailed, structured game, but he wants to play with speed. We’re a fast team. We move with speed, and we attack.“It’s the same for a coach as it is for a player. You’re going to do what got you to the National Hockey League. He coaches a structured, fast-attacking, forechecking team, and that’s what we’re trying to do here.”The Devils begin a three-game trip Tuesday at Calgary, but they have already won five of seven games away from Prudential Center. It is as plain as the stubble on their faces that this is a rejuvenated team.“The results are important because it’s a competitive environment and you want to be able to get 2 points,” Hynes said. “But a big part of it is that you’re not going to win all the time. You’re going to have to evaluate past the wins and the losses. Are we doing the things nightly that are going to give us a chance? And we’ve done that more often than not in this segment.”Advertisement