By RAVI UBHANOV. 16, 2015
One year ago, eager to return to the ATP World Tour Finals after a hiatus brought on by back surgery, Andy Murray played in six tournaments in six weeks in September and October. This year, with Murray set to lead his country in the Davis Cup finals just days later, he might be forgiven for wanting to sit out the World Tour Finals.The World Tour Finals, which began Sunday, are played on indoor hardcourts at O2 Arena in London. The Davis Cup finals will be played on indoor clay in Ghent, Belgium, starting five days after the World Tour Finals end.After Britain defeated Australia in a semifinal in late September, Murray, 28, told BBC Radio that he would be a “question mark” for the World Tour Finals if Belgium, as the host, opted for clay, since he would want time to prepare for the transition from the hardcourts used in the European indoor and Asian swings. His back trouble complicates the adjustment.But Chris Kermode, the ATP’s president and a friend of Murray’s, quickly reminded Murray of his responsibilities to the World Tour Finals.AdvertisementMurray, ranked No. 2, remains in the World Tour Finals field and defeated David Ferrer, 6-4, 6-4, on Monday in his first match of round-robin play. Their group includes Rafael Nadal, who defeated Stan Wawrinka, the 2015 French Open champion, 6-3, 6-2.AdvertisementIn less than a week, Murray went from competing on indoor hardcourts at the Paris Masters — he fell to Novak Djokovic in the final — to training on indoor clay for four days at the Queen’s Club in west London and back to indoor hardcourts at O2 Arena.“I think I definitely have a chance to win here,” Murray told reporters Friday, while acknowledging that “I do think I have to be a bit realistic.”He added: “The first few days just now, having just switched surfaces and balls and going back again, I may not be timing the ball perfect the beginning of the week. But hopefully, as it goes on, I’ll start to play better tennis.”Murray will find the pace and the bounce of the O2 court different from those in his recent stint on clay at Queen’s, and his body will have to acclimatize. But a former coach, Miles Maclagan, dismissed the possibility that Murray would be distracted.“I think the Davis Cup is now his priority,” Maclagan said. “No one knows when he’ll have this opportunity in the Davis Cup again. The top guys, though, are very good at compartmentalizing priorities.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“And as a natural competitor, when he gets out there, he just doesn’t want to come off the court and shake the guy’s hand having come second.”Murray is hardly the first player to have to participate in both the year-end championships and the Davis Cup finals in the space of a few days; the last time at least one player did not feature in both was in 1999.AdvertisementLast year, Roger Federer and Wawrinka, who are both Swiss, faced a similar situation. Federer reached the final of the World Tour Finals in London before withdrawing with a back injury. He recovered and sealed a Davis Cup victory for Switzerland over host France on an indoor clay court in Lille.“I know it’s a surface change, but it’s something that we do on many occasions throughout the year,” Federer said. “Maybe not within a few days, but we’ve done it in the juniors, pros, many levels, all the time.”Clay is the surface on which Murray is least comfortable, but Nadal — who participated in the World Tour Finals and the Davis Cup finals in 2009 and 2011 — said he did not expect Murray to encounter much difficulty adapting.The shift “will be not a big problem” for him, Nadal said.If Murray does emerge triumphant at the year-end championships and in Ghent, he will be the first player to win both titles in the same season since Germany’s Michael Stich in 1993.Winning the World Tour Finals would guarantee Murray his highest year-end ranking to date, No. 2 (even if he does not claim the title, he is still likely to finish immediately behind the top-ranked Djokovic), and he could draw motivation from his previous World Tour Finals match in London, a 6-0, 6-1 loss to Federer in last year’s round-robin play.Two years ago, Murray became the first British man since 1936 to win Wimbledon, and with a defeat of Belgium, Britain — the favorite, thanks to Murray’s presence — would secure its first title in the Davis Cup since that same year.A victory there would also move Murray, who has won two Grand Slam singles titles, closer to equaling his rivals Djokovic, Federer and Nadal, who have all won Davis Cups.Murray’s 10-9 record at the World Tour Finals might seem unimpressive given his status, and he has never made it past the semifinals.“It’s a massive event, and he’d like to have it on his C.V.,” Maclagan said.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Finals Entail Two Surfaces for Murray .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.