By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 18, 2015
Valeri Nichushkin scored 51 seconds into the game, and Antti Niemi stopped 24 shots to help the Dallas Stars beat the Sabres, 3-1, on Tuesday night in Buffalo.Alex Goligoski and Tyler Seguin also scored, and Dallas became the first N.H.L. team to 15 wins this season. The Stars’ 30 points are tied with Montreal and the Rangers for tops in the league.Ryan O’Reilly’s power-play goal with 6 minutes 57 seconds to play broke Niemi’s shutout bid. Sam Reinhart appeared to tie the score moments later, only to see the goal overturned after Stars Coach Lindy Ruff challenged the call, and video review showed Tyler Ennis to be offside.SHARKS 5, BRUINS 4 Patrick Marleau and Joe Thornton scored 25 seconds apart in the second period to put visiting San Jose ahead, and the Sharks held on to edge Boston.AdvertisementJoe Pavelski got the scoring started 42 seconds into the game for the Sharks and had two assists. Melker Karlsson, who assisted on Pavelski’s goal, also scored in the big second period.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BLUE JACKETS 3, BLUES 1 Brandon Saad scored twice to help host Columbus beat St. Louis for its first three-game winning streak of the season.AdvertisementCody Goloubef also scored for Columbus, which has won five of seven games.KINGS 3, FLYERS 2 Anze Kopitar scored in the shootout to lead Los Angeles to victory at Philadelphia.Milan Lucic and Jamie McBain scored in regulation for the Kings, who opened a five-game trip with their 12th win in the last 15 games and improved to 5-1 on the road this season.MAPLE LEAFS 5, AVALANCHE 1 P. A. Parenteau scored twice as host Toronto had four power-play goals and a short-handed score in dominating Colorado.Tylar Bozak had his first power-play goal of the season, Leo Komarov had Toronto’s first short-handed goal, and James van Riemsdyk also scored.PENGUINS 4, WILD 3  Evgeni Malkin scored two goals and picked up two assists for his first 4-point game in two seasons, and Pittsburgh topped visiting Minnesota.PREDATORS 3, DUCKS 2 James Neal and Miikka Salomaki gave host Nashville the lead, and Pekka Rinne stopped 38 shots as the Predators edged Anaheim.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Stars Earn 15th Victory by Topping the Sabres.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.