By SAM BORDENOCT. 4, 2015
LONDON — Maybe it was the sleep consultant. Maybe it was the special light-reducing sunglasses. Maybe — and oh, if wishing made it so — it was the imported toilet paper.No one on the Jets was quite sure why, exactly, the team finished off its short, strange, trans-Atlantic N.F.L. week with such a dominant start to its game against Miami on Sunday, but there was no denying it was critical.One week after a sloppy opening led to a letdown loss to Philadelphia, there was no time for jet lag. And so, on the first snap by the Jets’ offense, quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick called a play known as Double Go — basically two receivers going deep — and then hit Brandon Marshall for a 58-yard completion down the sideline.Two plays later, before many in the announced crowd of 83,986 fans at Wembley Stadium had settled into their seats, the Jets were in the end zone and on their way toward a thorough, if not always pretty, 27-14 victory.AdvertisementThe win sent the Jets into their bye week with a flourish and a 3-1 record. The Dolphins will have two weeks to ponder their 1-3 record, as well as the fate of Coach Joe Philbin, whose job was reported to be in jeopardy even before his team’s latest somnolent showing.For all the Dolphins’ struggles, they still had an opportunity to make the game close late. With about five minutes remaining, Ryan Tannehill dropped back to pass on fourth-and-goal from the Jets’ 9-yard line. A touchdown could have cut the Jets’ lead to 6 points, but when Tannehill floated the ball into the end zone, Darrelle Revis made a leaping interception that preserved what turned out to be the game’s final margin.

		With fourth-quarter interceptions by Revis and Marcus Williams, on Miami’s last possession — the Jets have recorded 13 takeaways through four games this season. They totaled 13 in 16 games last season.A rest. The Jets changed into comfortable clothes after the game — Revis did his interviews in a suit but then switched to sweats — and left for Heathrow Airport to fly back to New Jersey. They will report for a light practice on Tuesday but will then have the rest of their bye week free, Coach Todd Bowles said. Workouts ahead of the Oct. 18 game against Washington will begin next Monday. Much was made of the Jets’ planning for their overseas trip. The British news media seemed particularly interested in the Jets’ apparent opinion that European toilet tissue was too thin. But all the preparations — including the boxes of American condiments they had shipped to London as well as the expert who provided tips on reducing fatigue — were intended, in Fitzpatrick’s words, “to make us feel at home.”AdvertisementIt must have worked. Fitzpatrick passed for 218 yards and a touchdown, Marshall caught seven passes for 128 yards, and the plucky running back Chris Ivory recorded a career-high 166 yards on 29 carries.The Jets’ defense, too, was stout, with the Dolphins going 0 for 16 on third- and fourth-down conversion attempts. The Jets outgained the Dolphins, 425 yards to 226.“Coming here to London, I think we wanted to make a statement,” Jets cornerback Darrelle Revis said afterward. He shrugged and added, “I think it worked out pretty well.”While Fitzpatrick and Marshall provided the early spark for the Jets, Ivory’s bullish running was a constant hammer. After missing last week’s game with a leg injury, Ivory appeared rejuvenated, alternately whipping around the edge and slamming his way through the line.He regularly shucked off tacklers, at one point even shedding lineman Ndamukong Suh, the high-priced off-season addition who was supposed to shore up Miami’s defense. Ivory grinned when that sequence was mentioned to him. There are times, he said, when he seeks out contact — with a lowered shoulder he can fire into a defender’s chest — if he feels he cannot run to open space.
            Scores, highlights and analysis from this week’s games.        
Revis called Ivory a “workhorse.” Linebacker Calvin Pace said he was “a beast.” Marshall said Ivory ran “violently” and then admitted that he was guilty of poor blocking on some running plays because he was mesmerized by Ivory’s bulldozing of would-be tacklers.Advertisement“I’ve been horrible,” Marshall said. “Part of the reason: I’ve been a fan, just watching.”Ivory’s performance also opened the Jets’ passing game, and Fitzpatrick welcomed Eric Decker back from a knee injury by hitting him with a 10-yard touchdown pass just before halftime. (Decker finished with four catches for 46 yards.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That score made the margin 20-7 at halftime, and many in the pro-Dolphins crowd whistled as the Miami players ran off the field. The derision was understandable: Dolphins quarterback Ryan Tannehill looked overmatched, and Miami’s running game was virtually nonexistent. The Dolphins had managed to score only because the Jets “gave them 7 points,” Jets Coach Todd Bowles said, referring to two lengthy pass-interference penalties.Even though the Dolphins also made this trip last season, they were the ones who seemed out of sorts, spending most of the game looking as ragged as a dress shirt stuffed into the bottom of a carry-on.“We’ve got to make the plays,” said Tannehill, who completed 19 of 44 passes for 198 yards. “It’s kind of ridiculous that we keep talking about it, we keep saying it. In the locker room we’re talking about it. We’re talking about it to each other on the field. It’s not for a lack of want to or a lack of understanding of what we need to do. We’re just not getting it done, and we have to get it done. It’s plain and simple.”The lack of execution reflected poorly on Philbin, who met after the game with the team’s owner, Stephen M. Ross, and said he was “not at all” concerned about his job status, though he conceded that around his team these days it feels as if “the walls are closing in on you.” Even the Twitter account for Heathrow Airport seemed to have some fun at Philbin’s expense, posting a message after the game that indicated where Philbin could apply for a job as a baggage handler.Little seemed to go right for the Dolphins, who could never quite take advantage of the opportunities they were presented. The second half was more of a slog for the Jets, with the offense going quiet after Zac Stacy scored on a 2-yard run on the team’s first possession. But immediately after Fitzpatrick threw a third-quarter interception, Muhammad Wilkerson sacked Tannehill, and the Dolphins eventually punted, extinguishing any buzz.“We got a lot of hits on their quarterback,” Jets cornerback Antonio Cromartie said. “We had a good game plan, and we went right after him.”That was how it went for much of the closing 20 minutes — any whiff of Dolphins momentum quickly snuffed out by the Jets’ defense — and by the time Marcus Williams sealed the result with a final interception of Tannehill, many of the spectators had long since left.AdvertisementOn one side of the field, Philbin dropped his head; across the way, Bowles pumped his fist.Coaches and players often think of the N.F.L. season in quarters, so Bowles was asked after the game how he felt about his team with 25 percent of the season done.Perhaps cognizant of the Jets’ checkered history, Bowles declined to be too effusive.“After four games, I’m happy,” he said. “After 16 games, we’ll see.”EXTRA POINTSJets defensive end LEONARD WILLIAMS left the game with an ankle sprain, and safety CALVIN PRYOR sustained a deep bruise on his knee. TODD BOWLES said the players would be evaluated this week. ... The Jets left for the airport after the game. Bowles said the team would report to its training complex Tuesday but then have the rest of the week off.A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Cross the Atlantic Only to Cruise Past Miami .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.