AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressThe Dallas Cowboys waived quarterback Brandon Weeden on Tuesday with the possibility of Tony Romo’s return this weekend after missing seven games with a broken collarbone.Weeden went 0-3 filling in for Romo, and Matt Cassel was 0-4. It is the longest slide by Dallas since the team lost the final seven games of 1989 to finish 1-15 the year the owner Jerry Jones bought the team and hired Coach Jimmy Johnson out of the college ranks at Miami.Weeden got the first three starts after Romo’s injury but did not present much of a threat down the field. He was replaced by Cassel after a 30-6 loss to New England that was the Cowboys’ first game without a touchdown in four years.Cassel remains as Romo’s backup, even though Dallas twice went without a touchdown in his four losses, which dropped his career record to 33-42. He threw three interceptions in his first start and had a critical interception that was returned for a touchdown despite playing well in a loss to Philadelphia.Stephen Jones, Dallas’s executive vice president for personnel, said on the radio this week that the backup quarterback was “obviously something we’re going to have to address” in the off-season.Jones said the team would consider spending more after Weeden entered the season on a base salary of $660,000.MANNING A QUIET SUPPORTER Peyton Manning was not giving Brock Osweiler any unsolicited advice this week as his longtime understudy prepares for his first N.F.L. start.“I’m not a coach, for one thing,” Manning said. “As I shared with him, he’s probably going to have a lot of coaches this week — some who aren’t coaches — that are going to be offering him tips of advice.”So Manning told Osweiler he would be there for any questions he might have, “but I’m not going to be one of those extra voices in his ear.”Manning will be too busy trying to get healthy from a variety of injuries — a foot, shoulder and ribs — that led to his playing the worst game of his career against the Chiefs on the same day he became the league’s career passing yards leader.NICKS RETURNS TO GIANTS The Giants announced that wide receiver Hakeem Nicks, their first-round draft pick in 2009, was signed to replace Victor Cruz on the roster.Cruz, who did not play this season, was placed on injured reserve because he needs surgery on his left calf.Nicks played last season with the Indianapolis Colts. He had 38 catches for 405 yards and four touchdowns in the regular season, and six receptions for 98 yards and a score in the playoffs.MANZIEL CLEARED The N.F.L. said Browns quarterback Johnny Manziel would not be disciplined for a domestic incident last month.The league investigated whether Manziel had violated its personal-conduct policy during a roadside argument with his girlfriend on Oct. 12. In a statement, the N.F.L. said it reviewed information from law enforcement officials and interviewed Manziel and his girlfriend.The N.F.L. said it “concluded that there is an insufficient basis on which to take disciplinary action.”Manziel, who was promoted to be Cleveland’s starter for the remainder of the season, was facing a possible fine or suspension. Manziel told the police he had been drinking before the disagreement. He was not arrested.AROUND THE LEAGUE The Bears waived cornerback Terrance Mitchell and promoted Jacoby Glenn from the practice squad. ...  The Chiefs placed the rookie tight end James O’Shaughnessy on injured reserve and claimed defensive tackle David King off waivers from the Seahawks. The Seahawks released receiver Chris Matthews and signed receiver Kevin Smith from the practice squad. ... The Titans activated receiver Tre McBride from the practice squad and added receiver Andrew Turzilli from the 49ers’ practice squad.Advertisement