AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim RohanAs National League finalists appeared on MLB Network for the Manager of the Year Award announcement on Tuesday night, Chicago Cubs Manager Joe Maddon looked on comfortably from an Italian restaurant in Tampa, Fla. His gray hair swept across his head like a wave. He had his sleeves rolled up, his shirt splayed open, a silver chain sticking out.Behind him, a fireplace was ablaze.“Enjoy the red wine,” one commentator told him. “I know you’ll have more than one glass.”In his first year with the Cubs, under the weight of new expectations and a century-old curse, Maddon kept his young team at ease, leading it to a 97-win season, its best in seven years. Maddon received 18 of the 30 first-place votes for the award, finishing well ahead of the Cardinals’ Mike Matheny and the Mets’ Terry Collins, who received three first-place votes. All season, Maddon kept his players loose. He brought a magician into the clubhouse, organized a petting zoo and routinely canceled batting practice. During the National League Championship Series, when the Cubs trailed the Mets by two games to none, Maddon pumped the “Rocky” theme song through the clubhouse to inspire players. Asked to explain the tactic, Maddon relayed an anecdote from his days as a minor league manager in the mid-1980s. One day, he bought a stack of newspapers, clipped out the classified ads and posted them around the clubhouse. He told his players that if they did not play hard they would need new jobs. He even put the ads on the back of the bathroom door so the players saw job listings in San Antonio when they sat down.Over his career, Maddon has learned that was not the right approach. “I’d never seen an uptight moment be beneficial to any group, never,” he said. “Never. So I thought if I ever got an opportunity to do this, I’d really work against that concept.”The Cubs hired Maddon to shepherd a group of talented young rookies, including Kris Bryant, who won the N.L. Rookie of the Year Award. Maddon led them to a championship series and 24 more victories than last season. Jeff Banister won the award in the American League for leading another remarkable turnaround. In his first year as manager, Banister helped the Texas Rangers win 21 more games than last year, overcoming an injury to Yu Darvish, to capture the West title. He became just the fifth rookie manager to win the award.But Banister was hardly a rookie around baseball. After having only one at-bat as a player, Banister spent about two decades working his way up the baseball food chain as a coach and manager until he finally became Clint Hurdle’s bench coach with the Pittsburgh Pirates. Collins had worked alongside both award winners. He had spent more than four decades in baseball before he had a season like 2015, when he led the Mets to their first pennant in 15 years. During his first managerial stop with the Los Angeles Angels, in the 1990s, Maddon was his bench coach. “I’ve known T. C. for a long time,” Maddon said during his acceptance speech. “I know how good at his craft he is. And I want to congratulate him.”Advertisement