
On Soccer By                     
 SAM BORDEN
 
NOV. 17, 2015
LONDON — One of the great joys in soccer is its vocabulary. Only in soccer are there dummies and extra time and backheels. Only in soccer are there offside traps and toe pokes. Depending on what country you’re in, there may also be gaffers (managers) or howlers (embarrassing errors) or fixtures (games).Yet even amid this panoply of parlance, the most magical term is, without question, the simple one used to describe the match between England and France here at Wembley Stadium on Tuesday night.France and England paid a moving tribute to the victims of the Paris attacks before a friendly match between the countries’ national teams.Friendly.In other sports, such a game might be called an exhibition and, technically, this was that, too. This match wasn’t part of a league or cup or tournament, after all. It was a game that meant nothing. Except that on this night nothing felt like everything.How else to explain what happened before the match even started? Four days after terrorists killed 129 people in attacks that shook Paris, and just over an hour after the threat of an attack had canceled another high-profile game in Europe, 44 players walked out of the tunnel and onto the field just before kickoff. Normally, it would only be each team’s starting lineup; on this night, every player draped an arm around the one next to him.Then, after the teams’ coaches joined Prince William in laying flowers on the sideline in memory of the victims in Paris, the national anthems were played. Normally, the visiting team’s anthem would be played first; on this night, “La Marseillaise” was played last and the fans — nearly all of them, not just the French contingent tucked in the corner of the upper deck — stood and sang together.Advertisement“My French is so bad they might prefer I didn’t,” Graham McLauchlan, an England fan, had said with a smile earlier on. “But I will. This game is something special.”It was. A few players had tears in their eyes. A great many fans had lumps in their throats. France’s manager, Didier Deschamps, said the emotions were “powerful,” the kind “you feel in your heart.” Roy Hodgson, the England coach, said the ceremonies were “poignant” and “everything I expected.”AdvertisementThe verses of the anthem, steeped in military bravado, may well be brutish but the sentiment — the feeling of a stadium in full throat — was the perfect opening to something the French call, so poignantly, un match amical.“We came because we care,” said Julien Lemaire, a French fan from near Calais. “We came because we wanted to be together.”There was still fear at Wembley, still plenty of anxiety. There had to be. The terrorists had attacked the Stade de France while France played Germany inside, along with a concert hall and some restaurants, in their wave of violence last week, and late on Monday night a match between Belgium and Spain in Brussels scheduled for Tuesday was canceled because of security concerns.Then, less than two hours before kickoff in London, news came that a match between Germany and the Netherlands in Hannover had been canceled at the last minute because of what German officials labeled a credible bomb threat at the stadium. Details of the threat were not definitive, but the message certainly was: big venues and big sporting events are, it is becoming increasingly clear, a target.Of course, that is a large part of why the French and English players and coaches felt it was so important to play. After finishing their match on Friday night, the French players had remained in their dressing room at the Stade de France until nearly 3 a.m., waiting until the German team had figured out its own travel plans. Only then did the French team return to its training base about an hour south of Paris.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was, initially, some reluctance from the players about going ahead with Tuesday’s match at Wembley. One France player, Lassana Diarra, was grieving his cousin, killed in the attacks; another, Antoine Griezmann, was dazed by the revelation that his sister had been at the Bataclan concert venue where 89 people were murdered but had survived. The rest of the players wanted to be with their families, wanted to close their doors, wanted to stop the panic in their brains and the churning in their stomachs. They wanted the same thing every Parisian wanted.AdvertisementBut the president of the French soccer federation, Noël Le Graët, said almost immediately that Tuesday’s match would go on. And Deschamps put it best when he said that the players had “a duty” to show the unstoppable tumble that is being alive. They would cry and hurt and worry, Deschamps said. And then they would go back to work.“Football is important, and life is still going on,” France’s captain, Hugo Lloris, said.It is. From a purely sporting perspective, the game may not have been a wondrous spectacle, but the 71,223 fans knew what they were witnessing. England won, 2-0, and around the long stretches of typical torpor that often mark these one-off matches there were shimmers of brilliance. Wayne Rooney, the England captain, smashed a gorgeous volley past Lloris and Dele Alli, a wunderkind England midfielder, unleashed a rising shot from long range that opened the scoring and drew appreciative applause even from the French fans.Some might call Alli’s shot a screamer, the mellifluous label for an amazing shot from distance. On any other night, it would have been the highlight of the evening. On Tuesday, it was just a part of something bigger.A return to living. A show of unity.A friendly.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Friendly in Every Sense of the Word .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »