AdvertisementSupported byBy Jay SchreiberThe Yankees and Mets have had successful seasons but a troublesome final week. Combined, they have lost 10 of their last 11 games going into Sunday afternoon’s regular-season finales, and all those defeats have already inflicted damage and might continue to do so.In the case of the Mets, home-field advantage in their first-round payoff matchup with the Los Angeles Dodgers is now gone. Just a few days ago, the Mets held the edge in that battle along with the tiebreaker if the teams ended up with identical regular-season records.But five losses in a row by the Mets along with a modest Dodgers winning streak means the series will open next Friday in Los Angeles. So after the Mets finish out their season at Citi Field today they will not play there again until Monday, Oct. 12 — in Game 3 of their playoff series. That also happens to be Columbus Day.As for the Yankees, it took them longer than expected last week to nail down a wild-card spot for the postseason. And now they are again having trouble, this time clinching home-field advantage for the wild-card game, which will be played on Tuesday.If the Yankees win today, for just the second time in their last seven games, they will be at home on Tuesday, against either the Houston Astros, Los Angeles Angels or Texas Rangers, all of whom are still in a battle in the American League West.But if the Yankees lose, other scenarios come into play. If the Astros and Rangers both win on Sunday, Texas will be the A.L. West champion and Houston will be the second wild-card team. And because the Astros hold the tiebreaker over the Yankees, the Tuesday wild-card game will be played in Houston, not the Bronx.But if the Astros win and the Rangers, who are playing the Angels, lose on Sunday, then the two Texas teams play on Monday to decide the A.L. West winner. The loser then plays the Yankees on Tuesday. And no matter what, the wild-card game will still be in the state of Texas because the Rangers also hold the tiebreaker over the Yankees.And if the Rangers win and the Astros lose on Sunday? Houston plays the Yankees in New York.Finally, if both the Astros and Rangers lose on Sunday, Texas will win the A.L. West by default and the Astros and Angels will play on Monday to decide the second wild card slot. If the Angels win that game, they would play the Yankees in New York on Tuesday because the Yankees hold the tiebreaker against them.That’s a lot of scenarios. The way for the Yankees to avoid all of them, of course, is to beat the Orioles in Baltimore on Sunday, something they couldn’t do in either game of a doubleheader on Saturday.Meanwhile, two other issues will be resolved on Sunday. The Kansas City Royals and Toronto are still fighting for the No. 1 record in the American League and the top-seeded spot in the postseason. The Royals hold a one-game lead, but if the two clubs end up tied after Sunday’s games the tiebreaker goes to the Blue Jays.In the National League, the Pittsburgh Pirates and Chicago Cubs are the two wild-card teams but where their showdown willl be played on Wednesday remains undecided. The Pirates have a one-game lead in the standings, but if they end up tied with the Cubs by Sunday night, the tiebreaker will go to the Cubs and the Wednesday game will be played in Wrigley Field.Finally, it should be noted that almost every major league game is being played at the same time on Sunday — at 3 p.m. Eastern. That could create some dizzy moments on the final day of the season.Advertisement