AdvertisementSupported byBy Naila-Jean MeyersEvery Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. Washington Capitals at Detroit Red Wings, Wednesday, 8 p.m.Alex Ovechkin sits at 483 goals, tied with Sergei Fedorov for most by a Russian N.H.L. player. He matched Fedorov on Nov. 7, and three days later faced the Red Wings in Detroit, where Fedorov was being honored for his induction into the Hockey Hall of Fame last week. Ovechkin tried his best to break the record in Fedorov’s presence, collecting 15 shots on goal in a 1-0 loss. He is back in Detroit after going scoreless for three games in a row.Chicago Blackhawks at Edmonton Oilers, Wednesday, 9:30 p.m.Ovechkin has led the N.H.L. in goals the past three seasons, but through five weeks, he is not even in the top 10 in that category. At the top of the list is the Blackhawks’ Patrick Kane, who has scored a goal in seven games in a row and now has 13 over all. The Oilers find themselves in a familiar spot: last place. Since the rookie phenom Connor McDavid was sidelined by a broken collarbone, Edmonton (6-12-0) has lost four of five games.Rangers at Tampa Bay Lightning, Thursday, 7:30 p.m.The Rangers have won nine in a row and come into this rematch of the Eastern Conference finalists with the league’s best record (14-2-2). The Lightning (8-9-3), who ousted the Rangers in seven games last spring, have sputtered, losing seven of their last 10 games. After leading the league in scoring last season with 3.16 goals per game, the Lightning are 23rd so far this season at just 2.30 goals per game. On Saturday, the Lightning can commiserate with another struggling conference finalist from last season when they host the Anaheim Ducks (6-8-4), the N.H.L.’s lowest scoring team.Antoine Roussel and Pierre-Edouard BellemareThe French flag has been on display on N.H.L. ice sheets, and “La Marseillaise” has been played along with “O Canada” and “The Star-Spangled Banner” in recent days, gestures of solidarity after the terrorist attacks in Paris. Those moments were particularly meaningful for Dallas Stars forward Antoine Roussel and Philadelphia Flyers defenseman Pierre-Edouard Bellemare, the only two active N.H.L. players from France.Though the N.H.L. is full of French Canadians, only nine players born in France have played a game in the N.H.L., according to Hockey Reference. But of those nine, four grew up in Canada. Roussel, a 25-year-old from Roubaix, and Bellemare, a 30-year-old from Paris, are among the few who trained in France before coming to North America. Cristobal Huet, a goalie for the 2009-10 Chicago Blackhawks, is the only French player with his name on the Stanley Cup.Bellemare, who, like Roussel, has been wearing stickers of the French flag on his equipment, had missed eight games with an injury before returning to the Flyers’ lineup on Saturday in Raleigh, N.C., where “La Marseillaise” was played before the game.“Whatever happened to me the last two weeks, it’s somehow kind of less important.” said Bellemare, who was an N.H.L. rookie last season at age 29. “You don’t think about yourself anymore at all.”Advertisement