By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 17, 2015
As Michael Cooper noted in The New York Times, the French national anthem, “La Marseillaise,” has emerged as a symbol of defiance and hope in the wake of the terrorist attacks in Paris last week.On Tuesday, France will play its first major sporting event since the attacks, a friendly soccer game against England at Wembley in London. In soccer, national anthems at sporting events are not always respected by opposing fans. But for this game, English supporters will be encouraged to sing along in solidarity, and the words will be displayed on the big screens to help them.Roy Hodgson, manager of the English national soccer team, said he hoped England's fans would join in singing the French national anthem, "La Marseillaise," at the match between the two set for Tuesday.It may be a stirring moment of peaceful unity between two nations with a rivalry dating to Agincourt. But a close look at the song’s lyrics, written at the height of the bloody French Revolution, adds a note of incongruity.“Allons enfants de la Patrie, le jour de gloire est arrivé,” the anthem begins, stirringly. “Arise, children of the fatherland. The day of glory has arrived.”AdvertisementThe song then veers quickly into more bellicose language, going on about “L’étendard sanglant” (the bloodstained banner), “féroces soldats” (ferocious soldiers) and, disconcertingly, warning of enemies, “Égorger vos fils, vos compagnes!” (cutting the throats of children and consorts).France and England paid a moving tribute to the victims of the Paris attacks before a friendly match between the countries’ national teams.The conclusion urges citizens, “Qu’un sang impur, abreuve nos sillons!” (“Let impure blood water our furrows.”)AdvertisementSubsequent verses continue the violent imagery, raising the disturbing specters of bloodthirsty tyrants, angry tigers and children sharing their forebears’ coffins.Of course, bombs are “bursting in air” in other national anthems, too. Perhaps when Englishmen and Frenchmen get together to sing off-key on Tuesday, it will be better not to listen too closely.Play ball!
            WATCH: Wembley Stadium joins in on singing French national anthem, La Marseillaise, ahead of kickoff. #ENGvFRA https://t.co/A33fVM237x We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.