AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — No matter the trepidation in France at the moment, there is no shortage of players willing to give everything to qualify for one of the biggest sporting events to be held in that country since the 1998 World Cup. On Sunday, Hungary qualified for the 2016 European Championship, which will be staged in 10 stadiums around France next June and July. It is the first major tournament that Hungary has reached since the 1986 World Cup in Mexico.Then on Monday, Ireland became the 22nd qualifier for the tournament, and the team’s manager, Martin O’Neill commented, “We might be short of many things, but courage and determination and fighting to the end are not among those.”“It’s been a long road,” O’Neill added, “12 games to get there. I can tell you this, we will have a massive contingent of supporters going over to France.”No doubts. No hesitation. No mention of any fears on the minds of the latecomers to this ball.Players are the last people to allow negative thoughts get in the way of the road ahead. Hungary’s top goalkeeper, Gabor Kiraly, will turn 40 before the Euro starts, and he was the only starter in Sunday’s 2-1 win over Norway to have been born when his country last qualified for anything this significant.“It’s a great success for the whole country,” Kiraly told reporters. “I think about the ex-players of the national team over the last 30 years, and the coaches who did a lot of work. We have first of all to enjoy this new feeling, and after that we’ll need to start the preparations for France.” The veteran Irish striker Jonathan Walters scored both goals in Monday’s tough and intense 2-0 victory over Bosnia-Herzegovina. The first came via a penalty kick that was, to say the least, a harsh judgment against the Bosnian Ervin Zukanovic, whose hand had barely brushed the ball as it was kicked against him from close range. The second goal, though, was typical of the energy and effort that Walters, 32, ceaselessly puts into games.When the ball was whipped across the goal by Ireland’s Robbie Brady, it was Walters who gambled that it would reach the far post, and it was Walters who ran the extra yard to side-foot in a volley that knocked the stuffing out of the Bosnians.On paper, the Balkan team had more talented players, like Miralem Pjanic and Edin Dzeko, but the creative passing of Pjanic and the scoring threat of Dzeko was rarely seen. The spirit of the Bosnians was broken by the early penalty, and the 51,000 fans in Dublin seemed to suck the energy out of the opponent.The common denominator between Ireland and Hungary is that while few on their teams will be big-name stars — or even Premier League players — both squads get by with teamwork and desire.Bernd Storck stepped up from coaching Hungary’s youth teams to guide the senior squad in its attempt to qualify for the Euro. “We have many players who don’t play regularly with their clubs, but I trust them,” the coach was quoted as saying by U.E.F.A. “They play with confidence and without fear. Their level of intensity was amazing, and we deserve 100 percent to go to France.“I would like to congratulate my team. We will see what lies ahead, and now I’m Hungarian!”Citizenship has been granted for less.Managers like O’Neill and Storck cannot make average players great, but they have demonstrated that they can get great effort and maximum attention to teamwork out of players who really want to get to France. But no matter how much Storck now regards himself as a man in a promised land, there was only one generation of Magical Magyars.That, way back in the 1950s, included exceptional players like Ferenc Puskas and Jozsef Bozsik and, after them, Florian Albert. It has been a long and barren road in Hungary since then, but just for a moment on Sunday, Tamas Priskin threw back the years and scored a wonderful goal.He ran from the halfway line down the left while holding off one defender, turned into the penalty box, eluded a second Norwegian defender and drove the ball into the top far corner of the net.The finest goal of his life? “I would think so,” Priskin told reporters. “I would like to dedicate this goal to Marton Fulop, my very good friend.”Fulop, a much-traveled goalkeeper who perhaps served too many short spells on loan among English clubs, announced in 2013 that he was taking time out from soccer after a malignant tumor appeared in his arm. He returned to Hungary and, after surgery, attempted a return to the game. He died last week at 32.And while no one would suggest that a tragic case of cancer is remotely comparable to what happened in France, the Hungarian players wore black armbands to show respect for both the victims of last week’s attacks in France and in memory of their compatriot, Fulop. Soccer expects to play the full 51-game tournament in France seven months from now. No one has even whispered of staying away.Les Bleus, the French national team, paused to reflect and then agreed to go ahead with Tuesday’s friendly against England in London.It was right to expect England’s supporters to pay respect to the dead, but some had doubts over the request for every fan to sing the words of “La Marseillaise.” It is France’s anthem, not England’s, and silence from the home fans surely would be the most appropriate gesture. And maybe it is time to ask if anthems add to the spectacle, or whether they stir nationalistic tendencies around sports.Advertisement