AdvertisementSupported byGlobal SoccerBy Rob HughesLONDON — Manchester City explodes, with Sergio Agüero firing five goals during a 20-minute burst of world-class opportunism.Chelsea implodes, and Manager José Mourinho comes out firing by saying on television that he will not resign, that Chelsea would have to fire him to get rid of him.Even by Premier League standards, this is no normal October. No titles are decided in the autumn, but the gap between City at the top and Chelsea down near the bottom is a formidable one for two clubs whose wealth has allowed them to dominate the league for much of the past decade.City and Agüero first. The Manchester team was a goal down Saturday at home against Newcastle United when the Argentine started his own firestorm just before halftime. He was treated for a calf injury in the locker room at the break, and Manager Manuel Pellegrini said that he had better be quick if he wanted to score some more.Between the 49th and 62nd minutes, Agüero, with beautiful help from the pass-master David Silva, turned a 1-1 tie into a 6-1 victory, helped by Kevin De Bruyne, who scored City’s fourth goal on a sumptuous strike.“Kun is amazing,” said Pellegrini, referring to Agüero by the Argentine’s nickname. “I took him off after his fifth goal because it would have been a risk for him to finish the game.”A risk for whom? Five men in history have scored five goals in a Premier League game: Dimitar Berbatov, Andrew Cole, Jermain Defoe, Alan Shearer and now Agüero.The Argentine’s goals came from all angles, from swift and elusive movement and from deft, almost uncanny strokes. He knows instinctively what he will do before defenders might react. His fourth strike, which made it 5-1, was the best, as he curled it around a Newcastle defender, giving the opposing goalkeeper no chance to see it.City’s collection of forwards is so stellar that it wasn’t even Agüero, but De Bruyne who had the finest goal of the day. Moving into a cross from Jesús Navas from the right, De Bruyne let the ball fall over his right shoulder and, on the half turn, delicately volleyed it over his own head and into the top far corner of the net.There is no way that the flight of that shot could have risen and gently dropped just beneath the crossbar without the perfect measure of delicacy and spin. It was a masterpiece from De Bruyne and another galling moment for Mourinho, who discarded him a season and a half ago when he decided that the Belgian would never make it as a Chelsea player.We don’t know for certain that De Bruyne will be a permanent fit for City. But after a prolific season with Wolfsburg last year, when he was named the player of the year in Germany, and his seamless integration into Manchester’s star-heavy lineup, it is easy to suggest that De Bruyne is a far better player than Mourinho thought he would be.Right now, the Chelsea manager is having — by his own admission — by far the worst period of his coaching career. Saturday’s 3-1 loss to Southampton was Chelsea’s fourth defeat in eight league games this season, and a reminder that the Premier League is full of smart, ambitious and hungry teams like Southampton that will take advantage when the big clubs drop their standards.The Saints, managed on a relative shoestring budget by Ronald Koeman, never flinched when Willian struck a magnificent free kick to put Chelsea ahead.Koeman is like Pellegrini. He sees the virtue in attacking opponents’ weaknesses. He knew that Chelsea, for whatever reason, is a fallen champion suffering from a lack of confidence and a suddenly brittle defense.After going a goal down, Southampton attacked through its front trio of Graziano Pellè, Sadio Mané and Dusan Tadic.Koeman, who began his own coaching career alongside Mourinho long ago at Barcelona, knows how to take advantage when defenders are vulnerable, because that was his role as a player. He — and lately just about every opposing manager — has seen the remarkable falloff in play this season from Chelsea right back Branislav Ivanovic, along with the slowing down of the 34-year-old central defender John Terry.Thanks to Mané’s fast runs, Pellè’s height and strength and Tadic’s ability to find the openings, Southampton pulled Chelsea apart. The three goals might easily have been twice that, had the referee seen the blatant way that Ivanovic pulled at the shirt of Virgil van Dijk in the penalty area, or how Chelsea’s Ramires stamped on the foot of Pellè.Mourinho refused to discuss those obvious Southampton claims of infractions, instead accusing the referee of missing what he saw as a clear-cut foul against Radamel Falcao in the penalty area.“The referees are afraid to give decisions to Chelsea,” Mourinho said at length during his normal postgame comments about how referees are biased against his team.The referee on Saturday was consistent: There were three penalty claims, two by Southampton and one by Chelsea, yet he awarded none.“My team is in such a low mentally,” Mourinho said. “They collapse when big decisions are against them.”Not waiting to be asked who is ultimately responsible for the team’s state of mind, Mourinho gave a seven-minute-long monologue on Sky TV.The central theme was himself. “If the club wants to sack me, they have to sack me,” he said. “It’s a crucial moment in the history of this club, because if they sack me, they sack the best manager they ever had.”The coach signed a four year contract extension in August. It might cost $45 million to pay him off. Someone’s judgment, somewhere, must pay for the club’s sudden slide down the league.Advertisement