AdvertisementSupported byRugbyBy Huw RichardsTWICKENHAM, England — A world championship without the home team involved can feel like a party whose host has already gone to bed, and that will be the case for the final four weeks of the Rugby World Cup, after the eviction of England by Australia.An economist from the London Business School estimated that Australia’s 33-13 victory on Saturday night could cost the British economy up to 3 billion pounds, or about $4.5 billion. But in at least one part of Britain, that was a price well worth paying.England’s loss was Wales’s gain. The loss put Wales into the World Cup quarterfinals alongside Australia, meaning that the meeting of the two next Saturday at Twickenham will determine who it will be that they play in the quarterfinals, with the winner getting a lower-seeded opponent.England, third in Pool A with one win and two losses, is the first primary host in eight World Cup tournaments not to reach the knockout stage and also the first former champion — it won the Cup in 2003 — to fail to progress. It has one match left, against Uruguay in Manchester next Saturday.“Words can’t express how disappointed we are,” said England Coach Stuart Lancaster. “We have had fantastic support and we feel we’ve let them and the whole country down.”Lancaster, who has been coach since 2011 and is under contract through 2019, acknowledged his job could be at risk, “but that is not just my decision.”Should he depart, it will be with considerable credit and sympathy. While England has disappointed in this tournament, its performance was nothing like the embarrassment and disarray that it showed at the 2011 World Cup in New Zealand. Lancaster has restored English rugby’s reputation and credibility, winning 80 percent of his games (although with no titles) in the European Six Nations championship, and it has the only victory in the past decade by a European nation over New Zealand.His misfortune was that England was placed in the toughest group in World Cup history — a consequence of the organizers’ insistence that the draw be held in 2012, little more than a year into the four-year World Cup cycle.Lancaster said that England’s biggest failure was not winning a match it dominated the previous weekend against Wales. “We scored four tries against Fiji and led 22-12 against Wales and should have finished the job,” he said Saturday.But where England was ambushed by Wales, it was dismantled by Australia. Australia is not always the strongest team in test rugby, but it makes the best use of limited resources. Rugby union is far from the biggest game in Australia, outweighed in New South Wales and Queensland by rugby league and in the rest of the country by Australian rules football, both of which held their finals over the weekend.As one British rugby league fan tweeted about Australia, “these aren’t even the best rugby players in Oz.”They may, though, be good enough to win the World Cup. If the tournament lost its host Saturday night, it also saw its first championship-caliber performance.“On that performance, yes, definitely,” was Lancaster’s response when asked if Australia could take the trophy. “They were strong in all areas, they’ve got a good balance in their game and have got some world-class players.”Bernard Foley, Australia’s much-criticized flyhalf, was the star. He scored 28 of Australia’s 33 points, including the two first-half tries that silenced the 80,000 fans at Twickenham by giving the visitors a 17-3 lead at halftime. Foley’s second score, a lightning-sharp break through the English defense combined with a deft exchange of passes with the replacement wing Kurtley Beale, was as good as anything seen in the tournament.Australia’s quick, combative back-rowers, David Pocock and Michael Hooper, dominated the battle for possession at the breakdown, thwarting several England attacks by stealing possession. And the scrum, traditionally an Australian weakness, more than matched up with England, which usually expects to dominate that part of the game.England did not go without a fight. After George Ford, dropped after the opening match against Fiji, came on as a halftime replacement, England looked much sharper and closed the gap to 20-13 with 15 minutes to go.“We did have a dark period in the second half, but we managed it a lot better than we have in the past,” said Australia Coach Michael Cheika.Any doubt was ended when England flyhalf Owen Farrell was yellow-carded and given a 10-minute suspension for a dangerous tackle on Australia’s inside center Matt Giteau with nine minutes left. Foley kicked the resulting penalty to make it 23-13, then added another three-pointer and a conversion of Giteau’s last-minute try to seal Australia’s victory.“I’m very pleased,” said Cheika. “It wasn’t perfect; there are still a lot of areas that we can improve on.”Australia won both of the previous World Cups hosted or co-hosted in Britain, in 1991 and 1999, and it would be no surprise to see it complete the hat trick.While one former champion went out, another dodged a bullet Saturday when South Africa beat Scotland, 34-16, in Newcastle. It will reach the quarterfinals if it beats the United States on Wednesday, while Scotland will progress if it beats Samoa on Saturday. Japan, which produced another surprise Saturday by beating Samoa, 26-5, can progress by beating the United States on Sunday, should either South Africa or Scotland lose.Advertisement