AdvertisementSupported byBy Tom SpoustaTAMPA, Fla. — The tone of Brian Boyle’s voice had the urgency that N.H.L. players usually save for spring. Emotional and physical reservoirs are only so deep, and the draining quest for a Stanley Cup can grind on for nine months.The fatigue factor often manifests itself on the other side, at the start of the next season, as teams try to recapture their playoff swagger. For Boyle, a center, and the Tampa Bay Lightning, the hangover from their loss in the finals to the Chicago Blackhawks has lingered for 20 games, reflected in their 8-9-3 record. Normally a feared offensive team, the Lightning have been shut out four times after being blanked only once during the 2014-15 regular season. “It’s just hard to get over that,” Boyle said Wednesday, referring to the Lightning’s season-ending loss to the Blackhawks in Game 6 of the finals. “It’s a tough thing to swallow. It’s like, O.K., well, the last game we played was the biggest game of our lives. Then you start with preseason, and now we’re in October, and then it’s like, yeah, people are still watching football. “You’ve got to put that out of your head,” Boyle added. “Two points now is the same as 2 points in March and April. But it’s a tough thing to do. You’ve got teams who didn’t make the playoffs that are raring and ready to go. They’re flying — every point matters, and they know it. They learned the hard way. We need to understand that. We can’t take it for granted that we’re just going to go into a year with two rounds already won in the playoffs.”The Lightning are not alone in their malaise. Two other conference finalists from last season, the Anaheim Ducks (6-9-4) and the Blackhawks (10-7-1), have struggled early.Of the conference finalists, only the Rangers have matched last season’s level, opening 14-2-2. Their 30 points have them tied for the league lead with the Dallas Stars and the Montreal Canadiens. The Rangers have won nine in a row and face the Lightning here Thursday night in a rematch of the Eastern Conference finals. “It takes a lot out of you when you have long runs, to come back and start over,” said goaltender Henrik Lundqvist, who has been dominating in the Rangers’ early stretch. “That’s what you have to do — you really have to start from scratch. You’re not going to get anything. You look at Chicago and Tampa: They’re two really good teams, but it’s tough to win games right now.” Salary-cap considerations forced the Blackhawks to part ways with several key players and retool with a young lineup. Injuries to defensemen Duncan Keith and Michal Rozsival caused lines to be juggled, adding to Chicago’s inconsistency. Still, the Blackhawks have struggled since they dropped their season opener to the Rangers on the night they unveiled their third Stanley Cup banner in six years. “It’s tough — you’ve got every team coming in wanting to beat the Stanley Cup champions,” right wing Andrew Shaw said. “Basically, you’re going to get everyone’s ‘A’ game. But I think in the long run, that makes you better.”There are signs the Blackhawks are coming around. Back-to-back victories against St. Louis and Calgary over the weekend, with Keith and Rozsival back in the lineup, provided a much-welcomed lift. “We’ve strung two games together,” said Jonathan Toews, the team’s captain. “It’s not a whole heck of a lot, but it’s a good start, and as far as getting streaky as a team, we want to start feeling more and more confident.”The Ducks and the Lightning have also endured injury troubles. Tampa Bay’s scoring has suffered with Tyler Johnson, Ondrej Palat, Jonathan Drouin and Cedric Paquette sidelined. Ryan Callahan was hurt this week, and he and Drouin were listed as doubtful to play against the Rangers. Long playoff runs clearly take a physical toll on teams. Boyle and Anton Stralman were with the Rangers when the team reached the Stanley Cup finals in 2014. Combined with last season’s Stanley Cup appearance with the Lightning, both of them have played 214 games over the past two regular seasons and playoffs. “Getting over the fact that we lost again, and the second year in a row for me and Stralman, that’s hard to get over,” Boyle said. “And when you’re trying to get over it, it’s tough to get motivated and get in that routine again and get ready for the next season physically.” Aside from an occasional bicycle ride, Boyle said he did not start training and skating in earnest until early August. “It’s tough to heal your body and train at the same time,” Boyle said. “For me, this past summer, that was a tough thing to try and balance. I had done it before, but no summer is the same. You have different injuries each year.” Tampa Bay Coach Jon Cooper said he believed the Lightning, the Ducks and the Blackhawks were experiencing the same harsh reality after last year’s successes. “That’s a big weight on a lot of teams after they go through it,” Cooper said. “The mental side is a huge part of that because of how much you put into the regular season and playoffs. That’s a nine-month grind. The emotional lows and highs are huge. You can’t keep that pace going all the time. You just can’t keep it.”Jeff Arnold contributed reporting from Chicago, and Dave Caldwell from Greenburgh, N.Y.Advertisement