

 Scott Cacciola
 

ON PRO BASKETBALL
NOV. 18, 2015
Long before it took Kristaps Porzingis all of 12 regular-season games to become a sensation with the Knicks, he plied his trade for Baloncesto Sevilla of Spain’s ACB League. As Sevilla’s general manager, José Luis Galilea became uniquely familiar with Porzingis, and he could sense the player’s bright future.Galilea based his confidence on two observations.The first was that Porzingis almost always stayed late after practice to develop his skills with Nikola Radicevic, a teammate. Basketball mattered to Porzingis in a way that struck Galilea as unusual, especially for a player who could have coasted on his natural gifts.Long and athletic, Porzingis was already capable of doing astonishing things on the court. The foundation was there, and then some. But Porzingis wanted more.“When you feel capable of doing everything — you can shoot, you can dribble, you can run, you can dunk — sometimes it’s easy to fall into the temptation of saying, ‘O.K., I can just do it somehow,’ ” Galilea said in a recent interview. “But no, he always listened to his coaches, and he always worked. And I thought that was going to be priceless for him.”AdvertisementThe second observation that Galilea made had to do with an older woman whom Sevilla employed to do odd jobs for the team. She also acted as a den mother for many of the younger players. Porzingis, who grew up in Latvia, was a teenager far from home, and he appreciated her. So whenever Sevilla went on a trip, Porzingis would return with a gift for her — a box of chocolates, say, if the team had traveled to Belgium.“This, coming from a 19-year-old kid, was unbelievable,” Galilea said.Viewed through the prism of what Porzingis, now 20, has done for the Knicks, highlighted by his 29-point scoring burst against the Charlotte Hornets on Tuesday night, stories likes these run the risk of bleeding into hagiography. And sad but true: Porzingis will, in fact, make mistakes in the coming weeks. He will commit turnovers. He will miss shots. And the Knicks will lose more games.But after so much suffering, and in the wake of last season’s hazmat spill, fans can be forgiven for their collective case of Porzingitis. The cheers, the chants — these are the sounds of hope. If New York has gone overboard for him, it is entirely understandable. The reaction may even be justified because Porzingis does not appear to be some sort of fluke.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He’s so talented,” the Knicks’ Arron Afflalo said.Beyond his 7-foot-3-inch frame and his ability to hit 3-pointers, beyond his spin moves and his putback dunks, Porzingis has impressed teammates with his commitment. The dynamics of a locker room can be fickle and fluid, especially when a first-year player gets the loudest ovations and the most attention. But Porzingis has disarmed everyone around him.“We’re happy to see a guy who works so hard get the good games,” Jose Calderon said. “He’s been great since Day 1, and you always want those guys to be successful.”AdvertisementWith the Knicks, there may be no greater litmus test for a young player’s development than securing the endorsement of Carmelo Anthony. Porzingis has said from the night he was drafted in June that he merely wants to learn from Anthony, that he wants to absorb as much as possible from him.Porzingis practically genuflected at the altar of Anthony, and it was the wisest move he could have made.If Anthony was initially annoyed by some of the Knicks’ off-season moves — and he has denied that he ever was — he has since become one of Porzingis’s most vocal advocates. More significant, there were moments in Tuesday’s victory when Anthony actually passed up open looks to get the ball to Porzingis, who shot 10 of 17 from the field.“He picked it up for everybody,” Anthony said. “It felt good to hear his name being chanted in the arena. I’m proud of him.”This could all change tomorrow, of course, and health is always a concern with a player so young. Coach Derek Fisher said he would continue to exercise caution. Asked if he would accede to public demands that Porzingis play more minutes, Fisher said, “That won’t happen.” He also does not expect Porzingis to fill the box score with pyrotechnics every night.“But you can see he’s getting more comfortable each game,” Fisher said. “To me, the best part about it is that a lot of it’s happening naturally, in the flow of the game. To me, that’s a sign of a really good basketball player, when you can be effective and impactful in the game without trying to make it happen.”Porzingis continues to grow. With Sevilla last season, he averaged 11 points and 4.6 rebounds in 21.4 minutes a game. With the Knicks, he has averaged 12.8 points and 8.6 rebounds in 25.3 minutes a game. Over his last four games, he has shot 45.3 percent from the field and 36.4 percent from 3-point range.On Tuesday, his production was notable in part because it was his second crack at the Hornets. He had clearly learned from his first meeting with them — a game in which his go-ahead 3-pointer at the buzzer was waved off when officials ruled that he had released the ball after time had expired.The second time around, there was no need for dramatics. Porzingis’s two late free throws sealed the Knicks’ 102-94 victory as fans filled Madison Square Garden with chants of his last name. Afterward, Porzingis delivered towels to his teammates — a rookie chore — before evaluating his performance.Advertisement“I could have played better,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: A Player Wanting More Gives the Knicks Hope.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »