By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 18, 2015
The Tigers are turning to the right-hander Francisco Rodriguez in their latest attempt to shore up the back end of their bullpen.Detroit acquired Rodriguez in a trade with Milwaukee on Wednesday, sending the minor league infielder Javier Betancourt and a player to be named to the Brewers. Detroit General Manager Al Avila said the Tigers might also receive a player to be named in the deal.Rodriguez, who turns 34 in January, went 1-3 with a 2.21 E.R.A. for the Brewers in 2015. He had 38 saves in 40 chances. Detroit finished last in the American League Central this year after winning four straight division titles, and the bullpen was a priority heading into this off-season.Detroit’s bullpen has been a problem for the last few seasons. Closer Jose Valverde faltered toward the end of 2012, and the following year, the Tigers eventually settled on Joaquin Benoit as their closer. Then Benoit left, and they signed Joe Nathan, but he struggled in 2014 and missed most of 2015 with an elbow injury. The Tigers declined their $10 million option on Nathan for 2016.AdvertisementRodriguez, who holds the major league record for saves in a season (62), is owed $7.5 million for 2016, with $2 million of that deferred without interest until January 2018. He has a $6 million team option for 2017 that includes a $2 million buyout.AdvertisementORTIZ ADDRESSES RETIREMENT The beloved Boston Red Sox slugger David Ortiz confirmed reports that he would retire next year.On the day that he turned 40, Ortiz said in a video posted on The Players’ Tribune that the 2016 season would be his last.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I wish I could play another 40 years so I could have you guys behind me, but it doesn’t work that way,” Ortiz said of his fans. “After this year, time is up. So let’s enjoy the season.”BLUE JAY HAS SURGERY Blue Jays second baseman Devon Travis had surgery on his left shoulder and will be sidelined up to 20 weeks.Toronto said Travis had the operation on Tuesday to treat a condition in which one of the four growth plates of the acromion bone, which extends over the shoulder joint, fails to fuse and causes an extra bone.Travis was placed on the disabled list twice last season with left shoulder inflammation and did not play after July 28.NO CHANGE TO MINIMUM SALARY Major League Baseball’s minimum salary will remain at $507,500 next year because of the lack of inflation.The collective bargaining agreement called for a cost-of-living adjustment based on the yearly increase through October of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers. That measure decreased, but the league’s labor contract protected salaries from falling in 2016.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: Brewers Send Their Closer to the Tigers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.