NOV. 18, 2015
Here are the best-selling sports books in October 2015, according to the New York Times best-seller list:1. THE BOYS IN THE BOAT by Daniel James Brown (Penguin). A group of American rowers pursued gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games.2. ABOVE THE LINE by Urban Meyer with Wayne Coffey (Penguin Press). A championship-winning college football coach shares his insights on team building and leadership.3. I FEEL LIKE GOING ON by Ray Lewis with Daniel Paisner (Touchstone). The former N.F.L. linebacker, now an ESPN analyst, reviews his life and career.4. UNBROKEN by Laura Hillenbrand (Random House). An Olympic runner’s story of survival as a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II; a 2014 movie.Advertisement5. MY FIGHT / YOUR FIGHT by Ronda Rousey with Maria Burns Ortiz (Regan Arts). Rousey — an Olympic medalist in judo, a popular Ultimate Fighting Championship women’s bantamweight fighter and a Hollywood celebrity — tells her story.Advertisement6. FAST GIRL by Suzy Favor Hamilton with Sarah Tomlinson (Dey Street/Morrow). Bipolar disorder drove a former Olympic runner to become a high-priced Las Vegas escort.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.7. RAW by Colin Cowherd (Gallery Books). The ESPN radio show host shares an “unfiltered” insider’s view of professional sports.8. GOT TO GIVE THE PEOPLE WHAT THEY WANT by Jalen Rose (Crown Archetype). The life and opinions of the ABC/ESPN analyst and former N.B.A. player.9. FIND A WAY by Diana Nyad (Knopf). Memoir of the world champion swimmer who, in 2013, at age 64, swam 111 miles in shark-infested waters, from Cuba to Florida, in 53 hours.10. BRADY vs. MANNING by Gary Myers (Crown Archetype). The untold story of the rivalry that transformed the N.F.L.And One 13. THE THREE-YEAR SWIM CLUB by Julie Checkoway (Grand Central). Maui’s Sugar Ditch Kids and their quest for Olympic glory in 1937.Rankings reflect sales for October 2015. The sports titles ranked here are selected by the editors from among all adult nonfiction books in all print and electronic formats, as reported to the New York Times best-seller lists for the previous month. The definition of sports is deliberately broad and inclusive, so as to reflect all manner of the outdoor sports world, varying from the professional leagues to personal athleticism.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.