AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherAfter suffering through a miserable 17-win season by the Knicks last season, Madison Square Garden fans are getting excited again, thanks in large part to the play of Kristaps Porzingis. When a 7-foot-3 Latvian rookie comes to town, you might expect him to be a novelty act, beloved by fans but unproductive. But it is starting to look as if Porzingis is actually going to be good.On Tuesday night, he put it all together in a 102-94 victory over the Hornets, scoring a career-high 29 points on 10-for-17 shooting, and adding 11 rebounds.Porzingis is stacking up well against the other big men taken at the top of this year’s draft, including No. 1 Karl-Anthony Towns of the Timberwolves and No. 3 Jahlil Okafor of the 76ers. And he is playing a significantly greater role than the big men drafted lower, like Willie Cauley-Stein of the Kings, Frank Kaminsky of the Hornets and Myles Turner of the Pacers.Notably, he is an offensive rebounding machine, ranking fourth in the league. He collected eight against the Spurs and nine against the Bucks earlier this month, figures only the superhuman Andre Drummond has matched or bettered this year.But there are negatives. Porzingis is shooting .453 from 2-point range, compared with Towns’s .500 and Okafor’s .479. Porzingis likes to take the occasional 3, and while he was 2 for 2 on Tuesday, he will not help the team much at his current percentage, .265. He also is not really a passer, with only seven assists so far.But the biggest flaw in his game at the moment is fouls. He has committed 41 this season, tied for the league lead. While he has not yet fouled out of a game, he has threatened to do so frequently and spent time on the bench in foul trouble.It is not uncommon for rookies, especially big men, to commit a lot of fouls; Okafor has 37 and Towns 35 this year. It takes a while to learn how fouls are called in the league and to earn the respect of referees. The speed of opposing players in the N.B.A. often flummoxes newcomers used to N.C.A.A. or European-caliber opposition.“I just have to be smarter and not commit some stupid fouls that don’t matter that much,” Porzingis, 20, told ESPN this month.Still, it sometimes seems like any motion by Porzingis in the direction of an opposing player brings a whistle. Porzingis also committed his share of fouls while playing in Spain. His foul rate was a disturbing 6.3 per 36 minutes in 2013-14, though he cut that to 4.4 last season. His N.B.A. figure so far is 4.9.In his big game on Tuesday night, fouls were not an issue, as he committed only two.Porzingis’s spindly frame worries some Knicks fans who like their centers with a Patrick Ewing-type physique. And injuries have hampered other skinny centers over the years.Perhaps this was why many New Yorkers at the Barclays Center for the draft booed Porzingis when he was taken with the fourth selection. “I think our fans are going to like him,” the team president, Phil Jackson, said at the time. “The reaction of the crowd is what you anticipate in New York.”But Porzingis’s performance, off-court humility and enthusiasm for the game have helped change opinions. With the team 6-6 and well placed in the weak Eastern Conference, more and more Knicks fans are coming around to Jackson’s point of view.Advertisement