By REBECCA R. RUIZNOV. 18, 2015
Sepp Blatter’s latest effort to keep hold of power at FIFA, the governing body of world soccer, has failed.On Wednesday, FIFA announced that it had rejected appeals by Mr. Blatter, the organization’s president, and Michel Platini, president of the European soccer confederation, challenging the 90-day suspensions imposed on them last month in the wake of reports about a financial transaction between the two men for which Mr. Blatter is under criminal investigation.The decision means Mr. Blatter, who has led FIFA since 1998, remains forbidden to set foot in the organization’s headquarters, a short walk from his apartment in Zurich, or to conduct business related to the sport while an internal review of the transaction continues. That review is expected to conclude before the 90 days expire, in early January.Mr. Platini is also barred from the sport for that time, although the European confederation has expressed some support for him as the organization’s vice president has assumed Mr. Platini’s daily responsibilities.AdvertisementIn the interim, the men have the option of appealing to the Court of Arbitration for Sport in Lausanne, Switzerland.AdvertisementThe rejection of the appeal came days after Mr. Blatter, 79, was in the hospital for a stress-related medical condition.A lawyer for Mr. Blatter, Richard Cullen, called the decision one-sided and lacking in supporting evidence, and he noted that FIFA had delayed an announcement of the decision by two weeks.“The appeal committee rendered this decision on 3 November but released it only today, over two weeks later,” Mr. Cullen wrote in an email. “President Blatter is committed to clearing his name and hopes this inexplicable delay is not an effort to deny him, during his elected term, a fair hearing before a neutral body.”On Sept. 25, Switzerland’s Office of the Attorney General announced it had opened an inquiry into a payment of roughly $2 million that Mr. Blatter made in 2011 to Mr. Platini, a member of FIFA’s executive committee who has aspired to succeed Mr. Blatter as president. The money was for work done a decade earlier, the men said, and there was no corresponding written contract for it.Swiss officials said their investigation centered on suspicion of criminal mismanagement and misappropriation of funds.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two weeks after Switzerland made its inquiry public, FIFA’s ethics committee reacted to the allegations. On Oct. 8, FIFA suspended both men amid an internal investigation into the transaction.Mr. Blatter’s appeal to FIFA had centered on the organization’s decision to suspend him while that internal review took place. Mr. Blatter’s lawyers argued that the suspension was premature and without evidence.Wednesday’s announcement was a procedural development — an affirmation of the provisional ban — that will keep Mr. Blatter and Mr. Platini out of power until a final decision, be it a dismissal of the accusations or a longer exile from the sport, is delivered, perhaps as soon as late November.AdvertisementBefore that ruling comes, but after FIFA has completed its internal review and recommended a course of action to the organization’s adjudicatory body, Mr. Blatter and Mr. Platini will have the opportunity to be heard by the deciding judge and present a defense.Mr. Platini, too, has been hurt by the accusations, and the likelihood of his winning the FIFA presidency — previously seen to be high — is increasingly unlikely, after an electoral committee’s completion of mandatory background checks on possible candidates, which did not include him because of his 90-day suspension.The election of Mr. Blatter’s successor is set to take place on Feb. 26. Five men — including one, Sheikh Salman bin Ebrahim al-Khalifa of Bahrain, who has defended himself against allegations of human rights abuse — have been cleared to run for the position.The scrutiny of Mr. Blatter and Mr. Platini comes as FIFA engages in extensive self-examination in the wake of racketeering conspiracy and corruption charges brought by the United States in May against nine FIFA officials.Both the United States and Switzerland are continuing with criminal inquiries into further possible corruption within the sport, and FIFA, seen as a victim of the alleged crimes, is seeking to aid the unfolding investigations by both countries.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B17 of the New York edition with the headline: Blatter and Platini Lose Bids for Reinstatement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.