By DOUGLAS ROBSONNOV. 17, 2015
LONDON —  Only eight nations have captured the World Cup in men’s soccer in 85 years of competition, with Brazil’s five titles topping the leaderboard.Thanks to Marcelo Melo, Brazil is a member of another elite group of countries: those that have produced a top-ranked man in singles and doubles tennis.This month, Melo seized the top individual doubles spot seemingly out of nowhere — without the gate-crashing drama that accompanied the rise of his charismatic compatriot Gustavo Kuerten, who went by the nickname Guga and gave Brazil a singles No. 1 in 2000.With steady improvement and a torrid autumn, Melo, who is unranked in singles and who peaked at No. 273 in singles in 2005, ended the Bryan brothers’ stranglehold on the individual No. 1 doubles ranking on Nov. 2. (Mike or Bob Bryan had held the ranking since September 2012.)AdvertisementMelo, 32, assumed the top spot after winning a third consecutive tournament, in Vienna. A week after moving up, at the indoor Paris Masters, he locked up the year-end No. 1 ranking when he and his regular partner, Ivan Dodig of Croatia, won their third title of 2015 together.AdvertisementBrazil is now one of seven nations with singles and doubles No. 1s — along with the United States, Australia, Sweden, Serbia, the Czech Republic and Spain.Mike Bryan said he had thought Bruno Soares, another doubles standout from Brazil, would get to No. 1 before Melo.Chris Kermode, the ATP Tour’s executive chairman and president, said of Melo: “You get these players that come in, last the course, grind away. They do slip under the radar, and suddenly they appear. He’s one of those.”Melo’s ascension underscores a trend in tennis toward taller players. At 6 feet 8 inches, Melo, known as Girafa (“giraffe” in Portuguese), is the tallest No. 1 in ATP history.Melo said he had not fully grasped his accomplishment and would not until the season ended and he returned to his native Belo Horizonte.“To be really honest, I’m still realizing what I did,” he said Saturday. But he added that it seemed like “something special” to reach No. 1 when the Bryan brothers, the leaders in career titles, were still competing.Of more immediate concern, Brazil has a new star to galvanize locals as the world gradually turns its focus to the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.Advertisement“This is a good pressure,” said Melo, whose 17-match unbeaten streak ended Wednesday with a loss to Jean-Julien Rojer and Horia Tecau at the season-ending ATP World Tour Finals.Melo said he had received many messages of congratulations, including one from Kuerten, a three-time French Open champion who became his close friend through the Davis Cup and practices. Kuerten, who retired in 2008, had invited Melo to stay at his home in Florianópolis to practice and help him recover from hip operations near the end of his career.Melo said he was most touched by the kind words from top singles players. Roger Federer, who lost to Melo in a doubles match in Shanghai two years ago, said, “It doesn’t go unnoticed, a change like that, especially after the Bryans’ dominance.”Melo has been successful no matter whom he has teamed with this year, winning six titles with three partners: Raven Klaasen; Lukasz Kubot; and Dodig, with whom he won the French Open. In that match, with Kuerten looking on, Melo and Dodig upset the Bryans in the final, 6-7 (5), 7-6 (5), 7-5, for their first Grand Slam championship.Melo played with five partners in 2015, becoming the first individual with three or more to finish a doubles season at No. 1 since Max Mirnyi of Belarus, who matched up with six players in 2003.The Bryans attributed Melo’s adaptability to his laid-back, positive nature — a quality they said he shared with Mirnyi.“They aren’t going to rub anyone the wrong way, and they’re going to jell with any partner,” Bob Bryan said.Opponents say that Melo had solid foundations when he showed up on tour and that he has doggedly developed all aspects of his game. He shored up an attackable second serve. He improved his patchy returning. He enhanced his footwork.Advertisement“He’s not like a flashy player where you say, ‘Wow, he’s amazing,’ or blows you away with his serve and return,” Bob Bryan said. “He’s just a complete player with fast hands who blankets the net. He’s the most improved guy out there.”That includes his play in tight situations. It is no coincidence that Melo and Dodig are a tour-best 11-1 in match tiebreakers.“Mentally is where he’s made the biggest jump,” said Rojer, who is ranked sixth in doubles. “He stays calm under pressure. You can see now that he doesn’t panic as much.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Melo’s net-rushing style is straightforward. But his wingspan, which should make him vulnerable to body shots and dipping returns, is rarely exploited because of his cat-quick reflexes.That has helped him mesh with Dodig, 30, a superior backcourt player who has been ranked as high as No. 29 in singles and continues to split his time between the two disciplines.“We are a great combination because we are totally different players, which can work well in many situations,” said Dodig, ranked No. 4 in doubles.Dodig, Melo’s partner for four years, said the key to their chemistry was a solid friendship that allowed them to work out problems on and off the court.It also helps that they have time apart when Dodig is chasing singles points, Melo said. Their 13 tournaments together were the fewest of any team at the Finals.Advertisement“We kind of refresh each other,” Melo said.Melo did not aspire to be a doubles standout. The top 16-and-under and 18-and-under junior in Brazil, he admired Kuerten and Andre Agassi and did not focus solely on tennis until he gave up soccer at 16.It later became clear that doubles was Melo’s calling. He was the first Brazilian to reach a Grand Slam final since Kuerten in 2001 when, at the 2009 French Open, he and the American Vania King finished as the runners-up in mixed doubles.Melo broke into the top 10 in doubles in October 2013, but his climb has included setbacks, including a two-month doping ban in 2007 for a stimulant he said he inadvertently ingested.“It was not a good moment for me,” said Melo, who had reached his first Grand Slam semifinal at Wimbledon that summer with a fellow Brazilian, André Sá. “It was hard, but I became strong.”While Melo has locked up the individual ranking, the team No. 1 remains up for grabs. Four teams, or half the field in the round-robin format in London, are in contention, including the top-ranked Bryans and Rojer and Tecau. Dodig and Melo are together ranked third.The crowded contest reflects a year in which the Bryans, 16-time Grand Slam champions, failed to win a major for the first time in a decade. The four Grand Slam tournaments were captured by different duos, all of them first-time major winners.Despite his success, Melo said the year would not feel complete unless he and Dodig finished as the No. 1 team. Then the Rio Games loom, with Melo planning to play with Soares, a former top-three doubles player.“They are waiting for at least a silver medal,” Melo said with a smile.If recent form holds, a gold may be just as likely.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: A Brazilian, Not a Bryan, Is the No. 1 Doubles Player, Ending a 3-Year Streak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.