AdvertisementSupported byN.F.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressRashad Greene returned a punt 63 yards, setting up a 5-yard touchdown pass from Blake Bortles to Julius Thomas with 3 minutes 30 seconds remaining, and the Jacksonville Jaguars beat the visiting Tennessee Titans, 19-13, on Thursday night.The Jaguars won consecutive games for the first time since December 2013 and gained ground in the muddled A.F.C. South.The Titans lost for the eighth time in nine games and spoiled the return of Mike Mularkey, their interim coach, to Jacksonville. Mularkey was fired after one season with the Jaguars, a 2-14 campaign in 2012.For much of the night, it looked as if Mularkey would celebrate a rare win in Jacksonville.But Greene, a rookie who had missed the last seven games while recovering from a torn ligament in his left thumb, wove his way down the near sideline before finally getting tackled at the 5-yard line. Bortles hooked up with Thomas on the next play, putting Jacksonville ahead by 16-13.TEXANS CLAIM WEEDEN Houston claimed quarterback Brandon Weeden off waivers, with Brian Hoyer listed as questionable for Sunday’s game against the Jets because of a concussion.Weeden was released by the Dallas Cowboys on Tuesday when Tony Romo returned from injury. Weeden started three games this season, throwing two touchdowns and two interceptions.With Hoyer’s status in question after he sustained a concussion on Monday night, the Texans were left with just one healthy quarterback on their roster, T. J. Yates. Yates took over after Hoyer was injured on Monday, and he led the Texans to a 10-6 win over the Bengals.CARDINAL BACK AT PRACTICE Arizona left guard Mike Iupati practiced on a limited basis, returning to workouts just four days after he was taken off the field in Seattle in an ambulance.Iupati was injured during a violent collision with the Seahawks’ Kam Chancellor in the second quarter of Arizona’s 39-32 victory.“It was scary,” Iupati said. “When your neck hurts and both of your arms go numb, it’s a scary feeling.”He said he “should be O.K.” for the Cardinals’ game Sunday night against the Cincinnati Bengals.Iupati said the feeling returned to both arms while he was lying on the turf, but he said he understood that medical personnel had to take precautions. As he lay on the ground, he winked at Coach Bruce Arians.“I was trying to tell everybody I was fine,” Iupati said.LIONS PICK NEW PRESIDENT Detroit appointed Rod Wood as the team’s new president. He will oversee the business side of the organization and report directly to the owner, Martha Firestone Ford.The Lions are overhauling their front office after firing Tom Lewand, the former team president, and General Manager Martin Mayhew.Advertisement