By FRANK LITSKYNOV. 19, 2015
Mal Whitfield, a sleek middle-distance runner who won three Olympic gold medals for the United States, at one point as a Tuskegee Airman, and later became an American good-will ambassador promoting athletics abroad, died on Thursday in Washington. He was 91.His daughter Fredricka Whitfield, an anchor at CNN, confirmed his death, at a Department of Veterans Affairs hospice center.Orphaned as a child in the Watts section of Los Angeles, Whitfield went on to set records and achieve celebrity while running for Ohio State University. In 1954 he became the first African-American to receive the coveted Sullivan Award as the nation’s outstanding amateur athlete.After his athletic career, Whitfield spent almost 50 years promoting sports and physical education in Europe, Africa and the Middle East, both for the United States Information Agency and through his own foundation.AdvertisementDuring World War II he was a member of the celebrated and racially segregated Tuskegee Airmen, part of the Army Air Forces. In Korea, he once trained for the Games between bombing missions, running on runways at night with a .45-caliber automatic strapped to his side.AdvertisementWhitfield was still a staff sergeant when he set an Olympic record in the 800-meter event at the 1948 London Games with a time of 1 minute 49.2 seconds.He won another gold medal in the same Olympics anchoring the United States’ 4x400-meter relay team, and a bronze medal in the 400 meters.Four years later, at the Helsinki Olympics, he won the 800 again — in the identical time — and added a silver medal in the relay. He just missed making the Olympic team in 1956.In each of Whitfield’s Olympic 800s, Arthur Wint, a 6-foot-5 Jamaican, ran second.“I knew I was going to win,” Whitfield, a genial and gregarious man, once said on Wint’s website. “He was a chain smoker,” he said of Wint, “and I was living this gorgeous, clean life: no whiskey, no smoking.”Whitfield, who stood 6 feet 1 inch and weighed 165 pounds in his prime, had a long, flowing stride with high knee action. He set six world records, including 1:48.6 for 880 yards outdoors and 1:09.6 for 600 yards indoors. He won six United States titles outdoors and two indoors. The sports pages called him “Marvelous Mal.”He was elected to the National Track and Field Hall of Fame in 1974 and the United States Olympic Hall of Fame in 1988.In 1955, a year before he retired as a runner, Whitfield started conducting sports clinics for new runners and occasional training camps for elite runners, first in Europe and then in Africa. At almost every stop, he turned neophytes into champions. He coached in 20 nations and lived in Kenya, Uganda and Egypt.AdvertisementIn Kenya in 1955, Reginald Alexander, the mayor of Nairobi at the time, told Time magazine that Whitfield was “something like a Billy Graham of the sports world.”Whitfield was always struck by the warm reception he had on his travels. “If I could get all the athletes who want to train in America to come over,” he told Time, “I could fill every university from New York to San Francisco.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Malvin Greston Whitfield was born on Oct. 11, 1924, in Bay City, Tex. His family moved to Los Angeles when he was 4. He was 4 when his father died and 12 when his mother died. An older sister, Betty, raised him from then on.As a child, Whitfield lived four miles from Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, and when the 1932 Olympics were held there, he sneaked in to watch Eddie Tolan’s historic duel with Ralph Metcalfe in a thrilling 100-meter race that Tolan won by “a gnat’s eyelash,” as the sportswriter Grantland Rice put it.“From that moment on, I knew I wanted to run in the Olympic Games,” Whitfield told Sports Illustrated in 1991.With World War II on, he joined the Army Air Forces after graduating from Thomas Jefferson High School in 1943. He enrolled at Ohio State after the war, in 1946, while stationed nearby as a member of the 100th Fighter Squadron, a unit of the 332nd Fighter Group, popularly known as the Alabama-based Tuskegee Airmen. With that double duty, he said, he would wake up at 5 a.m. and go to bed at 12:30 a.m.When the Korean War broke out, Whitfield was recalled to the service and served as a tail gunner on 27 bombing missions. But he continued to train for track, running at night while carrying his sidearms.He was honorably discharged in 1952 and went back to Los Angeles to complete his bachelor’s degree at California State University, Los Angeles.His work as a good-will ambassador began in 1955 with an appointment by the State Department. He served more than 30 years as a youth and sports affairs officer for the U.S.I.A., visiting by his count more than 130 countries. He also held sports and physical education advisory posts in the Liberian and Nigerian governments.AdvertisementBesides Ms. Whitfield, he is survived by another daughter, Nyna Konishi; his wife, Nola Whitfield; a son, Malvin Jr., known as Lonnie; a son and a daughter from a previous relationship; eight grandchildren; and four great-grandchildren.He later established the Mal Whitfield Foundation to promote sports, academics and culture around the world, continuing the work he had started with the government. In 2002 the foundation published his autobiography, “Beyond the Finish Line.”“I have had a chance to see what the world is like,” he told Sports Illustrated in 1991. “I may have had to take a detour or two in my life, but I can honestly say that somehow I’ve achieved everything I started out to do.”Lauren Hard contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Mal Whitfield, Olympic Gold Medalist and Tuskegee Airman, Is Dead at 91.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.