AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressMajor League Baseball is close to new recommendations for safety netting at its stadiums for the 2016 season.Commissioner Rob Manfred said Thursday that it was “absolutely clear” that there would be changes. But there was more work to be done, he said, adding that he was not prepared to go into details.“In addition to a recommendation on the physical location of nets, there will be a broad fan education component to the program," Manfred said after owners had finished their quarterly meeting in Dallas.There were several instances of fans injured by foul balls at major league games this year. Manfred said that fan safety was paramount and that the 30 clubs had encouraged M.L.B. to move forward conceptually. He said there was an understanding of the outlines of the plans, but he did not want to elaborate until those details were “down in writing,” perhaps when the owners meet in January.Other items that were addressed during the owners’ two-and-a-half-day meeting:■ Manfred said that M.L.B. and Fox had reached a three-year agreement on in-market streaming of games for the 15 teams whose rights are held by Fox. Manfred said conversations had begun and would continue with the media-rights holders of the other 15 teams in the hope of having a comprehensive in-market streaming program.■ In regard to possible changes about sliding plays at second base, Manfred said the owners’ competition committee had recommended moving ahead with discussions with the players’ union “with a view toward altering the rule” for such plays.METS TO OPEN ON NATIONAL TV The Mets will discover next season that reaching the World Series for the first time in 15 years will mean increased national attention and increased expectations. The first sign of this will arrive April 3, the first day of the season, when the Mets are set to open on “Sunday Night Baseball” on ESPN as part of a three-game package.The Mets will be in Kansas City, Mo., to play the Royals, the team that beat them in five games to win the Series.ESPN’s opening day package will feature two National League Central rivals, the St. Louis Cardinals and the Pittsburgh Pirates, playing in the afternoon, followed by a game between two American League East foes, the Toronto Blue Jays and the Tampa Bay Rays. The Mets and the Royals will play the nightcap. TIM ROHANAdvertisement