AdvertisementSupported byOn GolfBy Karen CrouseNAPLES, Fla. — The two men, owners of thick collections of player photographs, stood behind the seventh green at Tiburon Golf Club, the site of this week’s L.P.G.A. Tour finale. The men had items for Suzann Pettersen of Norway to sign once she was finished on the green during Wednesday’s pro-am.They insisted they were not autograph hunters procuring signatures for items to be placed for sale on the Internet. Besides, one of the men added, “There’s probably not much of a market after what she did.”What did Pettersen, a major champion and 15-time tour winner, do to drive down the value of her autograph? Play with nonconforming equipment like Tom Brady and, after being caught, stubbornly maintain her innocence despite evidence to the contrary? Lose a season to a performance-enhancing drug suspension like Alex Rodriguez? Break an opponent’s leg like Chase Utley?Pettersen’s crime was following the letter of the law in a tight four-ball match at the Solheim Cup in September in Germany. Pettersen, 34, was paired with Charley Hull against the American duo of Alison Lee and Brittany Lincicome in a contest that was all square through 16 holes. At the 17th, Lee missed a birdie putt to win the hole and picked up her ball, thinking the 18-inch par putt would be conceded to halve the hole.But the putt had not been conceded, as Pettersen made plain to the match official, who awarded the hole to the European team. That set off a chain of events that led to the Americans losing the match but mounting a furious charge in the singles play to win the Cup.By the end of the Americans’ comeback, the biggest loser was Pettersen, who was pilloried for allowing her competitiveness to get the better of her sportsmanship.“She did not do the wrong thing,” Judy Rankin, a television commentator, said on the eve of the CME Group Tour Championship. “It just turns out not to have been the right thing.”Rankin added, “It is pretty well assumed in the game of golf, and pretty much across the board, everyone wants to win and everybody wants to win fairly, but what you really want is to win when somebody else played good and not because of some other outside something.”Phil Mickelson’s competitiveness prompted him to publicly criticize his captain, Tom Watson, in the news conference after the United States’ loss in the 2014 Ryder Cup, a clear breach of golf etiquette. Far from being ostracized for his lapse in sportsmanship, he was empowered with a seat on a Ryder Cup task force that was formed afterward. Then, at this year’s Presidents Cup, Mickelson switched balls midmatch, a rules infraction that resulted in his team essentially losing a hole twice. After the Americans rebounded to beat Adam Scott and Jason Day, Mickelson compounded his error when he chose talking trash over winning with grace. “We spotted the Internationals’ best team two holes,” he said, “and they still couldn’t beat us. Just saying.”  Pettersen’s competitiveness resulted in her being instantly upbraided on the Internet by critics who included other European female golfers and a smattering of PGA Tour players. The day after the event, Pettersen apologized. “I put the point that could be earned ahead of sportsmanship and the game of golf itself,” she said, adding, “I can be so much better, and being an ambassador of the game means a lot to me.”  Before her first competitive round on American soil since the Solheim Cup, Pettersen revisited the fateful four-ball match, particularly the scene at 18th hole, where Hull and Lee dissolved in tears and Pettersen ignored the pleas of her captain, Carin Koch, to concede the 18th hole to halve the match.“I just think the way the situation was handled could have been done differently,” Pettersen said. “How it all went down on 18 after the match was not a pretty sight for TV, and I guess we all could have taken more responsibility and left that out of the picture.” To be a female athlete is to be ever mindful that appearances matter. Prettiness is next to godliness, which is why many of the players wear makeup during tournaments and treat their competitiveness as an imperfection that needs to be covered up with hugs and smiles. The same icy stare that identifies Tiger Woods as a fierce competitor is off-putting when it freezes Pettersen’s opponents.“Absolutely, there is a double standard,” said Pettersen’s swing instructor, Butch Harmon, whose past clients include Mickelson and Woods. “It’s not right. One of the things I love about Suzann is what a great competitor she is. She prepares, and she plays, to win.”Speaking by telephone, Harmon added: “If you look at Serena Williams, she gets put in the same category. People say Serena Williams is overaggressive. No, what she is is very, very good and very, very competitive.”Rankin recalled that Pettersen had once been voted the most intimidating player in an anonymous poll of her peers. “And when she heard it,” Rankin said, “she said, ‘Good.’ ”Pettersen has scorched enough people with her intensity that L.P.G.A. officials, well before the Solheim Cup, had made a push to polish her competitive edges as if she were the tour’s Eliza Doolittle.On Thursday, Pettersen was greeted with polite applause by the roughly four dozen fans around the first tee. She finished with a humdrum one-under 71, five shots behind the leader, Austin Ernst. Pettersen said she had moved on from what happened in the team event, but Jerry Foltz, working the event for Golf Channel, wondered how that was possible.“I feel sorry for her,” he said, “because something like this, it’s not going to define her career, but it will follow her for a long, long time.”What about Lee, whose rookie mistake became Pettersen’s misery? “Literally, it hasn’t even been on my mind,” Lee said after signing for a 69. She added: “I don’t think I would have done anything differently. For me, it’s not that I feel bad for what I did. I just feel bad that everyone kind of pointed the finger at Suzann.”Before the tournament, members of the L.P.G.A.’s extended family were invited to a screening of “The Founders,” a feature-length documentary about the 13 women who formed the L.P.G.A. in 1950. Speaking to the camera, one of the founders, Louise Suggs, said she had a hard time being friendly on the course. The film makes clear that her main rival, Babe Zaharias, was never confused for the head of the welcome wagon committee. One of the three living founders, Marilynn Smith, said before the screening that she had watched the Solheim Cup on television. She was rooting for the United States, but she could not take the Americans’ side on the controversy that engulfed the event.“I thought she did the right thing,” Smith said, referring to Pettersen. “I don’t understand why people criticized her. I gave her a big hug today. She’s one of my favorite people.”Advertisement