By TYLER KEPNERNOV. 19, 2015
The final snapshot of the 2015 baseball season was grim for Josh Donaldson and Bryce Harper. Donaldson ended the American League Championship Series for his Toronto Blue Jays by grounding out on the road with the tying run at third in Game 6 against the Kansas City Royals. Harper, after his last at-bat at Nationals Park, was shoved by the throat against the dugout wall by Jonathan Papelbon, Washington’s closer.Thursday brought a better conclusion to their stories. Donaldson was named the A.L. Most Valuable Player, and Harper took the prize in the National League. It was the first M.V.P. Award for both players, who won easily in balloting by the Baseball Writers’ Association of America.Harper, who was 22 years 353 days old when the season ended, is the youngest unanimous M.V.P. in major league history. He is already among the most recognizable figures in the game, and seems prepared for an even higher profile.“I enjoy putting baseball out there,” Harper said on MLB Network. “I enjoy putting M.L.B. on the map and doing everything I can to further the game for the young talent across the world. The game is just getting better and better.”AdvertisementHarper’s traditional statistics — .330, 42 homers, 99 R.B.I., with an N.L.-best 118 runs scored — were impressive enough. But his combined on-base and slugging percentage, 1.109, is a figure rarely achieved anymore.AdvertisementBefore baseball’s recent supercharged offensive era — beginning with the 1993 expansion and coinciding with the rise of steroids — only eight players had achieved a season with an O.P.S. as high as 1.109 and at least 42 homers. All are Hall of Famers: Babe Ruth (who did it nine times), Lou Gehrig (3), Jimmie Foxx (3), Mickey Mantle (2) and Hank Greenberg, Rogers Hornsby, Ted Williams and Hack Wilson (once each). Harper is the first player with such a season since Barry Bonds in 2004.The performance was enough for Harper, a right fielder, to overcome voters’ bias against players whose teams did not reach the postseason. Harper became the first player to win the M.V.P. from a non-playoff team since Albert Pujols of the St. Louis Cardinals in 2008.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Nationals underachieved badly last season, with an 83-79 record. They will have a new manager (Dusty Baker) and a new coaching staff next season, but Harper — who has three years left before free agency — will remain their centerpiece.Three first basemen trailed Harper in the balloting: Paul Goldschmidt of Arizona was second, followed by Joey Votto of Cincinnati and Anthony Rizzo of the Chicago Cubs. Harper is the first M.V.P. in the history of the Nationals franchise, which started in Montreal in 1969, and Donaldson is the Blue Jays’ second winner, after George Bell in 1987.Donaldson had helped his previous team, the Oakland Athletics, reach the postseason three years in a row. He cannot be a free agent until after the 2018 season, but the A’s, seeking to capitalize on his value, shipped Donaldson to the Blue Jays last November for third baseman Brett Lawrie, pitchers Kendall Graveman and Sean Nolin and the highly regarded Class A shortstop Franklin Barreto.“I was very surprised, because it was a little bit ahead of my timetable as far as when I thought I was going to be traded,” Donaldson said on a conference call with writers. “And then after two or three weeks of being shocked, my agency and my family talked about it and we saw the bigger picture, as far as being able to play in Toronto and the A.L. East, and being able to hit in the lineup we have in Toronto. We knew it was going to be a better situation for my career, and we truly believed I was going to be able to perform at a higher level.”Donaldson lived up to that prediction. He hit .297 with 41 home runs and led the A.L. in runs batted in (123) and runs scored (122) while playing standout defense at third base. The Blue Jays’ playoff appearance was their first in 22 years, ending the longest active drought in the majors.AdvertisementMike Trout of the Los Angeles Angels, who won the award last year, was the runner-up to Donaldson, as he was to Detroit’s Miguel Cabrera in 2012 and 2013. Trout and Yogi Berra are the only A.L. position players to finish in the top two in M.V.P. voting for four consecutive seasons.Kansas City center fielder Lorenzo Cain, who finished third, was the only player besides Donaldson and Trout to appear on every A.L. ballot. Three Yankees received one vote apiece — Brian McCann had a ninth-place vote, and Alex Rodriguez and Mark Teixeira each had a vote for 10th place.The Mets, who won the N.L. pennant, had two players appear on M.V.P. ballots. Center fielder Yoenis Cespedes collected two votes for sixth place, three for seventh and two for 10th, while right fielder Curtis Granderson had one vote for seventh place.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Harper and Donaldson Earn M.V.P. Awards.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.