AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe DrapeThe Massachusetts attorney general proposed regulations on Thursday for daily fantasy sports companies to operate in the state, including raising the age minimum for participants and excluding college sports. “These regulations are a first of their kind for the daily fantasy sports industry,” the attorney general, Maura Healey, said in a statement, “and they focus on protecting minors, ensuring truthful advertising, bringing more transparency to the industry and leveling the playing field for all consumers.”Ms. Healey offered a more tempered opinion of the games than that of her counterpart in New York, Eric T. Schneiderman, who is trying to shut them down. But Ms. Healey asserted that the unregulated multibillion-dollar industry needed to be reined in.DraftKings, one of the market leaders, operates out of Boston, and Ms. Healey has proceeded slowly in examining how daily fantasy sports fit into the gambling landscape. She has previously said that daily fantasy is a “form of gambling” but that the distinction “doesn’t make it illegal.”Ms. Healey’s office has spent the last month investigating the industry and will continue to do so, she said, but her proposals laid out a road map for how the games might continue to exist in her state, with substantive changes. There will be a public comment period, and if the rules are accepted, they will take effect early next year.In separate statements, DraftKings and FanDuel, which is based in New York, generally praised Ms. Healey’s approach.DraftKings also said in its statement: “While we do have some concerns with the draft regulations, we intend to work closely with the attorney general’s office to ensure we are operating in the best interest of our customers.”In daily fantasy sports, customers pay an entrance fee, assemble rosters of hypothetical teams using actual players and win cash prizes based on how the players perform in real games. The payouts are typically more than $20, but some have been six figures.The proposed regulations would limit the amount players could deposit monthly to $1,000, unless the operators obtained verification from the players that they had the ability to sustain losses at a higher limit.The draft rules would also require prominent disclaimers, and marketing and advertising would have to list places where problem gamblers could receive help.In addition, the age minimum for participation would be raised from 18 to 21, and the sites would be prohibited from offering contests based on the performances of N.C.A.A. players.No professional athletes, agents, employees or others connected to a particular sport would be allowed to enter contests in that sport. Bans on company employees, and others with access to insider information, would be formalized.Ms. Healey, acknowledging that less than 2 percent of all players win 90 percent of all prizes, called on the companies to offer games that excluded experienced players, preventing casual or beginning players from being exploited.In addition to regulatory pressure, there have been nearly two dozen class-action lawsuits filed in the name of daily fantasy customers accusing DraftKings and FanDuel of defrauding them. The most recent, filed Wednesday in United States District Court for the Southern District in New York, singled out the banks and credit card companies that processed payments.Advertisement