AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherThe Golden State Warriors continue to torch the rest of the N.B.A. At 12-0, they are closing in on the record for the longest perfect start, and the biggest hurdle on the way is probably Thursday night against the Clippers.Golden State has not only won 12 straight times, but it has done so mostly effortlessly. The Warriors were uncharacteristically taken to overtime on Saturday by the lowly Nets, and beat the Clippers by 4 on Nov. 4 and the Raptors by 5 on Tuesday. But their nine other wins have all come by 9 points or more and include a 50-point shellacking of the Grizzlies.Golden State’s average margin of victory is 15.3 points. Even throwing out the 50-point blowout, the margin is 12.2. The 1995-96 Bulls, who were 72-10 and are often called the greatest team ever, also had an average winning margin of 12.2.The Warriors are not much different from last year’s champions: Draymond Green, Klay Thompson, Harrison Barnes and company were good then and are good now. The biggest difference is Stephen Curry, who has transformed from a most valuable player into some kind of super M.V.P., improving his points per game average from 24 to 34. He is taking five more shots a game, but shooting better, .521 to .487. He is also sinking an average of five 3-pointers a game, putting him on a pace to make around 425 this season. The record, set by Curry last season, is 286.You cannot even say that Golden State’s 12-game run has been that surprising. The Warriors have been favored in every game. They were 1-point favorites at Houston in the second game of the season, but from 5½- to 17½-point favorites in every other game.The record for a perfect start is 15-0, held by the 1993-94 Rockets, who were led by Hakeem Olajuwon in his lone M.V.P. season. Their run was more precarious, including an overtime game as well as wins of 2, 3, 4, 4 and 6 points. After losing Game 16 at Atlanta by 22, the Rockets coasted some, finishing the season 43-24. They did go on to win the title, beating the Knicks in seven games.(The N.B.A.’s forerunner, the Basketball Association of America, also had a 15-0 team, the 1948-49 Washington Capitols.)The Warriors certainly have a square chance to break the record, but face a challenge on Thursday night at the Clippers. Los Angeles fought Golden State all the way in their Nov. 4 matchup in Oakland, leading after three quarters before falling, 112-108, despite 24 points from Chris Paul and 23 from Blake Griffin. It took some absurd Curry 3-pointers late to win the game for Golden State.The Clips, unbeaten at the time, have slumped since then, however, winning just two of their last six. And Paul and J.J. Redick may not play because of injury.The Warriors are rated a 6-point favorite in the game, and historically that means they should win about 70 percent of the time. If they beat the Clippers, will it be smooth sailing after that?Game 14 is against the 8-3 Bulls, but will be played in Oakland. Because of that home-court edge, the Warriors may well be favored by double digits. Derrick Rose could return for the game for Chicago, but may still be hampered by an ankle problem.Game 15, to tie the record against the Nuggets, could also be a 10-point spread despite the game’s being played in Denver. And the record breaker is the easiest of the lot, a home game against the dreadful Lakers, currently sitting at 2-9.On the other hand, the Warriors’ biggest scare so far came when taken to overtime at home by the Nets, who may be worse than the Lakers. There are no sure things, though watching Curry in action this year can make one think otherwise.Advertisement