By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 21, 2015
EDMONTON, Alberta —  Leon Draisaitl and Taylor Hall each had a goal and two assists, and the Edmonton Oilers beat the Devils, 5-1, on Friday night to end a three-game losing streak.Oscar Klefbom, Jordan Eberle and Mark Letestu also scored, and the Oilers won for just the second time in seven outings. Anders Nilsson made 19 saves.The Devils lost their second in a row. Kyle Palmieri had their lone goal.Edmonton started the scoring seven minutes into the opening period when Hall made a terrific feed in front and Draisaitl was able to deflect the puck at full speed past goalie Keith Kinkaid. It was the seventh goal and the 15th point in 10 games for Draisaitl. He also has 17 assists.The Devils tied the game on the power play six minutes into the second period when Palmieri walked in and picked the top corner on Nilsson.AdvertisementEdmonton got that goal back a minute later. Teddy Purcell spotted Klefbom creeping in from the point and was able to send the feed into a wide-open net.AdvertisementThe Oilers made the score 3-1 early in the third on the power play. Eberle was allowed to take several attempts at the puck from the side of the net before banking it in off the skate of Devils forward Lee Stempniak.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With seven minutes left, Letestu picked off a pass and sent a shot that went off Kinkaid’s glove and into the goal.The Devils pulled their goalie with more than three minutes remaining, and Hall scored on the empty net with an assist by Draisaitl.The Devils return to the ice on Sunday in Vancouver, finishing off a three-game swing through western Canada. The Oilers kick off a five-game trip in Washington on Monday.The Devils were missing Tuomo Ruutu (foot) and Patrik Elias (knee). Kinkaid, the Devils’ backup goaltender, made his fourth start of the season in place of Cory Schneider.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Sports Briefings | Hockey; Devils Fall in Edmonton.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.