AdvertisementSupported byKnicks 93, Thunder 90By Scott CacciolaIn their not-so-distant past, road trips were the stuff of nightmares for the Knicks. Opposing crowds loved seeing them come to town. Things have changed. The Knicks ventured to Oklahoma City on Friday and sent another message in a month full of them by defeating the Thunder, 93-90.With each passing game and every fresh victory, the Knicks have pushed the horrors of last season deeper into the past. Led by Carmelo Anthony, who scored 25 points, the Knicks (7-6) shot 12 of 20 from 3-point range before fending off a furious rally by the Thunder (7-6).The Knicks, who led by 16 points, committed several turnovers in the fourth quarter, allowing the Thunder to rally. Russell Westbrook, who scored a game-high 34 points, made two free throws with 46.3 seconds left to cut the Knicks’ lead to 89-85. Later, after Westbrook made a wild 3-pointer to cut the lead to 93-90, Robin Lopez threw the inbounds pass away with 11.8 seconds left, leaving the door ajar for the Thunder.But Westbrook and Dion Waiters missed 3-pointers in the closing seconds, and the Knicks survived.It was a productive start to a four-game trip for the Knicks, who will face the Rockets in Houston on Saturday. Last season, the Knicks were 7-34 on the road. This season, they are 4-2.The Thunder were without Kevin Durant, who was sidelined for the fifth straight game with a hamstring strain. His absence meant that even more responsibility fell to Westbrook, who entered the game averaging 28.1 points and a league-leading 10.4 assists a game.But Jose Calderon did an admirable job pestering Westbrook along the perimeter, and the Knicks packed the paint to deny penetration. Westbrook shot 11 of 29 from the field. The Thunder made only 3 of 29 3-point attempts.The game presented the latest opportunity for Kristaps Porzingis to advertise his wares. He opened the scoring with a 3-pointer after Steven Adams, the Thunder’s starting center, was a half beat late to venture 24 feet from the basket. But Porzingis was otherwise quiet, finishing with 7 points and 6 rebounds in 26 minutes.As for Anthony, after misfiring on his first four shots from the field, he got on a roll, making three straight in the third quarter. Langston Galloway, the league leader in 3-point percentage, soon came off the bench to hit a 3-pointer and help establish a theme. The Knicks’ second unit kept asserting pressure and building on an early lead. Coach Derek Fisher went 12 players deep before four minutes had elapsed in the second quarter. The Knicks have a tough stretch ahead, so Fisher most likely wanted to spread the team’s minutes around in hopes of conserving some energy.But as adeptly as Fisher’s bench performed in the first half, it was Anthony who powered the Knicks, scoring 15 points to guide them to a 48-44 halftime lead.Midway through the third quarter, Calderon converted a layup in transition for a 10-point lead. Early in the fourth, Derrick Williams came off the bench to make consecutive 3-pointers that gave the Knicks their largest lead, 82-66.Advertisement