By ALLAN KREDANOV. 20, 2015
The Islanders have a winning record. They are coming off a 101-point season and are playing at a level that should keep them in the playoff race all season.But more than a quarter of the way into their first season at Barclays Center in Brooklyn, the Islanders are 28th in attendance in the 30-team league, with an average of 12,408 tickets sold through 12 games, less than four-fifths of capacity.Against the conference-leading Montreal Canadiens on Friday, the arena had swaths of red-clad fans rooting for the visitors. They yelled, “Go, Habs, go” after each Montreal goal as the Canadiens skated to a 5-3 victory.The influx of opposing fans may have helped generate a crowd of 15,171 at Barclays, which has the league’s second-lowest capacity at 15,795, including many seats with obstructed views.Advertisement“So far we love it here,” said Eric Fedak, 35, who drove down from Montreal on Friday with a friend and took the subway to the game from Manhattan. “The building is very nice, and everyone has been friendly. I’ve been coming to New York for 15 years to see the Canadiens, and we’re enjoying our first visit to Brooklyn.”AdvertisementGranted, the Islanders have had only one Saturday night game — a traditional time slot at Nassau Coliseum, their Long Island home for 43 years. During the first month of the season, they also had to compete with the Mets’ playing the same night five times during the baseball postseason.In addition, the Islanders have hosted six Western Conference opponents, and except for the defending champion Chicago Blackhawks — who won on opening night — such teams rarely generate sellouts.Despite three years of buildup to the N.H.L.’s debut in Brooklyn, however, the enthusiasm that usually greets a team playing in a new home has been modest at best for the Islanders, who have six victories at home and are 10-7-3 over all.“We have seen very low sales and interest in the Islanders this year in their new home,” said Jason Berger, managing partner with the ticket reseller AllShows.com. “Coming off a great year, the sales this year being so low may be tied to the location of the new arena. Barclays is accessible to subway and buses, but we feel many Islanders fans were used to driving to the game in Uniondale.”Other New York teams that shifted to new homes in the past decade tell a different story. The Yankees and the Mets drew strongly in 2009, when they moved to new stadiums. Even the Devils, who are 26th in attendance this season, had a surge in the 2007-8 season, their first at Prudential Center in Newark.Some fans are making the train trip from Long Island on a regular basis — around 5,000 of them, according to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. But it has been a struggle to generate ticket sales anywhere near last year’s pace, when the Islanders had 27 sellouts in 41 games at Nassau Coliseum in an emotional final season on Long Island.Jesse Lawrence, the chief executive of TiqIQ, which tracks ticket resale prices online, said a longer time frame would be necessary to gauge the team’s drawing power in a new environment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said Barclays and the Islanders needed a full season to adequately measure success in Brooklyn.“It’s still very early, and there’s still a lot of upside,” Lawrence said. “The Islanders moved from what essentially was a small market to New York City. If they go on a Cup run, they will sell out.”AdvertisementBrett Yormark, Barclays Center’s chief executive, remains upbeat, citing strong suite sales for hockey. He said the three-year-old arena’s 84 suites were at or near capacity for most games, through a combination of customers who buy suites for every event and those who specifically buy them for Islanders games.With contests looming against traditional rivals like the Philadelphia Flyers on Wednesday and the Rangers on Dec. 2, the building may finally experience a true full house. Opening night against Chicago was listed as a sellout, but there were many rows of empty seats, especially in the lower bowl.“It takes time for a fan base to evolve,” said Yormark, who also oversaw the Nets’ move from New Jersey to Brooklyn in 2012. “The prospects are still very good. There are still many people in Brooklyn who haven’t sampled hockey yet.”Even in the three seasons before last year’s season-long farewell to the Coliseum, the Islanders had a higher average attendance through 12 games than they have at Barclays Center.Yormark said such comparisons could be construed as apples to oranges, as the Islanders now have the dual challenge of keeping existing fans while attracting new followers in an area where most hockey fans root for the Rangers.“Hopefully the team makes the playoffs and we’ll have something to build on,” Yormark said. “My goal is that more marketing will bring this sport to life for fans that haven’t experienced it yet. I know you will see a lift in our attendance through holiday time and into January, when the season heats up in the push for the playoffs.”Yormark also said he was especially eager for the Rangers’ first visit. “It’s almost a second opening night,” he said.Stephanie Beige, an Islanders season-ticket holder from Manhattan, said she had witnessed a positive postgame trend in terms of generating local fan support.“The subways back to the city are full of Isles fans after games,” she said. “I think Barclays is trying and doing better.”AdvertisementSLAP SHOTSDefenseman Jeff Petry scored twice for the Canadiens and Carey Price made 33 saves in his first game since Oct. 29. For the Islanders, Brock Nelson scored twice and defenseman Travis Hamonic scored his first of the season. “I thought the atmosphere was good,” Canadiens coach Michel Therrien said. “It’s a nice building.”A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Islanders Are Adjusting to Their New Home Faster Than Their Fans Are.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.