AdvertisementSupported byBy Douglas RobsonLONDON — On the eve of the year-end ATP World Tour Finals, Rafael Nadal mused, “In the work, always there is a solution, no?”Several days later and true to his words, Nadal was plugging away on the practice courts. He finished a 90-minute practice session Thursday afternoon with Richard Gasquet, then relocated to another bubbled court inside O2 Arena and logged another 45 minutes, mostly hitting serves.Nadal’s coach, his uncle Toni, and his longtime physical therapist, Rafael Maymo, were at his side. When they were done, Nadal helped pick up his own balls, too.His lunch-pail work ethic has been a bedrock of his appeal and success. It seems central to a late-season resurgence after a lackluster year for him.The surest evidence that Nadal, a 14-time Grand Slam champion and a former No. 1 who is now ranked fifth, is finding solutions in sweat is his 5-2 record against the top 10 players since the Shanghai Masters last month. He was 2-8 against them this year before that point.That includes straight-set wins this week in the round-robin portion of the finals against No. 2 Andy Murray and No. 4 Stan Wawrinka. On Friday afternoon, Nadal improved to 3-0 with a grinding 6-7 (2), 6-3, 6-4 defeat of seventh-ranked David Ferrer.On Saturday, Nadal faces No. 1 Novak Djokovic in the first of two semifinals. The two have met an ATP record 45 times, with Nadal holding a 23-22 edge, although he has only one victory in their last eight matches. Later Saturday, No. 3 Roger Federer plays Wawrinka, who beat Murray, 7-6 (4), 6-4, to secure the final semifinal berth. This remains the biggest title that Nadal, 29, has yet to claim. A two-time finalist in the event, Nadal has missed large portions of previous seasons with injuries. He has missed the World Tour Finals four times in the last decade. Last year, Nadal withdrew to have surgery for appendicitis.Since winning a record ninth French Open in 2014, Nadal has looked diminished. The viciously spinning forehands, the irrepressible fight, the groans and the grimace on his face are still there, but the menace is his game has gone.“This year, I have been losing much more than usual,” Nadal conceded this week.For the first time since 2005, he failed to add to his Grand Slam total; he is tied with Pete Sampras for second to Federer’s 17. In June, Nadal dropped to No. 10 in the rankings, his lowest since April 2005, one month before his first French Open title.His 19 losses are his most in a season during his 14-year career. A few have been stunners, including a season-opening loss to No. 127 Michael Berrer and a second-round loss at Wimbledon to No. 102 Dustin Brown.Nadal, the undisputed king of clay, also came up short against Murray in Madrid, against Wawrinka in Rome and against Djokovic at the French Open. He lost three times to Fabio Fognini — twice on clay and then in the third round of the U.S. Open, after holding a two-set lead.There have been no apparent injuries, or excuses. Nadal has been transparent about his woes — the “fixes” he needs to his game, the “nerves,” the lack of confidence.“If you are able to compete the whole year, as I did, as Novak did, as Andy did, as Roger did, as Wawrinka did, then the ranking is fair,” Nadal said Wednesday after beating Murray, 6-4, 6-1, for his best win since defeating Djokovic in the 2014 French Open final.But Nadal scoffed at the idea that there was anything shameful about a No. 5 finish, although it is his poorest since finishing No. 51 as a teenager in 2004.“After a tough season, if you arrive to this tournament with this number, that says the level is still there,” he said.Some have suggested a coaching change. Nadal has said repeatedly that he believes in his team. Any dip in performance is his to bear alone.Toni Nadal said he had not discussed revamping the team.“It’s true — sometimes, someone needs new words,” Toni Nadal said Thursday, adding that it was “not my responsibility” to make any substitutions.He also rejected the idea that 2015 was a lost season. Rafael Nadal’s improving form on his least favorite surface — indoor hardcourts — at a time of year when he has often hobbled to the finish line is a building block for better things to come.“For us, I think it is very important,” Toni Nadal said of a post-U.S. Open period in which Nadal has recorded career highs in matches (21) and victories (17-4). “I think we can have a possibility to make a good 2016. We have played in a part of the year where normally we have more problems.”Rafael Nadal’s strong results this autumn include runner-up finishes at Beijing and in Basel, Switzerland, a semifinal at the Shanghai Masters and a quarterfinal at the Paris Masters this month.Nadal also has an eye on next season.“If I am able to play well here, I think that’s great news, because that can be a good chance to start next year again with positive feelings,” he said.The growing self-belief has been evident in Nadal’s aggressive tactics.He is serving more effectively. His whipping left-handed forehand is finding the corners and allowing him to control rallies and move forward on the court. In beating Murray, Nadal used a variety of angles and spins and depth to exploit the entire geometry of the court. He even found his way to the net, winning 11 of 13 points.“I go to the net when I am confident,” he said.The key, Nadal said, is that he is no longer pressing. He is not thinking too much. He is allowing himself to flow.“This year I have been more worried about myself than the opponents for a lot of matches,” he said, adding, “Today I feel free.” Whether Nadal can return to take his place alongside Djokovic, Murray and Federer on the Mount Rushmore of men’s tennis is for many the only question that counts. No rival in London doubted he could. Federer said he considered Nadal a threat to win anywhere he plays.The road back to No. 1 gets more difficult each passing year, Toni Nadal said. Rafael Nadal finished No. 1 in 2008, 2010 and 2013, the last two after significant injury setbacks.“We can improve,” Toni said.A win over Djokovic would send a strong message. These days, that is tall order, no matter how much perspiration one spills.With 10 titles, including the Australian Open, Wimbledon and the U.S. Open, Djokovic has been nearly untouchable in 2015. He has lost only six of 86 matches — three of them to Federer, who ended Djokovic’s 23-match unbeaten streak this week. Djokovic is seeking his fifth year-end title and his fourth in a row.Nadal did not take a set off Djokovic in three matches this year, including a quarterfinal loss at the French Open. Last month, Djokovic thumped Nadal, 6-2, 6-2, in the final at Beijing on outdoor hardcourts.“The best tactic possible is play very, very well,” Nadal said. “Let’s see tomorrow if I am able to win more games.”If he cannot solve Djokovic, Nadal will return to the practice court for answers. He is not allowing himself much downtime during the off-season.“I don’t deserve vacation this year,” he said with a grin.Advertisement