By PAULINA VILLEGASNOV. 20, 2015
MEXICO CITY — A dispute between Mexico’s government and the nation’s sports federations over how public money is spent and how athletes will be selected for the 2016 Olympics could result in Mexico’s being barred from participating as a team at the Games.Mexico’s Olympic committee and the national sports commission have traded allegations in recent days as the case heads to the International Olympic Committee, which, if it perceives political meddling, could take the rare step of barring the nation.Athletes could still compete and march under the I.O.C. banner but would not hear their national anthem at the winners’ podium or otherwise participate as a team. Mexico won seven medals at the London Games in 2012, including a gold in men’s soccer.Carlos Padilla Becerra, the head of the Mexican Olympic committee, said Friday in an interview that the national commission, known by its Spanish acronym Conade, had in recent months sought closer scrutiny of the federations’ finances and had moved to replace some of the federation managers, even going so far as to draw up lists of athletes who should go to the Games.AdvertisementThe commission did so, he said, in the name of rooting out corruption, a widespread problem in the country.AdvertisementBut the committee and the federations maintain that the government is acting without proper authority and in violation of the Olympic Charter, which seeks to prevent governmental and political interference in the Games.Mr. Padilla has taken the case to the I.O.C., which could rule in early December. Kuwait was recently barred over similar issues, but other countries suspended in the past won reinstatement after making changes to which the I.O.C. was amenable.“If interference is proved, a necessary and harsh sanction will come on Mexico,” Mr. Padilla said. “It can go from a warning, a public reprimand, to disqualification, like it did for Kuwait.”Some athletes scoff at the idea of standing before the I.O.C. flag and hearing its anthem instead of Mexico’s. Both the flag and passionate singing of the national anthem are prominent fixtures of almost every public celebration in Mexico.“When I think of that feeling that is to hear the national anthem in the Olympic Games, which is really every athlete’s dream, and if I imagine standing there saluting a white flag and listening to the I.O.C.’s anthem instead of mine, well, it would put me down,” said Román Garibay, 27, the national decathlon champion the past four years. “It wouldn’t be the same enthusiasm, the same passion.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The commission said in a statement that it was reviewing the matter, but it declined to elaborate.Alfredo Castillo, the head of the sports commission, did not respond to a request for an interview, but in comments this week to the Mexican news media he defended the moves as an attempt to shine the light of transparency on the opaque federations.He said the Olympic committee was essentially “blackmailing” the government by raising the specter of disqualification in the Games.“We have rich federation directors and poor athletes,” Mr. Castillo wrote on Twitter, while a local newspaper quoted him as saying, “We can’t allow for federation executives to enrich themselves with government funding destined for national sports.”AdvertisementStill, Mr. Castillo said he was confident that the dispute could be worked out.“Mexico is under no minimal risk of being disqualified, and we will participate in the Olympics,” he said.“Whatever needs to be fixed, we will do,” he added.In any case, a rift remains between the government and the country’s sports federations.Antonio Lozano, the president of Mexico’s track and field federation, said Mr. Castillo’s allegations of financial irregularities did not make sense, as the government had increased financing for the federations by 6 percent in the 2012-14 period, to the equivalent of over $30 million.In April, however, shortly after Mr. Castillo’s appointment by President Enrique Peña Nieto, a close ally, he said he was withholding future money. Then, Mr. Lozano said, came attempts to change the management of the federations and the selection of athletes in international competitions.“Yes, we are angry about the funding, but what is really outraging is the way he has tried to break the Olympic Charter’s selection criteria and other high principles,” Mr. Lozano said of Mr. Castillo, adding, “He thinks he can act as an emperor and his wishes are the rule.”A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Intramural Rift Imperils Mexico’s ’16 Participation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.