By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 20, 2015
Houston Texans quarterback Brian Hoyer will miss Sunday’s game against the Jets with a concussion.T. J. Yates will make his first start since he was a rookie in the playoffs in January 2012. Yates took over in the third quarter Monday, after Hoyer was injured, and threw the game-winning touchdown pass in a 10-6 victory at Cincinnati. Brandon Weeden, who was claimed off waivers on Wednesday after being released by Dallas, will be Yates’s backup.FITZPATRICK TO START Jets quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick will start at Houston on Sunday, but defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson is questionable because of a hamstring injury.Coach Todd Bowles said Friday that Richardson would be a game-time decision. Richardson has 19 tackles, two sacks and a forced fumble in five games after being suspended the first four for violating the N.F.L.’s substance abuse policy.Fitzpatrick had no setbacks after surgery on his left thumb last week.EAGLES TURN TO SANCHEZ Mark Sanchez will start at quarterback for the Philadelphia Eagles on Sunday when they host the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.AdvertisementSanchez will replace Sam Bradford, who was ruled out with a concussion and a left-shoulder injury after being sacked in a loss last week to the Miami Dolphins. Sanchez, a former Jets quarterback, relieved him and completed 14 of 23 passes for 156 yards.A win would put the Eagles (4-5) in a first-place tie in the N.F.C. East with the Giants (5-5), who have a bye on Sunday.COLTS LOSE SAFETY The Colts’ Mike Adams, a Pro Bowl safety, has an injured left ankle and will miss Sunday’s game at Atlanta. Coach Chuck Pagano did not say who would replace Adams.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Colts are already without quarterback Andrew Luck, who is out two to six weeks with a lacerated kidney and a partially torn abdominal muscle sustained during a Nov. 8 victory over Denver.TWO HURTING RECEIVERS Michael Floyd and John Brown, two of the Arizona Cardinals’ top three wide receivers, are listed as questionable for Sunday’s game against the Cincinnati Bengals because of hamstring injuries. Floyd has not practiced all week after being injured following his two touchdown catches in last Sunday’s 39-32 victory at Seattle. Brown practiced on a limited basis on Friday.RAIDERS CENTER QUESTIONABLE The Oakland Raiders may be without the starting center Rodney Hudson when they try to end a two-game losing streak Sunday in Detroit. Hudson, who sat out last week’s loss to the Minnesota Vikings with an ankle injury, was limited Friday and is listed as questionable.CAUTION IN DALLAS Cowboys running back Darren McFadden is listed as questionable against Miami because of a groin injury. Jerry Jones, the team’s owner and general manager, said on his radio show that the team was being cautious with McFadden, an often-injured eighth-year player.AdvertisementCELEBRATION COSTS PALMER Arizona Cardinals quarterback Carson Palmer has been fined $11,576 by the N.F.L. for a celebratory gesture directed at the crowd last Sunday. Palmer pumped his fist and then added a pelvic thrust — drawing an unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty — at the end of the Cardinals’ 39-32 win at Seattle. He told ESPN he had made the gesture toward friends in the crowd, not at Seahawks fans.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets to Face a Backup Quarterback on Sunday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.