AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe DepaoloLAS VEGAS — Miguel Cotto sat expressionless on the dais, arms crossed, as he listened to Oscar De La Hoya speak at a prefight news conference on Wednesday.De La Hoya, the Hall of Fame boxer turned promoter, was attempting to drum up some excitement for Saturday night’s middleweight championship fight between Cotto and Saul Alvarez, known as Canelo.“Miguel Cotto versus Canelo Alvarez: Puerto Rico versus Mexico; puncher versus puncher; young lion against ... ” De La Hoya paused briefly, seeming to consider his words. Then he said, “an older lion.”With several wrinkles visible on his face, Cotto turned toward his trainer, Freddie Roach, and flashed a wide, knowing smile. De La Hoya’s characterization is one with which Cotto will not quarrel. Now 35, Cotto, the Ring magazine middleweight champion, has begun to seriously contemplate the end of his career.“I don’t want to be in the sport for that much longer,” Cotto said. “I see two or three more fights and that will be all.”Despite this pronouncement, Cotto (40-4, 33 knockouts) is anxious to show that he is not yet a lion in winter. In the 25-year-old Alvarez (45-1-1, 32 knockouts), Cotto is meeting a highly regarded fighter just entering his prime.Roach, who began working with Cotto last year, said he believed that his fighter’s experience would prove decisive.“Canelo makes a lot of mistakes,” Roach said Thursday. “And we’re really going to take advantage of those mistakes. He has youth on his side. But that’s not going to be enough to beat us.”Roach, who began working with Cotto after consecutive losses to Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Austin Trout, has won all three of his fights in Cotto’s corner. Chief among them was a victory over Sergio Martinez at Madison Square Garden last June, perhaps Cotto’s signature conquest.Cotto credited Roach with sparking a career renaissance, and he said that they had a few tricks in store for Alvarez.“”I know with Freddie in my corner, and in charge, and handling everything, we can surprise him,” Cotto said.A major story line leading up to the fight has been the controversy involving Cotto and the World Boxing Council. Cotto was that organization’s champion until he was stripped of the belt on Tuesday for refusing to pay a sanctioning fee to the organization.The W.B.C. president, Mauricio Sulaiman, said that he could not disclose the terms of the proposed sanctioning fee, stating that they were confidential. But a spokeswoman for Roc Nation Sports, which promotes Cotto, said it was $300,000. This was on top of the $800,000 that Roc Nation Sports has agreed to pay the W.B.C.’s No. 1 contender, Gennady Golovkin, to waive his right to challenge for the title, allowing this weekend’s matchup to take place.Sulaiman said that he was upfront with Cotto and his representatives about the money.“The W.B.C. acted in good faith at all times,” Sulaiman said. “It’s unfortunate. This is a very troubling situation for us.”Referring to Cotto’s decision not to pay the fee, Michael Yormark, the president of Roc Nation, said: “This fight is not about belts or any other material symbols of success. When the fight ends on Saturday night, and one man’s hand is raised, everyone will know who the true champion is.”Some observers believe Cotto opted not to pay the fee because he had no intention of fighting Golovkin, even if he were to win on Saturday. This would likely have resulted in the W.B.C. stripping Cotto of the championship anyway.Roach said he believed that Cotto was willing to take on Golovkin, also known as Triple G.“He is a very good fighter,” Roach said of Golovkin. “Is he unbeatable? I’m not sure. I think about that fight, and I would like to get him ready for a fight with Triple G.”It appears that a Cotto-Golovkin bout would happen only if Cotto and Roc Nation Sports considered it a sound business move. There is some question whether it would be. Golovkin sells tickets, having recently filled Madison Square Garden for his fight against David Lemieux. But the fight was considered a slight disappointment on pay-per-view, with a reported total of approximately 150,000 buys.Cotto allowed that finances would play a role in many of his career decisions, including his refusal to pay the W.B.C.’s sanctioning fee.“It was all about money,” Cotto said. “The fee for this fight was absurd to me and I prefer to keep the money in my account.”But ultimately, Cotto said that he was driven by his legacy. And that even though he was in the twilight of his career, he would seek out the biggest fights possible.“I’ve been working hard for 23 years,” Cotto said. “And I’m not going to stop working hard until my career is over.”Advertisement