AdvertisementSupported byBy Jason Sablich and Justin SablichFantasy football analysis for N.F.L. Week 11 games and Monday’s matchup between the New England Patriots and the Buffalo Bills. You can also follow the Sablich brothers on Twitter at @5thDownFantasy and see their complete Week 11 player rankings.1 p.m. Line: Falcons by 5.5Quarterback Matt Hasselbeck (IND) — The Falcons are fantasy’s fourth worst quarterback matchup, and only three quarterbacks have managed to produce 18 or more fantasy points against them. Hasselbeck is not an advisable QB2 option this weekend.Matt Ryan (ATL) — The Colts rank 28th in the N.F.L. against the pass (279.3 yards per game) and have yielded multiple touchdowns to the position in six of their nine games. Ryan has only been QB1-worthy in four of his nine starts this year, but it will be hard to keep him out of your lineup considering the plus matchup.Running Back Frank Gore (IND) — Coming off a big game against Denver’s elite run defense (83 yards, 1 touchdown), he’s a safe high-end RB2 play against an Atlanta unit yielding the seventh most fantasy points to the position.Devonta Freeman (ATL) — The Colts have the 11th worst run defense, and have surrendered double-digit fantasy points on the ground in seven of nine games. Freeman is an elite RB play.Wide Receiver/Tight End T.Y. Hilton (IND) — The Colts wideouts face the fourth worst matchup in fantasy, and just four receivers have managed to top 10 fantasy points against them this year. Hilton has a lower ceiling without Andrew Luck as his quarterback and the negative matchup, but volume will keep him in lineups. Julio Jones/Leonard Hankerson (ATL) — A receiver has managed at least 11 fantasy points in all but one game against the Colts, who represent fantasy’s ninth best matchup for the position. Hankerson is in play as a decent bye-week WR3 if he can return to action. Jacob Tamme (ATL) — The Colts have surrendered double-digit fantasy points to the position in three of the last four games. They are the 10th best matchup a tight end can have. Tamme loses some shine if Hankerson can return, but he is hard to argue against as a high-end TE2 play.These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard and PPR scoring formats and will be updated throughout the season.1 p.m. Line: Even Quarterback Jay Cutler (CHI) — Denver has the league’s best pass defense (182.8 Y.P.G.), and are allowing the fewest fantasy points to the position (11.4 F.P.P.G.). Cutler did well in a tough matchup against the Rams in Week 10, but trust him to do it again at your own risk.Running Back Jeremy Langford/Matt Forte (CHI) — The Chiefs’ Charcandrick West shredded this defense for 161 total yards and two scores in Week 10. They have permitted double-digit fantasy points to backs in all but two games this year. Forte is trying to return from his knee injury but missed practice Thursday. Langford would be a high-end RB2 option if Forte cannot go.Wide Receiver/Tight End Alshon Jeffery (CHI) — Jeffery is banged up with groin and shoulder injuries, and is facing fantasy’s toughest matchup for the position. The Broncos have permitted just two receivers top 10 fantasy points. Jeffery is more of a WR2 option this weekend.Demaryius Thomas/Emmanuel Sanders (DEN) — Both receivers’ ceilings are presumed to be lower with Brock Osweiler taking over for Peyton Manning, but the way Manning has played this year, that could be debated. Sanders is dealing with ankle and shoulder injuries and is the riskier play. Thomas is a midrange WR2 considering his inability to convert red zone targets.Martellus Bennett (CHI) — The Broncos have permitted just one double-digit fantasy day to the position. Opposing tight ends are averaging 6.- F.P.P.G against them. Bennett is a mid-to-low-end TE1 at best.1 p.m. Line: Raiders by 1Quarterback Derek Carr (OAK) — The Lions are permitting 20 F.P.P.G to the position, the third most in the game. Carr’s breakout season continues, as he has topped 300 yards five times this year, and he has produced multiple touchdowns days seven times. He is a high-end QB1 option this weekend. Matthew Stafford (DET) — This is a plus matchup for a well-rested Stafford, who has now managed to produce multiple touchdown outings in three of his last four contests. Oakland’s 31st-ranked pass defense has allowed the -10th most fantasy points to his position. We are compelled enough to consider Stafford a low-end QB1 play.Running Back Latavius Murray (OAK) — The Lions’ 28th-ranked run defense is permitting the fifth most fantasy points to opposing ground games this year. Murray is a high-end RB1 option.Wide Receiver/Tight End Amari Cooper/Michael Crabtree (OAK) — Both receivers are shoe-in options this weekend against a Lions unit that is yielding 24 F.P.P.G.Eric Ebron (DET) — Tight ends have exploited this unit for an average of 12.5 F.P.P.G., the second most in the league. Ebron is in play as a TE1 option this weekend.1 p.m. Eastern Line: EvenQuarterback Ryan Tannehill (MIA) — The Cowboys have held opposing passers to 15 fantasy points or less in six of nine games this year. This is a tough spot for Tannehill, who has topped 18 fantasy points just twice this year.Tony Romo (DAL) — Romo gets the eighth best fantasy matchup for quarterbacks in his return. He immediately warrants QB1 consideration.Running Back Lamar Miller/Jay Ajayi (MIA) — The Dolphins coaching staff has confirmed that Miller will remain the lead back despite Ajayi outplaying him in recent weeks. He’s an RB1 play against a weak Dallas run defense that has allowed the fourth --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------most F.P.P.G. to backs. Darren McFadden (DAL) — Just one team has failed to produce a double-digit fantasy performance from a back against the Dolphins, who have allowed the second most F.P.P.G. to the position. The return of Romo will benefit the Dallas ground game as well.Wide Receiver Dez Bryant (DAL) — He should be the old Dez with Romo back behind center. The Dolphins have been burned for 20 or more fantasy points by a single receiver in three of their last four games.Jarvis Landry/Rishard Matthews (MIA) — A potential mismatch with Landry likely matching up with the rookie cornerback Byron Jones, who is filling in for the injured Morris Claiborne. Jones has yet to face a receiver with Landry’s size and quickness. Matthews remains a steady WR3 play having averaged 75 receiving yards over his last five games.Jason Witten (DAL) — The Dolphins forked over 134 yards to the Eagles’ tight ends last week, and another 113 to Rob Gronkowski in Week 8. Romo’s security blanket should get a nice lift with his return.1 p.m. Line: Eagles by 5.5 Quarterback Jameis Winston (TB) — The Eagles have held Eli Manning, Cam Newton and Ryan Tannehill to a 12.3 fantasy average over the last three weeks. Winston is a risky play on the road this week.Mark Sanchez (PHI) — We have seen this guy before and it typically is not pretty. But the matchup is favorable with Tampa Bay yielding the seventh most fantasy points to the position, and Sanchez will be busy throwing in Chip Kelly’s offense (11th most passing attempts), which makes Sanchez a worthy streaming option this weekend if you are desperate.Running Back DeMarco Murray (PHI) — Tampa Bay held the Cowboys’ McFadden to 32 yards on 17 carries last week, and has not given up 100 yards on the ground since Week 3. A tough matchup for Murray, but his receiving abilities keep him in the RB2 mix.Doug Martin (TB) – Philadelphia, the league’s fifth worst running back matchup, has been beatable of late, yielding double-digit fantasy points to opposing backs in three consecutive contests. Martin a solid RB2, but expectations should be kept reasonable. Wide Receiver Jordan Matthews (PHI) — Just when we thought Matthews had turned a corner, he failed to produce against a generous Miami secondary. Another favorable matchup awaits, but he’s more WR3 material with just one start-worthy game to his name over his last seven contests.Mike Evans (TB) — Vincent Jackson is sitting yet again, meaning the passing offense will go through Evans, again. He’s an elite WR play as he takes on an Eagles unit surrendering the third most fantasy points to this position.1 p.m. Line: Panthers by 8.5Quarterback Kirk Cousins (WAS) — Cousins should return to earth this week as Carolina’s defense is a far cry from the Saints. The Panthers are the third worst fantasy matchup for quarterbacks at 14.5 F.P.P.G. and are allowing the second lowest completion percentage (57 percent). Cam Newton (CAR) — The Redskins secondary has slowly gotten healthier in the last two weeks, which could help explain how they managed to hold Drew Brees to 12 points in Week 10 and Tom Brady to 17 in Week 9. Newton is still a QB1, but on the lower end this week.Running BackJonathan Stewart (CAR) — Stewart has now cleared 12 fantasy points in four of his last five games. He’s a solid RB1 play against the Redskins’ 29th-ranked run defense.Wide Receiver/Tight End DeSean Jackson/Pierre Garcon (WAS) — This is a good week to stay away from Redskins receivers, as the standout cornerback Josh Norman and company are limiting opposing receivers to the fifth fewest fantasy points in the league.Jordan Reed (WAS) — Reed’s targets have declined significantly since Jackson’s return, but his ability in the red zone has kept him in the TE1 picture with five touchdown receptions in his last three games. He remains a midrange TE1 option against this middle-of-the-road matchup.Greg Olsen (CAR) — A tough matchup for Newton’s primary target, as the Redskins have yet to allow more than 10 fantasy points in a game to a tight end.1 p.m. Line: Ravens by 1Quarterback Joe Flacco (BAL) — The Rams rank fifth against the pass and are fourth in the league in sacks. Despite Cutler’s fluky 24-point fantasy day last week, this unit remains the second worst matchup for quarterbacks. Flacco’s a low-end QB2 play.Running Back Todd Gurley (STL) — Gurley’s matchup is not a good one on paper (10th worst), but the Ravens have faced plenty of lackluster competition this year, with four backs ranking 25th or lower in fantasy points. Gurley remains a must-start.Justin Forsett (BAL) — The Rams’ run defense has been exploited by the backs Langford (30 points) and Peterson (20 points) over the last two weeks, but it’s hard to get too excited with Forsett managing just 8 F.P.P.G. and 3.6 yards per game over his last four. He’s a midrange RB2 play this week. Wide Receiver Tavon Austin (STL) — Baltimore is the best fantasy matchup a receiver can have, but Austin is far from certain to take advantage of that with Case Keenum making the start at quarterback and Wes Welker now around to steal targets.Kamar Aiken (BAL) — This is an ugly matchup as only the Broncos have allowed fewer fantasy points to the position. Antonio Brown and Julio Jones are the only wideouts to top 10 points against the Rams this year.Crockett Gillmore (BAL) — The Rams were torched by Zach Miller for 107 yards and two touchdowns last week, but have allowed just three double-digit fantasy performances to the position this season. Gillmore is touchdown-dependent, having yet to haul in more than five receptions in a game, but you could do worse if your regular tight end is on a bye.1 p.m. Line: Jets by 2.5Quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick (NYJ) — With improved play in recent weeks, Houston may be a tougher matchup than its 17.5 F.P.P.G. allowed to the position indicates. The Texans did not allow a touchdown pass to the Bengals’ Andy Dalton or the Titans’ Zach Mettenberger in their last two games. Fitzpatrick is a somewhat risky QB2 play.Running Back Chris Ivory (NYJ) — While the Texans have allowed 20.7 F.P.P.G. to backs on the season (10th most), they have yielded only two rushing touchdowns over the last five games. Regardless, Ivory, coming off a solid performance against the Bills (99 yards on 18 carries), is again an RB1.Alfred Blue (HOU) — There’s no good reason to start Blue this week against the Jets’ top-ranked run defense. Blue has 61 yards on 26 carries in his attempt to be a lead back for the Texans.Wide Receiver Brandon Marshall/Eric Decker (NYJ) — Marshall is tied for the third-most red zone targets among receivers (16), which has led to six touchdowns on the season. He’s a must-start every week, as is Decker, fantasy’s 12th best receiver. DeAndre Hopkins (HOU) — With starting quarterback Brian Hoyer ruled out and a matchup with the Jets’ Darrelle Revis on deck, keep expectations in check for Hopkins, fantasy’s third best receiver.4:05 p.m. Line: Chiefs by 3Quarterback Alex Smith (KC) — With seven touchdown passes in his last eight games, there’s little to get excited about for this midrange QB2 play. Philip Rivers (SD) — He had his five game streak of at least 20 fantasy points broken in Week 9 against the Bears, but still threw for 280 yards and a touchdown. That was his second worst fantasy performance of the season, which is saying something. He’s still a top five QB play in a tough matchup with Kansas City (15.9 F.P.P.G.). Running Back Melvin Gordon/Danny Woodhead (SD) — Last week, the Chiefs allowed their first rushing touchdown to a back since Week 4, and are allowing 15.1 F.P.P.G. to the position over all (seventh fewest). Gordon, who still does not have a rushing touchdown, is not worth considering and Woodhead, with his 59 targets (second in N.F.L. for backs) remains a must-start in P.P.R. leagues.Charcandrick West (KC) — He’s a top five RB option against the Chargers, who have allowed the most fantasy points to running backs in 2015 (24.7 F.P.P.G.).Wide Receiver/Tight End Stevie Johnson/Malcom Floyd (SD) — As expected, Johnson saw a season-high 10 targets in Week 9 as the Chargers’ new WR1 (7/68/0). Consider him a low-end WR2 against a team that has allowed the second most fantasy points to the position (30.3 F.P.P.G.). Floyd will not play.Jeremy Maclin (KC) — He has not had more than three receptions in a game since Week 5. He’s still a low-end WR2, as the Chargers secondary has proved beatable in recent weeks (24.4 F.P.P.G. last three games).Antonio Gates (SD) — The Chiefs have shut down tight ends all season long (4.4 F.P.P.G., fewest in league), but as long as he’s on the field, Gates and his 10-plus targets per game is a must-start, even more so since receiver Keenan Allen was lost for the season.Travis Kelce (KC) — The Chargers have allowed four touchdowns to the position over the last three games, and over all are the ninth best TE matchup (9.7 F.P.P.G.).4:25 p.m. Line: EvenQuarterback Aaron Rodgers (GB) — It took another fourth quarter burst last week against the Lions to get Rodgers’s fantasy numbers up. The Vikings have not allowed more than 20 fantasy points to a quarterback this season, so keep that in mind when setting your expectations for Rodgers this week.Running Back James Starks (GB) — Whether or not Eddie Lacy is able to play, Starks will be the lead back for the Packers. He struggled in that role last week, averaging 2.8 yards per carry and totaling 42 rushing yards. He’s a low-end RB2 against a Vikings defense that has yielded only two touchdowns to the position in its last eight games.Adrian Peterson (MIN) — He has quieted any doubters with 47.9 fantasy points in his last two games, and averaged 7.8 yards per carry in his monster performance against Oakland last week.Wide Receiver/Tight End Randall Cobb/James Jones (GB) — After a strong start, Cobb only has one game with more than five fantasy points in his last six. Jones has also been quiet, with only 10 targets total in his last three games and no touchdowns. Only two receivers have topped 100 yards against the Vikings this season. Jones is barely in the WR3 conversation while Cobb is a high-end WR2 despite his recent struggles. Stefon Diggs (MIN) — He has just seven targets in his last two games combined, but keep in mind that the Vikings did not need to throw much in Week 10 as Peterson led the team to a blowout victory. Consider him a low-end WR2 against a team that has allowed a receiver to score a touchdown in each of the last three games.4:25 p.m. Line: Seahawks by 13.5Quarterback Russell Wilson (SEA) — The 49ers have allowed the fourth most passing yards per game (280.6), but have given up the sixth fewest total rushing yards to quarterbacks (73), and held Wilson to 11.4 fantasy points in Week 7. He remains a low-end QB1 who should be putting up bigger numbers than he is.Running Back Marshawn Lynch (SEA) — Lynch totaled 122 yards on 27 carries against the 49ers in Week 7. Keep an eye on Sunday’s injury report (abdomen) but plug him in as a midrange RB1 on Sunday.Wide Receiver/Tight End Anquan Boldin (SF) — He has not played since Week 7 against the Seahawks, when he had three receptions for 39 yards. Boldin may suit up this week, but unless you start more than three receivers in your league, keep him on your bench.Jimmy Graham (SEA) — He has not scored a touchdown since Week 3, and only had two catches for 31 yards against San Francisco in Week 7. He remains a mid-to-low-end TE1.8:30 p.m. Line: Cardinals by 5Quarterback Andy Dalton (CIN) — He will face Arizona’s seventh-ranked passing defense that is allowing the eighth fewest F.P.P.G. to quarterbacks (15.2). Dalton has been under 10 fantasy points in two of his last three games and is safer as a high-end QB2 this week.Carson Palmer (ARI) — The Bengals have been particularly tough on quarterbacks of late, allowing only three passing touchdowns and snagging four interceptions over the past three games. But Palmer has a 9-to-2 touchdown-to-interception ratio over his last three games and is a midrange QB1 play this week.Running Back Jeremy Hill/Giovani Bernard (CIN) – Hill received 22 snaps on Monday night, compared to Bernard’s 50. Bernard seems the better play going forward, but is nothing more than a low-end RB2 against Arizona’s fourth-ranked run defense (92.9 Y.P.G.)Chris Johnson/Andre Ellington (ARI) — The Bengals have allowed only one 100-yard rusher this season (Thomas Rawls in Week 5). Ellington is starting to dig into Johnson’s workload, but not enough to change Johnson’s status as a low-end RB2.Wide Receiver Larry Fitzgerald/Michael Floyd/John Brown (ARI) — The Bengals cover the position well, not allowing more than 15 fantasy points to a receiver since Steve Smith in Week 3. But all three need to be in lineups given Arizona’s proficient passing game (297.2 Y.P.G., 4th in N.F.L.). A.J. Green (CIN) — He has topped 10 fantasy points just once in his last six games. He’s an WR1 who is due for more production, but it will not be easy against Arizona.Tyler Eifert (CIN) — The Cardinals allow the third fewest fantasy points to tight ends (4.--------------------------------------------------------------5 F.P.P.G.), but Eifert remains one of the better TE plays each week.8:30 p.m. Monday. Line: Patriots by 7.5Quarterback Tom Brady (NE) — He had his best passing performance of the season against the Bills in Week 2 (466 yards, 3 touchdowns).Tyrod Taylor (BUF) — He has not done much since returning in Week 9 (27.1 fantasy points in two games), but against the Patriots in Week 2, he threw for three touchdowns and ran for another. With his top target, Sammy Watkins, back to near full health, he’s a high-end QB2 to consider in Week 11.Running Back LeGarrette Blount (NE) — Blount only received two carries against the Bills in Week 2, but that was before Dion Lewis was lost for the season. He has a touchdown in each of his last two games and is a solid RB2 this week.LeSean McCoy (BUF) — He has rushed for over 100 yards in each of the last two games, and added 47 receiving yards last week against the Jets. He averaged 5.9 yards per carry against the Patriots in Week 2 (89 yards).Wide Receiver Brandon LaFell/Danny Amendola (NE) — With Julian Edelman out for six to eight weeks, LaFell and Amendola are the top receiving options for Brady outside of Rob Gronkowski. They are both potential WR2s this week.Sammy Watkins/Robert Woods (BUF) — Watkins had no setbacks with his ankle in Week 10 and appears to be near full-strength. He caught six-of-eight targets for 60 yards and a touchdown against the Patriots in Week 2.The Sablich Brothers have provided award-winning fantasy football advice for The Times since 2010. Follow them on Twitter @5thdownfantasy.Advertisement