AdvertisementSupported byBy Fred BiermanNo. 9 Michigan State at No. 2 Ohio State3:30 p.m., ABCThe defending champion Buckeyes come into this one riding a 23-game win streak, but they have struggled to put away a couple of inferior opponents and have yet to face a ranked team this season. Last year the Buckeyes were on the outside of the playoff picture before going into East Lansing and making a huge statement with a 49-37 victory over the Spartans. That was the coming out party for the backup quarterback J.T. Barrett, who was starting because of an injury to Braxton Miller. This year Barrett is again starting under center (after a midseason quarterback change and some off the field drama), Miller has been converted to receiver, and the Buckeyes are in the driver’s seat for a playoff berth. Michigan State has its share of problems. The defense has had some serious lapses, quarterback Connor Cook is banged up and the running game is ranked 10th in the Big Ten. Ohio State has no problem running the ball. Ezekiel Elliott is clearly the best back in the conference and has a good shot at the Heisman Trophy if he keeps playing well and the Buckeyes keep winning. Ohio State is a two-touchdown favorite in this one and would seem to be an easy pick.In the college football playoff rankings, many analysts focus on the teams. That’s the wrong way to think about the playoff picture.No. 11 T.C.U. at No. 7 Oklahoma8 p.m., ABCOklahoma is putting it all together at the right time of year. Quarterback Baker Mayfield is playing as well as anyone in college football and running back Samaje Perine’s has nine touchdowns in his last four games. Despite being upset by Texas earlier this season, the Sooners seem to have the best chance of any of the one-loss teams to crack the playoff. After a huge victory over Baylor last week, Oklahoma needs to keep it going against the Horned Frogs if they hope to stay in the hunt. After a loss to unbeaten Oklahoma State, T.C.U. struggled to put away a winless Kansas team in a game in which they lost star receiver Josh Doctson for the season. Quarterback Trevone Boykin went down with an ankle injury in the first quarter and did not return. The offense was anemic without him, and his status is questionable this week. If Boykin can’t go, it’s going to be a long night for the Horned Frogs.No. 10 Baylor at No. 4 Oklahoma State7:30 p.m., FoxOklahoma State began the season unranked, but has won its first 10 games and finds itself in the hunt for a playoff spot. The Cowboys have had their struggles but keep finding ways to win. They dominated T.C.U. in a game that announced them as contenders, but last week needed a late rally to put away Iowa State. They have played very well at home, and Baylor has not won in Stillwater since 1939. The Bears lost their first game of the season last week to Oklahoma and dropped in the rankings as a result. With Seth Russell out for the season and Jarrett Stidham banged up, Baylor might be down to their third string option.No. 22 U.S.C. at No. 23 Oregon3:30 p.m., ESPNThis is an intriguing Pac 12 matchup of two teams that are looking to stay in contention for a conference championship. U.S.C. is tied for first in the South with Utah and owns the tiebreaker over the Utes. If they win out, they win the division. The Ducks need to win here and hope Stanford loses to Cal. Trojan receiver JuJu Smith-Schuster leads the conference in receiving and Oregon’s secondary is giving up over 300 yards a game.A look at the top players in contention for college football’s highest honor.No. 14 Michigan at Penn StateNoon, ABCThe Wolverines needed overtime to beat Indiana in a thriller last Saturday and needed a goal line stand to beat Minnesota two weeks ago. The Michigan defense had three consecutive shutouts earlier this season, but has looked suspect lately. Penn State has yet to lose at home, but the combined conference record of the teams they have beaten in Beaver Stadium is 3-22. Linebacker Carl Nassib, a former walk on, leads the nation with 15.5 sacks.L.S.U. at Mississippi3:30 p.m., CBSTwo weeks ago L.S.U. was national title contender and Leonard Fournette seemed to have a lock on the Heisman Trophy. But after back-to-back losses to Alabama and Arkansas, the Tigers are trying to avoid a total free fall down the rankings and Fournette appears to be on the periphery of the Heisman race. Unbelievably enough, Mississippi is still in the hunt for the SEC West title. They would need to win out and have Alabama lose to Auburn.Harvard at Yale2:30 p.m., NBC Sports NetworkHarvard’s loss to Penn last week snapped a 22-game winning streak, but the Crimson could still clinch at least a share of the Ivy League title with a victory at the Yale Bowl. Harvard is tied with Dartmouth and Penn atop the league. Yale has had injury issues this season, but the prospect of keeping their archrival from winning the league has to be appealing.Advertisement