AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherAfter years of sloppy, defense-free hockey in its All-Star Game, the N.H.L. has decided to try something new this season Nashville: a four-team tournament played three-on-three.It remains to be seen if the new format is a hit. Three-on-three has proved exciting in five-minute overtimes this year, but goalies may struggle to survive 20 minutes of odd-man rushes.Still, the N.H.L.’s venture fits in with the history of All-Star games, which have often been crucibles of experimentation.Here are 10 All-Star oddities over the years.Let’s Play Two If one All-Star Game is a success, why not try two? Baseball launched a second game in 1959, and Hank Aaron, Willie Mays, Ernie Banks and the rest duly lined up at Forbes Field in Pittsburgh in July and again at Memorial Coliseum in Los Angeles in August. The experiment ended after four years, when it was clear that playing two games a year brought diminishing returns.Us Against the WorldThe classic East-West matchup in All-Star games sometimes lacks excitement, and the N.H.L. gave a North America versus the world format a try starting in 1998. North America won three games and “the World” two before the format was dropped. Major League Soccer tried something similar in 1998, when the United States improbably beat the World in soccer, 6-1. The Glowing PuckOne of the biggest complaints of non-hockey fans is that they can’t always see the puck on television. The N.H.L. tried a high-tech solution in the 1996 All-Star game, adding gadgetry to the puck that gave it a blue glow on screen. When the puck moved quickly, as after a slapshot, it seemed to emit a red streak. Never enormously popular with fans, the glowing puck faded away by the late ‘90s, though in a way it was a forerunner to many of the visual effects on sports broadcast today.The Champ vs. the Rest Before there was the Pro Bowl, there was the N.F.L. All-Star Game from 1938 to 1942, featuring the league champion against all-stars from the rest of the league. The champs won the first four games, before the all-stars finally triumphed at Shibe Park in Philadelphia in 1942, the final edition of the game. The Canadian Football League also used this format five times, with the all-stars winning all of them.The Aztec BowlYou may not have heard, but since 1950, small-college football players have been traveling south to play a team of Mexican players. After years of Mexican domination, the United States started sending teams of all-stars instead of one college team. Since then, the United States leads the series, 12-2. This year’s game will be Dec. 5 in Mexico City.Nascar’s All-Star RaceThe race in Charlotte has had a dizzying array of format and eligibility tweaks over the years, including cash bonuses for leading particular laps, mandatory pit stops and wild 10-lap finishes. The race has generally been run in segments, with the order of the field sometimes being inverted at the start of a new segment. For a while, fans even got to vote on whether to invert the field or not.Texas vs. the NationTexas is by acclamation the greatest state for high school football, and in this game it endeavored to prove that. Starting in 2007, the Sun Bowl was the site of an All-Star game for college seniors with ties to Texas against those from elsewhere. Big name coaches like Buddy Ryan and Jerry Glanville were recruited for the game. Alas, after six editions, the game folded, with the series tied at 3-3, leaving it forever unclear whether Texas is better than the rest of the country.The N.B.A. All-Star Legends GameWhat could be better than watching the career greats suit up one more time? From 1984 to 1993, stars like Rick Barry, Oscar Robertson and Walt Frazier put on the short shorts again as a part of N.B.A. all-star weekend. Unfortunately, the old-timers were not always ready for the grind of 5-on-5 basketball, and injuries abounded. In 1992, for example, David Thompson ruptured a patella tendon, and Norm Nixon ruptured a quadriceps tendon. The game was quietly dropped in favor of a rookie game.Rugby LeagueAll-star games are mostly a North American phenomenon, but in Australia a rugby league match pits a team of indigenous players against an All-Star team. At one time the match was called informally, and uncomfortably, the “black vs. white game.”The Chicago College All-Star Game Did the N.F.L. champion really once play an annual game against a team of college all-stars? It sure did, from 1934 all the way to 1976. As you might expect, the college players generally struggled against the league champion, winning nine times, and losing the final 12 editions. Even for the final game, in 1976, more than 50,000 turned up to Soldier Field to see the Super Bowl-winning Steelers romp, 24-0.Advertisement