By VICTOR MATHERNOV. 20, 2015
After almost two months on the sidelines, Lionel Messi could be ready to return to the field for Barcelona — perhaps even in time for a Clásico showdown at Real Madrid on Saturday.Messi has not played since tearing a knee ligament less than 10 minutes into a league game on Sept. 26. News of the injury no doubt worried Barcelona fans, but since the injury the club is 5-1 in the Spanish league and 3-0 in the Champions League.Barcelona has opened a 3-point lead over Real Madrid at the top of La Liga through 11 games heading into this weekend’s match, as its other two attacking stars, Neymar and Luis Suárez, have filled the gap with 10 goals each since Messi’s injury.Real had been keeping pace until a 3-2 loss at Sevilla on Nov. 8, and the Spanish news media is already piling the pressure on Manager Rafa Benítez. Should Real lose on Saturday, the pressure would only increase. Benítez on Friday promised to play an attacking style, even if Messi is in Barcelona’s lineup.AdvertisementThere is as yet no definite word on whether Messi will start, come off the bench or even play at all. He practiced with Barcelona’s B team last week and returned to first-team training this week. Coaches and teammates have spoken highly of his recovery, but it is also possible that some gamesmanship is afoot.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Whether Messi plays or not, the great news is that he is fit again,” Manager Luis Enrique said Friday.El Clásico is one of the biggest regular sporting matches in the world, and Messi has been a key figure in the rivalry for a decade, scoring 21 Clásico goals, the record. In that 10-year span, Real Madrid and Barcelona have won 9 of 10 Spanish titles. Barcelona has also won four Champions Leagues in that time, and Real Madrid one.AdvertisementSecurity for this year’s game will be high in the wake of the attacks outside a match at the Stade de France in Paris last week. The Belgium-Spain and Germany-Netherlands exhibition matches were canceled this week, but soccer is returning across the continent this weekend. But as usual, no game will be bigger than El Clásico.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.