

      By TIM ROHAN

OCT. 6, 2015

The ulnar collateral ligament, which connects the humerus bone in the upper arm to the ulna bone in the lower arm, is under attack in major league baseball. A quarter of pitchers have had surgery to reconstruct the ligament, a procedure known as Tommy John surgery. Regardless of his position, age or surgeon, every baseball player who has had the operation carries a defining emblem of the trade. Related article: Every Scar Tells a StoryDo people ask about the scar?Most people notice it because I tattooed little safety pins around it. It looks like they’re kind of holding it together. We had to go back in on the same scar for the flexor, so it messed the tattoo up a little bit.How many operations have you had in your career?Baseball-related? Well, two elbows, two shoulders, a hip. So five.You were at the lowest level of the minor leagues when your injury was diagnosed. Were you afraid your career was over before it started? I flew up to New York. The next morning, got an M.R.I., saw the doctor, and he said: “Hey, you need Tommy John. When do you want to do it?” I said, “As soon as possible.” And he’s like, “All right, today at 3:30.” I didn’t know much about it. I was like, “All right, let’s do it!” I didn’t have an agent at the time, so I didn’t even think about getting a second opinion. Mine was quick. After I had it, I was thinking, What’re they going to think of me? I just got drafted. I hadn’t proven anything. Struggled in rookie ball, actually. So I was a little nervous at that point. And that’s when you met Johan Santana and he taught you his changeup?Yeah, we crossed paths in 2011, or whenever I was doing rehab. Played catch with him a few times. We talked about different things about pitching and stuff. I was new to it, so I was trying to learn everything I could from the people around me. That’s when we talked about the changeup and the idea behind it and how he developed it from being an O.K. pitch to one of his better pitches.You had recently been converted to a pitcher. Were you surprised that your elbow had broken down so soon? I never asked why or anything. My arm never hurt when I played the infield. But I think it might’ve been getting thrown into the mix a little too quick in college. Didn’t really have much of a pitch count. In one game, I threw 130 pitches. Didn’t really have a routine. Then I would go play the infield after I pitched — and sometimes the outfield. Never really took a break or had a routine to take care of my arm. Do you ever look at the scar? Mine’s not the best-looking one. It’s kind of thick. I don’t pay attention to it anymore. Did you try to play through it?Yeah. I tried. Once I got warmed up, it was O.K. But then, if it was cold, it just stiffened up and hurt. It got to the point where I couldn’t take the pain anymore.How did you injure your elbow?I hurt it long-tossing. A lot of guys long-toss a lot of pitches. But I never really did it a lot. And when I got on the D.L., I tried to keep my arm in shape by long-tossing. I don’t know if I was throwing it the wrong way or something. But that’s when it started.What does your scar look like? Nothing like the scars of today. Mine is long, very thin, and you can hardly see it. You were the first one to have the operation. How much did Dr. Jobe explain about what he was going to do? He explained everything. It wasn’t like a doctor to a patient. It was like a father to a son. He explained things and asked if I understood. If I didn’t, then he would explain it in a little clearer terms. He might be one of the most caring people I’ve ever been around in my life. He was concerned that if I had the surgery, and it probably wouldn’t work, was I going to have the means to support my family? Because my wife was due with our daughter. She was born two days after the surgery. And his thing was, “Are you going to have the means to support your family?” I go, “Yeah, I got a fallback.” He said, “O.K., I don’t want you to think you’re going to go into this and you’re going to come right back out and be as good as new.” He said, “More than likely, it will probably fail.” Did he explain why the scar looked the way it did? Nope. I never asked him. See, he operated on me in 1972. I had torn the flexor mass off the elbow in ’72, last game of the season. He operated on me. Then in 1974, he operated on me using the same scar. And I asked him why he used the same scar. He was like: “It’s kind of like taking a trip. If you find a good route and there’s good food on the way, you tend to go the same way.” When you originally injured the ligament, was it on one pitch? It was July 17. I was pitching against Montreal. I threw one pitch in maybe the third, fourth inning, and I’m like, “Oh, God!” The pain was excruciating. And I threw one more pitch, and it was excruciating again. I called time, and I walked off. And I told Walt Alston. I said: “Get somebody in, Walter. I think I’ve hurt my arm, and I hurt it bad.” I got to the bench, and I tell our trainer, Bill Buhler. I said, “Billy, get Dr. Jobe; something’s wrong.”Are you surprised the operation is so common now? No. The worst thing you can do in the world is pitch 12 months a year. The best pitchers in baseball don’t pitch 12 months a year. So if the best pitchers in baseball, which are major league pitchers, if they don’t pitch 12 months a year, why should some kid 8, 9, 10, 11 years old who can’t walk and chew gum at the same time? Why should he do that? You’ve got to rest your body. And what we’re seeing now, all these guys having the surgery, it’s the tidal wave of these kids who have been doing year-round baseball for all these years. What do you remember from the day of the operation?The only thing I remember is waking up and could feel it a little bit. I remember telling the nurse I need something. She goes, “All right, tell me when you’re good.” I think I got, like, five shots of whatever they had. I was like, “Another one, another one, another one.” Then she had me stand up, and she was, like, this big. She was like, “O.K., we’re going to wheel you all the way out.” Have you wondered why your elbow went out twice?Yeah. Everyone says: “You have a clean delivery. Your delivery is nice.” And I’m not always trying to throw max effort. I would at times, but it wasn’t the whole game. So yeah. I’ve tried different grips on the slider, changeup, everything. I’ve tried to mess with everything to see if anything would let up — nothing. So yeah, I don’t know. They’re still doing so much research. You’re still not 100 percent sure.Do you treat the scar at all? Ointment or anything?Scars don’t really concern me. I’m not too worried about the inside of my arm.It’s rare for position players to have Tommy John surgery. Do you think a lot of people know you’ve had it?Actually, not a lot of people do. A lot of people go: “What’s that scar on your arm? I didn’t know you had that.” A long time ago, 2001. It’s been almost 15 years. I think more position guys have it than many people think. They just don’t know about it. Matt Carpenter had it. If you threw a lot as a kid — I played quarterback as a kid, did a lot of throwing, a lot of pitching as a young kid. Eventually it’s coming, for most throwing athletes.You had Tommy John surgery early in your career. Were you afraid at all?I was kind of down a little bit because I saw what they did. They gave me a video, a CD, and I went back to my house, and I watched it. I was like, “Wow, I might not ever pitch again.” I saw everything they did to me, the whole surgery.They gave you a video of the operation?Yep. Everything.You’re the first pitcher to be elected to the Hall of Fame after having Tommy John surgery. And you pitched for years knowing you’d probably need the operation. Were you afraid your career was over?I knew I had needed it for quite some time. I was pitching through it. I don’t know — everyone pitches through discomfort. I pitched through my share of it, knowing full well the next surgery I would have would be Tommy John. So I bought enough time, until I got to the age of 34. I thought that would be it. That I would retire. I didn’t know much about guys having it my age. And there wasn’t the epidemic that exists today. So I had just checked out mentally. Fortunately, I didn’t give in to that. Had the surgery, and the rest is history.Why is the injury so common now?The damage is being done early. It’s like buying a used car. If you don’t know that it’s been in a couple of accidents, you have no idea it’s probably going to break down later, in the time that you own it. I think that’s the one thing in youth baseball — that’s why there’s all the injuries. My philosophy is this: If you’re young and you throw too hard, you’re taxing a ligament and tendons that don’t just have the opportunity to bear that. We’re throwing harder than we ever had. We’re stronger. We’re working out more. But we’re not smarter. We have all the technology in the world, but we’re working out things that are sport-specific instead of balancing the body. More pulled obliques. More pulled muscles. More Tommy Johns.Do you ever look at your scar?It’s funny: I don’t think twice about it. But whenever I look at it, I’m reminded of everything I just said to you. You know: a lot to overcome, perseverance, building a school. Would never have built a school had I not been out all year and been able to make meetings. I’ve never had — which has been unreal — I’ve never had any problems since that surgery. I’ve had problems on everything else. Three shoulder surgeries and probably another one here in the near future. But through it all, it taught me how to overcome. You know, what was once thought of as a career-ending injury has now become a second birth of life for a player.You had a small tear. Did part of you not want to have surgery?I didn’t want to at all because I wanted to play. I was so looking forward to playing. I had worked so hard to get there. And there was no guarantee that I will have a spot afterwards. And there’s no real guarantee that I’m going to throw as hard afterward, even though the statistics say people recover well. There’s still a chance I might not. So I really was — it took me a couple of days to think about.What kind of advice did you get?A lot of people, when they found out I was going to miss a majority of the season anyway, they said there’s no reason to chance it. Because if I got hurt again, after resting it, and had to sit out another year after and get the surgery anyway, that would have really crushed me.What does your scar look like?It doesn’t look good. I don’t think it will ever look good. It kind of just looks like I got into a knife fight. But no one can really see it unless they’re looking for it, I guess. It’s not like a scar across my face or something. It’s not too noticeable. It’s not going away, so I’ve kind of accepted it. That’s the easy part because it’s going to stay with me. I just don’t even really think about it. But a lot of that is just not watching baseball this year. It’s really hard to watch just because I know I can’t play.What was that moment like when you heard you had to have Tommy John surgery a second time? It was one of the lowest moments of my life, to be honest with you. I had already missed a year, missed a year of playing a game I had been playing my whole life. As soon as I hung up, I just dropped the phone. I remember just crying for an hour.If you had another setback, what would you do?I don’t think I’ll ever get to the point where it’s not in the back of my head. Every time I feel a little soreness, I’m going to think the worst thoughts. It’s just one of those things. You can’t pitch scared.Do your children ask about the scar?The only one I have to explain it to is my littlest. She’s 3. Now she knows I have it because of “so-joey.”Do you treat the scar, with ointment or anything?No. And if anybody ever asks, I’ll just tell them I got in a knife fight and I won.What was your recovery experience like?I felt good after I did all my rehab, but once I started throwing, it got all tight on me. And then I had a couple setbacks. I would rest, start throwing, and it would get tight. Rest, start throwing, and it felt good for a while. Then, I remember, I got into a game, and it felt really tight, and had to shut down again. Started the throwing program again and was repeating that until finally it just felt better.Did you ask for an explanation? Did you want one?Yeah, I was trying to find an explanation. I actually got another M.R.I., and they thought I possibly needed a second Tommy John. But they said M.R.I.s are really hard to read after you have a surgery like that. They said it could be scar tissue that they were seeing in there, and that’s what it turned out to be. They said the new ligament just took a little bit longer to mature against the bone.How much velocity did you gain?I think I just throw harder more consistently. I never threw over 95 before. And then after the surgery, I got up to 96, 97.Did you have to change the way you pitched after having surgery?Oh, yeah, I changed everything. I didn’t have my speed back. I had to really learn how to pitch and not just go out there and throw. I didn’t have the stuff I used to have. I wish I could throw hard again. But you know, it is what it is. I’ve just tried to learn to pitch with what I have and not try to create something I don’t have anymore. I wish I could have it back.Produced by Rumsey TaylorBecause of an editing error, an earlier version of a picture caption with this article misstated the date of David Hernandez’s surgery and misidentified the surgeon who performed it. It was on March 24, 2014, and by James Andrews; it was not on July 7, 2009, by David Altchek — that was the operation date and surgeon for another player interviewed, George Kontos of the San Francisco Giants. Because of an editing error, an earlier version of another caption misstated the date of John Smoltz’s first operation. It was on March 23, 2000, not March 1, 2000.Advertisement