By HUW RICHARDSNOV. 20, 2015
LONDON — The moment comes a week later than originally scheduled, but the small-town club Oyonnax will get to make its debut at the highest level of European club rugby union Saturday.The visit to the four-time champion Toulouse in the European Rugby Champions Cup, rugby’s equivalent of soccer’s Champions League, is a further step in the remarkable rise of the team from the hilly Rhône-Alpes region of France.Only 12 years ago, Union Sportive Oyonnax was playing in the third level of the French leagues. The ascent of a town with a population of 22,500 reverses the recent trend of small-town teams’ losing out to well-funded clubs from Paris and larger centers like Toulon, Montpellier, Clermont-Ferrand and Bordeaux.“This is a great moment for our club and for the town,” the U.S.O. club president, Thierry Emin, said, “To play in the top European competition and to play against the greatest club in European rugby is a real opportunity.”AdvertisementThe debut was supposed to happen a week ago, when Oyonnax was scheduled to host the Irish club Ulster, another former champion. But the match was postponed after the terrorist attacks in Paris. Oyonnax had also planned “72 hours in Red and Black,” a three-day festival of events celebrating its debut, but that, too, was called off.Advertisement“It should have been a great occasion, but of course there was too much emotion and sadness, and we had to show solidarity with Paris,” said Emin. “We could not possibly play or hold our festival.”New dates for four other matches postponed in France have still to be agreed upon, as clubs and organizers wrestle with schedules already overcrowded by the compression of this season to accommodate the World Cup. A further match, Stade Français versus Munster, scheduled to be played Sunday in Paris, has also been postponed.Top-class rugby offers opportunities not just for the club, but an entire community. Oyonnax has some claims to fame. A significant center for the French plastics industry, it markets itself as “Plastics Valley” — local expertise went into the synthetic 3G turf field at U.S.O.’s Stade Charles-Mathon — and it was also one of about 20 communities honored collectively after the World War II for resistance to Nazi occupation. “This is very important for the town,” said Emin, who combines his club role with running his family-owned 150-employee cardboard box manufacturing company. “It is an unmatched opportunity to promote not only our rugby, but the town as a whole.”Emin has been president since last year, and his connection to the club goes back to its previous period of greatest success in the 1980s, when he was captain of the team as a No.8 forward. “We were in the first division then, but it was rather different to the modern Top 14 competition,” he said, referring to the current highest level of France’s domestic competition. “It was amateur, and there were 64 teams in the first division.”What has not changed is the town’s enthusiasm for the game. “This is somewhere where rugby is talked about all the time,” said Emin. “On Thursday and Friday you are discussing the match that is going to happen on the weekend, then on Monday and Tuesday we talk about what did happen.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Playing for Oyonnax takes character. The climate makes it tough,” former assistant coach Frédéric Charrier told L’Équipe, France’s national sports daily newspaper, earlier this month. “You need to have a spirit of adventure.”Those qualities have taken it into the Top 14, where it must compete with the richest, strongest clubs in Europe.“We have one of the smallest budgets in the league, only half of Toulouse or Clermont,” said Emin. “To compete takes the collective spirit of the club and of everyone involved in it, and the passion of our players and supporters.”AdvertisementTwo million euros, about $2.14 million, have been invested in a new, state-of-the-art training facility. “If you have a small budget, you cannot afford to sign the most expensive players,” Emin said. “To compete you must develop your own players.”Sixth place last season, its second in the Top 14, earned Oyonnax a Champions Cup slot. But its success impressed richer clubs, and the coaching team led by Christophe Urios was lured to Castres.New signings for this season included scrumhalf Piri Weepu, a World Cup champion with New Zealand in 2011. But Oyonnax has struggled in the Top 14, where it currently is 13th. Urios’s successor, the former France hooker Olivier Azam, left the club Nov. 12, and his assistants, Stéphane Glas and Pascal Peyron have taken over.“Survival in the Top 14 is our priority. It is what makes everything else possible,” said Emin. “But at the same time, it matters to us to do as well as possible in Europe.”Toulouse is aware of Oyonnax’s priorities but is not taking the debutant lightly.“Some of the best performances come from teams who do not feel under pressure, because they are relaxed and have nothing to lose,” the Toulouse center Yann David said Thursday. “We will be preparing very seriously.”That’s only sensible. Underestimating Oyonnax is, as several well-resourced teams have found in recent years, a recipe for defeat.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.