AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe DepaoloLAS VEGAS — The fans, many of whom sported red, white and green attire, roared when the Mexican boxing legends Marco Antonio Barrera and Julio César Chávez were shown on the big screen at the Mandalay Bay Events Center on Saturday night.They cheered even louder when, in the final undercard bout, Francisco Vargas of Mexico recorded a stunning ninth round technical knockout victory over Takashi Miura of Japan to win the World Boxing Council superfeatherweight championship in a match that Vargas seemed on his way to losing.The partisan crowd of 11,274 felt certain of one thing: Their native son, Saúl Álvarez of Mexico, known as Canelo, was going to deliver an emphatic victory over Miguel Cotto, his rival from Puerto Rico, in their middleweight bout.Sure enough, Álvarez delivered, winning a unanimous 12-round decision to secure the W.B.C. middleweight title. Álvarez won by scores of 117-11, 119-109 and 118-110.“We knew going into this fight that it would be a difficult journey,” Álvarez said. “But I feel that I was the faster and stronger fighter tonight. I wasn’t hurt by his punches.”The lopsided scores did not do justice to a scintillating bout in which Cotto, according to the statistics tracking website Compubox, landed 129 of 629 punches, only 26 fewer than Álvarez, who landed 155 of 484.After three measured rounds to open the bout, the pace picked up in the fourth when Cotto landed some effective counterpunches to temporarily stall Álvarez’s attack.He appeared to have some more success through the fifth and sixth rounds, before Álvarez began to assert control in the seventh.Even in the second half of the bout, Cotto still had his moments. But Álvarez’s pressure began to wear down Cotto just a bit.In a superb 12th round, Álvarez landed heavy-handed combinations with consistency.In the eyes of the judges, he had already done more than enough to secure the victory.The rivalry between Puerto Rico and Mexico has produced some true classics in the boxing ring. Many experts trace the rivalry’s origin to the 1981 brawl in which Salvador Sanchez of Mexico knocked out Wilfredo Gomez of Puerto Rico.Other memorable Puerto Rico-Mexico bouts include Chávez’s 1992 victory over Hector Camacho, and Felix Trinidad’s brutal 12th-round stoppage of Fernando Vargas in 2000.Perhaps the most anticipated clash between fighters representing these two nations took place in 1999, when Oscar De La Hoya met Trinidad. But that match failed to live up to the hype, with Trinidad earning a majority decision in a lackluster bout.This bout came much closer to the classics category, if perhaps falling a tad short.Before the bout, both boxers said that they would not allow the boisterous fans and the pressure of the rivalry affect them.“I understand the magnitude of this fight and what it means for the history of Puerto Rico versus Mexico,” Álvarez said.But, he added, “I’m not worried about the pressure.”Just the same, Álvarez (46-1-1, 32 knockouts) was bullish on the prospects of the match living up to the legacy of the other Puerto Rico-Mexico classics.“I know this fight will go down as one of the most exciting and explosive nights in the famed rivalry and in the sport of boxing,” Álvarez said.Álvarez has spoken repeatedly, and at length, about wanting to earn the victory for his native Mexico. Cotto, too, has expressed a desire to win for Puerto Rico. But his primary motivation was more personal than nationalistic.“I have to win for me, for my kids, for my family, and then for Puerto Rico,” Cotto said.The intensity of the Puerto Rico-Mexico rivalry did not result in any personal animus between the fighters, who were cordial with each other throughout the promotion. They even shook hands after the staged face-off, which took place after the weigh-in and is designed to generate hostility.Cotto (40-5, 33 knockouts) reserved most of his scorn during the week for the World Boxing Council. He was stripped of that sanctioning organization’s championship on Tuesday, when, according to a spokeswoman from Roc Nation Sports, which promotes Cotto, the fighter refused to pay a $300,000 sanctioning fee that the W.B.C. was seeking.“I don’t need their belt,” Cotto said of his decision. “I have enough belts in my house. And with the money I saved, I can buy any belt I want.”The W.B.C.’s No. 1 contender, Gennady Golovkin (34-0, 31 knockouts), watched the fight from ringside, hoping for an eventual fight with the winner.Álvarez said after the fight that he’d be willing to face Golovkin, but he would do so on his own terms. Álvarez fought Cotto at a contractually agreed upon weight limit of 155 pounds, five less than the middleweight. Álvarez said he would look to fight Golovkin at that weight.“G.G.G. is a great fighter, and he is my friend,” Álvarez said. “I have respect for him, but if we do fight it’s going to be at my weight class. I’m the champion, I don’t have to do what he wants.”Tom Loeffler, the managing director of K2 Promotions, which promotes Golovkin, is optimistic about the prospect of his fighter getting a chance to face Álvarez.“I think Canelo at some point will definitely fight Gennady,” Loeffler said. “I think they’re on a collision course. Whether it happens next fight, two fights down the road, a year down the road, I think that’s going to be a huge fight.”A huge fight to unify the middleweight title that, were it to take place, would hopefully be as action-packed as the one on Saturday night.Advertisement