AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressCarmelo Anthony and Knicks Coach Derek Fisher insist they knew months ago that Kristaps Porzingis was capable of this type of performance.Porzingis had 24 points, 14 rebounds and 7 blocks in a 107-102 victory over the slumping Rockets on Saturday night in Houston, the Knicks’ fourth straight win.Anthony long ago brushed off the uproar that followed the Knicks’ using the No. 4 draft pick this year on Porzingis, who was perceived to be a long-term project.“It was concern from people who didn’t know,” Anthony said. “People didn’t know what to expect. Nobody had ever seen him before, and people were all so upset that the Knicks drafted him.”Porzingis became the first 20-year-old to post his specific statistical line in a single game since Shaquille O’Neal in 1992-93. Fisher said Porzingis’s defense was one aspect of his game that impressed Knicks management before the draft. “Everybody, of course, was fascinated by the shot-making, but we thought the activity on the defensive end was one thing that would really give him a chance to be good,” Fisher said.The Knicks (8-6) ended an 11-game losing streak against the Rockets and a 10-game skid when playing in Houston. They did not get their eighth win last season until Jan. 23, when they were 8-36.James Harden had 24 points, 10 assists and 7 rebounds as the Rockets lost for the sixth time in seven games.The Rockets threw a variety of defenders Porzingis’s way, utilizing Harden’s strength, Trevor Ariza’s length and Terrence Jones’s combination of both, but Porzingis found ways to score, mostly with his jump shot.With the score tied at 95-95 with less than three minutes remaining, Porzingis blocked a layup by Harden, and Carmelo Anthony made a 3-pointer in transition. Porzingis later made two free throws to give the Knicks a 100-99 lead with 1 minute 22 seconds left.Ariza hoisted a 3-point attempt that would have tied the game with 20 seconds remaining, but it rimmed out, and the Knicks grabbed the rebound.Anthony picked up his third foul early in the second quarter and his fourth foul early in the third and was forced to watch much of the game from the bench. He was limited to 14 points in 25 minutes.The Knicks used a 34-point second quarter to take a 58-53 halftime lead, and they were 12 of 25 on 3-pointers in the game. The Rockets, who held an opponent to fewer than 100 points for the first time this season on Friday night, fell to 2-7 when allowing 106 or more and 1-2 since firing Kevin McHale.“Games like this, we’ve got to get it done,” Harden said. “We didn’t get enough stops. We’ve got to get stops.”Houston rested Dwight Howard, but his absence was barely noticed given the strong play from the second-year center Clint Capela, who had the best game of his young career with career highs in points (16) and rebounds (14). Still, Houston fell to 1-4 without Howard.KINGS 97, MAGIC 91 DeMarcus Cousins had 29 points and 12 rebounds as Sacramento held on in Orlando.Rajon Rondo added 13 points, 9 assists and 7 rebounds for the Kings, who had lost two in a row. CAVALIERS 109, HAWKS 97 Kevin Love scored a season-high 25 points, LeBron James added 19, and Cleveland won at home against Atlanta.The teams were meeting for the first time since the Cavaliers swept the Hawks in the Eastern Conference finals in May, and the Cavaliers took control after trailing by 17-16 midway through the first quarter. Cleveland quickly built a 10-point lead and stretched the margin to 57-40 late in the first half.Hawks Coach Mike Budenholzer was ejected in the second quarter after making contact with an official. Budenholzer was given a technical foul for arguing a call, bumped the referee Ben Taylor after stepping onto the floor and was quickly tossed.HEAT 96, 76ERS 91 Dwyane Wade scored 27 points, and Miami survived a major scare from winless Philadelphia, rallying from 17 points down to win at home.Hassan Whiteside had 13 points, 9 rebounds and 8 blocks for the Heat, who went on a 19-2 run in a seven-minute stretch of the fourth quarter to escape. WIZARDS 97, PISTONS 95 Nene scored 18 points, and Otto Porter added 17 as Washington won at Detroit.The Wizards had the ball and a 2-point lead with 9.2 seconds left, but Porter was called for a five-second violation on the inbound attempt. That gave Detroit a last chance, but Marcus Morris missed a 3-point attempt at the buzzer. The Pistons’ Andre Drummond (8 points and 13 rebounds) failed to record a double-double for the first time this season. SPURS 92, GRIZZLIES 82 Kawhi Leonard scored 19 points, Tony Parker had 18, and host San Antonio broke Memphis’s four-game winning streak. San Antonio is unbeaten in six home games.PACERS 123, BUCKS 86 C. J. Miles scored a season-high 21 points to lead Indiana to a blowout win at home against Milwaukee.Paul George had 20 points and 7 rebounds, and Jordan Hill added 20 points, also his season high, off the bench for the Pacers, who have won five of six.Advertisement