AdvertisementSupported byRangers 5, Panthers 4By The Associated PressSUNRISE, Fla. — Rick Nash helped the Rangers continue their domination of the Florida Panthers.Nash scored his third goal of the game 2 minutes 1 second into overtime, lifting the Rangers to a 5-4 victory on Saturday night.The winning goal came on a power play when Nash’s wrist shot from the right circle got past Florida goaltender Roberto Luongo to give the Rangers their seventh straight win against the Panthers and their fourth straight against Luongo.Nash said he knew that with Mats Zuccarello in front, “I could get it through the defenseman’s legs.” “I just shot it and hoped for the best,” he said.Nash’s hat trick was the seventh of his career.Zuccarello and Viktor Stalberg each scored in the third period to put the Rangers ahead by 4-2. Henrik Lundqvist made 39 saves as the team bounced back from a loss at Tampa Bay on Thursday night that ended a nine-game winning streak.“We thought we gave away a point” at Tampa Bay, Nash said. “You want to lock things down. After tonight, I think we’ll take it the way we got it.”Jaromir Jagr, Aleksander Barkov, Jussi Jokinen and Nick Bjugstad scored for the Panthers. Luongo stopped 26 shots.Down two goals, the Panthers scored twice in a 39-second span late in the third period to send the game into overtime.Barkov’s power-play goal pulled Florida to 4-3 behind with 2:28 left, and Jagr then sent a shot from the right circle over Lundqvist’s shoulder with 1:49 to go. Both goals came as the Panthers played with an empty net.Jagr said: “How many times does it happen — you pull the goalie, you score two goals? It was a great call by our coach to pull him with a lot of time. I feel like we played good enough to win.”Reilly Smith missed a penalty shot for Florida with 1:42 left when his shot went high.“There was no quit,” Panthers Coach Gerard Gallant said. “I was really proud of our guys tonight, because we played one of the fastest teams in the league and we kept up with them, and we probably pushed the pace more than they did tonight.”Zuccarello put the Rangers ahead by 3-2 when he approached on a breakaway and put the puck past Luongo with 9:44 to go in the third. Stalberg stretched the lead to 4-2 when he beat Luongo from low in the right circle on the short side nearly two minutes later.“Our goaltender kept us in it,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “He gave us an unreal performance, and there’s no doubt Nash played one of his better games this year.”Nash gave the Rangers a 1-0 lead when his shot from below the right circle got past Luongo’s glove and went high into the net with 8:52 left in the first period.The Panthers tied it at 6:46 of the second as Pirri passed from the left circle to Bjugstad in front, and Bjugstad put the puck underneath Lundqvist’s pads.Nash’s second goal put the Rangers ahead by 2-1 when he brought the puck from his own end, and his shot from the left circle beat Luongo on the short side with 6:38 to go in the second.The Panthers tied it again when Jokinen, in front of the crease, tipped in a shot from the right circle by Brandon Pirri with 2:03 left in the second.Earlier in the second, Lundqvist took a puck to the groin area and took several minutes to recover.Advertisement