By MARC TRACYNOV. 21, 2015
COLUMBUS, Ohio —  Michael Thomas and Jalin Marshall, Ohio State’s best wide receivers, both had inexplicable drops on what should have been simple throw-and-catches against Michigan State on Saturday. The drops came on two of the staggering six three-and-out drives the No. 2 Buckeyes had.It is difficult to say whether catching the ball would have even mattered. Wherever an Ohio State player was, a Michigan State defender was there to stop him. The result was grinding, sleet-soaked trench warfare in which the No. 9 Spartans, even without their starting quarterback, Connor Cook, played their best game of the year and upset the Buckeyes, 17-14. The victory came on a 41-yard field goal by Michael Geiger, a junior, as time expired — along with, in all likelihood, the Buckeyes’ aspirations of repeating as national champions.Michigan State (10-1, 6-1 Big Ten) now controls its destiny, so that a win next Saturday at home against Penn State would send it to face Iowa on Dec. 5 in Indianapolis for the conference championship game. A win there would make the Spartans likely, if not guaranteed, contenders in the College Football Playoff.Ohio State (10-1, 6-1) faces a more dire postseason picture. To have a shot at the Hawkeyes and the Playoff, not only does it need to win at Michigan next Saturday — something the Spartans barely managed — but Michigan State would need to lose.AdvertisementBuckeyes Coach Urban Meyer said he had trouble thinking about the prospect of repeating as national champion: “Oh, boy, we’ve got to get a couple of first downs and start finding a way to complete a pass and beat our rival,” he said, referring to Michigan.The Buckeyes, undefeated and playing at home, were the clear favorites Saturday. As it became increasingly likely that Cook, who injured his shoulder in last week’s 24-7 win over Maryland, might not play, oddsmakers set the line at two touchdowns.AdvertisementMichigan State — used to feeling overlooked in favor of Michigan — exploited the chip everyone else seemed to place on its shoulder.“We sat around all day and listened to how we were underdogs,” Coach Mark Dantonio said.Michigan State center Jack Allen added, in reference to two Ohio State defensive linemen: “I read somewhere someone said we couldn’t stop Joey Bosa or Adolphus Washington. I didn’t see them back there too much today.”Michigan State quarterbacks Damion Terry, a redshirt sophomore, and Tyler O’Connor, a junior, entered Saturday’s game with a combined 63 pass attempts in their college careers.Yet they traded duties admirably on Saturday. O’Connor was 7 of 12 for 89 yards, Terry 1 of 4 for 2 yards. Though Michigan State used some misdirection and some designed runs, particularly for the more mobile Terry — who rushed for 25 yards — it more often ran a modest version of the pro-style offense that Dantonio has favored.The rain, which started minutes before kickoff and turned harder as the temperature fell, made passing less of an option anyway.“We like that nasty weather,” said Shilique Calhoun, a Michigan State defensive end.The Spartans’ first touchdown, in the second quarter, came after O’Connor hit wide receiver Aaron Burbridge for 36 yards and running back Gerald Holmes ran twice, for 9 and 7 yards, setting up a 12-yard touchdown pass from O’Connor to fullback Trevon Pendleton.AdvertisementOhio State committed four penalties for 20 yards, not including a declined pass-interference call on the 36-yard Burbridge completion. Its defense did not play like the highly ranked unit it is, giving up 294 total yards and forcing just one turnover from two inexperienced quarterbacks.That turnover came when Bosa sacked Terry and Sam Hubbard forced a fumble. The Buckeyes recovered at the Michigan State 32-yard line, and it led to Ezekiel Elliott’s 1-yard touchdown run on fourth-and-goal with 12 minutes 45 seconds left in the second quarter.But Bosa, who is projected to go high in next year’s N.F.L. draft, also committed three offside penalties, including one on a Michigan State fourth-and-8 in the fourth quarter on a 75-yard drive that culminated with a two-yard touchdown run by Gerald Holmes to tie the game at 14-14 with 12:03 remaining.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was telling that the only turnovers — Terry’s fumble and a muffed punt reception late in the third quarter by Michigan State’s Macgarrett Kings Jr. — led to the only two drives Ohio State started in Spartans territory and, in turn, Ohio State’s only two scores.Ohio State entered the day averaging more than 36 points per game, but Michigan State’s defense held the Buckeyes to 132 total yards. Quarterback J. T. Barrett went 9 of 12 for 46 yards.Meyer blamed himself, saying he was “not content” with the play calling. Elliott, a junior running back and a strong contender for the Heisman Trophy who ran for 33 yards on 12 carries, questioned the play calling after the game.Both Elliott and Cardale Jones — who started at quarterback during Ohio State’s championship run last year and for the majority of this season — indicated after the game that they would leave after this season, presumably for the N.F.L.Ohio Stadium set a record with an announced crowd of 108,975. O’Connor said he had played here once before, in a high school all-star game. A native of Lima, Ohio, he seemed to speak for several Spartans from Ohio with grudges to bear, including Cook, Pendleton and Geiger.Ohio State, O’Connor said, had contacted him just once during the recruitment process — as a punter.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2015, on Page SP1 of the New York edition with the headline: Spartans Stun Buckeyes With a Late Field Goal .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.