AdvertisementSupported byBy Andy KentMIAMI — Far from the Nascar hotbed of Charlotte, N.C., sits a nondescript auto shop with no sign out front, smack in the middle of the Colorado Rockies. It is the last place a race fan would expect to find Martin Truex Jr., one of four drivers competing Sunday for the 2015 Sprint Cup Championship at Homestead-Miami Speedway in Homestead, Fla.Behind garage doors in Denver, the Furniture Row Racing team has turned its wrenches and done everything in its power to prepare Truex and his No. 78 Chevrolet for this opportunity. It is a lone-car operation going up against the giants of the sport: Hendrick Motorsports, Stewart-Haas Racing and Joe Gibbs Racing, which have a combined 10 Sprint Cup champions since 2002 headed into the season-ending Ford EcoBoost 400.“Obviously, you look at what we’re up against,” said Truex, who won back-to-back Xfinity championships in 2004 and in 2005 on this track. “You have Hendrick with four cars, you have Stewart-Haas, who is a satellite team of Hendrick, with four cars, and you have Gibbs, who has four cars. We’re a one-car team out of Colorado.”The last time a driver won the Nascar Cup title with a single-car team was Alan Kulwicki in 1992.Furniture Row Racing is allied with Richard Childress Racing, which supplies its engines and chassis, but remains independent.“We’re almost like a teammate to the R.C.R. guys, but at the same time we do everything out in Denver, one car,” Truex said. “It’s quite a bit different than what we’re up against.”With all the attention centered on Jeff Gordon, who is trying for his fifth Cup championship in what he says will be the final race of his career, Truex’s road to a spot in the Championship 4 has taken a back seat. Standing in Gordon’s way along with Truex are Kevin Harvick, the defending champion, and the resilient Kyle Busch, who bounced back from a broken leg and a broken foot to win four of five races, including three in a row.Any one of those story lines would resonate with the Nascar fan base, but Truex and his team have happily embraced the underdog role. During Thursday’s prerace news conference, Truex took his place at the far end of the table on the stage with Busch, Gordon and Harvick. Truex grasped the microphone when it was his turn and, with a wry smile, said: “The way I see it, these three next to me are supposed to win the championship and I’m probably not. That’s a pretty cool story in itself.”It is that unassuming approach that has Truex so well aligned with everyone on his team, from the owner Barney Visser to his rookie crew chief, Cole Pearn. They bonded and developed a unique chemistry in Denver, with little to distract them.“Martin in some cases reminds me of our owner,” said Joe Garone, Furniture Row’s general manager. “Our owner is the same way. They don’t necessarily wear it on their sleeves, but once you get to know them, you find out that they are ultracompetitive. At the end of the day, they just put it out there to win races or to win, no matter what they’re competing in.“But you don’t get that straight up and in-your-face with Martin. It’s something that took some time to learn with him. It’s part of the excitement going into this weekend, is to see that in him.”Perhaps some of that balanced perspective is a testament to what Truex went through away from the track over the last year. His longtime girlfriend, Sherry Pollex, was found to have Stage 3 ovarian cancer in August 2014. She had surgery a week later and then began treatments. Pollex insisted that Truex continue to race.Pollex, who is in South Florida to support Truex in his quest to win his first Sprint Cup title, has three more treatments, the last scheduled for February, right before the Nascar season opens with the Daytona 500.“Hopefully, that’s the last she’ll ever have to see of it, that place,” Truex said. “It’s been pretty remarkable the way she’s went through everything, really inspiring to me. There are so many things I could say about it, but in the end there’s three to go and she’s a fighter.”Truex also shared how his racecar was delayed by a snowstorm that hit Denver. The team’s hauler left 12 hours later than planned and had to pull into a parking lot for the night after the highways were shut down.Still, being the only Nascar team that operates west of the Mississippi suits Truex just fine.“The shop out there, you can’t even tell it’s a race shop,” he said. “You would drive right by there and you would go, ‘What the heck is in there?’ There’s no sign out front. For our team specifically, they really love it there. It’s a great place for young people to live. All our guys enjoy it. They are really close friends.”If things go Truex’s way on Sunday, they will celebrate a championship together in Denver.Advertisement