By FILIP BONDYNOV. 21, 2015
Justin Meram apologized in advance for any yawns that might occur during the interview. He had just endured a 27-hour journey from Taiwan that had included two layovers, 13 time zones and one very troublesome, existential question:Why had Meram bothered to join the Iraqi national soccer team on the other side of the globe right in the middle of the Major League Soccer postseason to play in a World Cup qualifying match — or, as it turned out, not to play?“I was down, I’m not going to lie,” Meram said. “I was extremely upset. Not everyone who travels far should play, but not even to be on the selection?“I know it’s something not related to soccer,” added Meram, the only American-born player on Iraq’s team. “From previous games, I did everything right to be in the starting 11. I was playing well with Columbus. I’m trying to figure it out, something between the fans and the federation. We’re baffled by this. I can’t tell you why. I’m making phone calls. Maybe I’ll be able to tell you in a few months.”One game in which he is sure to see action arrives straight away: Meram, 26, will most likely be in the starting lineup when his Columbus Crew face the Red Bulls on Sunday in the first leg of the Eastern Conference finals. His path to that game had its own quirks — lightly recruited out of high school, he went to junior college before he starred at the University of Michigan and was drafted by the Crew — but it was nothing compared with his journey into international soccer.AdvertisementDiscovered online by an Iraqi supporter trawling for national team prospects, Meram made his debut for Iraq in November 2014. He had started two of Iraq’s three previous matches in the current round of Asian World Cup qualifiers and was brought in as a substitute in the third. He had scored two goals — one after he was chosen to take a penalty kick in the first match against Chinese Taipei.AdvertisementMeram showed up for the return match in Taiwan last week in time for four of the team’s six training sessions, expecting more minutes. But he was snubbed by Yahya Alwan, the Iraqi coach, a cruel reminder to Meram and others that the Iraqi national team remains very much a work in progress, steeped in the vagaries of politics, religion and enigmatic grudges.Only 15 years ago, Uday Hussein, the son of Saddam, ruled brutally over the soccer team, reportedly imprisoning or torturing players who faltered on the field. A remade Iraqi team won the Asian Cup in 2007, yet conditions remain far from ideal. FIFA has mandated that no matches can be played inside volatile Iraq, so the team stages home qualifying games in Iran.“The organization and the logistics are much better than they were, but nowhere near where they should be,” Meram said. “The resources, the field, the ability to train at home. Sometimes, when I come from America, I feel for them. Even the small things — the taping, the massages, the treatment — we don’t have what Japan or the Emirates have.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Meram has never visited Iraq. His father, Sam, and mother, Lamia, are Chaldean Catholics who met in the Detroit area after immigrating to the United States separately from Mosul, more than a decade before Justin was born. His parents’ families all escaped Mosul, now under ISIS control, yet his mother and father remain deeply concerned about the city’s fate.“They’re devastated,” Meram said. “My mom feels it a lot. When all the museums of the Chaldean culture in Northern Iraq are being destroyed, where they grew up, that’s hard on them. Ancient statues are getting destroyed. It’s devastating seeing that.”Meram, 26, a dual citizen, finally became eligible to play for Iraq late last year. His technical skill was evident early in his youth, when he excelled at Eisenhower High School in Shelby, Mich., in both soccer and as the kicker for the football team. Major colleges at first failed to recognize his talents, but Maurice Hughes, a graduate of Yavapai College in Arizona, a top junior college power, recommended him to the coach there.“We knew we’d discovered a diamond in the rough the very first training session,” Yavapai Coach Michael Pantalione said. “In the first preseason training session, we had seven-a-side matches. Three groups. When the session was finished, Justin had a dozen goals. He had a brilliant career. Then the same schools that said no to him, two years later, were extremely interested in the junior college player of the year.”AdvertisementYavapai won two national titles with Meram before he headed to the University of Michigan and then to Columbus, as the 15th pick in the 2011 M.L.S. draft. Pantalione praised his ability to run at defenders, putting them on their heels. In 33 regular-season and playoff games this year, Meram has six goals, five assists and 78 shots on goal, while establishing himself as a complementary threat to the team’s top scorer, Kei Kamara, whose 22 goals this season tied him for the league lead.“Give him a window, he’ll get a good shot on goal,” Crew Coach Gregg Berhalter said. “He was always a strong 1v1 finisher,” he added, referring to one versus one. “Now, his work defensively is outstanding, his ability to take the ball in transition, his passing, they’re much better.”Iraq defeated Chinese Taipei, 2-0, without Meram on Tuesday, and now must beat both Thailand and Vietnam next March, most likely in Tehran, in order to advance to the next round of Asian World Cup qualifying.Meram, though, is confused and uncertain about whether he will rejoin the Iraqi team if it calls again, until he figures out why a federation with such limited resources flew him business class to Taipei only to ignore him once he arrived.“It’s not like this has happened many times, just this once,” Meram said. “I’m waiting to hear some answers. Right now, I’m looking forward to Sunday. At least I’m fresh.”A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2015, on Page SP10 of the New York edition with the headline: Long Way for a Snub in a Qualifying Match .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.