AdvertisementSupported byRoundupBy The Associated PressLuis Suárez scored twice, and Neymar had a goal and an assist to lead Barcelona to a 4-0 win over Real Madrid in the Spanish league’s first Clásico of the season on Saturday.Suárez scored in the 11th and 74th minutes. Neymar got a goal in the 39th and set up an Andrés Iniesta goal in the 53rd minute to hand Madrid its first home loss in 23 Spanish league games. Barcelona opened up a 6-point lead in the standings and has won four of the teams’ last five meetings.Barcelona played most of the match without Lionel Messi, who had been sidelined for nearly two months because of a knee injury and came off the bench in the 56th minute.SCORING RECORD TIED Jamie Vardy tied the Premier League record for scoring in consecutive games and helped Leicester climb to the top of the standings. Vardy’s goal, which set Leicester on its way to a 3-0 win at Newcastle, pushed his scoring streak to 10 matches, tying the record Ruud van Nistelrooy set across two seasons while with Manchester United in 2003.Manchester City and Arsenal, which entered the weekend tied for points at the top, both lost and were overtaken by Manchester United, which needed a 90th-minute own goal to win at Watford, 2-1. City conceded three goals in the opening 32 minutes and lost, 4-1, at home to Liverpool. Arsenal lost, 2-1, at West Bromwich Albion, with Santi Cazorla missing a late penalty kick that would have tied the game.Chelsea beat visiting Norwich, 1-0, thanks to a second-half goal by Diego Costa. The result ended Chelsea’s three-game losing run, easing some pressure on its manager, José Mourinho.BAYERN PREVAILS Thomas Müller scored in injury time for Bayern Munich, which extended its German league lead with a 3-1 win at Schalke.EMOTIONAL WIN FOR P.S.G. A moment of silence was observed before Lorient’s home match against Paris St.-Germain in remembrance of the victims of the Nov. 13 Paris attacks.Thousands of fans waved French flags inside Le Moustoir stadium and then joined players, match officials and coaches in a searing rendition of the French national anthem.Unbeaten P.S.G., which is chasing a fourth straight French league title, won the match, 2-1, to extend its lead over second-place Lyon to 13 points. REVENGE AGAINST ROMA Mattia Destro came back to haunt his former team, scoring on a late penalty kick to help host Bologna draw, 2-2, with title-chasing Roma in the Italian league.Juventus continued to climb up the standings, beating A.C. Milan, 1-0, to earn a third consecutive Serie A win for the first time this season.VIOLENCE IN GREECE A Greek league match between the rivals Panathinaikos and Olympiakos was postponed after fans of host Panathinaikos clashed with the police before the game and threw flares at Olympiakos players as they walked out onto the field. Two Olympiakos players were injured.The referee, Andreas Pappas, waited half an hour beyond the scheduled kickoff on Saturday but eventually decided that the conditions were unsafe.Panathinaikos, which will most likely have to forfeit the game and could be docked points, fined and made to play a number of home games behind closed doors, contested the referee’s decision while condemning the violence, blaming “the individual action of 2-3 fools.” The club’s chairman, Yiannis Alafouzos, issued a statement late Saturday saying he would submit his resignation to an emergency meeting of the club’s board Sunday.Clashes between the fans and the police started outside the stadium about two hours before the game when fans, apparently without tickets, tried to storm the gates and threw rocks at the police.The police said that more than 50 people were detained inside and outside the stadium, that 16 had been charged and that three officers had been injured.No Olympiakos fans attended the game. It is standard policy in the violence-plagued Greek league not to allow visiting fans to attend.Advertisement