AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressLONDON — There is one more match to play this season, and there is plenty riding on it for both Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer.Djokovic, who has had the best season of his career with three major titles, will try to cap it by becoming the first man to win four straight titles at the ATP World Tour Finals. Federer, however, could add to his record six titles while also proving he can still beat the top-ranked Djokovic in big matches.“When he’s on, it’s hard to play him,” Djokovic said of Federer, who reached his 10th championship match at the World Tour Finals, the season-ending tournament for the top eight players in the world. “We always play matches with a lot of tension. There is a lot at stake. I know I have to be on top in order to win against him.”Djokovic reached Sunday’s final by beating Rafael Nadal, 6-3, 6-3, on Saturday. Federer advanced by defeating Stan Wawrinka, this year’s French Open champion, by 7-5, 6-3.Sunday’s match, at O2 Arena, will be the eighth meeting this season between Djokovic and Federer, who hold a combined 27 major singles titles. Djokovic won four of the seven matches between them in 2015, including victories in the Wimbledon and United States Open finals. Federer, though, won in straight sets Tuesday in the round-robin stage of the World Tour Finals.“It’s the same conditions, same court, same place,” said Federer, who handed Djokovic three of his six losses this year. “For me it’s an advantage because I guess it gives me a bit of confidence. For him it’s an advantage because he gets a second chance.”Against Nadal on Saturday, Djokovic showed why he is the top player in the world. Djokovic, a 10-time major champion, lost only seven points on his serve in the first set and three in the second. On the receiving end, he converted three of his five break points, including one in the final game of the match.“Novak, for the moment, is almost unbeatable,” Nadal said. “What Novak is doing is just amazing.”Nadal tried just about everything to stay in the match. In the last game, Djokovic lobbed the ball over Nadal’s head, but Nadal chased it down and whipped a shot between his legs that made it over the net. Djokovic, though, was there to tap it back over for the point.The win evened the head-to-head record between the two at 23-23, the first time Djokovic has managed to draw level since their rivalry started in 2006. Their 46 meetings are the most between two players in the Open era.Djokovic will have a chance to even his head-to-head series against Federer, too. Federer currently leads by 22-21.But Federer, a 17-time major singles champion, is considered by many to be the best indoor player in history. He has played in the semifinals at the season-ending event in 13 of his 14 appearances, advancing to the final 10 times. Last year, he withdrew from the final against Djokovic because of a back injury.Trailing by 3-2 against Wawrinka, Federer quickly turned things around by breaking back to 4-4, and he then reeled off five straight games to win the first set and take a 3-0 lead in the second.“He has the perfect game against my game,” said Wawrinka, the only man besides Djokovic to win a major this year. “If you look today, it’s not that I play really bad. I’m not tough enough mentally with myself. I’m not completely there.”Djokovic will be there to face Federer in the final on Sunday. And even a loss would not dampen his accomplishment this season.“Regardless of the outcome of tomorrow’s match,” Djokovic said, “the season will still be the best that I had.”Advertisement