AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressAnyone who wrote off the Houston Texans, the Kansas City Chiefs, the Washington Redskins or the Chicago Bears early on, when they slid to the bottom of the standings, better have used pencil.None of those teams have championship-level talent, but they have revived their fortunes and are making some noise.Yes, all are 4-5 and have the kinds of holes that virtually eliminate them from contention for the Lombardi Trophy. But they are revitalized and figure to be dangerous opponents down the stretch, with the Texans and the Redskins still in the mix for titles in weak divisions.“Our guys have to understand: O.K., how did we get to this point?” Texans Coach Bill O’Brien said. “Well, we’re doing these things this way; we’ve got to continue to do it that way. It’s all about hard work and putting the time in.”Chiefs Coach Andy Reid said, “I always felt like the sky’s the limit for this team, as long as we’re in the right mind-set and ready to go.”The mind-set is pretty positive right now, even though Houston started 1-4, Kansas City 1-5, Chicago 2-5 and Washington 2-4. The Texans ended the Bengals’ unbeaten streak Monday night in Cincinnati.The Chiefs won handily at Denver, driving Peyton Manning to the bench. The Bears are 3-0 against the A.F.C. West and bullied the St. Louis Rams’ hard-charging defense last weekend. The Redskins have beaten the Philadelphia Eagles, the early N.F.C. East favorite, and hammered the New Orleans Saints last Sunday.So what has changed, and where are these teams headed?HOUSTON O’Brien guided the Texans to a 9-7 record last season after their league-worst 2-14 in 2013. That came with a revolving cast of quarterbacks.DeAndre Hopkins has emerged as one of the N.F.L.’s best receivers.Far more significant has been the rebirth of the defense. J. J. Watt remains the game’s best defensive lineman, and probably its best defensive player. Tied for the lead in the A.F.C. South, the Texans finish with three division games they probably need to sweep.KANSAS CITY After an opening victory, the Chiefs handed a game to the Broncos and went into a funk, losing four straight. But there always has been faith in the defense. Charcandrick West has been a suitable replacement for the injured running back Jamaal Charles. And tight end Travis Kelce has been terrific.The A.F.C. wild-card race is muddled, and Kansas City’s remaining schedule is weak. CHICAGO This turnaround might be the most stunning. The Bears looked inept in their first three outings, and their first three victories came by a total of six points. In fairness, though, quarterback Jay Cutler has ranged from steady to sensational in the last month, with his work in a comeback win at San Diego perhaps the best of his much-maligned career.A .500 record would be significant progress in Chicago. The other wild-card contenders are better than the Bears. Still, progress is being made.WASHINGTON A victory Sunday against undefeated Carolina would be monumental. It would lift the Redskins into a tie for first place in the N.F.C. East, and they have four divisional games remaining.That Washington is even in that conversation is remarkable given how unimpressive this team has been in most areas. The running game should be far better than it has been, and the run defense is weak.But quarterback Kirk Cousins can make a difference when he is on, and his receivers are strong. So is the coaching. A victory Sunday would say a lot about Washington.Advertisement