By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 23, 2015
Paul Rhoads is out as Iowa State’s coach after seven seasons, the university said.Rhoads led Iowa State to just its third bowl win in his first season. But Iowa State is 3-8 this season and blew a 35-28 lead with 1 minute 31 seconds to go in a loss Saturday at Kansas State.Iowa State signed Rhoads to a 10-year, $20 million contract before the 2012 season. He is owed a buyout fee of about $4.5 million under the terms of that deal.■ The campus police at the University of Wisconsin said more than 100 fans were ejected from Saturday’s game against Northwestern at Camp Randall Stadium.The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported that fans had thrown snowballs and ice at one another and onto the field as the season’s first big snowstorm hit Madison. Twenty-four fans were issued tickets. (AP)Advertisement■ Notre Dame’s leading rusher, C. J. Prosise, is listed as doubtful with a sprained ankle for the No. 4 Irish’s biggest game of the season, against No. 13 Stanford on Saturday, with a College Football Playoff berth almost certainly on the line.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cornerback KeiVarae Russell, one of the team’s leading tacklers, is out for the game with a broken right leg.Advertisement■ Oklahoma quarterback Baker Mayfield’s status is uncertain for Saturday’s showdown with Oklahoma State.Mayfield was injured during Saturday’s 30-29 win over Texas Christian. He was shaken up early in the second quarter after a helmet-to-helmet hit by Horned Frogs linebacker Ty Summers, who was ejected for targeting.The No. 5 Sooners can clinch the Big 12 Conference title with a victory over the No. 9 Cowboys in Stillwater, Okla. Oklahoma Coach Bob Stoops said Mayfield would be evaluated this week before a decision was reached.A version of this brief appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Iowa State Fires Coach.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.