AdvertisementSupported bySports Briefing | GolfBy The Associated PressRory McIlroy survived a late scare and finished his frustrating season on a high, winning both the DP World Tour Championship and the Race to Dubai crown on Sunday in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.The third-ranked McIlroy got the better of the overnight leader, Andy Sullivan, on the back nine to clinch the World Tour Championship, the European Tour’s season-ending tournament. McIlroy shot a six-under-par 66 with eight birdies to finish at 21-under 267, one stroke ahead of Sullivan (68). McIlroy had an anxious moment late in the day when his tee shot on the par-3 17th found the water and threatened to nullify his advantage at that stage. But he made a brilliant 40-foot putt to limit the damage to a bogey, which gave him a one-shot lead going to the 18th, where he and Sullivan made par. “Definitely the best bogey of my career,” McIlroy said of his putt on the 17th. ■ Cristie Kerr won the CME Group Tour Championship in Naples, Fla., Lydia Ko won $1 million and became the player of the year, and Inbee Park won the scoring title and is going to the L.P.G.A.’s Hall of Fame.Kerr took command with a 12-foot eagle putt on the par-5 17th. She closed with a 68 and finished at 17-under 271. Ko tied for seventh, which was good enough for her to win the Race to CME Globe bonus for the second straight year.Park finished sixth, beating Ko by a slim margin for the scoring crown — three shots during the course of the season. She is now assured of going to the L.P.G.A. Hall when she completes her 10th season next year. ■ Kevin Kisner ended a year marked by runner-up finishes with his first PGA Tour victory at the RSM Classic in St. Simons Island, Ga.Kisner’s three-shot lead turned into six shots at the turn, and he breezed home with a six-under-par 64 to win by six shots over Kevin Chappell. Kisner broke the tournament record with a 22-under 260. ■ The Web.com Tour player Jeff Gove won the Pebble Beach Invitational, birdieing the final two holes for a six-under 66 and a two-shot victory over the Champions Tour players Kevin Sutherland and Duffy Waldorf in Pebble Beach, Calif.Gove had seven birdies and a bogey for a 15-under 273 total.Sutherland and Waldorf shot 67s. Sutherland won in 2000 and finished third last year.Advertisement