AdvertisementSupported byN.B.A. RoundupBy The Associated PressKlay Thompson scored 21 points, and the Golden State Warriors tied the N.B.A. record for best start, beating the Nuggets, 118-105, in Denver on Sunday night to move to 15-0.Golden State matched the start of the 1948-49 Washington Capitols and the 1993-94 Houston Rockets. The Warriors can break the record Tuesday at home against the Los Angeles Lakers.The Warriors also surpassed the 1957-58 Boston Celtics for the best start by a defending champion.Thompson hit a 3-pointer with 2 minutes 8 seconds remaining in the second quarter, and Golden State never trailed again. The reserves built a sizable lead and allowed Stephen Curry to rest the entire fourth quarter. Curry had 19 points, the first time this season he did not reach 20.Darrell Arthur had 21 points for the Nuggets, who were without Kenneth Faried because of a sprained left ankle. Danilo Gallinari and Will Barton each had 19 points for Denver (6-8).Harrison Barnes scored 7 of his 17 points in the third quarter to enable the Warriors to gain some separation. This was the way things went for the Warriors in the third: Festus Ezeli missed a wide-open dunk, and it clanged straight to Curry, who drained a 3-pointer.When the Warriors played in Denver last March, they rested Curry. That did not sit well with fans who were expecting to see Curry, a sharpshooting guard.Resting was not an option this time. Not with the Warriors so close to an N.B.A. record.“Whether or not we get it, it really doesn’t affect our ultimate goal of trying to win a championship,” said the interim coach Luke Walton, who picked up a technical in the third quarter. “It would be something nice to get along the way.”RAPTORS 91, CLIPPERS 80 DeMar DeRozan had 21 points, DeMarre Carroll scored all of his 21 points in the first half, and visiting Toronto held Blake Griffin and Chris Paul scoreless through the first 20-plus minutes of a victory over Los Angeles.J. J. Redick scored 17 points for the Clippers, who have lost three straight and seven of nine after starting the season 4-0.PELICANS 122, SUNS 116 Anthony Davis capped a 32-point, 19-rebound performance with a tiebreaking 3-pointer in the final minute, and host New Orleans overcame Phoenix.Ryan Anderson, who scored 30 in each of his previous two games, had 29 points for New Orleans. Eric Bledsoe scored 29 points for Phoenix, which lost despite hitting 17 3-pointers. THUNDER 117, MAVERICKS 114 Russell Westbrook had 31 points and 11 assists, and Oklahoma City rallied from a double-digit third-quarter deficit to overtake visiting Dallas, ending the Mavericks’ six-game winning streak.Serge Ibaka had 16 points, 9 rebounds and a key blocked shot for Oklahoma City, which was without the star forward Kevin Durant (injured hamstring) for the sixth straight game.Advertisement