AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichJeremy Lin signed with the Knicks on Dec. 27, 2011. The team played the Miami Heat that night, but Lin was not on the floor, and there was not much heard from him for a couple of months. Then, in February, Lin started putting together big games. Twenty-five points, 7 assists and 5 rebounds against the Nets. Thirty-eight points against the Lakers at Madison Square Garden. A winning 3-pointer to down the Raptors on the road. Jeremy Lin had officially arrived, and the tabloids spouted neologisms in approval.It was not meant to last. Lin went down with a torn meniscus after a lackluster March, and the Cinderella story was over before the team had even made it to the ball. The Knicks were easily dispatched by the Heat in the playoffs.Four seasons later and New York is buzzing like it hasn’t since the halcyon days of Linsanity. Shouts of “Zinger!” ring from the Garden and rebound across Twitter when the Knicks’ 7-foot-3 Latvian rookie Kristaps Porzingis has the kind of game he had Saturday night against the Houston Rockets: 24 points, 14 rebounds and 7 blocks (including a massive swat against James Harden to keep the game knotted in the fourth quarter). The Knicks went on to beat the Rockets, something they had failed to do in 19 of their last 20 tries.It was only Porzingis’s second career outing with 20 points or more, so much of the excitement remains anticipatory. But it is fair to say that he looks terrific, and that his potential alone has the city’s carpenters hammering extra planks onto the Knicks’ bandwagon. The Knicks won 17 games last year. This season is not even a month old, and the Knicks are 8-7.Porzingis has rejuvenated the Knicks’ star Carmelo Anthony, who has been able to play fewer minutes and take fewer shots. Anthony played only 25 minutes against the Rockets on Saturday. The time on the bench gave him fresh legs, which came in handy when he scored 8 of his 14 points late in the fourth quarter, including a timely 3 to put the Knicks up 98-95.Some of Phil Jackson’s other moves as the Knicks’ general manager are beginning to look prescient. The journeyman Arron Afflalo, acquired this off-season, has been a major contributor since he started playing in the middle of this month; he has averaged 15.3 points in the last three games. And the point guard Langston Galloway, who was brought up from the N.B.A. Development League under Jackson’s eye, has been a worthwhile contributor off the bench, offering 10.7 points and 4.1 rebounds in 26 minutes a game.Given the echoes of 2012, it’s fitting that twice on national television this week the Knicks will face the Miami Heat, the team they played the night that Lin was signed, and the team that bounced them from the playoffs that season.The Heat (9-4) defeated the Knicks, 95-78, on Monday in Miami. But Friday’s matchup at the Garden (7:30 p.m. Eastern, NBA TV) is the can’t-miss one.Miami has had a relatively easy schedule so far and has played three-quarters of its games at home, but the Heat are an interesting parallel to the Knicks as another team that has rebuilt with a mixed roster of veterans and fresh faces.The Heat’s veterans, of course, are Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh. Wade, 33, is still chugging away, despite his history of injuries. He leads the team in scoring, and recently passed Reggie Theus for 49th place on the league’s career points list. And like Anthony, their 2003 draft-class buddy, the Heat’s old men are getting a chance to rest, thanks to the Heat’s younger stars. Wade is playing fewer than 30 minutes a game for the first time in his career. Bosh, too, is playing fewer minutes and attempting fewer shots.The success of both teams highlights a resurgent East. Last season was a dismal one for the conference, but there is far more intrigue in the East this year. The Knicks and the Heat twice in a week is an event to savor and not an occasion for grumbling about big-market favoritism.But given the excitement in Gotham over Porzingis, fans around the country should be sure to tune in the day after Thanksgiving to watch the Knicks defend the Garden. The bright lights and the big city are the perfect backdrop for great basketball, and for the first time since Lin electrified the league, the Knicks are reminding the world of how much fun that can be.Advertisement