By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 22, 2015
Chandler Catanzaro kicked a 32-yard field goal with two seconds remaining, and the host Arizona Cardinals escaped with a 34-31 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals on Sunday night.The field goal was considerably closer than it would have been because Cincinnati’s Domata Peko was called for unsportsmanlike conduct for calling out the offensive signals as the Cardinals were about to spike the ball to set up the kick.Carson Palmer overcame two early interceptions to throw four touchdown passes. With 57 seconds left, he completed three quick passes to move the team into field-goal range after the Bengals had rallied to tie it at 31-31.Andy Dalton threw two touchdown passes for the Bengals, both to Tyler Eifert. The second, a 10-yarder, cut Cincinnati’s deficit to 31-28 with 3 minutes 44 seconds to play.AdvertisementCOWBOYS 24, DOLPHINS 14 Tony Romo pulled off his latest comeback victory, returning from a collarbone injury to throw for two scores, and visiting Dallas won for the first time since he was hurt in Week 2, beating Miami.AdvertisementThe Cowboys halted a seven-game losing streak, their longest in a single season since 1989. The Dolphins increased the likelihood that they would miss the playoffs for the seventh year in a row.Romo went 18 for 28 for 227 yards and overcame two interceptions by throwing touchdown passes of 31 yards to Terrance Williams and 16 yards to Dez Bryant.Dallas linebacker Rolando McClain scored the game’s first points, and his first career touchdown, on a 12-yard interception return. Miami had the ball for only 21 minutes.BRONCOS 17, BEARS 15 Brock Osweiler threw for two touchdowns while starting for the injured Peyton Manning, and Denver stopped Jeremy Langford on a 2-point-conversion run in the final minute to win in Chicago.Langford scored on a 2-yard run with 24 seconds left to cap a 65-yard drive. But he ran into a crowd on the conversion attempt, and the Broncos escaped with a narrow victory.Osweiler completed 20 of 27 passes for 250 yards with Manning, a five-time most valuable player, back in Denver because of injuries to his foot, ribs and shoulder.PACKERS 30, VIKINGS 13 Aaron Rodgers threw for 212 yards and two touchdowns, Datone Jones had two of Green Bay’s six sacks, and the Packers ended a three-game losing streak with a convincing victory in Minnesota to pull even in the N.F.C. North race.AdvertisementJames Jones had six catches for 109 yards and a score, Eddie Lacy rushed for a season-high 100 yards on 22 carries, and the Packers beat the rival Vikings for the 10th time in the last 11 meetings with Rodgers at quarterback. He has thrown for 28 touchdown passes with just three interceptions in those games.The Vikings’ six-game winning streak was halted by a proud Packers team that was not ready to concede a division it had won four straight times.COLTS 24, FALCONS 21 Adam Vinatieri kicked a 43-yard field goal with 52 seconds remaining, and visiting Indianapolis twice overcame two-touchdown deficits to beat slumping Atlanta behind the backup quarterback Matt Hasselbeck.With the injured Andrew Luck watching from the sideline, Hasselbeck threw two touchdown passes and overcame two interceptions. D’Qwell Jackson tied the game with about 10 minutes left on a 6-yard interception return for a touchdown.The Falcons lost for the fourth time in five games after a 5-0 start. This defeat could be attributed to the offense, which bogged down in the second half.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.LIONS 18, RAIDERS 13 Matthew Stafford ran for a go-ahead 5-yard touchdown early in the fourth quarter, and host Detroit beat Oakland.The Lions have won consecutive games for the first time this year. The Raiders are on a season-high three-game losing streak.Matt Prater made three field goals in three attempts in the first half to give Detroit a 9-0 lead.BUCCANEERS 45, EAGLES 17 Jameis Winston tied a rookie record with five touchdown passes, Doug Martin ran for 235 yards, and Tampa Bay won in Philadelphia.Martin had 177 yards in the first half, including runs of 84 and 58 yards. He finished 2 yards short of tying Barry Sanders’s record for most yards without a touchdown. Sanders had 237 for the Lions against Tampa Bay in 1994.AdvertisementThe Buccaneers have won two straight for the first time in two years. The Eagles have lost two in a row.RAVENS 16, RAMS 13 Justin Tucker kicked a 47-yard field goal as time expired, and host Baltimore rallied from a 10-point deficit in the fourth quarter to edge bumbling St. Louis.In a game filled with mistakes and penalties, one final miscue decided the outcome. Rams quarterback Case Keenum fumbled when he was hit by Courtney Upshaw, and Upshaw’s teammate Lawrence Guy recovered at the St. Louis 41 with 54 seconds to go.The Ravens moved to the 29 before Tucker delivered the winning kick.SEAHAWKS 29, 49ERS 13 The rookie Thomas Rawls rushed for 209 yards and had two touchdowns, Tyler Lockett caught two touchdown passes from Russell Wilson, and Seattle climbed back to .500 with a win at home over San Francisco.Starting in place of Marshawn Lynch, who was out with an abdominal injury, Rawls posted the third 100-yard rushing game of his rookie season and exceeded 160 yards for the second time. Rawls scored on a 2-yard run in the first quarter and added a 31-yard catch-and-run touchdown from Wilson in the fourth to give Seattle a 16-point lead. Rawls finished with 255 all-purpose yards.Lockett caught a 24-yard touchdown pass in the first quarter and carried a San Francisco defender into the end zone on an 11-yard grab later in the first half.CHIEFS 33, CHARGERS 3 Justin Houston intercepted a Philip Rivers pass and returned it 17 yards for a touchdown, the 346-pound defensive tackle Dontari Poe leapt over the pile for a 1-yard touchdown, and visiting Kansas City embarrassed free-falling San Diego.The Chiefs won their fourth straight game after a five-game losing streak. The Chargers lost their sixth straight.AdvertisementKAEPERNICK DECISION MUTUAL The decision for San Francisco quarterback Colin Kaepernick to have season-ending surgery on his left, nonthrowing shoulder was a mutual one between Kaepernick and the team, General Manager Trent Baalke said.Speaking before the 49ers’ game in Seattle, Baalke said Kaepernick had consulted team doctors and had received a second opinion before the decision for surgery was made.Baalke said that he expected Kaepernick to go through off-season recovery with the team and that any speculation that Kaepernick’s stint with the 49ers was over was unfounded.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cardinals Outlast Bengals With Kick in Final Seconds.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.