AdvertisementSupported byBy Zach SchonbrunWill Wade has started every day since January the same way: with a run of a mile, often more.He tries shrugging it off, but, really, it has become something of an obsession. Wade, the 32-year-old basketball coach in his first year at Virginia Commonwealth, was on his 324th consecutive day of running on Sunday, and there seemed to be no end in sight. “We’re trying to see who’s going to quit first,” said Greg Graber, a friend who has his own streak of 361 days. “We’ve said we’re going to try to go 10 years.”Wade said: “I ask my team to be disciplined. I’ve got to be disciplined as well.”Wade replaced a coach, Shaka Smart, who brought the Rams to midmajor glory: five N.C.A.A. tournament appearances in six years, including a charmed trip to the 2011 Final Four. Smart was young, hip, playful and charismatic. It was always presumed he would not last long at V.C.U., and Texas finally lured him away with almost $22 million last spring.So in comes Wade, a baby-faced assistant under Smart from 2009 to 2013, and his approach to making players run hard and compete hard differs slightly. He instills discipline through his own example of willpower. By running daily, without excuse, Wade sets the tone.“It motivates us to stay consistent,” the senior guard Melvin Johnson said. “When the head honcho is doing that every single day, you’ve got no choice but to fall in line.” The Rams, still playing the exhausting full-court defense designed by Smart, nicknamed Havoc, remain one of the toughest defending and best-conditioned teams in the country. After losing, 79-71, to No. 5 Duke at Madison Square Garden on Friday, V.C.U. (2-2) fell to Wisconsin, 74-73, on Sunday after Bronson Koenig’s layup with five seconds remaining in the consolation game of the 2K Classic. The challenge in replacing Smart, Wade said after Friday’s loss, was not trying too hard to be like him. Wade stood in a corridor outside the locker room slapping hands with members of the V.C.U. pep band as they walked by. He had deep bags under his eyes — a product, undoubtedly, of ritually waking up at 4:30 a.m. to hop on the treadmill.The idea came from Graber, a middle school principal in Memphis who runs a company, Mindful Memphis, that specializes in what is called mindfulness training. He works with college basketball programs on techniques like meditation, visualization and deep breathing. Wade, who coached at Tennessee-Chattanooga for two years before returning to V.C.U., found Graber’s program intriguing.“Will is one of those coaches who’s very innovative, always looking for the difference-maker or an edge,” Graber said when reached by telephone Sunday.Graber met with the Chattanooga players once a month. Part of his training involved having the players do something constructive once a day for an entire year. Tasks were as simple as keeping a daily journal, calling their parents, finding a different motivational quote or reading Scripture. Nothing related to basketball. Wade would monitor his players. But he wondered if there was something Graber did daily as well.Graber told Wade, “I’m a streak runner.”There is a membership group of “streak runners” who run at least a mile every day for one year or more. The United States Running Streak Association has 588 runners with that distinction, including a handful whose streaks have lasted more than 40 years.“I’m not into it that much,” Wade said, although he knew about the association.Not yet. But, as Graber knows, a daily activity can become rather addictive. “But we like to say it’s being dedicated,” Graber said, adding that one person’s dedication can seem like an obsession to a different person.Wade’s daily runs started as a way to challenge himself, but it has become cathartic. Now Wade does not know if he can stop.“It clears my mind and allows me to plan my day, all those sorts of things,” Wade said. “It’s just my way of making sure I’m in shape, more mentally sharp. It’s just become a routine for me.”Since his return to Virginia, Wade still has Graber work with his team. He has already visited the Rams four times since June. Over the summer, Graber had the players meditate three times a day.“He helps us to block out all the distractions,” the junior guard Jordan Burgess said.Johnson said Graber’s deep-breathing techniques had an enormous impact on how he handled himself during games. He now has a right wristband with the word “Breathe” on it to remind him to do so in tight situations, such as Sunday’s game with the Badgers. He scored 21 points. All it takes is a text message from Graber with an expression or an image to “get the team’s mind-set back on track,” Johnson said.“It’s just about clearing your head,” he added.Burgess remembers arriving at early-morning practices as a freshman and seeing Wade, then an assistant, finishing up a workout on a treadmill or elliptical machine. Wade’s dedication to fitness did not surprise him. But now that Wade is a streak runner?“They all think I’m crazy,” Wade said.Advertisement