AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressAlex Galchenyuk broke a tie with 3 minutes 29 seconds left, and Max Pacioretty added an empty-net goal to lift the Montreal Canadiens over the visiting Islanders, 4-2, on Sunday night to complete a weekend home-and-home sweep.Galchenyuk one-timed a pass on the power play from P. K. Subban for his third goal of the season. About two minutes later, the Islanders were called for too many men and Travis Hamonic was given a game misconduct penalty, setting up Pacioretty’s power-play empty-netter.After John Tavares gave the Islanders a 1-0 lead late in the first period, David Desharnais scored on the power play for his seventh goal, and Tomas Fleishmann added his seventh this season for Montreal while the Canadiens were short-handed. Anders Lee knotted the score with 8:07 left in the third, before Galcheynuck’s tiebreaker. Carey Price made 21 saves to help the Canadiens follow Friday’s 5-3 win over the Islanders with another triumph.HURRICANES 4, KINGS 3 Defenseman Justin Faulk scored two power-play goals, and Carolina stopped a five-game losing streak with a victory at Los Angeles.His first goal came at 4:26 in the second period and put Carolina ahead, 3-0, after goals from Jeff Skinner and Brett Pesce, who found the back of the net for the first time in his N.H.L. career. The Kings closed the gap to 3-2 when Anze Kopitar scored the first of his two goals 58 seconds after Dustin Brown converted a penalty shot.Faulk restored the Hurricanes’ cushion with a shot from the right circle with 2:14 left in the second, giving him a league-high eight with a man advantage.Jonathan Quick allowed four goals with 17 saves in two periods before Jhonas Enroth replaced him and made eight stops.The Kings had an impressive rally, with Kopitar making it a one-goal game with 10:45 to play on a slap shot from the circle that might have clipped Carolina defenseman Ron Hainsey on its way past goalie Cam Ward.But Ward stopped everything after that on his way to 26 stops, including a slick save on Drew Doughty with about five minutes left. SHARKS 5, BLUE JACKETS 3 Joe Pavelski scored twice as San Jose rallied for a win at Columbus, its sixth straight victory and seventh straight on the road.Patrick Marleau had a goal and an assist, and Brent Burns and Brenden Dillon also scored. Ryan Johansen, Boone Jenner and Cam Atkinson scored for the Blue Jackets.Despite being road weary on the final stop of a six-game trip and having played on Saturday night in Pittsburgh, the Sharks had more than enough energy in the first period. They seemed to catch Columbus off guard with their speed, and they did not shy away from physical play, participating in two fights four seconds apart. Marleau scored the lone goal in the period.But Columbus carried the play in the second period, outshooting the Sharks, 19-7, and putting them on their heels. The Blue Jackets scored twice in a 78-second span to take the lead.They led by 3-1 after Atkinson’s goal 1:23 into the third, but the Sharks stormed back with help from several key offensive zone face-off wins. They took the lead by scoring three times in a 7:02 span, including Dillon’s go-ahead goal with 6:45 left.Pavelski started the rally at 6:13, with a long redirection between Sergei Bobrovksy’s legs. Burns pulled San Jose even, one-timing a cross-ice feed from Ward at the left circle for his eighth goal and third in two games.Pavelski scored his 12th goal, an empty-netter, with 1:16 remaining.Advertisement