AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher StockHOMESTEAD, Fla. — Jeff Gordon did not have the storybook finish that he had hoped for to end his 24-year career, but he still had a day to remember.Gordon finished sixth Sunday at the Ford EcoBoost 400 at Homestead-Miami Speedway in the Chase for the Sprint Cup Series championship, with Kyle Busch taking home the title just ahead of Kevin Harvick.“I think had I won this race and this championship, it would have been perfect,” Gordon said, “and I don’t think I would have accepted that. I wouldn’t have known how to.”It was not perfect, but there were certainly moments that had feelings of perfection.“Nothing could have topped the way my day started: I woke up — I was planning on sleeping in — and I was too excited and woke up a little earlier,” he said. “I pulled up the shades on my bus, and my mom just happened to be walking by. That just made my day so amazing.”Gordon shared an emotional moment with his mother, Carol Ann Bickford Houston, and his family to start the day before his record 797th career start. “It was just perfect,” Gordon said. “Just missed a little bit on the race.”There were other emotional moments, including one of his crew members getting choked up before sending Gordon off right before the race started. His fellow competitors were also posting messages on social media that Gordon appreciated. Harvick even took a photo next to Gordon’s No. 24 car. The racing legend Mario Andretti and the Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton were on hand to cheer Gordon on top of his pit box. The three also posed together for a photo before the race in a moment Gordon said he considered “so cool.”The beginning of the race was delayed for 1 hour 20 minutes because of rain, but there were no issues when it started at around 4:35 p.m. with the South Florida sun beaming on the one-and-a-half-mile oval in front of a sellout crowd of 65,000.Before the race started, fans honored Gordon with signs that read, “Thank You Jeff.”Gordon, the four-time champion and sentimental favorite, finished inside the top 10, but he was never in serious contention after leading for nine laps early. He moved up late, but hovered around 10th most of the race.Although he frequently trailed Busch and Harvick, Gordon did have a moment that drew a roar from the crowd. Gordon, known for his inefficiency with restarts, showed an aggressive move on the restart on Lap 36 to pass Busch for first place in Turn 1.“I actually felt like when I got ahead of Kyle that we actually pulled away from him, so I kind of got excited and got my hopes up there,” Gordon said.On the 54th lap, Gordon was slow on a restart, dropping to eighth, from third, on the same turn that took him to the front earlier. Shortly after, Gordon dropped a few more spots and had a long battle with his fellow title finalist Martin Truex Jr., who finished 12th, while Busch and Harvick were battling up front.“I knew when those guys got by me, I just didn’t quite have what they had,” Gordon said. Busch was not supposed to be involved in the Chase for the Sprint Cup championship, but he overcame the odds after seriously injuring his right leg and left foot in a February crash by claiming his first Cup title with his fifth victory of the season.“It’s pretty unbelievable,” Busch said. “A dream of a lifetime, a dream come true and something that only happens every so often. I just can’t believe with everything that happened this year and all the turmoil, all the things that I went through.”Busch led 41 of 267 laps to complete an improbable comeback after missing the first 11 races of the season. Nascar has a rule that states a driver must compete in every race to have a shot at qualifying for the Chase, but Busch was granted a waiver to allow him to be eligible.“The rehab of getting back, getting ready and focused — all that was the hardest part and the hardest thing I have ever gone through,” Busch said. “To put it all together and be here tonight, this wasn’t that hard.”Busch led Gordon, Harvick and Truex for most of the race. Busch took his sixth and final overall lead out of a restart on Lap 261, blowing by Brad Keselowski in Turn 2.Harvick, last year’s champion, finished second, but he did not threaten Busch’s title quest down the stretch, finishing 1.5 seconds behind.“We were definitely a little bit off tonight,” Harvick said. “We just kept throwing stuff at it and we never really found anything that really helped the car that was like, ‘Oh man, that’s what we needed right there.’ ”Keselowski finished third, and Joey Logano and Kyle Larson rounded out the top five.Advertisement