By BEN SHPIGELNOV. 22, 2015
HOUSTON —  The Jets tried holding on to their playoff aspirations Sunday, but they dropped them, like the deep balls botched by their rookie receiver. The Jets tried sustaining those aspirations, but they were depleted by every sack they allowed, every interception they threw, every dose of gadgetry that stunned them into mediocrity.No matter how Coach Todd Bowles chooses to spin their plight, the Jets are reeling, losers of four of their last five games. The ramifications of this latest flop, a 24-17 loss to the Houston Texans at NRG Stadium, radiated throughout the premises afterward.In the back of the locker room, the stall of the star cornerback Darrelle Revis, who was torched for a 61-yard touchdown in his worst game since rejoining the team, sat empty. He was being treated for symptoms of a concussion that could jeopardize his availability for next week’s game against the Miami Dolphins.Toward the front, the rookie Devin Smith — who butchered one long pass over the middle and then mangled what would have been a 46-yard touchdown — sat facing his locker, head down, nodding along to the encouraging words of the receivers coach Karl Dorrell.AdvertisementIn the interview room, Bowles’s nostrils flared, and his eyes raged as he demolished his team for its failure to perform in critical situations. Told that he had expressed the same displeasure before, Bowles said: “I’m not repeating myself. I’m just stating the obvious.”AdvertisementNo longer are the Jets in command of a wild-card berth in the A.F.C., as they were a month ago. No longer are the Jets a prime contender for a postseason spot, as they were two weeks ago. No longer do the Jets have solid positioning on the periphery of the race, as they did 10 days ago.After all of the Jets’ misery Sunday, they still had two chances to tie the score late in the fourth quarter. Both times, Ryan Fitzpatrick misfired. He lamented his throw that Eddie Pleasant intercepted on fourth-and-5 with 2 minutes 47 seconds left. A minute later, hoping to throw a slant to Brandon Marshall, Fitzpatrick waited too long for Texans linebacker Brian Cushing to clear, allowing safety Andre Hal to make an interception.
		That is the number of turnovers the Jets forced Sunday, a game after failing to coax any. When they have at least two takeaways, the Jets are 5-0. When they do not, they are 0-5.The Miami Dolphins visit MetLife Stadium for a game that could either improve the Jets’ playoff chances or drop the team into last place in the A.F.C. East.Through 10 games, the Jets are 5-5, an average record for an average team. Because of the ordinary A.F.C., the Jets remain in the hunt, resembling business travelers with meager airline status. They are sort of special, but not really.They believe that they are better than average, which could be true. Quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick, for one, noted his frustration with losing to teams “that we feel like we’re better than,” though it was not immediately clear how long that list was. It is also just as possible that the Jets are worse than average.A full deconstruction of Sunday’s mess will take place Monday, when Bowles and his staff will evaluate why the Texans looked like the fresher and more prepared team, despite having four fewer days of rest.And why the Jets failed to make the necessary adjustments to counter a backup quarterback, T. J. Yates, and the trickery deployed to minimize his limitations.And why Houston’s two best players — receiver DeAndre Hopkins, who burned Revis on that long score, and defensive end J. J. Watt, who had two sacks, five quarterback hits and five tackles for loss — made a mockery of the notion that the Jets could contain them.In the aftermath, Bowles will also examine whether Fitzpatrick remains his best option at quarterback after interceptions on the Jets’ last two drives stalled any hopes of a comeback. The issue was left unresolved Sunday.AdvertisementThat Bowles did not immediately say Fitzpatrick would start next week suggests that Bowles is at least considering a change, even if he is unlikely to make one.“I’m still committed to Ryan,” Bowles said. “I just don’t think he played very well, just like a lot of other people on both sides of the ball.”With the exception of long snapper Tanner Purdum and Randy Bullock, who made all three of his kicks, Bowles could have been speaking about anyone.With Houston starter Brian Hoyer sidelined, the Jets’ defense buckled against Yates, who had thrown only 15 passes the last two seasons and had not started a game since January 2012. The Jets had professed not to care about Yates’s inexperience, saying that they were preparing not for him but for Houston’s scheme, which nonetheless managed to surprise them.The Texans unleashed the Wildcat formation, gaining two first downs on a 16-play drive that led to a field goal, and then a double pass from Yates to Cecil Shorts, who threw a 21-yard touchdown pass to an open Alfred Blue that snapped a 10-10 tie midway through the third quarter.Asked if he had seen that play before, cornerback Buster Skrine said, “Never.”Asked if the Jets were caught off guard, Shorts said, “They had no clue what to do.”There were other indictments, too, like Watt’s persistent abuse of right tackle Breno Giacomini and anyone else the Jets tried to block him with, and Hopkins’s unfolding a beach chair on Revis Island.“I play football,” Hopkins said. “Went out there and played my game. Nothing special.”That is also an apt description of the Jets’ suddenly one-dimensional offense, which averaged 3.3 yards rushing on 21 carries and tends to rely too much on receiver Brandon Marshall, who short-armed one pass and was unable to corral a deep ball on the Jets’ second series.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The offensive coordinator Chan Gailey spoke last week of the importance of another player emerging. Given a chance, with the Jets trailing by 24-10 late in the third quarter, Smith struggled to track a perfect pass from Fitzpatrick that landed in his hands.Advertisement“Our rookies got to stop being rookies,” Bowles said, alluding to Smith, who against Buffalo fumbled a kickoff that was returned for a touchdown. “They need to grow up. They get paid like everybody else. They got to start acting like they’re not in college no more.”Those with far more experience contributed to the misery. In his return to Houston, where he spent 15 years working in the front office, Jets General Manager Mike Maccagnan watched the offense he assembled amass all of 57 first-half yards and, for a second consecutive game, score 3 first-half points.The Jets lacked precision. And energy. And yards. And points. And first downs. And third-down conversions.Asked to explain his unit’s lethargic starts, Marshall suppressed his candor, pausing for 10 seconds before answering.“We just got to make plays,” Marshall said.He paused for 13 more seconds before basically repeating himself, and then offered an assessment rarely spoken of teams that fashion themselves as contenders.“We’re not playing good football,” Marshall said, “and that’s everybody in the locker room.”EXTRA POINTSCenter Nick Mangold left after the Jets’ second series with a deep gash to his right hand between his pinkie and ring finger. It required stitches, and he did not return. He said he was optimistic that he could play next week against Miami. ...Both of the Jets’ 2013 first-round draft picks were inactive Sunday. Defensive lineman Sheldon Richardson was sidelined by a balky hamstring, while cornerback Dee Milliner, sick last week but listed on the injury report as probable, was a healthy scratch.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page D1 of the New York edition with the headline: Jets Drop Ball, and Watt Drops Jets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.