By REUTERSNOV. 22, 2015
LONDON —  Novak Djokovic put the finishing touch on a magnificent season by beating Roger Federer, 6-3, 6-4, on Sunday to win the ATP World Tour Finals for the fifth time.Djokovic became the first player in the year-end tournament’s 46-year history to triumph four times in a row.Federer, who pulled out of the final against Djokovic last year with a back injury, brought the tournament to a close in anticlimactic fashion once again, double-faulting on the final point.After a modest celebration, Djokovic walked to his chair and wrote, “And now for vacation,” in Serbian on a camera lens.AdvertisementThe top-ranked Djokovic, 28, won three of the year’s four Grand Slam tournaments, beating Andy Murray in the Australian Open final and Federer in the Wimbledon and United States Open finals. He lost to an inspired Stan Wawrinka in the French Open final.AdvertisementDjokovic also won a record six Masters Series titles and reached 15 consecutive finals after losing to Ivo Karlovic in the Doha quarterfinals at the start of the year. He won 11 tournaments over all.“Obviously sitting here with this trophy alongside me, I couldn’t ask for a better finish of the season,” Djokovic said.“This season definitely stands out. I can’t say I expected it, not at all. But I always gave my best, and I’m always asking from myself the most.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Djokovic ended the year with an 82-6 record. Half of his defeats came against Federer, including a 7-5, 6-2 group-stage defeat on Tuesday that ended Djokovic’s 23-match winning streak.With the stakes raised, though, Federer, 34, made far too many errors Sunday while Djokovic’s defenses proved largely impenetrable.Federer’s chances were fleeting. He had the first break point, in the second game, but hit a forehand into the net.In the next game, a nearly identical forehand went into the net to give Djokovic a break. From there, he never looked back.AdvertisementFederer, serving at 3-4 in the second set, trailed by 0-40 but escaped with five straight points.Djokovic was unrelenting, however, and wore down his opponent with a brutal rally two games later, sealing the victory when a Federer second serve sailed long.Djokovic evened his head-to-head record with Federer at 22-22, a day after pulling even with Rafael Nadal, 23-23.He is seven Grand Slam titles short of Federer’s record total of 17, and if Djokovic avoids injuries, he could threaten that mark in the next few years.Federer, ranked No. 3, said that Djokovic would have a hard time emulating his 2015 performance.“Margins are small at the very top,” Federer said.“That’s why this year of Novak’s is amazing. Rafa has been there. I’ve been there. We both know how hard it is to back it up. It takes a lot of effort.”A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic Beats Federer at ATP Finals, Ending the Year With 11 Titles and an 82-6 Record.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.