

 Benjamin Hoffman
 

KEEPING SCORE
NOV. 22, 2015
Kristaps Porzingis is a player who inspires many debates. The arguments include what nickname best suits him — Godzingis and Three-Six Latvia are gaining traction after he said he was not a fan of Zinger — and his potential as a player.But one thing worth pondering is his height.Before this year’s N.B.A. draft, reports indicated that Porzingis was at least 6 feet 11 inches, though scouts said he was much taller. When he showed up at Barclays Center for the draft, he towered over the 7-footers Frank Kaminsky and Willie Cauley-Stein, so people began to make their own wide-ranging estimates. Because Porzingis clearly fits under a regulation N.B.A. rim, it can be said with certainty that he is between 7 and 10 feet.Porzingis has been compared to Dirk Nowitzki, another 7-footer with a delicate long-range shooting touch. Porzingis’s height, which the Knicks list as 7-3, was seen as something that could provide him an advantage in an era obsessed with the 3-pointer because he would be able to create his own shot by simply towering over defenders. And on Saturday night, when he scored 24 points, grabbed 14 rebounds and swatted away seven shots in a victory over the Houston Rockets, he confirmed that his game was suited to the modern N.B.A.Knicks Coach Derek Fisher said it was that combination of skills that had attracted Phil Jackson, the team’s president, to the 20-year-old Porzingis, who was booed on draft night but almost immediately became a fan favorite.Advertisement“Everybody, of course, was fascinated by the shotmaking,” Fisher told reporters after Saturday’s game. “But we thought the activity on the defensive end was one thing that would really give him a chance to be good.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was not the first time Porzingis had a big game rebounding, but the blocked shots were by far his career high, and they stand out in Knicks history. Blocked-shot totals before the 1985-86 season are unreliable, but according to Basketball-Reference, it was the 41st time since that season that a Knicks player had as many as seven blocks. Patrick Ewing accounted for 34 of them, making Porzingis just the sixth Knicks player in that span to accomplish the feat. The Knicks’ franchise record for blocks is 10, which is shared by Dikembe Mutombo, who did it in 2004, and Joe C. Meriweather, who did it in 1979.But as good as Porzingis was defensively Saturday, his offensive performance stood out as well. He compiled his 24 points on 8-for-12 field-goal shooting (2 of 3 from 3-point range). Since 1985-86, a 20-year-old player has had as many as 24 points, 14 rebounds and 7 blocks in a game just three times: Shaquille O’Neal (twice) and Porzingis.If you expand the list to include all players, it is hardly less impressive. The only players to accomplish that more than once since then are Hakeem Olajuwon, David Robinson, O’Neal, Tim Duncan, Ewing, Alonzo Mourning, Dwight Howard, Anthony Davis, Yao Ming, Larry Nance and Jermaine O’Neal.AdvertisementOn draft night, few would have predicted that Porzingis would be mentioned in such company, but the ceiling for his capabilities has been elevated with his recent play. And as fans continue to treat his career like a Paul Bunyan tall tale come to life, it is possible that he just reached up and lifted the ceiling by himself.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page D6 of the New York edition with the headline: Porzingis, With 7 Blocks, Raises Ceiling on Potential.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »