By ROB HUGHESNOV. 22, 2015
LONDON — When the white handkerchiefs are waved en masse at the team, the coaches and the club president at Real Madrid’s stadium, it usually has drastic repercussions. It means the coach is on the firing line.The gesture is one of derision, of rejection by Real Madrid’s supporters of their own team, and the handkerchiefs came out Saturday at Santiago Bernabéu Stadium as the home team lost, 4-0, to its rival, F.C. Barcelona, in the first el Clásico of the season.The opening and final goals were struck by the Uruguayan Luis Suárez. The Brazilian Neymar struck the second, while the third came from Barça’s captain for the night, the Spaniard Andrés Iniesta.Forget the politics and the polemics associated with the 231st meeting in this rivalry. Lay aside the solemnity of the teams’ paying tribute to the victims of the terror attacks in Paris on Nov. 13. Try to look at this as just a soccer game in a long series, albeit one that perennially pits Real and Barcelona and that more often than not has a direct bearing on which one wins the Spanish league.AdvertisementThere was a wonderful uplift in the stadium when Iniesta, still seen as the nation’s darling after he shot the winning goal in the 2010 World Cup final, left the field late in the second half. The applause for Iniesta — the least offensive architect of the home team’s embarrassment whom you could imagine — was long, sincere, and in total contrast to the darkening mood of the fans.AdvertisementThe Bernabéu has 80,000 seats, and all but a few hundred were filled Saturday by Madrid members.“We only wanted to be ourselves,” said Iniesta at the news conference directly after the game. “And we have done that. We neutralized Madrid.” And then he grinned and concluded: “These games are double the fun.”The fun is in winning. The other side of that contest was articulated by Madrid’s captain, Sergio Ramos. “We need to ask the Real Madrid fans for forgiveness,” Ramos said. “We didn’t play to the standards of this crest.”Ramos, though, had to answer a question. Reporters, anticipating the postgame ire of the club president, Florentino Pérez, had asked whether the team was behind the coach.“Obviously,” Ramos answered, “we are standing firmly behind the coach.”Were they? Madrid’s performance, its second loss in a row after it surrendered a lead on Nov. 9 to lose at Sevilla, smacked of disharmony. This game, like the second half in Seville, had us wondering how a collection of so many world-class talents could fall apart so abjectly.Yes, Barcelona is the current European champion. Yes, the Catalans have some of the finest players outside of Madrid. And though Lionel Messi had missed nine games because of a knee injury, Barcelona has so much going for it that it could account for a Madrid team’s playing at full throttle.Except that Saturday in no way looked as if Real Madrid was playing to its full extent. In speed and in thought, whether playing with the ball or without, there was such a disparity between the two clubs that it looked at times embarrassing.To be sure, the goals were classical. The first involved, by all accounts, 24 passes before Sergi Roberto applied the final incisive stroke between the defense, allowing Suárez to run through and do what he has been doing for months: finish it off with a goal.AdvertisementHeads then dropped on the home side, if ever they were raised. Neymar danced through to slide the ball beneath the body of Madrid goalkeeper Keylor Navas after another astute pass from Iniesta to make it 2-0 before halftime.Then, reaffirming Barcelona’s supremacy in the second half, Iniesta almost broke the netting with the power of his shot during the third goal, which was created by a back-heel pass from Neymar. The rout was complete when Messi, who came on as a substitute, linked up with Neymar, whose pass allowed Suárez to end the scoring.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Four goals was humbling enough, but frankly the total could have been double that. Barcelona squandered some chances, while others were saved by Navas.It is true that Barcelona’s goalkeeper, Claudio Bravo, also made some spectacular saves of his own, most notably when he reached up from his knees and flicked away a lobbed attempt from Cristiano Ronaldo.But Ronaldo, Karim Benzema, Gareth Bale and James Rodríguez — all the Galácticos hired by Madrid — never threatened to breach the defense anywhere nearly as often as Suárez and company did.There lies the dichotomy for Real, and the beauty for Barcelona. The latter needs only to make it to the new year, and then a FIFA ban preventing it from playing new transfers will end. Barcelona will finally get to use Arda Turan and Aleix Vidal — a creator and a wing back who have been forbidden to step on the field so far — and Messi will be nearing a return to full health.A punishment designed to handicap Barcelona has not worked out that way. The team won the Spanish League, the Spanish Copa del Rey, and the Champions League while playing under the ban last season.Real, meanwhile, fired its popular coach, Carlo Ancelotti, last June, even though he led Madrid to its much-awaited 10th European title, “La Décima,” in 2014.Whereas Ancelotti found ways to incorporate — and deal with the egos of — the star players acquired by Pérez, the jury is out on whether his replacement, Rafael Benítez, can do the same.Benítez was asked after Saturday’s drubbing if picking the players was his choice, or the club’s. “I try to manage the group as best as possible,” Benítez said. “It hurts us a lot to lose like this against Barcelona. We must all take responsibility, and must all be united, work, and recover quickly for the next game.”AdvertisementThe president remained silent and somber-faced as the white hankies were waved in his direction. Barcelona departed with the points, with the world watching.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.