AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonThe star wide receiver Victor Cruz, who was expected to return to the Giants’ lineup on Sunday for the first time in nearly a year, aggravated a strained left calf muscle that had been bothering him since mid-August and left practice Wednesday.The Giants offered no diagnosis for the severity of Cruz’s injury, and Cruz was not available after practice, which is closed to the news media except for an early warm-up period.But because Cruz has been hobbled by the calf for roughly six weeks and unable to practice, another setback to the same muscle could mean an indefinite absence.Cruz has not played since Oct. 12, 2014, when he ruptured the patellar tendon in his right knee during a game in Philadelphia. Cruz said Monday that he expected to play Sunday against the Buffalo Bills and emphasized that he was running without pain or discomfort in either leg.In a statement from the team, Coach Tom Coughlin said: “Victor came out and tried to do individuals. He felt the calf again, and that’s all he did.”Coughlin was referring to a portion of practice when players work within groups before practicing as a team. Cruz was expected to be eased back into Wednesday’s practice. He ran some pass routes but never completed the practice. Customarily, especially under Coughlin, players who cannot practice do not play for the Giants.Wide receiver Rueben Randle said he thought Cruz was running tentatively Wednesday, saying that Cruz did not look like himself.Randle added: “I don’t think he’s too far away, but I don’t think he’s quite there yet.”Quarterback Eli Manning, when asked about Cruz, answered: “He did some individuals and ran a few routes and that was about it. We’ll see how it goes.”Asked how disappointed he was to see Cruz, who has had three seasons with more than 70 receptions, sidelined again, Manning said: “We’re going about our business. We’ve got guys who have been playing and practicing. We’ve got a job to do.”While Odell Beckham Jr. has been productive this season, and Randle had a strong performance last week, the Giants have been waiting to get Beckham and Cruz on the field at the same time. It is the combination Giants fans have been waiting to see as well.“It can be frustrating, but I just told him to not worry about it,” cornerback Prince Amukamara said of Cruz. “It’s a long, long season. It’s just one of those things. If it’s not right, it’s not right.”In other injury news, left tackle Ereck Flowers, cornerback Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie and defensive end Robert Ayers all practiced.Advertisement