By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 6, 2015
Kam Chancellor punched the ball free from Detroit wide receiver Calvin Johnson at the 1-yard line when it appeared the Lions were going to take the lead, and the Seahawks held on for a 13-10 win on Monday night in Seattle.With Detroit on the verge of capping a 91-yard drive with the go-ahead touchdown with less than two minutes remaining, Chancellor came from the side and punched the ball from Johnson’s arm as he was being tackled by Earl Thomas. The ball bounded into the end zone and went over the back line for a touchback, giving Seattle possession at its 20.Russell Wilson was sacked six times and pulled numerous escape acts, but he threw a touchdown pass to Doug Baldwin in the first half, and Steven Hauschka hit two field goals from 50-plus yards.Seattle evened its record at 2-2, with both wins coming at home.Detroit fell to 0-4 with its third loss on the road.AdvertisementDOLPHINS DISMISS COACH The Miami Dolphins fired Coach Joe Philbin after a 1-3 start in a season that was billed as a turnaround year for the franchise.AdvertisementPhilbin, whose team was beaten by the Jets, 27-14, in London on Sunday, is the second N.F.L. coach in two years to be fired immediately after losing a game in England. The Oakland Raiders fired Dennis Allen last year after his team lost to the Dolphins in London, also in Week 4.Philbin, hired in 2012, was 24-28 as Miami’s coach and never led his team to the playoffs.Dan Campbell, the tight ends coach for the past five years, will take over as interim head coach.Before joining the Dolphins in 2010, Campbell, 39, played 11 N.F.L. seasons as a tight end after being drafted by the Giants in 1999. KEN BELSONGet the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MALLETT REMAINS STARTER The Houston Texans are sticking with Ryan Mallett as their starting quarterback despite his recent struggles.Mallett did not lead the Texans to any points Sunday before he was replaced by Brian Hoyer late in a 48-21 loss to Atlanta.Hoyer directed three scoring drives late against a Falcons defense that had pulled most of its starters. Hoyer won the job out of camp but was benched after one game in favor of Mallett. (AP)BUCS CUT KICKER Kicker Kyle Brindza’s struggles the past two weekends cost him his job with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.AdvertisementBrindza, a rookie from Notre Dame, was cut after he missed two field-goal attempts and an extra point in a 37-23 loss to the Carolina Panthers. Brindza also missed three field goals and an extra point the previous week in a 10-point loss at Houston.The Bucs (1-3) planned to look at new kickers Tuesday and sign Brindza’s successor before practice Wednesday. (AP)SUSPENSIONS END Pittsburgh Steelers wide receiver Martavis Bryant and Denver Broncos defensive end Derek Wolfe returned to work after four-game drug-related suspensions. And Cleveland Browns General Manager Ray Farmer was back after a four-game ban for sending text messages to the sideline last season. (AP)AROUND THE LEAGUE Dallas running back Lance Dunbar will miss the rest of the season with what appears to be a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee. ... St. Louis Rams outside linebacker Alec Ogletree will have surgery Tuesday for a broken right ankle and could be out for the season. ... The Jacksonville Jaguars will place right guard Brandon Linder on injured reserve. He will have surgery this week to repair a torn labrum in his left shoulder, the team said.(AP)A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Seahawks Force Fumble to Preserve Win Over Lions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.