By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 24, 2015
James White scored the first two touchdowns of his career, one running and one receiving, and the New England Patriots improved their record to 10-0 with a 20-13 home victory over the Buffalo Bills on Monday night.Tom Brady completed 20 of 39 passes for 277 yards, and the Patriots, the defending Super Bowl champions, remained on course for their second perfect regular season in nine years. The Bills (5-5), who had won two straight, lost to Brady for the 25th time in 28 games.The game was filled with mistakes, penalties, injuries and turnovers, including two fumbles on a single punt and an inadvertent whistle that led to one of many lengthy conferences among the officials.Buffalo’s LeSean McCoy ran 20 times for 82 yards and a touchdown and caught six passes for 41 yards to surpass 100 yards from scrimmage for the fourth straight game.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.MANNING OUT OF LINEUP AGAIN Brock Osweiler is preparing for his second consecutive start at quarterback for the Denver Broncos, and Peyton Manning is seeking a second opinion on his injured left foot.AdvertisementManning flew to Charlotte, N.C., on Monday to meet with Dr. Robert Anderson, a foot specialist, about his torn plantar fascia.AdvertisementCoach Gary Kubiak said Osweiler would start again next weekend when the Broncos face New England. (AP)RAVENS TO START SCHAUB The Baltimore Ravens said Matt Schaub would start at quarterback next Monday night against Cleveland after a magnetic resonance imaging test confirmed that Joe Flacco tore the anterior cruciate and medial collateral ligaments in his left knee in Sunday’s 16-13 win over the St. Louis Rams. (AP)PANTHERS RESERVE SUSPENDED Wes Horton, a backup defensive end with Carolina, was suspended for the team’s next four games for violating the league’s policy on performance-enhancing substances. (AP)A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Patriots Improve to 10-0 as They Hold Off the Bills.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.