AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill PenningtonTwo weeks ago, after the Giants opened the season with two disheartening, humiliating losses, news media accounts referring to Coach Tom Coughlin almost always mentioned his age. The intimation was not overly subtle. Was Coughlin a 69-year-old coach who had lost touch with players from pro football’s modern era?Monday, after consecutive victories rejuvenated the Giants’ season — and left them in a tie for first place in the N.F.C. East — the story line, especially as told by his players, was changing.“I think he’s come in with more energy, more enthusiasm — here’s a guy who’s 69 years old, and he’s doing jumping jacks in the meetings,” Giants middle linebacker Jon Beason said. “It’s always a joy to see how much he loves to do what he does, and how much of a competitor he is.”Center Weston Richburg added: “He’s made a name for himself by being able to motivate people, and he definitely did that for us when we were 0-2.”Cornerback Prince Amukamara smiled at the notion that Coughlin could lose touch with his players.“Coach Coughlin is so tapped into everything going on in the locker room, the meeting rooms, the practices and probably the cafeteria, too,” Amukamara said. “The energy, the attention to detail and his never-ending consistency is noticed by everyone. He gets through to us, believe me.”Monday, Coughlin sounded almost taken aback when he was told that some of his players had suggested his energy level rose after the 0-2 start.“Whether the energy level came up from whatever level it currently is, I don’t know about that,” Coughlin responded.Perhaps Coughlin took it as an affront that he, at 69 or any other age, could display more vigor. His workday begins at 5:30 a.m. — usually on a treadmill at the team’s training complex — and ends about 10 p.m. Coughlin takes very few days off in the regular season, probably fewer than a handful. He often exercises twice daily.His assistant coaches, taking a coffee break from their game preparation at night inside the Giants’ offices, occasionally look out at the practice fields and see Coughlin, a former Syracuse running back, running 100-yard sprints in the dark.“It’s easy to get up and go out and fight for a guy like that,” Beason said of Coughlin on Monday.LINEBACKER IS HOBBLED As happy as the Giants were after their upset of the Buffalo Bills on Sunday, the injury news was disconcerting. Linebacker Devon Kennard, who had a spectacular interception in the game and has been one of the stars of the defense, left in the second half with a strained hamstring muscle. Kennard missed much of last season with a hamstring injury.Kennard indicated after Sunday’s game that he did not think this year’s injury was as bad as last year’s, but he acknowledged he needed an M.R.I. on Monday to properly assess the damage. The Giants did not update Kennard’s status Monday.The team did announce that Daniel Fells, who is the Giants’ best blocking tight end, would be lost for the season because of a staph infection. Fells did not play Sunday because he was being treated for a chronic ankle condition. Monday, the team said Fells was hospitalized and needed to be treated for a staph infection, which can be a serious condition. The Giants will almost certainly have to sign another tight end.Even with Fells healthy, the Giants were not deep at tight end. Larry Donnell is now the starter, but his backups, Jerome Cunningham and Will Tye, are inexperienced.A CHANCE AT FIRST PLACE ALONE On the verge of having slim chances at earning a playoff berth only two weeks ago, the Giants could be one week away from being alone in first place in the N.F.C. East. Sunday night, the Giants host the San Francisco 49ers, who have a 1-3 record.The Washington Redskins, who like the Giants have a 2-2 record and are tied atop the division, play at Atlanta earlier in the day. The Falcons are 4-0 this season. The Dallas Cowboys, who have lost consecutive games, play the undefeated New England Patriots, who with a bye over the weekend will have extra time to prepare for Dallas. New England Coach Bill Belichick is 11-4 in games after a bye week since he became the Patriots’ coach in 2000.“It’s wide open,” Jon Beason said of the N.F.C. East. “It’s still too early to say anybody is the favorite, which is a good thing.”Advertisement