AdvertisementSupported byN.H.L. RoundupBy The Associated PressHenrik Lundqvist made 31 saves in his second shutout of the season, and the Rangers beat the Nashville Predators, 3-0, on Monday night for their ninth straight victory at home.Rick Nash, Derek Stepan and Kevin Hayes scored for the Rangers, who won for the ninth time in 10 games over all and improved to 16-3-2. The Rangers’ 34 points tied the team with Dallas and Montreal for most in the N.H.L.The shutout was the 57th in regular-season play for Lundqvist and his second against Nashville.“He’s one of the best goalies in the world,” Nashville’s Shea Weber said. “We knew it was going to be a tough night.”Pekka Rinne made 19 saves for the Predators, who fell to 11-6-3 with their third straight shutout loss.Nashville has not scored in a franchise-record 213 minutes 47 seconds, since Miikka Salmomaki’s goal at 6:13 of the second period in a 3-2 win over Anaheim last Tuesday.Nashville outshot the Rangers by 14-3 in a scoreless first period. The Predators spent 7:21 on the power play, as Dan Girardi (interference), Keith Yandle (holding) and Stepan (double-minor for high-sticking) committed penalties.Still, the Predators were stymied by an aggressive Lundqvist, who challenged Nashville’s shooters throughout.Lundqvist’s play kept the Rangers in the game, and Nash’s sixth goal of the season at 4:32 of the second period gave them the lead. The goal was Nash’s fourth in the Rangers’ past two games. BRUINS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 3 David Krejci scored the only goal in a shootout and Patrice Bergeron extended his point streak to eight games as Boston won in Toronto to sweep a home-and-home series.Brad Marchand scored twice and Zac Rinaldo also had a goal in regulation for the Bruins, who defeated Toronto, 2-0, in Boston on Saturday.CAPITALS 1, OILERS 0 Dmitry Orlov scored with 6:32 left in the third period, Braden Holtby made 33 saves, and Washington edged visiting Edmonton.Tom Wilson started the game-winning play by coming up with a puck in the right corner. He quickly sent it across the ice to Orlov, who fired a high slap shot past goalie Anders Nilsson from the left circle.FLYERS 3, HURRICANES 2 Shayne Gostisbehere scored 24 seconds into overtime on a power play to give Philadelphia a victory over Carolina.Brayden Schenn and Claude Giroux had goals in regulation for the host Flyers, who were shut out in the previous two games and entered averaging an N.H.L.-worst 1.70 goals per game. BLUES 2, SABRES 1 Troy Brouwer and Robby Fabbri scored third-period goals, and St. Louis came back to win in Buffalo.Jake Allen made 24 saves in the win, the Blues’ second against Buffalo in the last week.KINGS 3, PANTHERS 1 Jonathan Quick bounced back from a poor performance and Alec Martinez scored the go-ahead goal late in the second period to lift Los Angeles over Florida.Marian Gaborik and Tyler Toffoli also scored for the visiting Kings, and Quick stopped 31 shots. Quick was back in net after being pulled when he gave up four goals on 21 shots through two periods Sunday at Carolina.AVALANCHE 4, JETS 1 Cody McLeod scored the tiebreaking goal early in the third period, and Colorado won at Winnipeg. The former Jets defenseman Zach Redmond’s shot from in close clipped McLeod and rolled past Winnipeg goalie Michael Hutchinson for McLeod’s fifth goal of the season at 6:45.Advertisement