By SCOTT CACCIOLANOV. 23, 2015
MIAMI —  Heat players pledged before Monday’s game to learn from the mistakes of their predecessors. They would actually defend Kristaps Porzingis, the newly minted wunderkind of the Knicks. They would roam with him to the perimeter, denying him open looks at 3-pointers. They would challenge him.The fact that Miami deemed it necessary to endorse this common-sense approach was, of course, another sign of Porzingis’s growth. One month into his N.B.A. career, Porzingis has found that opponents pay more attention him. They focus on him. And they prepare for him as best as they can.“He’s big,” Erik Spoelstra, the coach of the Heat, said before the game.Greater respect comes with costs, and the Heat caused the Knicks problems in a 95-78 victory at American Airlines Arena.A disastrous start proved too much for the Knicks (8-7) to overcome. After trailing by 23 points in the second quarter, the Knicks watched their four-game winning streak evaporate.Advertisement“Our activity level wasn’t high enough to start,” Coach Derek Fisher said. “We were playing from behind, and that’s tough to do on the road, or anywhere.”AdvertisementPorzingis was productive once again, collecting 20 points and 14 rebounds. But he worked for everything he got, shooting 7 of 18 from the field against waves of defenders. Carmelo Anthony added 21 points. The Knicks’ bench accounted for just 10 points.“They just didn’t have it tonight,” Anthony said.Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh each scored 16 points to lead the Heat (9-4), who made 28 of 36 free throws.The Knicks had won the first two games of a four-game trip, which will conclude Wednesday night against the Orlando Magic. On Monday, the Knicks were hoping to extend their good fortune. The Heat wasted little time extinguishing that dream.Bosh drew the early assignment on Porzingis, who opened the game by drilling a 3-pointer. It was a clean look, and it turned out to be the exception. True to their word, the Heat pressured Porzingis on the perimeter. He tried to penetrate but then found additional defenders — including Hassan Whiteside, a shot-blocking virtuoso — awaiting him in the lane.Porzingis missed his other four shots in the first quarter as the Heat built a 26-19 lead. The Knicks labored to find their rhythm.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I still got open shots,” Porzingis said. “Inside, I was just missing a lot.”The Heat extended their lead early in the second quarter before Fisher called on reinforcements. Porzingis and Anthony returned to the court, but the team’s struggles persisted. Tyler Johnson connected on a 3-pointer from the corner to put the Heat ahead, 42-21.During the ensuing timeout, players huddled around Fisher. Jose Calderon tried to encourage his teammates. But things looked bleak. The Heat ran out to a 52-30 lead by halftime. The Knicks shot 28.6 percent from the field in the first half, and their bench went scoreless.Advertisement“I thought the guys on the bench just struggled to bring the right energy to the game,” Fisher said.To their credit, the Knicks played with improved effort in the second half. After Anthony drew a foul on a leaning jumper for a 3-point play early in the fourth quarter, Lou Amundson drove for a layup that cut the Heat’s lead to 73-61. Miami, though, promptly rattled off 7 unanswered points by going straight at the basket.Again, the Knicks fought back. Anthony made two free throws to trim the Knicks’ deficit to 13 before Johnson soared for a putback dunk.Amar’e Stoudemire, who appeared in 36 games for the Knicks last season and was once the franchise’s great hope, did not dress for the Heat because of an illness. He has played in just two games this season, and he seemed to acknowledge that his career was winding down. He said he was studying contract negotiation, perhaps so he can become an agent.“Stay tuned,” he said.At the same time, Stoudemire said he had been keeping an eye on the Knicks. Last season, he said, some players were reluctant to buy into a new system under Phil Jackson, the team’s president and philosophical guru. Amid the disastrous season, Stoudemire secured his release and joined the Dallas Mavericks. This season, Stoudemire said, the Knicks appear more committed.“I think there’s more of a sense of urgency from the guys,” Stoudemire, who signed with Miami in July, said before the game. “I think they’re bonding to the system now, and Porzingis is doing a great job of being himself. You can tell he’s not being pressured to be a certain type of player. He’s playing his style of basketball. For most rookies, it takes some time to become yourself in this league.”Through 15 games, that has not been the case with Porzingis. Agile at 7 feet 3 inches, and with an improving perimeter touch that is remarkable for a man his size, Porzingis presents challenges for defenders. Yet he tends to resist the urge to force shots when things are not going his way, and that might be the most obvious sign of his maturity.During his past five games, Porzingis has averaged 18 points and 9.8 rebounds. And while Monday provided a lesson about the rigors of the season, Anthony preached patience.“This is something we won’t let linger,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Heat Defenders Swarm Porzingis, Who Can’t Save Knicks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.