

 Ben Shpigel
 

ON PRO FOOTBALL
NOV. 23, 2015
Ryan Fitzpatrick was asked an obvious question, and he responded in kind.“I do think I’m the right man for the job,” Fitzpatrick said Monday, and imagine the Jets’ predicament if he did not feel that way.As it is, his team is a bit of an unmade bed right now — rumpled and disorganized, a mess of the team’s own making. The Jets are built to run, and they cannot. The Jets are built to defend, and they cannot. They are built to score — really, truly — and they do not, at least not before halftime.Those problems have not gone unnoticed, but they have gone uncorrected, leading to four defeats in five games, the latest by 24-17 to the Houston Texans, who won — dominated, really — without their starting quarterback and running back and a cornerback.These types of losses, as well as their frequency, tend to bring about a deep examination of the roster, which Coach Todd Bowles and his staff conducted Monday. They opted to make one move, releasing the former first-round pick Quinton Coples, while refraining from one that would have been far more notable.AdvertisementFitzpatrick defended his credentials on Monday not because he wanted to, but because he had to. And he had to because Bowles had stalked out of the postgame interview room at NRG Stadium in Houston without confirming who would start at quarterback Sunday against the Dolphins.AdvertisementBowles quashed any possibility of a change by saying “not much” consideration had been given to benching Fitzpatrick, who has completed 46.6 percent (34 of 73) of his passes, with four interceptions, over the last two games.“He’s our starting quarterback,” Bowles said Monday.Bowles added: “When you have a quarterback, you have to look at the overall scheme, not just the quarterback. I think Ryan made some good throws. I thought he made some bad ones as well. But you don’t give up on a quarterback just like that, because over all, what he’s done this year, he still proved he can do that going forward.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Generally speaking, when a coach indicates that he is at least considering a switch at the position, it is not because the other 10 offensive starters are performing at a Pro Bowl level. Fitzpatrick undermined the Jets on Sunday by throwing two comeback-stalling interceptions, but the team has been hurt just as much by passes he threw perfectly that were not caught.Before Devin Smith’s two critical drops on Sunday, including one that could have turned into a 46-yard touchdown in the third quarter, and the ball Brandon Marshall wished he had grabbed on the Jets’ second series, Eric Decker cost the Jets a first down in their last loss, Nov. 12 against Buffalo, by mangling a catch on third-and-two from the Bills’ 20-yard line. The Jets were trailing by 12 points at the time, early in the fourth quarter, and they compounded that mistake with a blunder on fourth down that negated a prime scoring chance.These misplays are not mere annoyances. They have been pivotal moments, at the time as well as in hindsight. And the Jets have been unable to mitigate them.“The whole thing is, we have to get going earlier on offense,” Bowles said. “We can’t come from behind. In all the games we’ve lost, we’ve been behind maybe double digits, and we have to come back and try to fight at the end.”Their problems are entwined. The absence of a pass rush has stressed a linebacking corps that struggles in coverage and, in turn, a secondary whose deficiencies have been exposed over the past month. A main culprit against Houston, Darrelle Revis, who allowed a 61-yard touchdown to DeAndre Hopkins, was not feeling better Monday after having sustained a concussion, Bowles said, and may be unavailable for Miami.AdvertisementThe bruising, creative running game that escorted the Jets to victories earlier in the season has vanished, and its absence has restored even more predictability to a unit that already relies too much on Marshall.If the Jets are to snap out of this malaise, a primary catalyst will be Fitzpatrick, whose teleconference on Monday grew awkward when he was asked whether — as some have speculated, he was told — he felt he was still physically capable of playing well.“That’s fine,” Fitzpatrick said, “but I’m still here.”That he is.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Sticking With a Quarterback, if Not Enthusiastically .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »