AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ShpigelFLORHAM PARK, N.J. — A day after losing for the fourth time in five games, the Jets cut one of their underachieving players, the 2012 first-round draft pick Quinton Coples.Inherited by the new coach Todd Bowles, Coples, a defensive end miscast as an outside linebacker, proved an incongruous fit in the defensive scheme. As the Jets started playing more of a 4-3 defense upon Sheldon Richardson’s return from a suspension, Coples started receiving fewer and fewer snaps. His playing time bottomed out in the Jets’ sluggish 24-17 loss Sunday at Houston, where he played only five plays on defense.“We’re just trying to play good football players, and we’re trying to play guys that want to play and guys that are ready to play,” Bowles said Monday. “And obviously along the way, whether we’re winning or losing, we still have to make business decisions going forward. That was just one of them.”Coples started out as a defensive end for Rex Ryan, who, after working him out personally at North Carolina’s pro day, said to himself, “I think I just made this man a lot of money.”In his second season, the 6-foot-6, 290-pound Coples moved to outside linebacker, but he lacked the speed to drop into coverage and pressure the quarterback consistently. The Jets’ stockpiling of defensive linemen, including Muhammad Wilkerson, Richardson and the rookie Leonard Williams, left Coples without much of a role.“That doesn’t mean he still can’t play,” Bowles said. “That just means he wasn’t a fit for us.” Coples was the last first-round pick by the former Jets general manager Mike Tannenbaum, who took him No. 16 over all out of North Carolina — five spots before the Patriots selected Chandler Jones, who has emerged as a pass-rushing force in New England.Entering Monday night’s game, Jones had 34 sacks across three and half seasons, more than twice as many as Coples’s 16 ½. With Coples’s departure, only two members of the eight-man draft class remain with the Jets: the third-round pick Demario Davis, a starting linebacker, and the seventh-round pick Antonio Allen, a defensive back on injured reserve after tearing his Achilles’ tendon in training camp.Bowles hinted that the Jets knew how they will fill the vacated roster spot, although he would not reveal the plan. Given the season-ending injury to Zac Stacy, it is likely that they will add a kickoff returner. Advertisement