By JOE DRAPENOV. 23, 2015
The New York State Gaming Commission fined the horse trainer Steve Asmussen $10,000 on Monday for violating its drug rules and proposed sweeping new regulations to ensure racehorses are humanely cared for and to restrict the use of drugs in the sport.The fine and proposed regulations were prompted by an undercover inquiry in 2013 by an investigator for People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. The investigator used a hidden camera in Asmussen’s barn to record seven hours of video. The group said the video, along with a 285-page report, showed mistreatment of Asmussen’s horses to be widespread.The proposed regulations are aimed at stopping trainers and veterinarians from giving horses drugs that they do not need but are administered in the hope of improving their performance.“While the troubling allegations of the PETA investigation were largely unfounded, our extensive review and other considerations have prompted the commission to put forth substantial changes to further combat the entrenched drug culture in horse racing,” said Robert Williams, executive director of the New York State Gaming Commission. “We recognize PETA for playing a role in bringing about changes necessary to make thoroughbred racing safer and fairer for all.”AdvertisementAsmussen, with the help of his longtime assistant Scott Blasi, who was also named in the PETA complaint, has built one of the top racing stables in North America. The commission fined him $10,000 for giving a thyroid hormone to his horses within 48 hours of racing, which is against the rules.AdvertisementThe commission investigation found that Asmussen had used synthetic thyroxine on the animals under his care without “evidence of medical necessity.” The drug is routinely prescribed in many barns across the nation in the hope of raising a horse’s metabolism so it can run faster.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“What Steve and Scott were accused of has been laid to rest,” said Clark Brewster, a lawyer for Asmussen and Blasi. “I think nobody has been more scrutinized and put up for ridicule than Steve, and now he has been vindicated.”Under the proposed rules, drugs would be prohibited from being given to a horse except as a medical therapy. Metabolism-modifying drugs would be tightly controlled. Trainers would be required to keep a log of all dispensed drugs administered by the stable, and any substance that abnormally affects a horse would be prohibited.In January, the Kentucky Horse Racing Commission, which also received the PETA allegations, found that Asmussen and Blasi had not violated any of its rules. New York regulators acknowledged that some PETA allegations were sustained, but not all represented regulatory violations.In a statement, Kathy Guillermo, a senior vice president for PETA, said: “The New York State Gaming Commission has taken significant and crucial steps to eliminate the suffering we documented, not only in Steve Asmussen’s barn but also for all horses used in New York racing. We applaud this progress and hope it will mean greater protection for thoroughbreds.”Asmussen has run afoul of regulators before. In 2006, he served a six-month suspension after a filly he trained tested 750 times over the legal limit in Louisiana for the local anesthetic mepivacaine, which can deaden pain in a horse’s legs. Instead of losing his livelihood, Asmussen turned the care of his horses over to Blasi, who won another 198 races as the stable finished the year with more than $14 million in earnings.The labor violations alleged by PETA were referred to New York State and federal agencies with jurisdiction over labor matters. The United States Labor Department has sued Asmussen, accusing him of violating the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 by not paying overtime to hot walkers and grooms who compiled over 40 hours of work per week at his Kentucky stables.The commission said in a statement that it “reserves the right to examine occupational character and fitness of Asmussen and Blasi dependent on the outcome of any investigation or litigation regarding these allegations.”A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Trainer Fined in New York for Breaking Drug Rules.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.