By KEN BELSONNOV. 23, 2015
The N.F.L. has trumpeted its increased efforts to spot and treat concussions, including allowing a medical spotter to call a timeout this season if a potential injury is missed by on-field staff members.But the concussion sustained by St. Louis Rams quarterback Case Keenum on Sunday has raised questions about how consistently the league’s new system is being applied.With a little more than a minute remaining in regulation and the score tied at 13 against the Baltimore Ravens, Keenum dropped back to pass and was thrown to the ground after releasing the ball. The back of Keenum’s head slammed against the turf. He immediately put both of his hands on his helmet. Then he tried to get up, wobbled and fell back down. Dazed, Keenum was helped to his feet by a teammate.The Rams sent their trainer onto the field to look at Keenum, who stayed in the game. Two plays later, Keenum was sacked, and he fumbled. The Ravens then moved downfield and kicked a winning field goal.AdvertisementOnly after the game did the Rams give Keenum a test to see if he had sustained a concussion, which he had. But by then, commentators on television and social media were aghast that medical personnel and team officials had let Keenum play on.In a league that has struggled to erase the perception that it does not take head injuries seriously, the episode set off alarm bells at N.F.L. headquarters and beyond. Brian McCarthy, an N.F.L. spokesman, said in a statement that, immediately after the game, the league had begun a review to determine why Keenum “was not removed from the game for the necessary evaluation by a team physician or unaffiliated neuro-trauma consultant as required by our concussion protocols.”AdvertisementLeague officials are talking to the Rams and their medical staff, the spotter at the game, the referees, N.F.L. medical advisers and the players’ union.“In the meantime, prior to this week’s games, we will reinforce with all involved the need to ensure that these injuries are properly identified and addressed in a manner consistent with our protocols,” the league said.Rams Coach Jeff Fisher said in a news conference on Monday that the episode had exposed flaws in the system of identifying concussions and protecting players, and changes might have to be made in the off-season.Fisher said he had seen Keenum go down but had not seen him hit his head on the turf or struggle to get up. After the play, Fisher said, he immediately turned his attention to preparing for the next play. But Nick Foles, the backup quarterback, apparently suspected something was wrong, as he quickly began warming up. And the trainer, Reggie Scott, recognized that Keenum might have been hurt, because Scott ran onto the field. Scott spoke briefly to Keenum, who said he was all right, Fisher said. Scott was then told by one of the officials to leave the field or the Rams would be charged with a timeout, so he returned to the sideline.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The independent spotter who sits in the press box during the game can ask for a medical timeout to be called when a trainer has not gone onto the field. But because the Rams’ trainer went to look at Keenum, the spotter had no reason to call down to the field, Fisher said. The league may need to find ways to improve communication among all the parties involved, he added.“Anytime you implement something, there are things that you have to work through,” Fisher said. “I think yesterday was a combination of unusual events that took place.”AdvertisementFisher said that if he had seen a replay on the stadium scoreboard, he would have taken Keenum out of the game.“There are no TV replays on our sideline, and we did not see it on the Jumbotron,” he said. “Had we seen that, then we would’ve taken a different course of action.”But Fisher also said that Keenum had not had trouble calling the subsequent plays, although one resulted in an incomplete pass and the other ended with a fumble. It is too early to know if Keenum will play this Sunday, Fisher said. Medical experts, though, were surprised that Keenum had not been taken out of the game for at least one play. While it is difficult to diagnose a concussion without directly observing someone, Keenum showed several clear symptoms, including grabbing his helmet and the difficulty he had getting up.“It was definitely suspicious the way he didn’t look right afterward,” said Dr. Erin Manning, a neurologist at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, who watched the game on television. “It was definitely surprising that they didn’t take him out for at least one play for a brief evaluation.”Fans and sports commentators were more precise. Bernie Miklasz, a longtime St. Louis sportswriter and radio host, spoke for many of the hundreds of commenters online when he called the oversight “disgraceful.”“This wasn’t a case of a player being able to cover up his injury — hoping no one witnessed it — so he could stay in the game,” he wrote. “This still happens too often in the N.F.L., even after the league’s initiative to be on full alert to look for signs of a concussion.”The hit to Keenum came less than two weeks after the Rams signed wide receiver Wes Welker, who has sustained several documented concussions in his 12-year career, including three in a nine-month period. Fisher said he had no concerns about Welker’s condition, and Welker, 34, brushed off skeptics.“I’m really not worried about it,” he said, adding that he had played last season without sustaining a head injury. “I know I’m a poster child right now and everything else. I’m good and ready to play some ball.”As it turned out, on the play after sustaining his concussion, Keenum threw the ball to Welker. The pass was incomplete.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Player Concussed, and a Policy Questioned.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.