AdvertisementSupported byBy Jill Painter LopezLOS ANGELES — The Los Angeles Kings did not spend this past summer basking in parades, designing new rings or putting up another championship banner. The only banner raised at Staples Center was one for Taylor Swift, who sold out a record five concerts in August. That resides across the arena from the two that commemorate the Kings’ championships in 2012 and 2014.The Kings failed to make the playoffs in 2015, but it was not a quiet off-season. Forward Jarret Stoll was arrested in Las Vegas in April and charged with felony cocaine possession. The charges were later reduced to two misdemeanors. He then signed a one-year deal with the Rangers.The high-priced center Mike Richards, who was demoted to the minor leagues for part of last season, was detained at the Canadian border in June and later charged with possession of a controlled substance. The Kings terminated his contract, citing a “material breach.”The Kings were still reeling from the arrest of defenseman Slava Voynov, who served jail time after pleading no contest to domestic violence charges stemming from an arrest last October. The N.H.L. suspended him, and he missed most of the season. He recently released a statement saying that he was returning to Russia with his family.Stoll, Richards and Voynov had helped the Kings win their first two Stanley Cups. Now, the Kings are not only trying to rebound from missing the playoffs but also looking to redeem themselves.“I’ve moved on from all that off-ice stuff,” Coach Darryl Sutter said. “Those guys are real important guys to me, still, in my life, personally and all that. You have to move on. My responsibility is to the group in the room. That’s how I see it. My motivation is the same as the day I was hired, to get this group to the playoffs.”The core group of veterans, including the captain Dustin Brown, goalie Jonathan Quick, forward Anze Kopitar and defenseman Drew Doughty, remain, and the Kings added the longtime Boston Bruins wing Milan Lucic. “It was a hard summer,” Brown said. “We addressed that very early in training camp and put that to bed and move on from there, understanding we’re not going to run from it. Then again, we’re focusing on what we need to do and being a good hockey team.”The Kings are working from a new blueprint, a plan they call “conduct awareness training initiatives.”David Carter, the executive director of the Marshall Sports Business Institute at the University of Southern California and a member of the Kings’ advisory board, said much would be learned from the coming season.“First of all, there’s a tremendous amount of good will, with the Kings having played well on the ice and what they’ve done in the community,” Carter said. “They slipped up on both of those fronts. Was last year an isolated year and an outlier or something that will be more of the same this year? “From my knowledge of the team, they aren’t going to tolerate that kind of fallback, and they’re doing all they can to be positioned as a competitive team that does right by the community.”The Kings partnered with the Herren Project, an organization that includes the former N.B.A. player Chris Herren and focuses on sobriety and awareness of addiction, and Peace Over Violence, a violence prevention center. Last month, Los Angeles hired the former N.H.L. player Brantt Myhres as the team’s player assistance director. He has had well-chronicled problems with drugs, having been suspended several times by the N.H.L. Myhres played for Sutter and Kings General Manager Dean Lombardi when they worked for the San Jose Sharks. Sober for seven years, Myhres, 41, is visible at practices and games,“He’s just another voice and someone that’s been through a lot in his life and playing career,” Lucic said. “He’s someone who is willing to help if anyone is in need, no matter what it is.” Lucic added, “He can give you a point of view of maybe a path you don’t want to go down and maybe a different take and approach on things.”Sutter has striven to create a family atmosphere in four seasons with the team. He has always allowed players to take their children into the locker room.He takes his adult son, Chris, who has a form of Down syndrome, to games. Chris Sutter is a constant presence on the Jumbotron, dancing and smiling at games, and in the locker room. Not making the postseason afforded the Sutters a few more months to work on planting season on their farm in Alberta — and time to think about what the Kings have experienced the last few years.“First time I’ve been home in a while where you get seasons,” Sutter said. “I was home in spring. You see a lot of work that should’ve been done before that you were able to do. I was ready to come back. I was motivated by the challenge of getting back to the playoffs.”He added, “Quite honestly, you do a lot of your best hockey work on the farm.”Advertisement