By JOHN DUERDENNOV. 23, 2015
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia —  In August 2014, Coach Anthony Hudson left the men’s national soccer team in Bahrain partly because he had grown tired of being unable to plan beyond the short term in a region where teams routinely change coaches at a moment’s notice.Now in charge of New Zealand’s national team, Hudson seems to be finding the long term the only option available to him. New Zealand’s geographical isolation means its calendar is barer than most, with the national team playing just three games in 2015, compared with 10 for England, 14 for Brazil, 17 for Japan and 20 for the United States.Last week, national teams around the world were playing key matches, including qualifiers for the 2018 FIFA World Cup and playoff games for the 2016 European Championship. New Zealand, by far the biggest member of the Oceania Football Confederation and the member with the highest expectations, was sitting on the sideline.The senior men’s team, known as the All Whites, must wait until the O.F.C. Nations Cup in May, with group games against Solomon Island, Vanuatu and Fiji, before it plays its next match. If the team wins that, as expected, it will take on South America’s fifth-place squad for a spot in the 2018 World Cup in Russia.AdvertisementBeing in Oceania does not help prepare teams for such challenges. Because of the distances involved, attracting teams to play in Auckland or Wellington is a tough sell and may actually be in violation of FIFA rules.AdvertisementMost of the official windows for international play — when club soccer stops and national teams have the right to summon players — allow for two games. There are rules, however, about how far teams are allowed to travel to face a team from a different confederation, which is the kind of opposition that New Zealand wants.“In the window, you can’t travel for more than five hours for your second game, so for us, Australia has to be involved as a doubleheader if anyone comes to play us,” said Hudson, 34. “We are reliant on others, but others are heavily involved in qualifiers. It all means we are not playing at home. All of our games are away in difficult environments.”And while that means that the All Whites play only one game while the others play two or more, at least that gives the young team some vital experience, though playing far from home also has its frustrations.“We have players coming from all different sides of the world, from Australia, from Europe, the United States,” Hudson said. “They are all from different time zones, and then just to get everyone organized in a couple of days is the biggest challenge. People will say this is international football, and it is, but we don’t have the benefit of playing every window, so we almost have to start again.”That makes its 1-0 victory on Nov. 12 in Oman and a close 1-0 loss in South Korea in March all the more impressive. (New Zealand had a goal disallowed against South Korea, a ruling some saw as harsh.) The only other game the All Whites have played this year was a friendly in September against Myanmar.Hudson’s team is ranked 159th by FIFA, just five ahead of Samoa, the next-best team in Oceania.The lack of games makes it difficult for the All Whites to climb higher in the rankings, but the expectations are completely different from those for other teams in its confederation. New Zealand is the only member of Oceania to play in the World Cup, and at the 2010 tournament, the team was the only one of the 32 participants not to make the knockout round after not losing in the group stage. (It tied all three matches.)The team has players in leagues all over the world, including the English Premier League, Major League Soccer and Australia’s A-League. The potential is there, but the games are not.One solution to New Zealand’s problems would be to join the Asian Football Confederation and follow the example set by its neighbor. Australia used to be in the same situation but left Oceania for Asia in 2006. Australia this year has played 14 games, 12 of which were competitive.AdvertisementHudson agrees that such a move would help. “Anything that means we can play more games against stronger opposition is valuable,” he said. “And not just for our first team, but for all our teams.”Jetting around Asia can be expensive, but for Hudson, it always comes back to the same thing. “From the football side, we need more and better games,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brendan Schwab is the chairman of FIFPro Asia, a branch of the worldwide player’s union, and he is the former chief executive of Professional Footballers Australia, which represents players in that country. Schwab said Australia’s move from the Oceania to the Asian confederation has been a success.“It has provided the Socceroos with a consistent World Cup qualifying path and some fantastic rivalries, such as with South Korea and Japan,” he said.Switching to the Asian confederation would not be easy for New Zealand, and any move would not just be about the All Whites. If the country were to leave Oceania, the already tiny confederation would most likely struggle to continue. There is little appetite in an already unwieldy Asian confederation for absorbing the 13 far-flung and sparsely populated island nations that make up the rest of the group.With membership in Asia currently a distant dream, any international tournament is crucial for the continuing development of the New Zealand team, especially as Hudson continues to introduce more young players.The oldest of the six substitutes used against Oman was 22. “The squad was getting old,” Hudson said. “In the last five or six games, I brought in 16 debutantes.”Winning the 2016 O.F.C. Nations  Cup would not only open the path to the 2018 World Cup, but it would secure a spot in the 2017 Confederations Cup, a tournament featuring the champion of each confederation.AdvertisementParticipating in the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro would have been the perfect springboard, too, as Olympic teams must use players younger than 23, with a few exceptions.New Zealand was on course to qualify for Brazil at the Pacific Games in July, but was disqualified for using an ineligible player.“To go to Rio was my dream; it was the players’ dream,” Hudson said. “It is a huge blow. We had a slight administrative error and that’s been tidied up.“The key is to be ready for the Nations Cup. We want to qualify for the Confederations Cup and then the World Cup. Forget the rest. We just need to follow our own path.”A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Games With New Zealand Are Distant Possibilities .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.