By ZACH SCHONBRUNOCT. 5, 2015
The first time Mike Fiers met Dallas Keuchel, they were opposing each other as starters in Class AAA. Fiers, then a minor leaguer in the Milwaukee Brewers’ system, saw things in Keuchel that reminded him of himself: pedestrian velocity, good command, multiple pitches. The difference was in the results.“Everyone was coming back to the dugout wondering why they didn’t get a hit,” Fiers said. “You’re thinking, like, ‘There’s got to be some kind of strategy to it.’ ”Fiers and Keuchel are now teammates in the rotation of the Houston Astros, and the same strategy, more or less, has propelled Keuchel to a season worthy of Cy Young Award consideration, even as many baseball fans are just beginning to learn the pronunciation of his surname (KY-kull).More memorable is his look, which features a bushy auburn beard obscuring his entire neck. It is the second most famous beard in Houston sports, trailing only the facial hair of the Rockets’ James Harden. Keuchel and Harden refer to each other as the “bearded brother.”AdvertisementIt has been hard to fit Keuchel into any other labels. The Yankees know this well. When he takes the mound for the Astros against the Yankees on Tuesday night in the A.L. wild-card game, he will be aiming for his third win against them this season, having posted a 0.00 E.R.A. in 16 innings.Advertisement“Finesse pitcher” does not quite fit him, catcher Jason Castro said. After all, Keuchel has been known to hit 94 miles per hour when he wants to.He is not just a heavy-ball thrower, either, as Yankees Manager Joe Girardi implied Monday when describing his team’s game plan. “You have to make him get the ball up is what you have to do on him,” Girardi said.Castro has a more apt description: command pitcher. Keuchel has had top-notch stuff since his arrival in the major leagues in 2012, Castro said. But Keuchel did not recognize how effectively he could command it.“He’s a lot more aggressive in the zone,” Castro said. “He’s going to trust the movement to get guys out. That’s what’s made him successful is his aggressive mind-set and relying on his stuff.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Keuchel, 27, said his first two seasons with Houston — when he compiled a 9-18 record with a 5.20 E.R.A. for two teams that lost more than 100 games — helped him discover that he did not need to be perfect with his pitches.“Just trying to be too fine, make it a perfect pitch every single pitch I throw, and you can’t do that,” Keuchel said. “I think I’ve made good adjustments.”Fiers, who was acquired by Houston from Milwaukee at the trade deadline, finally got to see Keuchel up close and understand what enabled him to set himself apart. Fiers recognized the strategy that had worked so well in the minors.Advertisement“He pitches in the zone, and then once those guys start swinging, he expands it,” Fiers said. “It just shows you that you can pitch with any speed.”Keuchel began to impress last season, when he finished seventh in the American League with a 2.93 E.R.A. and fifth among pitchers in wins above replacement (5.1) for the 70-92 Astros. This year, Castro said, he immediately noticed a difference in the development of Keuchel’s slider, which he used to collect 42 percent of his career-high 216 strikeouts.Keuchel also led the majors in ground-ball rate (62.3 percent) and led the A.L. in wins (20), WAR (7.2), and walks plus hits per inning (1.01). The decision for the A.L.’s Cy Young Award is expected to come down to Keuchel and Toronto’s David Price.“We’ve got a number of good starting pitchers, but none have been as exceptional as Dallas,” Astros Manager A. J. Hinch said. “He’s our ace; he’s our guy. To hand him the ball with the season on the line is pretty awesome.”There is one caveat for Tuesday’s game: It will be the first time in Keuchel’s professional career that he has pitched on only three days’ rest. With Houston needing a win on Friday to remain in contention for a wild-card spot, Hinch called on Keuchel, who delivered, allowing two runs in six innings as Houston pounded Arizona.The next day, he arrived at the ballpark at his normal time, 2 p.m., to maintain the routine that had gotten him there, not knowing whether he would have an opportunity to pitch again but not letting any concerns about rest deter him.His adrenaline, he said, might help.“Maybe it’s going to help me throw 91,” Keuchel said, “instead of 90.”A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: An Astro’s Key to Success Is as Hidden as His Neck.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.