
On Baseball By                     
 TYLER KEPNER
 
OCT. 5, 2015
If the Yankees’ most accomplished pitcher had suffered an elbow injury on the eve of the A.L. wild-card game, or hurt his knee, or wrenched his back, the team would have moved on. With so many games over so many months, baseball players are used to this.But when C. C. Sabathia announced Monday that he was checking himself into an alcohol rehabilitation center and would not pitch again this season, it was different. The Yankees’ affection for Sabathia, within the clubhouse and the front office, overrode the inconvenient timing.“The fact that he is tackling this in an honest and open way, the fact that he’s doing it right before our postseason starts, you take a step back and you acknowledge the courage that must take,” General Manager Brian Cashman said. “Will we miss him? Of course we’re going to miss him. Could we have used him? Of course we could have used him. But none of that stuff matters.”Sabathia, a former Cy Young Award winner who helped lead the Yankees to their last championship, in 2009, had an uneven season. He was 6-10 with a 4.73 earned run average, but his last victory, on Thursday, clinched the Yankees’ first playoff berth since 2012.AdvertisementAt 35, Sabathia threw the most innings on the Yankees’ rickety staff, and his recent improvement — a 2.17 E.R.A. in his last five starts — virtually assured him of a start in the division series, if the Yankees beat the Houston Astros in their wild-card elimination game on Tuesday. Now, Sabathia needs a break.AdvertisementIn a statement, Sabathia said it hurt to do this now, but he owed it to himself and his family to address his disease — as he called it — immediately. He said he wanted to be a person he could be proud of again.He did not attribute his absence to vague personal reasons, though that would have been understandable. He did not cite his chronic knee pain, which would have sounded plausible. Manager Joe Girardi said Sabathia could have simply sought help without telling the world.“That’s not C. C.,” Girardi said. “C. C. manned up.”Such accountability is highly valued on a team, and it is part of what has defined Sabathia. Down the stretch in 2008, he offered to pitch on short rest for the Milwaukee Brewers’ playoff run, theoretically risking injury just before becoming a free agent. The next fall, he twice pitched on three days’ rest for the Yankees in the postseason, helping them take critical three-games-to-one leads in the American League Championship Series and the World Series.In 2011, when Dellin Betances made his major league debut at Yankee Stadium and pitched horribly before his hometown crowd, Sabathia sensed his dismay. Late that night, after leaving the park, Sabathia sent an encouraging text message to the rookie.“That’s something I’ll always remember,” Betances said. “Anything I’ve needed, on the field, off the field, he’s always been there for me.”Betances dresses in Sabathia’s old locker in a far corner of the clubhouse, shuffled there after the retirement of Derek Jeter, the team captain, last season. The Yankees left the captaincy vacant but moved Sabathia into Jeter’s old locker.That is the kind of respect Sabathia commands, and Monday’s announcement only deepened the feeling.Advertisement“At the end of all this, I think he’ll be looked at as a hero,” outfielder Chris Young said. “He stepped up, and that takes an extreme amount of courage. I’m very proud of him.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It seems clear, in retrospect, that there was a warning sign in August, when Sabathia was caught on camera in a verbal altercation outside a Toronto nightclub. It turned physical just as he was pushed safely into a taxi. Yet Cashman and Girardi said they were surprised, on Sunday, to learn the extent of Sabathia’s problem.“I know players have drinks; that happens in the game,” Girardi said, seated at a news conference in front of a backdrop that included an ad for Budweiser, the official sponsor of Tuesday’s matchup. “Adults have drinks. But I was not aware that it was at that level.”In his statement, Sabathia recognized that the timing coincided with the playoffs, and added, “It hurts me deeply to do this now.” Knowing his professional pride as a competitor, and his sense of loyalty to the team, the Yankees immediately understood the severity of his condition.“Was there any discussion with C. C. about, ‘Can you hold this off?’ ” Cashman said, responding to a question. “No. No. When someone comes to you with the issue that he came to us with and said that he needs to get help and he needs it immediately, then that’s the only focus.”The last time the Yankees won a postseason series, over Baltimore in the first round in 2012, Sabathia carried them. He won both of his starts, including a four-hit complete game in the finale.They could not have expected something similar this month. Sabathia has not thrown a nine-inning complete game in his last 50 starts. But he is, in Girardi’s words, a warrior on the mound, and the Yankees will miss his presence on the field and off.The Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson said: “He’s like family to me, and he’s like family to everybody on this ball club — everyone in that front office, everyone on our staff. We’re with him. He’s loved. He’s a special guy.”Sabathia did his part to help the Yankees get this far, while dealing with a serious problem. That was all he could give, and now their journey continues without him.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: Leader’s Abrupt Departure Brings Only Respect From Team .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »