By PAT PICKENSOCT. 5, 2015
For about 40 years, from World War II until the 1983-84 season, N.H.L. games did not have overtime. But since the extra period returned, its format has been a frequent source of discussion.For 16 seasons, overtime was simply a five-minute extension of the game. Then, after a successful test run in the American Hockey League, the N.H.L. adopted a five-minute, four-on-four overtime period for the 1999-2000 season. Five seasons later, after a lockout led to a canceled season, the league added a shootout to decide games that would have otherwise finished in ties.This season, hoping to curb the number of games decided in a shootout, which some deride as a skills competition, the league will move to a five-minute, three-on-three overtime period.Each overtime change by the league was made to promote more aggressive offense and to make the game more appealing to fans.AdvertisementTeams seldom practice or play with only three skaters, and the amount of space on the ice can be alarming. Such a radical shift in this season’s format is forcing coaches to figure out how to use the increased space to make the finish exciting, and not embarrassing.Advertisement“It’s going to be exciting, but probably a feeling-out process for everybody in the league,” Islanders defenseman Travis Hamonic said.Like the original four-on-four overtime, the three-on-three format was born out of the A.H.L., pro hockey’s top minor league. After 65 percent of its overtime games finished in shootouts in the 2013-14 season, the A.H.L. changed its rules to accommodate a seven-minute overtime. The first four minutes were played four-on-four, followed by three minutes of three-on-three.As a result, only 26 percent of overtime games ended in a shootout last season. That was enough evidence for the N.H.L., where 55.6 percent of games tied at the end of regulation were decided in a shootout.The league approved a five-minute, three-on-three period in June, with the expectation that overtime games would finish earlier. During the preseason, the new overtime achieved the designed effect. Of the 26 games tied after 60 minutes, 19 were decided in the extra frame — 10 of which ended in the first two minutes of overtime.In addition to having fewer players on the ice, teams will be attacking the goal farther from their bench — the long change, as it is known in hockey circles.“I think line changes come into the thought process even more,” Rangers defenseman Ryan McDonagh said. “Getting caught out there, and getting tired, and them getting a couple guys on and are obviously fresher than you.”Because the long change makes it tougher to get off the ice, he added, “you’ve got to be real smart and not risk trying to take a chance and get caught out there too long.”AdvertisementTo give teams more opportunities to practice the overtime protocol, the N.H.L. scheduled some preseason games to play a five-minute, three-on-three period regardless of the score.Line combinations have varied during the process. Before, the most common situation in which teams had only three skaters on the ice was during a penalty kill. When teams kill penalties with three players, they often use one forward and two defensemen.During the preseason, some coaches elected to use three forwards. Others used two forwards and one puck-moving defenseman to try to win the game off the opening face-off.Coaches and players said that short shifts and puck possession were essential. Having possession tires defenders and enables the team with the puck to make a line change without negative ramifications.“You’ve got to make sure you’re trying to change at the right times,” Hamonic said. “I think honestly that’s where a lot of the goals are going to be scored. Already so far this year, it’s been a lot off the line changes.”Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While good changes are going to be essential, so too is shooting accuracy. If a shot sails wide, the likelihood of an odd-man rush the other way increases.“You’ve got to make good decisions with the puck and try and capitalize on your chance,” McDonagh said. “Because if it doesn’t work out, most likely, the other team is going the other way.”Having a good puck-handling goaltender will be an advantage.“There’s no question if you miss the net, it’s going to be like the N.B.A., here they come on a fast break,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “You’ve got to have a little bit of puck possession — don’t be afraid to use your goalie as a fourth man back there — there’s a lot of things you can do.”AdvertisementSkilled forwards can use their speed and the additional space to their advantage, and many players said that penalties would become more prevalent in overtime as flat-footed defenders aimed to take down the attacking player instead of allowing a one-on-one chance.“You can clearly dictate the play,” Islanders forward John Tavares said. “One turnover can almost lead to a shootout in the three-on-three, at least odd-man rushes.”In the event of a penalty during the three-on-three period, the teams would play four-on-three.The Rangers seemed to do everything right during overtime of their preseason game against the Boston Bruins on Sept. 24, but it still wound up backfiring.While his line possessed the puck in the offensive zone, Rick Nash forced Boston defenseman Matt Irwin to hook him, creating a four-on-three power play.Yet when the Rangers lost possession on the subsequent man-advantage, five players went over the boards, and they were caught with too many men on the ice. That infraction led to a Bruins power play. Boston ultimately won, 4-3, in a shootout.“This is a work in progress for everyone right now,” Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault said. “We’ve got to live through this experience, and obviously, we’re all going to make mistakes.”A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page B12 of the New York edition with the headline: N.H.L. Hopes Less Will Be More in Overtime’s Appeal to Fans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.