AdvertisementSupported byMarquette 78, Arizona State 73, OvertimeBy Tim CaseyIn recent years, most of the nation’s top college basketball coaches traveled to tiny Rice Lake, Wis., trying to persuade Henry Ellenson to join their programs. Kentucky’s John Calipari, Duke’s Mike Krzyzewski, North Carolina’s Roy Williams and Michigan State’s Tom Izzo were among those who showed up in the town of 8,000 to woo the 6-foot-10 Ellenson, a forward with guard skills.Those programs would have given him plenty of national exposure, but Ellenson chose Marquette, which is 300 miles from Rice Lake. That has not stopped him from drawing attention from all over the country.Ellenson was one of two star freshmen, along with Louisiana State’s Ben Simmons, competing this week at the Legends Classic at Barclays Center, with dozens of N.B.A. scouts and executives in attendance.After helping the Golden Eagles edge Simmons’s Tigers on Monday — Ellenson contributed 16 points and 11 rebounds before fouling out with 1 minute 56 seconds remaining in an 81-80 victory — he had a team-high 11 rebounds, as well as 18 points, which tied him for the team lead, in the tournament championship game Tuesday night, a 78-73 overtime win over Arizona State.Simmons, who is widely expected to be the No. 1 overall pick in the coming N.B.A. draft, followed a 21-point, 20-rebound game against Marquette by recording 4 points, 10 assists and 14 rebounds in the consolation game, an 83-72 L.S.U. loss to North Carolina State. But it was Ellenson who was named the tournament’s most valuable player.Ellenson sustained a left shin injury on Monday when he collided with an L.S.U. player, and the pain lingered on Tuesday. Ellenson went to the locker room early in the game and then sat out the final 3:04 of the half with an ice pack on his shin. He played all of the second half and overtime except for a brief stretch when he sat on the bench with the ice pack again on his leg.Yet despite foul trouble and the injury, Ellenson showed flashes of the versatility that has made him a potential N.B.A. lottery pick.“It’s cool to have all those scouts here and just the level of how this game was,” Ellenson said. “I know it was on ESPN, and the crowds here both days were great. I heard a couple ‘we are Marquette’ chants. That’s what I like to hear. It was awesome.”It was also what Steve Wojciechowski envisioned when he became Marquette’s coach in April 2014. Soon after taking over, Wojciechowski called Ellenson and drove to Rice Lake, where he saw Krzyzewski, his college coach and former boss. The competition did not dissuade Wojciechowski from pursuing Ellenson, who chose Marquette in part because he wanted to stay close to his parents and his siblings, all of them talented players themselves.Ellenson’s oldest brother, Wally, is a redshirt junior guard at Marquette who transferred last year from Minnesota. Ellwood Ellenson, who is two years older than Henry, plays at Valley City State University, an N.A.I.A. program in North Dakota. And Ella Ellenson, his only sister and a high school junior, is a Division I prospect. Their father, John, was a 6-foot-7 forward at Marquette and Wisconsin. Their mother, Holly, was a 5-9 guard and forward at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, a Division III program.Holly spent a few years as the women’s basketball coach at Northland College, a Division III program in Ashland, Wis. John served as her assistant. The team traveled in a 16-passenger van to places like Michigan, Minnesota, Illinois and Canada.“John was the best candidate for the job,” Holly said, laughing. “We had a lot of fun with it. I’m a pretty defensive-minded coach. He’s an offensive-minded person. We were a good combination.”When they had Wally, the Ellensons decided the travel, long hours, low pay and nomadic lifestyle of coaching were not conducive to raising a family. They devoted themselves to their children and passed along their love of basketball.Henry Ellenson joined his first organized basketball team when he was 2 ½, playing alongside his brothers. At nights, Holly and John took their children to Rice Lake High School, where Holly taught physical education. They shot in the gym, worked on their games and sometimes played three-on-three, with the brown-eyed Ellensons (Holly, Ellwood and Ella) facing the blue-eyed members of the family (John, Wally and Henry). The family competition helped Henry Ellenson become a complete player.“He was such a good ballhandler early because he couldn’t go down and post up his brothers,” said John Ellenson, an elementary school guidance counselor. “They were too big for him, so in order for him to score, he had to go outside, he had to learn how to put the ball on the deck, he had to learn how to hit hook shots and 3-pointers just because his brothers are tall and athletic. Being the younger kid, he had to figure out some way to score.”When Henry Ellenson was a freshman at Rice Lake, he received a scholarship offer from Georgetown, the program he had rooted for while growing up. He was also recruited by private high schools, but he never thought about leaving Rice Lake. His games almost always had capacity crowds; Holly Ellenson said a fire marshal counted heads to make sure they were not breaking the fire code for having too many people in the gym.Now, Ellenson is playing on a bigger stage, one that seems likely to keep growing in the years ahead.“This is awesome, to get a championship under the belt with this team,” he said Tuesday night. “It’s just all part of the process. This is the first championship we could win, so we did it. Now we’re just taking that same competitiveness we’ve been competing with these last two days and bringing it throughout the season.”Advertisement