By JODIE VALADESEPT. 30, 2015
KANNAPOLIS, N.C. —  When news leaked late Sunday that Tony Stewart intended to retire from Sprint Cup racing after next season, he began to fume. He had wanted the announcement to come on his terms, with his words, at his chosen time.But, Stewart acknowledged Wednesday, other unplanned events in his 17-year career had worked out better than he imagined. He won three championships in Nascar’s top series. His career path led him to become a team owner in 2009. The outpouring of adoration he had experienced in the last three days from fans and friends throughout the racing world had made up for the early spread of the news.“This was 100 percent my decision,” Stewart, 44, said. “There was not one factor that led to this other than just I felt like it was the right time.”Besides, the early reports had an important detail wrong: He was not retiring altogether and disappearing from the sport. Stewart said he would still be active as an owner at Stewart-Haas Racing, still planned to attend races and, most notably, still planned to drive.AdvertisementHe wants to race sprint cars, modified cars and even trucks. He wants to race more at Eldora Speedway, the dirt track he owns in Ohio. He wants to do everything the Nascar schedule did not allow in previous years.Stewart, who is known as Smoke in part for his fiery personality, even wants to do retirement on his terms.Advertisement“I’m not leaving the sport I love,” he said. “I’m not walking away from something I’m passionate about. I’m just changing roles, which is like just moving to a different position in a company. I’m not really retiring; I’m just changing positions.”Stewart-Haas Racing announced Wednesday that Clint Bowyer would drive Stewart’s No. 14 car beginning in 2017.Several factors have made the last two years the most difficult of Stewart’s career.He has not won a race since 2013, a 69-race drought that is the longest of his career. He sustained a broken right leg in a sprint car race in late 2013 that forced him to miss the last 15 races of that season. And last year, he struck and killed 20-year-old Kevin Ward Jr., who was approaching Stewart’s car on foot after a crash during a sprint car race. Ward’s parents have filed a wrongful-death lawsuit against Stewart.“I think the incident where he broke his leg and then a year later, when he had just that horrible accident with the fatality up in New York State in a sprint car, really sapped him of a lot of the passion,” Eddie Gossage, the Texas Motor Speedway president and a friend of Stewart’s, said in a phone interview.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Stewart said he had been contemplating retirement all season and insisted that the broken leg and Ward’s death had not influenced his decision.“Not 1 percent of it has had anything to do with it,” he said. “I mean, this is strictly what I want to do, and my leg feels fine. There’s nothing wrong with my leg. The tragedy, nothing is going to change that. It happened, but it’s not going to direct the rest of my life.”AdvertisementFor Stewart, who also won an IndyCar championship in 1997, his passion for racing was the reason he wanted to drive one more season, and he said he believed he would be competitive.Stewart was the second Nascar star this year to announce his retirement. Jeff Gordon, a four-time champion, said he would end his 23-year career after this season. But Stewart said he did not want next season to be like Gordon’s retirement tour.Stewart hopes to win the Daytona 500 and the Southern 500 in Darlington, S.C. — the only two race titles that have eluded him.“I can promise you, next year is not a ‘coast and collect’ year,” Stewart said. “It’s just the opposite because I don’t have to worry about making anybody mad next year and having to deal with it in 2017.”Viv Bernstein contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Stewart, Set to Retire, Won’t Coast.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.