By BRUCE WEBEROCT. 5, 2015
Neal Walk, who grabbed more rebounds at the University of Florida than anyone else in the basketball program’s history and became an effective center for the Phoenix Suns in the early years of the franchise, died on Sunday in Phoenix. He was 67.The Suns announced his death on their website. No cause was given, but Walk was known to have been in poor health. He had used a wheelchair since 1988 after having surgery to remove a tumor from his spine.Walk may have owned an unfortunate last name for a basketball player, but he was one of the first Florida Gators to play in the N.B.A. and one of the finest players in Southeastern Conference history; in his junior season, he averaged 19.8 rebounds a game, leading the N.C.A.A., and 26.5 points. He was selected by the Suns in the first round of the 1969 draft.In spite of his skills and achievements, however, he might be best remembered as a consolation prize. In the 1968-69 season, the Suns had been one of two expansion teams in the N.B.A. — the Milwaukee Bucks were the other — and after that year, a coin flip decided which would receive the first pick in the draft. The Bucks won and selected Lew Alcindor, later known as Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, who became the greatest scorer and perhaps the greatest player in the history of the game. The Suns took Walk.AdvertisementAlong with Connie Hawkins, Paul Silas and Dick Van Arsdale, Walk helped lead Phoenix to its first winning records, including a 49-33 finish in 1971-72. One of its wins that season, on Jan. 11, 1972, was a 115-114 squeaker against the Bucks in which Walk, a left-handed shooter, scored 42 points against Abdul-Jabbar, who had 27 and fouled out.For three consecutive seasons, Walk averaged more than 15 points and 8 rebounds per game, including his best season, 1972-73, when he averaged 20.2 points and 12.4 rebounds.After five years in Phoenix, he played briefly with the New Orleans Jazz (now the Utah Jazz) as a teammate of Pete Maravich’s, and a full season and parts of two others with the Knicks, with whom he went to the playoffs in 1975 alongside Walt Frazier, Earl Monroe, Bill Bradley and Phil Jackson. In eight N.B.A. seasons, he averaged 12.6 points and 7.7 rebounds.AdvertisementNeal Eugene Walk was born in Cleveland on July 29, 1948, though a boyhood friend and a teammate at Miami Beach High School, Michael Rappaport, said in a phone interview on Monday that after the family moved to Florida while Neal was in elementary school, “he always told people he was born in New York.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His father, Al, scrambled for a living, not always within the limits of the law, Rappaport said, while his mother, Sylvia, “was a saint.”Neal himself, Rappaport said, was such a dedicated athlete as a teenager that he spent the late 1960s, when much of young America was in rebellion, in the gym.“He sort of missed the ’60s,” he said. “He did the ’60s in the late ’70s.”Walk, who acknowledged that he used drugs, changed his name legally to Joshua Hawk after what another longtime friend, Eddie Steinfeldt, said was a spiritual experience on a Caribbean beach. Rappaport elaborated: “He was taking mushrooms or something, spoke to God, and God said his real name was Joshua Hawk.”Walk’s first marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by his wife, Georgia Hawk, and a brother, Warren Walk.After leaving the N.B.A., Walk played professionally in Italy and Israel. After his back surgery, he played in a wheelchair basketball league for several seasons. In recent years he worked for the Suns in community relations and as a photo archivist.The Gators retired his jersey number, 41, in 1997. In 2006, he was inducted into the National Jewish Sports Hall of Fame.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: Neal Walk, 67; Rebounded Coast to Coast.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.