By PAT PICKENSNOV. 24, 2015
Montreal’s significant French influence spills over to its beloved Canadiens. Francophone coaches are considered essential, as the team’s bench bosses give interviews in French and English before and after each game.Yet, when Max Pacioretty was named the team’s 29th captain, and the third born in the United States, fans overwhelmingly approved.“A great ‘Beliveaunian’ choice,” the Canadiens fan Donald Vien commented on the team website’s announcement, referring to Jean Beliveau, the Hall of Fame Canadiens forward. “Quiet, calm and likable and well respected by both teammates and fans alike.”Thus far the Canadiens have flourished under Pacioretty’s guidance. They set an N.H.L. record with nine straight regulation wins out of the gate. The Canadiens also weathered an injury to goalie Carey Price that caused him to miss nine games, and now face six weeks without forward Brendan Gallagher, their third-leading scorer, who has two broken fingers.AdvertisementPacioretty leads the team with 11 goals, and Montreal is tied with the Rangers atop the Eastern Conference with 34 points entering Wednesday’s game between the teams at Madison Square Garden.Advertisement“Everyone in the city has been very supportive of my new role on the team,” Pacioretty said. “Getting off to a fast start in the standings has made it a lot easier on myself.”A New Canaan, Conn., native who grew up a Rangers fan, Pacioretty, 27, has been one of the Canadiens’ most consistent two-way players since entering the league during the 2008-9 season. On a roster of superstars like the stalwart center Tomas Plekanec and the Norris Trophy-winning defenseman P. K. Subban, the soft-spoken Pacioretty’s selection as captain may be surprising to many on the outside.At his introductory news conference, Pacioretty acknowledged he had been taking classes to learn French and opened with a prepared statement in French to show how much being named captain meant.“Est un grand honneur pour moi de devenir capitaine du Canadiens de Montreal,” Pacioretty said, noting that it was a great honor to become the team’s captain, especially since he was chosen by his teammates.“Me and my family take it very seriously,” he added later in English when asked about his French opening and the language’s importance to the city. “We call Montreal home now, and this is a big part of the culture, and we understand that.”This is not the first time Pacioretty has been chosen to lead by his teammates. He spent two dominant seasons at the Taft School, a prep school in Watertown, Conn. He was set to move on to the Sioux City Musketeers of the United States Hockey League after his junior year at Taft, but the team still unanimously voted him as its captain for 2006-7.Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The kids respected him,” Taft Coach Dan Murphy said. “He wasn’t always the most vocal guy, but when he spoke, everybody listened.”AdvertisementMurphy was impressed from the moment he saw Pacioretty play. At Taft’s training camp in the fall of 2004, Murphy put Pacioretty on defense initially because of the team’s lack of depth there.“He was unbelievable on defense,” Murphy said. “He was a one-man breakout. I said, ‘Oh my God, this kid is going to be special.’ ”Back at his natural forward spot, Pacioretty showcased his ability as a playmaker.“He’d beat the same guy three times, beat the goaltender and then pass off to his teammate for the goal,” Murphy said. “He wasn’t a sniper in prep school. He scored some great goals, but he created offensive chances for his teammates.”After a year in Sioux City, Pacioretty went to the University of Michigan, where one of his old teammates saw his game take off.“He was always one of the better players and always one of the bigger guys, and he used that to his advantage,” said St. Louis Blues defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk, who won a national championship alongside Pacioretty on the Mid-Fairfield Blues’ 16-and-under team in 2005. “But he got to the college level, and I started to see him turn into this elite player and someone who bloomed and came out of nowhere.”As he grew older, Pacioretty grew into his body and became bigger and stronger. While playing in the American Hockey League in 2010, his teammates noticed his impressive shot and pushed him to use it more.“I started watching goal scorers and their tendencies and had more of a shot-first mentality, and it took off from there,” said Pacioretty, now listed at 6-foot-2 and 213 pounds.He scored a goal in his first N.H.L. game on Jan. 2, 2009, against the Devils, but he did not stick in the N.H.L. until Montreal noticed his budding goal-scoring prowess. He was called up midway through the 2010-11 season and scored 14 goals in 37 games. But he sustained a concussion and a fractured vertebra on a questionable check from Bruins defenseman Zdeno Chara, which forced Pacioretty to miss that season’s final 15 games.AdvertisementBut he has rebounded, posting three seasons of 30 goals in his last four in the N.H.L., falling short only in the lockout-shortened 2012-13 campaign. After scoring an empty-net goal in Sunday’s victory over the Islanders, Pacioretty is on pace for 41 goals this season, which would be a career high.“He has one of the quickest releases, and it’s hard to guard that,” Shattenkirk said. “When he realized he had that weapon, he started to find ways to get himself in a shooting position, and when he does that, he doesn’t need much time and space.”Pacioretty has maintained a strong defensive game. He and Plekanec make up the Canadiens’ top penalty-killing forward pair, and his plus-38 rating was tied for the N.H.L.’s best last season.“He’s one of the hardest-working people I’ve ever had the privilege to have met,” Shattenkirk said. “Considering the major injuries he’s had, for him to bounce back is a testament to the type of person he is.”A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Montreal’s Message to an American Captain: Bienvenue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.