By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 24, 2015
St. Louis Rams quarterback Case Keenum did not practice Tuesday while going through the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol, and Coach Jeff Fisher is hopeful he’ll be cleared Wednesday.Fisher said Keenum, injured late in Sunday’s loss at Baltimore when the back of his helmet banged into the turf after a hit, was at Rams Park studying film and participating in meetings Tuesday.“We’re hopeful tomorrow he’ll be ready to do some things outside,” Fisher said. “So he’s feeling pretty well, actually.”The N.F.L. is investigating whether correct concussion protocol was followed when Keenum was injured. Fisher said team doctors and trainers were involved in a conference call Tuesday night to discuss possible tweaks to the system. That call was led by the co-chairman of the N.F.L. Head, Neck and Spine Committee, Dr. Hunt Batjer; Dr. Betsy Nabel, the N.F.L.’s chief medical adviser; Dr. Robert Heyer, president of the N.F.L. Physician Society; and Dr. Thom Mayer of the N.F.L. Players Association.“There will be a conference call; then they’ll adjust the procedures ever so slightly, I guess, on game day,” Fisher said earlier Tuesday. Regarding suggestions for improvement, he said, “I can’t go there because there’s too many entities discussing their opinions and exactly what happened.”AdvertisementFisher believes the independent sideline observer decided not to get involved because the Rams’ trainer, Reggie Scott, went onto the field to examine Keenum with 1 minute 4 seconds remaining and the game tied at 13-13.AdvertisementBut Fisher inferred Scott had to make a snap judgment when told to return to the sideline, also noting that the play clock had been started.MANNING IN WALKING BOOT Peyton Manning will miss at least the next two weeks after consulting with a foot specialist who put him in a walking boot. Manning sought a second opinion from the renowned foot and ankle specialist Dr. Robert Anderson in North Carolina on Monday.Coach Gary Kubiak had already ruled out Manning, who has a torn plantar fascia in his left foot, for Sunday night’s showdown between Denver (8-2) and the Patriots (10-0).Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now, Manning will also miss the Broncos’ game at San Diego on Dec. 6 at the very least.Brock Osweiler led Denver past Chicago, 17-15, in his first N.F.L. start last weekend.The Broncos are expected to work out the former Vikings quarterback Christian Ponder on Wednesday.PARTYING COSTS MANZIEL Dropped from starter to third-stringer — without playing a game. Johnny Manziel partied his way out of the lineup during Cleveland’s bye week.Browns Coach Mike Pettine benched Manziel for his off-field behavior, a move that could signal that Manziel’s days with the team are numbered.Pettine said Josh McCown would start Monday night’s game against Baltimore in place of Manziel, who was recently handed the starting job.Manziel’s benching comes in the wake of a video surfacing of him holding a bottle of Champagne and rapping profane lyrics last weekend in an Austin, Tex., nightclub.Advertisement“Everyone in this organization wants what is best for Johnny, just like we do for every player in our locker room,” Pettine said. “I’m especially disappointed in his actions and behavior because he has been working very hard.”A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B13 of the New York edition with the headline: Rams Await Keenum; Broncos’ Manning Is Out for at Least Two Weeks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.