By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 24, 2015
Oklahoma moved into third and Iowa into fourth in the latest rankings from the College Football Playoff selection committee, released Tuesday.Clemson (11-0) and Alabama (10-1) remained the top two teams in the rankings, the third-to-last batch from the committee this season. The top four teams in the final installment, to be released Dec. 6, will secure national semifinal spots.Notre Dame, which had been fourth, slipped to No. 6 after narrowly beating a weak Boston College team at Fenway Park on Saturday night. In the rankings broadcast on ESPN, however, the selection committee’s chairman, Jeff Long, suggested the Fighting Irish’s demotion had more to do with the performances of Oklahoma and Michigan State.“In our view, Oklahoma is better than Iowa,” Long added. “We felt Iowa and Michigan State were extremely close.”AdvertisementNotre Dame (10-1) will have a prime opportunity to improve its résumé in its regular-season finale, on Saturday against Stanford (ninth in the rankings).Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it looks as if the Irish’s path to the Playoff goes through the Big Ten. The Irish could be blocked without an upset or two in the Big Ten.AdvertisementMichigan State plays Penn State on Saturday and Iowa is at Nebraska. If both win, that sets up a Big Ten championship game with unbeaten Iowa against Michigan State at 11-1. In that case, Notre Dame’s chances of jumping ahead of the Big Ten champion look very difficult. The Irish may have to crush Stanford just to keep alive their hopes of making the Playoff.Ohio State, which had been No. 3, tumbled to eighth after falling to the Spartans. But the Buckeyes (10-1) have a big game Saturday against Michigan, which is 9-2 and ranked 10th, and either team could secure a spot in the Big Ten title game against Iowa if Michigan State loses.The Sooners (10-1) will wrap up their regular season on Saturday against Oklahoma State, which dropped to 11th after losing its first game of the season, on Saturday night against Baylor, now ranked No. 7. With a victory, Oklahoma will win the Big 12.In the rankings broadcast, Long, the selection committee’s chairman, praised the Sooners for earning a second straight win over a top-25 team (Texas Christian, after Baylor).Navy (9-1), at 15th, was the top team from a conference outside the so-called Power 5. Houston, an American Athletic Conference team that had been 19th, fell out of the top 25 after sustaining its first loss, against Connecticut.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Oklahoma and Iowa Make Move for Playoff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.