The Warriors guard’s moves on the basketball court draws bravos from the world of ballet.By SCOTT CACCIOLANOV. 24, 2015
Taras Domitro was not a basketball fan when he joined the San Francisco Ballet as a principal dancer in 2008.“But I became one,” he said.Domitro, who was born in Havana, happened to arrive in the Bay Area one year before the Golden State Warriors drafted Stephen Curry. That fortunate turn of events goes a long way toward explaining how Domitro grew to enjoy watching the game.“What I see the most when I watch Steph is the incredible coordination he has with his arms, his legs and the way he handles the ball,” Domitro, 29, said before drawing a comparison between their respective disciplines and referring to the way male dancers support women as they execute a lift or a jump. “We don’t use a ball, you know. We use a woman. But the way he dribbles the ball is the way we handle a woman on stage.”The defending champion Warriors are at it again — scoring points, winning games and setting ridiculous standards. On Tuesday night, the Warriors (15-0) could break an N.B.A. record for the best start to a season by defeating the Los Angeles Lakers at Oracle Arena in Oakland, Calif. Curry, the N.B.A.’s leading scorer and last season’s most valuable player, has been at the center of it all, having added a new title to his résumé: the N.B.A.’s unofficial artist-in-residence.Advertisement“It’s beautiful to watch,” said Graham Lustig, 61, the artistic director of the Oakland Ballet Company.AdvertisementWith each 3-pointer and every spinning layup, Curry somehow seems to transcend the sport, turning the game into theater. Domitro and Lustig said that much of Curry’s aesthetic appeal was rooted in what ballet dancers seek most: to make their art look effortless.Golden State vs. Denver“We don’t want to see any pain when dancers are finishing their final variation of something,” Lustig said. “You don’t want to see them screwing up their faces and giving the impression they can hardly make it through to the end of a solo.”In a league full of behemoths who sweat and strain on every possession, the 6-foot-3 Curry has been operating on a different plane — one that has struck Lustig as deeply familiar.“Steph doesn’t really look like he’s putting in a lot effort, does he?” Lustig said. “I’m not suggesting at all that he doesn’t use effort. It’s just that he doesn’t display it, and I think that’s probably at the core of what this is about.”Lustig said he was particularly impressed by Curry’s body control, citing a move that Curry made against the Detroit Pistons this month. After dribbling past his primary defender, Curry launched himself at the rim before he managed to rotate his torso away from a second defender. He proceeded to flip the ball off the glass and through the hoop.Golden State vs. Detroit“He’s like a magician, juggling the basketball while he’s four feet off the ground,” Lustig said.When dancers jump and twist and glide across the stage, they rely on centripetal force — essentially the energy that pulls toward a center — for balance, Lustig said. But they must also possess remarkable core strength to be able to spin and soar at such dizzying heights.AdvertisementLustig sees that type of strength whenever Curry leaves his feet, and especially when he lands, as strange as that might sound.“It’s a lot easier to throw yourself up in the air and try to do something than it is to come down with control,” Lustig said. “And he’s not even trying to do something beautiful. His coach isn’t telling him how to land, but he does. It’s innate. His whole body knows what to do both in the air and in the return.”Every movement in ballet involves a great deal of skill, but the aerial theatrics are always rooted in the same foundation: bending at the knees, a movement known as plié. Dancers bend their legs before they leap, and they bend their legs before they land — all of it designed to ensure balance and to make their bodies more elastic.“That is the baseline that everyone is working from,” Lustig said.Golden State vs. DetroitIt seems safe to suggest, then, that few players in the N.B.A. have a more graceful plié than Curry, whose long and lean physique also lends itself to a certain elegance.“The thing about ballet is that you don’t want to look bulky on stage,” Domitro said. “Steph is not a bulky guy.”Any extraordinary moment in a performance — athletic or artistic — is the product of years of training and preparation, Lustig said. The act itself might look spontaneous, but little happens by accident. Domitro often trains from six to seven hours a day. Lustig danced professionally for 19 years before he succumbed to the effects of age and effort.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Like dancers, basketball players use their bodies as their instruments. The behind-the-scenes work is painstaking.“That knee, that foot, that shoulder, that wrist joint — that’s what they have,” Lustig said. “So they have to take care of their bodies because they’re going to push it to the limits.”With that in mind, Lustig noted one element of Curry’s pregame routine, which involves sprinting from halfcourt to one of the baselines immediately before the opening tip. That simple act provides a small window into the physical maintenance that Curry must do on a daily basis.Golden State vs. Detroit“That’s something dancers do all the time,” Lustig said. “They’re in the wings about to come on stage, and they’re jumping around, they’re stretching and they’re going over their moves — some of the stuff that challenges them the most. That happens quite a bit. And then I see Steph preparing: Zoom!”AdvertisementBut while Domitro and Curry both rehearse (Curry would call it practice), Domitro and Lustig marvel at Curry’s ability to improvise — the quick wit to lull a defender into a state of paralysis by dribbling the ball between his legs, over and over, before dashing past him. Curry must create something new nearly every time he touches the ball.Golden State vs. Detroit“There’s a certain sense of musicality to the way his body works,” Lustig said. “It looks like he’s moving in a slightly different dimension as everyone else, and I think that ties into his sheer speed and power and control — incredible, unbelievable control. And that’s what you want in a dancer.”Domitro explained how it takes an entire community to make a production work — the dancers, the orchestra, the stagehands, the audience. Much like a basketball game, he said, everyone involved plays a role in creating a theatrical experience.“We principals are nothing without the corps,” Domitro said. “We wouldn’t be able to do what we do.”The same is true of Curry, whose dance partner is often his defender. There are moments when he seems acutely aware that he is performing before a crowd.Lustig observed how, after the Warriors’ Harrison Barnes raced in for a dunk in that same game against the Pistons, Curry stood in the backcourt and celebrated by flapping his arms like a bird — three, four, five times.Golden State vs. Detroit“I’m flying!” Lustig said. “Even the way he does that is graceful.”The Oakland Ballet Company has been at work on a seasonal production of “The Nutcracker,” set to debut next month at the Paramount Theatre. Lustig said he had no doubt that with the proper training from an early age, Curry would have been a fine dancer. Lustig was asked how he would have cast him.Advertisement“Oh, he’d have to be the cavalier, right?” Lustig said. “He has to be the leading man.”Produced by Bedel Saget, Evan Grothjan and Sam ManchesterA version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Point Guard With the Grace of Baryshnikov.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.