By NAILA-JEAN MEYERSNOV. 24, 2015
Every Tuesday, The New York Times will look at the week ahead in the N.H.L., highlighting hot — or not so hot — teams and players. Montreal Canadiens vs. New York/New Jersey, Wednesday-SaturdayAfter sweeping the Islanders last weekend, the Canadiens visit Madison Square Garden on Wednesday to face the Rangers in a matchup of the top two teams in the Eastern Conference. Montreal won the first meeting between the teams, 3-0, on Oct. 15. Canadiens goaltender Carey Price, the reigning Vezina and Hart Trophy winner, returned last week from an injury that kept him out for nine games, during which Montreal was 5-2-2. In Price’s second game back, though, the Canadiens lost forward Brendan Gallagher to a broken hand. He tied for second on the team with nine goals. A home-and-home set against the Devils this weekend will complete a week of games against the New York metropolitan area teams for Montreal.Rangers at Boston Bruins, Friday, 1 p.m.In what the N.H.L. is calling the Thanksgiving Showdown, the Rangers visit Boston on Friday afternoon for NBC’s first national hockey broadcast of the season. The Rangers, who lead the Metropolitan Division, have lost five of their six games against the Bruins since Alain Vigneault became their coach.Chicago Blackhawks vs. California, Wednesday-SaturdayThe defending champion Blackhawks, who have struggled on the road (3-6-1), make a swing through California this week, beginning Wednesday against the San Jose Sharks, who are on a six-game winning streak (10 p.m., NBCSN). Friday finds Chicago in a rematch of the Western Conference finals against Anaheim (5 p.m., NBCSN). Though the Blackhawks have had a middling start to the season, the Ducks (7-10-4) have been worse. Chicago wraps up the trip Saturday night against the Kings, who are tied with the Sharks for the Pacific Division lead.AdvertisementAccording to the N.H.L., Rangers forward Chris Kreider last week was the first player since 2005 to have a penalty shot in consecutive games. He failed to score on either one. On Thursday, he was stopped by Tampa Bay’s Ben Bishop.On Saturday, it was Roberto Luongo’s turn to deny Kreider, who has only three goals this season.
            Kreider can't connect on the penalty shot. Ugh. Still 0-0. #NYR pic.twitter.com/572RzgX8J7 John Klingberg, Dallas StarsAdvertisementWith the N.H.L. season at the quarter turn, the top team in the West is the Dallas Stars (17-4-0). Jamie Benn and Tyler Seguin are second and third in the league in scoring, but the Stars’ breakout player has been Klingberg, a 23-year-old Swedish defenseman in his second N.H.L. season.After leading rookie defensemen in scoring last season with 40 points, Klingberg leads all defensemen this season with 23 points (4 goals, 19 assists), including 10 on the Stars’ second-ranked power-play unit. He is tied for the lead in plus/minus rating with the Rangers’ Ryan McDonagh at plus-14.Dallas, which just missed the playoffs in 2014-15, was second in goals scored per game last season, but 26th in goals allowed. With Klingberg in the top defensive pairing with Alex Goligoski, the Stars are seventh in goals-against so far this season while remaining second in scoring.With his strong two-way play, Klingberg has been called the next Erik Karlsson, after the Ottawa Senators’ Swedish star who has won the Norris Trophy twice.Hockey fans can compare the two on Tuesday night, when Dallas, winner of five in a row, hosts Ottawa. Karlsson, 25, is second among defensemen in points with 22.“I think the comparisons with Erik are going to be inevitable because of how offensive they are,” Jason Spezza, who played with Karlsson in Ottawa, said in an article in The Dallas Morning News. “I think they are a little bit different in how they play. Erik uses more of his legs, John a little bit more with his head and hands. He does a great job; he quarterbacks our power play, he plays against the other team’s top lines, he is somebody who isn’t going to be hidden for much longer, and he is one heck of a player.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.