AdvertisementSupported byBy Victor MatherBy holding off the Buffalo Bills on Monday night, the defending champion New England Patriots improved to 10-0. Despite the battle over Tom Brady’s deflation suspension and injuries to Julian Edelman, Dion Lewis and now Danny Amendola, it cannot be too shocking that a team with New England’s pedigree is unbeaten.Not so for the league’s other 10-0 team, the Panthers. Carolina was widely derided last season for making the playoffs despite a losing record, and its quarterback, Cam Newton, has for years been scorned for his unconventional style and middling statistics.Before the season, you would have found few projecting the Panthers to be an elite team. Even now, respect is hard to come by. Though Carolina is likely to have home field throughout the playoffs, 7-3 Green Bay and 8-2 Arizona seem to be more popular picks to win the N.F.C.The numbers show New England to be a far better 10-0 than Carolina. The Patriots have outscored their opponents by an average of 14.1 points a game; the Panthers’ figure is 10.8. The Patriots are averaging 6.2 yards a play and 7.4 net yards per pass. The Panthers are at 5.3 (ranking just 19th in the league) and 6.6 (13th).While the Patriots’ schedule has not been especially difficult, it rates tougher than Carolina’s, and various computer rankings rank New England much higher.The Panthers do stand out on defense. They are allowing 4.8 yards per play and 5.2 net yards per pass, second to the Broncos, compared with New England’s 5.2 and 5.9.Only two teams since the 1940s have finished a regular season undefeated, the 1972 Dolphins and the 2007 Patriots. Can either of this year’s unbeatens buck history?The Patriots will be favored in every game, of course, but must finish with four of six on the road. They could face a tricky test Sunday night at Denver against the league-leading defense. Even with Brock Osweiler starting in place of Peyton Manning for the Broncos, the Patriots are only 3-point favorites. Their other road games, against the Texans and the Jets and a season finale at Miami, also could be losable. It would be hard to bet against New England in any single game, but running the table looks challenging.The Panthers do not have as tough a team as the Broncos on their schedule, but because they are not as strong over all as the Patriots, they still seem quite likely to lose.Indeed, with the return of Tony Romo, the 3-7 Cowboys are only a 1-point underdog to the undefeated Panthers in a Thanksgiving afternoon game in Dallas. Carolina’s road games against the Giants and the Falcons also look too close to call.The Panthers have had to win a few coin tosses to get where they are. They are going to have to win a few more for a most unlikely 16-0 season.Advertisement