By SAM BORDENNOV. 24, 2015
MOSCOW —  The Russian soccer federation announced this year that it was toughening one of the rules for teams in its top domestic league: In an effort to bolster the development of young Russian players ahead of the 2018 World Cup, club teams would be particularly limited in the number of foreign players they could have on the field at any given time.Reactions to the change varied, and in a recent interview, the coach of the Russian national team said — not surprisingly — that he understood the thinking behind the regulation. Also not surprisingly, the coach of CSKA Moscow, one of the country’s perennial juggernauts and a team with the financial resources to sign players from abroad, said he was opposed to the rule.The only strange part about these perspectives was this: They came from the same man.Leonid Slutsky, a former goalkeeper whose career ended, he has said, when he was hurt while trying to save a cat, currently manages Russia’s national team in addition to its most visible club team, CSKA.It is not an ideal situation — Alex Ferguson and Guus Hiddink are the rare coaches who have tried, without success, to pull off such a prominent double — but it does not appear likely to end anytime soon.AdvertisementSlutsky, who became CSKA’s coach in 2009, was appointed to the national job as an interim coach after the Italian Fabio Capello was fired in August. Slutsky then led Russia to victories in its next four matches, ensuring a berth in next summer’s European Championships in France. This month, the Russian federation confirmed that Slutsky would remain in the dual role at least through the Euros.Advertisement“It is not as difficult as it might seem,” Slutsky said recently. “The goal in both situations is the same: to win.”Slutsky’s teams have done plenty of that; CSKA is in first place in the Russian Premier League and can still advance to the Champions League knockout rounds, provided it wins a key match against visiting Wolfsburg on Wednesday. But the dual-team setup did require some acclimation. In September, for example, only four days after the national team blasted Liechtenstein in a qualifying match, Slutsky addressed his CSKA players ahead of a critical Russian league game against Zenit St. Petersburg.As he named his starting 11, Slutsky called out the name of Igor Denisov — a tough, imposing midfielder. The only problem was that Denisov, a regular on the national team, happens to play for Dynamo Moscow, not CSKA.“It would have been nice to have him for that game, though,” Slutsky said, laughing.To help avoid similarly embarrassing mix-ups when it comes to his wardrobe, Slutsky keeps two suitcases at his house: one with his training clothes for the national team and one with a set for CSKA. He also keeps separate notebooks and folders so as not to mix his plans for any given match.Roman Shirokov, the captain of the national team and a member of Spartak Moscow, said that Slutsky had the kind of personality that allowed him to handle both jobs. Shirokov described Slutsky as a “player’s coach,” the kind who is easy to poke fun at away from the field but still commands respect when it is time to work.As a player for Spartak — CSKA’s biggest city rival — Shirokov said he noticed right away that Slutsky did not treat players from his club differently when he was with the national team.“It doesn’t matter if CSKA has an important match coming up or something,” Shirokov said. “He plays the players he should play, and he rests the players he should rest. It has never been a question.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The dual spotlight for Slutsky is perhaps the apex in a quick rise that has led him to become one of the best-known figures in Russian sports over the past six years. Before that, Slutsky was something of a journeyman; his professional playing career lasted less than a full season after he was badly hurt while trying to rescue a neighborhood cat that was stuck in a tree.Advertisement“I ended up a hero in my village because I saved the cat,” he once recalled. “Unfortunately, I also fell out of the tree and injured my knee.”After he began his managing career, Slutsky bounced around at smaller clubs — he coached Olimpia Volgograd, Uralan Elista, F.C. Moscow and Krylia Sovetov between 2000 and 2009 before replacing the Spaniard Juande Ramos at CSKA. In his first few months, Slutsky led CSKA to the Champions League quarterfinals. He has since won two Russian Premier League titles and two Russian Cup trophies, and he is known for his defensive acumen when it comes to team tactics.A thick, rotund man with heavy jowls, Slutsky often takes ribbing — from the news media, the fans and his own players — for his appearance. Recently, however, he has been embraced for his steady stream of victories. Slutsky tries not to get too wrapped up in the adulation, he said, if only because he knows such praise can be fleeting, particularly when one of his bosses is Vitaly Mutko, the Russian sports minister, and the other is the well-connected businessman Evgeny Giner, who fired Slutsky’s predecessor, Ramos, after only six weeks in charge.“There is only one step from love to hatred,” Slutsky said. CSKA fans expect another league title, while Shirokov said the national team players were looking for at least a trip to the quarterfinals at the European Championships next summer.From there, the stakes will rise again. Russia was eliminated from the 2014 World Cup in the group stage, having failed to win any of its three games, but much more will be expected when it hosts the tournament in 2018.One of the ways the Russian federation is trying to help the national team achieve that goal is through its foreign-player restriction. The rules are not unique to Russia, but they have caused consternation all the same, as some of the bigger clubs protested about having to field at least five Russian players.Aleksander Kerzhakov, a veteran striker for Zenit and the national team, said that he believed the focus on improving younger Russian players helped in the qualification for the European Championships and added that “of course it’s in the national team’s interests to have more Russians playing in the top division — especially young players.”“They need match practice to gain more experience and rise to the required level,” Kerzhakov said.Slutsky, in his national team role, agreed.“The young players are very important,” he said, but then he smiled. CSKA, of course, is his longtime employer, and it pays his primary salary.Advertisement“Actually, I am against the limit,” he said. “But I can certainly see both sides of the issue.”Artur Petrosyan contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Juggling 2 Jobs, and 2 Opinions of a Rule .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.