By JOHN BRANCHOCT. 5, 2015
The remains of the athlete Jim Thorpe will remain in Jim Thorpe, Pa., after the United States Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal from the tribe and Thorpe’s family asking to have his remains returned to his boyhood home in what is now Oklahoma.The Sac and Fox Nation and two surviving sons of Thorpe said that the remains were taken by Thorpe’s widow during a sacred ceremony after Thorpe’s death in 1953. She later struck a deal with the Pennsylvania towns of Mauch Chunk and East Mauch Chunk, which agreed to build a monument for Thorpe and rename the merged borough in his honor.The tribe and Thorpe’s sons sued in 2010, citing the 1990 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act.In 2013, a United States District Court judge in Pennsylvania ruled that Jim Thorpe, Pa., essentially served as a museum and must return the remains if asked to do so by direct descendants.AdvertisementA federal appeals court overturned the decision in 2014, which led Thorpe’s tribe and family to appeal to the Supreme Court. The court did not elaborate on its decision Monday not to hear the case.Advertisement“The denial of Jim Thorpe’s stated request to be buried on Indian land within the Sac and Fox Reservation is remembered in our tribe and elsewhere in Indian country as a serious injustice,” Kay Rhoads, principal chief of the Sac and Fox Nation in Oklahoma, said in a statement. “For now, it appears we will have to continue living with this memory, and without tools under the law to remedy this abuse of our human and religious rights.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Thorpe, born in American Indian territory that later became part of Oklahoma, was the gold medalist of the 1912 Olympic decathlon and pentathlon. He later became a major league baseball player and Hall of Fame football player. He died in 1953 at age 64.Thorpe’s family maintains that his remains were taken during a burial ceremony in Oklahoma by Patricia Thorpe, his third wife. She made the deal with the two struggling Pennsylvania towns in 1957. She died in 1974.Not all descendants supported the suit. And Jim Thorpe, Pa., said all along that it considered itself a worthy custodian of Thorpe’s legacy, including his remains.That was not the issue for Thorpe’s sons.“I don’t have anything against Jim Thorpe, Pa.,” Jack Thorpe, one of Thorpe’s sons, told The New York Times in 2010, months before he died in 2011. “But some things are not for sale.”A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page B14 of the New York edition with the headline: Supreme Court Declines to Hear Family’s Appeal in Dispute Over Jim Thorpe’s Remains.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.