By ROB HUGHESNOV. 24, 2015
LONDON — When Zlatan Ibrahimovic heard that he would be going home to Sweden to play in the Champions League against his first club, Malmo, his first response was that the stadium wasn’t big enough.“We should have had a coliseum,” he said, “and that would be filled.”It wasn’t to be. Malmo’s stadium has a capacity of 24,000, which by Swedish standards is more often than not perfectly adequate.But Ibrahimovic is right. His return after 14 years of winning titles with Ajax Amsterdam, Juventus, Inter, Barcelona, A.C. Milan and now Paris Saint-Germain, warrants a bigger stage.So he has ensured that there will be one. Ibrahimovic has rented the Stortorget, the main square in front of the city hall in Malmo, where the game will be screened live to anyone who wants to watch it.Advertisement“I have previously said that the game will be heard all over Malmo. Now I’ve also made sure that all of Malmo will be able to watch the game,” Ibrahimovic said on Facebook. “I’m on my way...”AdvertisementIn fairness, he set that up before the terrorist attacks that pushed P.S.G. to change their shirt for this and the team’s next game. Instead of advertising the club’s regular sponsor, an airline, the shirts will somberly state: “Je Suis Paris.“Zlatan, however, is Zlatan. He may be 34 now, but in his soul he remains the boy from Malmo, or more particularly from Rosengard, the rough-and-tough part of the inner city that was home to many immigrant families like his own.His father is a Bosnian Muslim, his mother a Croatian Catholic. They split when he and his siblings were young, and soccer on the streets and taekwondo were his outlets for letting off steam.His childhood idol was the Brazilian Ronaldo, and later he tried to emulate Ronaldinho. And as ridiculous as it might seem for someone who would grow up to be a lean 6-foot-5, he actually could do their tricks, perform their magic with the ball.We have seen Zlatan — he refers to himself that way, in the third person — pirouette in the air and bicycle-kick a goal from breathtaking heights. We have witnessed his fearsome power with goals shot from 30 yards or more.We still see him spring out of apparent disinterest into moments that spark him, or others on his team, to stun the opposition. These are moments he rehearsed time and time again in Malmo with his friends growing up, the same friends he prefers today.Sure, his journey has been illustrious. Certainly there have been times — as recently as his last game for the Swedish national team — when he mistakes soccer for taekwondo, and on that particular night was lucky that the Italian referee did not send him off.AdvertisementOne wry commentator observed that Italians all love him because Juventus, Inter and A.C. Milan all won a Scudetto, the Serie A title, while he was playing for them, as he topped the scoring charts in a league where it is more difficult to strike goals than almost any other on earth.(The two titles Juventus won with Ibrahimovic were stripped in a major Italian match-fixing scandal, and the team was relegated to Serie B, which is what led to his being signed by Inter.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Paris, in his apparent dotage, it has been a breeze. It has taken less than four seasons for Ibrahimovic to rack up 115 goals in 141 games, making him the club’s all-time leading scorer.He wants a Champions League title before he moves on again, not into retirement as some have contemplated, but perhaps instead for a last shot in the Premier League. It is said that the team of his choice in England would be Arsenal, which he had turned down as a youth.In his book “I Zlatan,” Ibrahimovic wrote, “Arsène Wenger asked me to have a trial with Arsenal when I was 17. I turned it down. Zlatan doesn’t do auditions.”Wenger, still Arsenal’s manager, sees and hears everything. And while Wenger usually prefers to start and develop playing careers, if Ibrahimovic is serious about this, the monsieur at Arsenal might be sorely tempted to look into it.What would an aging Ibrahimovic give to Arsenal? Who can say unless or until he is given the opportunity?Why would he leave P.S.G., which pays him like the main attraction he is? Possibly because there is talk of Cristiano Ronaldo seeking a way out of Madrid when this season ends — a path that only Manchester United or Paris might be able to afford.But that is speculation, and mischievous stuff at that.Right now, Ibrahimovic’s challenge is in the place that formed him. On Wednesday against Malmo, he will face as many as five of his teammates from the Swedish national team that he led as it qualified for the 2016 European Championship, which will be held in France.AdvertisementEvery one of those players look up to Ibrahimovic, because without him — and without the 62 goals he has scored for Sweden, including the two goals that allowed it to beat Denmark in the Euro playoff last week — the Swedes would not be going to the tournament next June.By then, Malmo will be out of European competition. Ibrahimovic, though, has everything to play for.He believes, because he is Zlatan, that P.S.G. can win the Champions League. He expects — and doubtless the people in the stadium and the thousands in the city square will expect as well — that there will be something special, something that transcends the match, in Malmo on Wednesday.“You can be different, and I’m living proof of it,” Ibrahimovic said to U.E.F.A.’s website this week. “The road I’ve taken and everything I have gone through ... you don’t have to be like everyone else.“We have grown apart a bit as old friends, but I am still in contact with everyone who played an important role in my life during that time,” he added. “I know who and where they are.”He is not the retiring type, and he is not likely to invite such an audience to show them nothing during his homecoming. Zlatan is one goal shy of 350 in a club career that has spanned 631 games in five different countries.As he said, he is on his way home.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.