AdvertisementSupported byIslanders 3, Flyers 1By The Associated PressThe Islanders’ distaste for the Philadelphia Flyers clearly came with them during their move to Brooklyn. Seeing their nemesis Wednesday night brought out some needed emotion.“We needed a good, hard, physical game like that,” Casey Cizikas said after the Islanders beat the Flyers, 3-1, in a rough-and-tumble affair at Barclays Center.“Those games are fun,” he added. “When they get testy like that, when they get physical like that, that’s what makes the game of hockey so much fun. I think we thrived off of that.”Jaroslav Halak made 17 saves and Kyle Okposo put the Islanders ahead early in the second period. Cizikas and Frans Nielsen also scored, and the Islanders improved to 11-8-3 by snapping a two-game losing streak.Steve Mason made 33 saves and Claude Giroux scored the Flyers’ lone goal. Philadelphia has lost four of five and fell to 7-10-5.“We’re just inconsistent,” Giroux said. “It’s the same story every game. We need to find a way to be consistent the whole game.”The first of five meetings this season between Philadelphia and the Islanders was a chippy one. There were post-whistle scrums after many whistles, and tempers boiled over in the second period when Nick Leddy fought Giroux.Leddy had earned the Flyers’ ire in the first period after boarding Michael Raffl face first into the boards, but Giroux said his rationale for fighting was only partially inspired by wanting to get even for his teammate.“The second period we were flat,” Giroux said. “Any time you have a chance to change the momentum, you do it.”Seven minutes after the Leddy-Giroux fight, Matt Martin squared off against Wayne Simmonds.“It was two teams battling hard,” said John Tavares, the Islanders’ captain. “We’re going to have a lot of those games coming up.”The Islanders took a 2-1 lead 5 minutes 14 seconds into the second period on Okposo’s fifth goal of the season. Tavares won an offensive-zone faceoff to begin the sequence, and Okposo gained possession of the puck along the wall, then curled toward the net before flipping a harmless-looking shot that appeared to ricochet off Nick Schultz and over Mason.“There’s no room for error,” said Mason, adding that the puck “bounced off the side of the net” for the game-winning goal.The teams traded goals in the first period and went into the first intermission tied, 1-1. Giroux opened the scoring with a power-play goal from the left circle 3:59 into the game, but Cizikas tied it with a short-handed goal with 58 seconds left in the period.The Islanders outshot the Flyers, 36-18, and had a 65-48 advantage in total shots.“It was one of our better games defensively,” Islanders Coach Jack Capuano said. “We didn’t give them too much.”Advertisement